No part of this book may be used or reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission from the publisher, except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews.
Bolden is still fighting to clear his name after being framed by the Mafia almost fifty years ago.
Evidence of Conspiracy ‘6 2: “Single Bullet Theory” Demolished and a New Look at Oswald 3: A Mafia Godfather Confesses 4: Carlos Marcello’s Rise to Power 5: Marcello, Cuba, and Jack Ruby 6: CIA vs.
While several hundred books about President Kennedy’s assassination have been published over the past five decades, fewer than two dozen have seriously dealt with the tidal wave of new information and evidence that has emerged in recent years.
Many of those new revelations resulted from the 4. million pages of JFK assassination files released throughout the 1990s as a result of the 1992 JFK Act.
Even fewer books have presented that information in a clear, concise way accessible to readers not already steeped in the sometimes arcane and always complex terminology of JFK assassination research.
Previous books that provided ample, credible documentation to prove their claims had the additional problem of extreme length.
I have personal experience with that, since my first two books on JFK’s murder—Ultimate Sacrifice and Legacy of Secrecy—were each more than nine hundred pages.
They had a combined total of almost four thousand endnotes documenting sources, hardly the type of book that most readers can easily digest.
New revelations about the case continue to emerge, both from previously released government files and from participants in operations for which the files are still mostly withheld.
For example, in 2008 Legacy of Secrecy first revealed and named the FBI’s daring undercover CAMTEX operation, which lasted from 1985 to 1986.
On December 15, 1985, that operation obtained godfather Carlos Marcello’s confession that he had ordered JFK’s murder.
More information about the CAMTEX operation, including the name of the FBI’s undercover informant, Jack Van Laningham, appeared for the first time in the updated trade paperback of Legacy of Secrecy in 2009.
Most of that book’s information came from uncensored FBI files I uncovered from officials involved in the operation.
However, since that time, I have had dozens of interviews and conversations with Van Laningham.
His observations illuminated many aspects of Marcello’s involvement with JFK’s murder—as well as with Lee Oswald and Jack Ruby—that weren’t completely clear from the files alone.
In addition, I uncovered independent corroboration for many of Van Laningham’s observations, originally made when he was Marcello’s cellmate and confidante for many months in 1985 and 1986.
For the first time, that documented information allows the full story of JFK’s assassination to be told in a clear, concise manner, one backed up by the most important earlier discoveries about JFK’s murder.
The story of Carlos Marcello, Jack Van Laningham, and JFK’s assassination will be told in the upcoming film Legacy of Secrecy, currently being produced by —and starring—Leonard DiCaprio, with Robert De Niro slated to play Marcello.
However, that film can tell only a small portion of the whole story of JFK’s murder.
This book provides a much fuller account and provides the supporting documentation backing it up.
Credibility is always important in evaluating information about JFK’s murder and in deciding which books or revelations to believe.
Because I have presented documented information from credible sources, buttressed by independent corroboration, my work has received more mainstream press coverage than most books documenting a conspiracy in JFK’s murder.
This includes appearing numerous times on CNN and in television documentaries about my work produced by a division of NBC News for the Discovery Channel and by German Public Television.
Those organizations have been able both to verify the authenticity of the declassified files I showed on those programs and to interview some of my key sources.
Other coverage has come from hundreds of newspapers, magazines, radio stations, and television stations, in this country and others.
Many of the key disclosures in this book came from more than two dozen key associates of John and Robert Kennedy, interviewed by me and by my original research collaborator, radio and television commentator Thom Hartmann.
I then found or helped get declassified files that verified their accounts.
For twenty-five years, I have been building on their work and advancing the findings of the five government investigating committees that came after the Warren Commission.
I spent most of that time working full-time on the case, and this book is the first compact culmination of all that research.
In response to requests from readers, this book features an Annotated Bibliography, making it easy for readers to refer to the books, articles, and documents used as source material.
In my previous books, bibliographic information lay instead in thousands of endnotes.
Though The Hidden History of the JFK Assassination has the same high level of documentation as my earlier works, we have dispensed with endnotes for this book.
Now, it’s easy to simply Google most quotations to find more information about their source.
Also, because of its shorter length, this book focuses on only the most important people involved in these events—in contrast to my earlier works, which contained hundreds of names of officials, witnesses, participants, journalists, and sources, often dozens in a single chapter.
The Hidden History, which devotes almost two hundred pages to JFK’s assassination.
When I began researching the case in 1988, I started with no preconceived conclusions and looked at the evidence against all the individuals and organizations that some considered suspects.
Focusing on credible sources, information, and documentation for which there is independent corroboration— and that have stood the test of time—led me to new discoveries and to a cohesive story of what really happened to President Kennedy.
Since 1966, dozens of carefully researched and well-documented books have thoroughly debunked every aspect of the Warren Commission’s conclusion and process, often using the Commission’s own evidence as well as information that was withheld from the Commission.
Chapter Two of The Hidden History of the JFK Assassination debunks some of the Warren Commission’s most glaring errors, but the rest of the book focuses primarily on telling the documented story of what led to the murder of John F Kennedy as simply and as concisely as possible.
The Hidden History of the JFK Assassination first gives a brief overview of the overwhelming amount of evidence for a conspiracy in JFK’s murder.
It then describes the Warren Commission’s 1964 conclusion about JFK’s murder (largely adopted by authors such as Bill O’Reilly, Vincent Bugliosi, Gerald Posner, and Stephen King) and shows how that conclusion is demonstrably wrong.
It also presents well-documented information that will show accused assassin Lee Oswald in a whole new light for most readers.
After revealing new information about the FBI’s CAMTEX operation and Carlos Marcello, this account begins the chronological story of Marcello’s rise to power.
It explains why he came to be targeted by John and Robert Kennedy and how he—and his criminal associates—became involved in CIA operations against Fidel Castro without the knowledge of the Kennedys.
Step by step, the book discloses how JFK was assassinated in a way that forced several top United States officials, including Attorney General Robert Kennedy, to withhold key information from the press, the public, and the Warren Commission.
Three CIA agents, officers, and assets who were involved in JFK’s murder—two of whom confessed before they died—are also named.
The book also reveals new information from Carlos Marcello about Lee Oswald, Jack Ruby, and the Mafia hit men in Dealey Plaza when JFK was killed.
We will also explore the hidden history of the aftermath of JFK’s murder, including just how close the truth came to being exposed on several occasions.
This history includes secret investigations conducted by the CIA, Naval Intelligence, and Robert Kennedy.
The account shows why Robert Kennedy’s associates pushed for the creation of the Warren Commission and why it was limited to essentially endorsing a conclusion that had been publicly proclaimed within hours of JFK’s murder.
That section includes the tragic story of Abraham Bolden, chosen by JFK to be the first black Presidential Secret Service agent, who was framed by the Mafia and then arrested when he tried to tell the Warren Commission about two earlier attempts to kill JFK, in Tampa and Chicago.
The book also identifies the five later government investigating committees that had access to far more information than the Warren Commission.
The book reveals what happened after Marcello made his JFK confession, unveiling details about JFK’s assassination in words recorded on undercover FBI audiotape.
It shows why the 1992 JFK Act unanimously passed by Congress requires the Bureau to release those tapes and transcripts and why the CIA and Naval Intelligence should release their remaining files related to JFK’s assassination.
According to NBC News, those agencies have still not released “millions” of pages of records involving JFK’s assassination.
However, The Hidden History of the JFK Assassination explains what is in the unreleased files, since much of the story came directly from Kennedy associates and others who experienced crucial events firsthand.
Along the way, the book also debunks some of the more pervasive myths about JFK’s murder that continue to surface on the internet, years after they were proven false.
The book identifies those who were involved in JFK’s assassination, as well as those whose involvement—or lack of it—is less clear and may be determined only when the CIA, FBI, and Naval Intelligence release the rest of their JFK assassination files.
Releasing all the JFK assassination files is important because US—Cuba relations have been essentially frozen since the time of JFK’s assassination.
In part, that’s because high United States officials such as President Lyndon Johnson and CIA Director John McCone—and those involved in Cuban operations in 1963 who later became high officials, such as Ronald Reagan’s Secretary of State Alexander Haig—believed fragmentary CIA reports that Fidel Castro was somehow behind JFK’s assassination.
Helping to expose that—and other parts of the hidden history of JFK’s murder—readers of this book can help to remove one of the last remaining obstacles to finally ending America’s fifty-two-yearlong Cold War with Cuba.
Using critical facts never reported before, this book documents exactly who was involved, why, and how they got away with it.
It builds on the findings of Robert Kennedy and his own secret investigations, as well as those of the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
Using exclusive interviews and newly declassified files not available to that Committee, this book provides detailed proof of that conspiracy.
In addition to Marcello and Trafficante, others involved included their associates Mafia don Johnny Rosselli and mobster John Martino.
Few realize that all four men made credible confessions to JEK’s murder, with Marcello providing by far the most detailed account, according to FBI files and sources that for the first time are fully detailed in this book.
All four mobsters had also been assets of the Central Intelligence Agency in the early 1960s, working on the Agency’s plots to kill Fidel Castro—plots that began in September 1960 at the direction of then Vice President Richard Nixon, before JFK was elected President.
Those ClA—Mafia plots against Castro continued into 1963 without the knowledge of President Kennedy, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, or even JFK’s CIA director, John McCone.
A Congressional investigator for the House Committee discovered that Morales— in 1963 a close friend of Johnny Rosselli—had confessed involvement in JFK’s murder to two close associates.
Barker admitted under oath that he had watched JFK’s shooting as it happened, even though JFK’s motorcade through Dealey Plaza was not broadcast live, even in Dallas.
Barker was also identified as being behind the picket fence on the grassy knoll at the time of JFK’s shooting by two credible eyewitnesses who encountered him, one of them a Dallas Deputy Sheriff.
Important new material from FBI files and personnel allows this book to detail for the first time Carlos Marcello’s own account of how he planned JFK’s murder and used trusted associates to carry it out.
This new information finally connects all the dots, tying Marcello to the shooters, to Lee Oswald, and to Jack Ruby.
What had formerly been a mass of compelling evidence—with a few key parts missing and some connections murky—now becomes a clear, coherent, and concise story of JFK’s murder.
For almost fifty years, polls have consistently shown that a majority of the American public believes JFK was killed as the result of a conspiracy.
Michael Kurtz—have publicly expressed their belief that the historical evidence for a conspiracy in JFK’s murder is conclusive.
For the “lone nut” thesis to work, a bullet found in almost pristine condition had to have caused two wounds to JFK while also shattering Texas governor John Connally’s rib and wrist bones.
The following chapter debunks this “single bullet theory,” long derided by its critics as the “magic bullet theory,” and shows how anyone can easily demonstrate the physical impossibility of the single bullet theory for him-or herself.
Several years earlier, I had helped high-level Review Board staff identify crucial JFK records that had not been released.
The news media rarely report that Robert F Kennedy himself, along with numerous government officials who were associates of RFK and JFK, voiced the belief that President Kennedy was killed as a result of a conspiracy.
Robert Kennedy told aide Richard Goodwin that he thought “that mob guy in New Orleans”—Marcello—was behind his brother’s death, as Goodwin confirmed to me.
RFK learned about Marcello’s role because he directed several trusted aides to conduct small, secret investigations into his brother’s murder for him.
RFK’s investigators included the head of the Justice Department’s “Get Hoffa Squad,” Walter Sheridan, and his press secretary, Frank Mankiewicz.
Other well-documented believers in an assassination conspiracy included President Lyndon Johnson, CIA Director John McCone, JFK’s personal physician Admiral George Burkley (the only doctor with JFK’s body at both Parkland Hospital and his autopsy at Bethesda Naval Hospital), JFK’s press secretary Pierre Salinger, and JFK aides Ted Sorensen, Arthur Schlesinger Jr., and Harris Wofford.
Also expressing belief in a conspiracy were LBJ aides Joseph A Califano Jr. and Alexander Haig, plus numerous Justice Department Mafia prosecutors for RFK, including Ronald Goldfarb and Robert Blakey—the last also authored the RICO Act, used in prosecuting organized crime, and directed the House Select Committee’s investigation.
JFK’s two closest aides, Dave Powers and Kenneth O’Donnell, actually witnessed two shots from the grassy knoll, from their perfect vantage point in the limousine directly behind JFK’s.
Powers and O’Donnell both confirmed the grassy knoll shots to House Speaker Tip O’ Neill, as O’ Neill described in his 1987 autobiography, Man of the House.
As I first discovered (with the help of the National Archives), Powers’s perjured affidavit was taken by Commission counsel Arlen Specter, the leading proponent of the single bullet theory, an important detail the Warren Commission omitted when it published Powers’s affidavit.
It’s important to stress that much of my information came not only from exclusive interviews with more than two dozen associates of John and Robert Kennedy but also from former FBI, Secret Service, military intelligence, and Congressional personnel, including those critical of how their agencies handled the investigation.
The Hidden History —many important new revelations are detailed in this book for the first time.
It has taken almost fifty years for the full story of JFK’s assassination to emerge, for reasons of national security that are detailed later, compounded by the reluctance of agencies such as the FBI and CIA to reveal their own intelligence failures and unauthorized operations.
Government agencies and officials withheld many hundreds of thousands of pages of relevant files and information on covert operations from the Warren Commission, but neither the public nor most journalists knew that when the Warren Report was issued in September 1964.
Instead, the American news media embraced and helped to disseminate the Report since it had been approved by a distinguished panel headed by Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren.
Many people don’t realize that in addition to the best-selling one-volume Warren Report, the Commission also issued twenty-six volumes of supporting material.
By 1966 authors and journalists were pointing out that the evidence contained in those twenty-six volumes didn’t support the Warren Report’s own conclusions.
Next came Edward Jay Epstein’s Inquest, which even former JFK aides found compelling.
Mark Lane’s Rush to Judgment and Harvard professor Josiah Thompson’s Six Seconds in Dallas, as well as Sylvia Meagher’s Accessories after the Fact.
All of those authors used the Warren Commission’s own information, along with fresh interviews and overlooked news accounts, to undermine the Warren Report’s “lone nut/single bullet” conclusion.
However, declassified files now show that FBI Director J Edgar Hoover and CIA Director Richard Helms immediately began a significant public relations counteroffensive, issuing detailed instructions on how to smear critics of the Warren Report.
For example, in a January 4, 1967, CIA memo in which the Agency gives fifty-three pages of specific instructions on how to counter the growing tide of books and articles questioning the “lone nut” conclusion, a domestic operation far outside the bounds of the Agency’s charter.
In many ways, those PR counteroffensives by the FBI and CIA would last for decades, and some writers make the case that they continue even today.
Though Garrison first focused on Carlos Marcello’s pilot and investigator in 1963—David Ferrie—Marcello’s name never publicly surfaced in Garrison’s probe.
FBI files show that Garrison came close to publicly naming Marcello twice but never did.
After Ferrie’s sudden death early in Garrison’s investigation, the District Attorney took his inquiry far from the Mafia, and it soon became a media circus.
None of the hundreds of articles in the mainstream press about it mentioned Ferrie’s work for Marcello in 1963 or raised the possibility of Mafia involvement in the assassination.
By mid-1967 the mainstream media had ended serious investigations of JFK’s assassination and had become highly critical of Garrison.
Mainstream journalists didn’t resume writing about the assassination until late 1974 and early 1975, in the aftermath of Watergate investigations, when the first widespread reports emerged about CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel Castro in the early 1960s emerged.
Those revelations spawned new investigations such as the Rockefeller Commission and the Senate Church Committee, which eventually added a JFK assassination subcommittee that included Senator Gary Hart.
In the summer of 1975, the mob stymied those investigations by murdering two key figures in the ClA—Mafia plots—Rosselli’s former boss Sam Giancana and Jimmy Hoffa— before they could testify.
When Johnny Rosselli, who was central to the CIA—Mafia plots, was gruesomely murdered the following year, the resulting media firestorm led to the creation of the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
The House Committee also found itself thwarted by a spate of sudden deaths of mob-connected potential witnesses— some murders, some suicides, some by natural causes—and the CIA, FBI, and military intelligence withheld even more relevant information.
In the case of both the House Select Committee and the Church Committee, the CIA assigned as its Committee liaison an Agency veteran of the 1963 anti-Castro plotting who actually should have been called as a witness.
Still, due to books such as Dan Moldea’s The Hoffa Wars and the House Select Committee’s investigation, the press finally linked Marcello and Trafficante to JFK’s assassination.
Surprisingly, only in the late 1970s did Jack Ruby first become widely identified in the press as a mobster, even though some journalists had known of his mob ties for years.
After the House Committee ended with its 1979 conclusion of conspiracy, more books and lengthy mainstream articles with evidence of conspiracy followed, including works by former Senate and House investigator Gaeton Fonzi and former FBI agent William Turner, who had been the first agent to publicly confront J Edgar Hoover.
Both men gave me important, early assistance when I began researching JFK’s murder in the late 1980s.
In 1985 the FBI finally obtained Carlos Marcello’s confession to JFK’s assassination, including details of how it was carried out and the godfather’s meetings with Oswald and Ruby.
Yet none of that information was released to the public at the time or during the intense media coverage of the twenty-fifth anniversary of JFK’s murder in November 1988—and in fact it wouldn’t reach the public for years.
Nonetheless, mainstream documentaries and articles casting suspicion on Marcello and the Mafia appeared at the time.
It took three years for the first releases to begin, and in the meantime, Gerald Posner’s 1993 Case Closed was part of a well-orchestrated media campaign to push back against the views of JFK and the conspiracy books by Mark Lane and others that had become best sellers in its wake.
Posner was criticized for presenting essentially a one-sided case against Oswald in championing the Warren Report’s “lone nut/single bullet” theory.
Similar criticisms were leveled fourteen years later against Vincent Bugliosi’s massive Reclaiming History, which—far from being an objective account—grew out of Bugliosi’s work as Oswald’s prosecutor in a televised mock trial.
That’s true for Bill O’Reilly’s Killing Kennedy, which basically accepts the Warren Report’s conclusion, and for Brian Latell’s 2012 Castro’s Secrets.
Latell, who admits his work for the CIA’s Cold War against Cuba goes back to the 1960s, also implies that Fidel Castro’s government was somehow linked to JFK’s assassination, something CIA personnel have been unsuccessfully claiming for decades.
The evidence of Carlos Marcello’s guilt in JFK’s murder was extensive even before his confession, but the new information makes his motivation and methods even clearer.
Marcello was far more powerful than any other godfather, and he remained so for an unusually long period of time.
For almost forty years, he was the unchallenged ruler of a territory that included all of Louisiana, most of Texas, and much of Mississippi.
For example, government investigators showed that Marcello played a key role in the ruthless, highly lucrative French Connection heroin network run by Santo Trafficante—which is one reason several members of that network played roles in JFK’s murder.
Investigators determined that by the 1960s, the revenue of Marcello’s vast criminal empire was equal to that of the largest American corporation of the time, General Motors.
This vast wealth allowed Marcello to own mayors, judges, governors, members of Congress, and senators.
Marcello even employed his own high-powered Washington lobbyist (the same one used by countries such as Nicaragua) and a powerful Washington law firm.
Yet he maintained a very low public profile and managed to remain out of the spotlight—until John and Robert Kennedy dragged him in front of the TV cameras covering their Senate crime hearings in 1959.
That started the Kennedys’ war against the Mafia, and against Marcello in particular.
As described in later chapters, that war resulted in the Kennedys’ April 1961 deportation of Marcello to Central America.
This unprecedented—and apparently extralegal—act involved a_ lawenforcement convoy rushing Marcello to the New Orleans airport, where a waiting plane took him to Guatemala, where Marcello had obtained a fake birth certificate.
Marcello, who had seemed untouchable under the Eisenhower—Nixon Administration, was furious over the Kennedys’ action.
After Guatemala ordered Marcello out, his hatred of the Kennedy brothers soon became even more intense.
The godfather had to trudge through the jungle in his Gucci shoes, accompanied only by his lawyer, all the while swearing eternal vengeance against President Kennedy and his brother.
After sneaking back into the United States with the aid of his pilot, David Ferrie, Marcello faced increasing pressure from the President and Attorney General Robert Kennedy, culminating in his federal trial in New Orleans in November 1963.
Thanks to bribing a key juror, Marcello made sure he was acquitted on November 22, 1963, just after JFK’s murder.
Knowing he would be acquitted, Marcello had even planned a celebration with his family and associates for the evening of JFK’s assassination.
Because Marcello ruled the oldest mob family in the United States, he didn’t have to get approval from the national Mafia commission before undertaking major hits.
Unlike most mob families , Marcello and his close associates also had a history of targeting government officials who posed a threat, including the 1954 assassination of Alabama’s anti-mob Attorney General—elect.
AFTER BECOMING PRESIDENT and Attorney General, John and Robert Kennedy had tried in vain to convict Marcello as part of their massive war against organized crime.
Their war against the mob became Marcello’s reason for killing JFK, in order to end Attorney General Robert Kennedy’s power and prosecution of him.
For years, historians believed the FBI had not followed up on the House Committee’s 1979 recommendation to investigate Marcello further for JFK’s murder.
I was the first to discover the FBI’s uncensored CAMTEX files about Marcello in the National Archives in 2006 and revealed them in about a dozen pages of Legacy of Secrecy in 2008.
However, the files contained so much information—and there was so much more from my exclusive interviews with the FBI supervisor for CAMTEX, with an additional key CAMTEX FBI official, and with another individual involved—that there wasn’t room to include all the CAMTEX revelations.
NBC News tracked down CAMTEX informant Jack Van Laningham for a Discovery Channel special featuring me and Legacy.
But there was room—and time—to insert only a few additional sentences naming Van Laningham in the updated trade paperback of Legacy because three new chapters of other important new information had already been added.
However, since that time, I have had more than a dozen exclusive, probing talks with Van Laningham about Marcello, fleshing out even more material in the FBI’s CAMTEX files.
Later chapters quote Marcello describing for the first time exactly how he had JFK killed, using Marcello’s own descriptions given to FBI informant Van Laningham, backed up with independent corroboration for many of the godfather’s statements.
Marcello ordered the murder because of his often-voiced hatred of John and Robert Kennedy over his deportation, his ongoing prosecution, and their unrelenting and ever-escalating war against the Mafia, especially against his allies such as Santo Trafficante and Jimmy Hoffa.
Yet Marcello had not reached and maintained his powerful position by taking rash action, especially where hits were concerned.
The House Committee found evidence that Marcello and Trafficante had carefully planned the JFK hit for more than a year.
Mafia don Johnny Rosselli, the Chicago Mafia’s man in Hollywood and Las Vegas, soon joined the godfathers’ plot, since his boss, Sam Giancana, was also under intense pressure from the Kennedy Justice Department.
Chicago, home of Rosselli’s mob family, Trafficante’s base of Tampa, or Dallas, in Marcello’s territory.
Carlos Marcello said that he imported two of the hit men from Europe for the JFK assignment; an independent account shows this was a favored technique for Marcello in other hits as well—a way to use difficult-to-trace shooters for especially sensitive hits.
Later chapters explain why the two men were chosen, how they obtained travel documents and aliases, and what the FBI was able to learn about their actual identities.
They also detail why Marcello said the two shooters came into the United States from Canada, through Michigan, instead of making a border crossing much closer to Dallas.
Michigan was logical because the mob bosses planned their first attempt to kill JFK for Chicago, on November 2, 1963.
JFK’s Chicago motorcade route passed by a warehouse that employed an ex-Marine with recent parallels to Oswald.
After Chicago-based Secret Service agents learned that four hit men were at large in the city, the ex-Marine was arrested and the attempt called off.
As detailed later, JFK canceled not just his motorcade but his entire visit at the last minute, and news of the threat was kept out of the press by the White House and Secret Service, even though it was known to some reporters.
Marcello’s next attempt was planned for Trafficante’s home base of Tampa, where the longest domestic motorcade of JFK’s Presidency was scheduled for November 18, 1963.
Mullins, told me that federal authorities learned about a plot to shoot JFK in the motorcade.
Security precautions were intense as JFK bravely went ahead with the motorcade for national security reasons.
Once again, the President’s men insisted that no word of the threat appear in the press.
Only one small article slipped out the day after JFK died, but it was quickly suppressed and never seen by the Warren Commission or the House Select Committee.
As revealed later in this book for the first time, Carlos Marcello explained how his second-in-command lieutenant in Dallas—mobster and restaurateur Joe Campisi Sr.—played a key role in managing the shooters for JFK’s murder.
The House Committee had been suspicious of Campisi, a close associate of Jack Ruby.
Ruby has long been reported to have been the Mafia’s “payoff man” for the Dallas Police, but the Dallas Chief of Detectives regularly conducted mob business with Campisi every Sunday night for years.
The book documents other associates of Marcello and Trafficante who were reportedly in Dallas to help with JFK’s assassination.
They include Michel Victor Mertz, Trafficante’s French Connection heroin kingpin and a former assassin who had intelligence connections, as well as CIA agent and Cuban exile Bernard Barker, then working on the CIA’s most sensitive authorized anti-Castro operation.
Carlos Marcello’s own words, confided to his trusted friend, FBI informant Van Laningham, provide the final pieces to the JFK assassination puzzle.
As part of setting up Oswald, Marcello had his pilot, David Ferrie, bring Oswald to meet the godfather personally—and secretly.
The House Committee uncovered evidence that Oswald had met Ferrie years earlier when Ferrie helped supervise Oswald’s Civil Air Patrol unit and that in the summer of 1963 Oswald was actually working with Ferrie.
Marcello also told Van Laningham about his meetings with Jack Ruby and said that Ruby’s club in Dallas was one of several in that city secretly owned by Marcello’s organization.
Ruby just fronted the club for Marcello, and when Ruby was caught stealing from the till to pay his back taxes, Marcello summoned him to Churchill Farms and made the trembling Ruby an offer he couldn’t refuse.
Essentially, Ruby had to arrange for a Dallas policeman to kill Oswald soon after JFK’s murder or else Ruby would have to do the job himself.
Marcello’s meetings with Ruby and Oswald are contained in the declassified CAMTEX FBI files.
In addition, Marcello’s accounts of the two shooters and his meetings with Oswald and Ruby are backed up by much additional independent evidence, as described in later chapters.
It all forms a consistent and credible story that finally makes sense of what until now has been a sprawling mass of evidence with several key gaps.
Much of the CAMTEX information appears for the first time in this book, since I am the only author to have extensively interviewed Van Laningham, CAMTEX FBI Supervisor Thomas Kimmel, and the CAMTEX FBI official who heard all the secretly recorded tapes of Marcello.
Further confirmation for Marcello’s story comes from my _ exclusive interviews with two noncriminal businessmen in Louisiana, men who had befriended Carlos Marcello in one case and his family in another.
Another new source is a businessman who became friends with Marcello’s brother Joe.
Carlos Marcello’s discovery of Van Laningham’s role eventually resulted in a documented hit attempt on the FBI’s CAMTEX informant when Van Laningham was on parole in Tampa.
In addition to Marcello’s explicit JFK confession, made in front of two witnesses, Santo Trafficante also confessed his involvement in JFK’s murder, and later chapters have new revelations about Trafficante’s admission.
Also detailed are the confessions of two mob associates of Marcello’s, Johnny Rosselli and John Martino, who were both CIA assets, as were Marcello and Trafficante.
According to former Justice Department prosecutor William Hundley, shortly before Rosselli was brutally murdered (following his last meeting with Trafficante), Rosselli confessed his involvement to his attorney.
Not long before CIA asset John Martino died from natural causes, he also confessed to a reporter for Newsday.
As the book shows, most of the mobsters Marcello and Trafficante used in the plot had worked for the CIA on anti-Castro operations, as did the two godfathers themselves.
This enabled them to feed disinformation into United States intelligence networks before and after JFK’s murder to force a government cover-up.
Marcello and Trafficante used their inside knowledge of covert United States operations to topple Fidel Castro in order to kill JFK in a way that forced high United States officials —including President Johnson, Robert Kennedy, J Edgar Hoover, and the CIA —to withhold key information from the press, public, and investigators.
In the fall of 1963, the godfathers knew from their CIA associates that John and Robert Kennedy had formed a secret subcommittee of the National Security Council to make contingency plans in case Fidel attempted the “assassination of American officials” in response to United States efforts to overthrow him.
United States officials were primed and ready when the phony evidence implicating Fidel in JFK’s murder quickly surfaced, triggering a cover-up to protect national security—a cover-up that in some ways continues today.
Also triggering cover-ups for national security reasons was the fact that JFK had a top-secret plan with the head of the Cuban Army, Commander Juan Almeida, to overthrow Fidel Castro on December 1, 1963—ten days after Dallas.
JFK’s Secretary of State Dean Rusk first revealed that plan to me; it has since been confirmed in great detail by other JFK associates and hundreds of pages of files declassified in the 1990s.
JFK had barred the Mafia from the coup and from reopening their casinos, but Marcello and Trafficante managed to penetrate the highly secret operation via their CIA associates who worked on it, such as Bernard Barker and David Morales.
Later chapters quote FBI files showing that a surprising number of Marcello associates—including Jack Ruby, John Martino, and David Ferrie—knew about the top-secret coup plan, even though it was so secret that government committees, from the Warren Commission to the House Select Committee, never learned of it.
JFK’s goal for the coup was a democratic Cuba with no Mafia influence, but Marcello saw a way to use parts of the secret coup plan to force a massive government cover-up after JFK’s murder.
If made public, JFK’s role in the plan to overthrow Castro could have triggered World War III in those tense Cold War times.
Even years later, the plan’s exposure could have cost the lives of JFK’s ally, Commander Almeida.
That’s one reason the government kept so much about JFK’s murder so secret for so long, since Almeida remained in place and unexposed for decades, passing away in 2009 when he was still a revered figure and a high official in Cuba.
The secret coup plan, and the Contingency Plans to protect it, helps explain why reporters in Dallas were warned off, for national security reasons, when they were pursuing leads that could have led to the exposure of United States covert actions against Cuba.
In the same way, preventing World War III was the real goal of the Warren Commission, and in that it succeeded.
It’s also one reason that even though a dozen of Marcello’s lieutenants and family were interviewed about JFK’s assassination or even arrested by law enforcement, Marcello’s name is nowhere to be found in the Warren Report.
As the fiftieth anniversary of the tragic events in Dallas approaches, it’s ironic to look back and realize how much important information the FBI had back in 1985, much of it from Marcello himself in the CAMTEX undercover operation.
Had it been released by the twenty-fifth anniversary of JFK’s murder in 1988, the public’s view of JFK’s murder would have been vastly different then and certainly would be today.
I discovered those uncensored files seven years later, and this book represents the first full account of that operation and of Marcello’s startling admissions.
He was caught providing false information before filming was complete, as verified by the book of the JFK screenplay.
However, considerable evidence that calls into question both theories has been available to the general public since 1966.
Additional information and files that demolish those key assertions have emerged in the succeeding decades.
This chapter shows why the single bullet theory is impossible and then uses well-documented facts to present a completely different view of Oswald—the only one that accounts for all the known facts about him.
First, the single bullet theory of the 1964 Warren Report—and authors supporting it since that time—maintains that only three shots were fired at the limousine on Elm Street holding President Kennedy and his wife, Jackie; Governor Connally and his wife, Nellie, in the seat in front of them; and two Secret Service agents in the front seat.
The Warren Commission’s theory says that one shot not only completely missed the limo but missed the entire street, hitting a curb and knocking a piece of concrete up to hit a bystander, James Teague.
That bullet caused multiple wounds in Connally—including shattering four inches of his rib, smashing into his wrist bones, and plowing into his thigh— before emerging in almost pristine condition.
That remarkable bullet was supposedly found on Governor Connally’s stretcher at Parkland Hospital just over an hour after the shooting and was later matched to Oswald’s cheap, mailorder Mannlicher-Carcano rifle, cinching the case against the ex-Marine marksman, as the Commission indicated it had unanimously concluded.
The third and final shot—according to the Commission—was the horrible, fatal head shot, which the Commission said Oswald fired from behind the President.
In the Warren Report itself, the Commissioners—and the staff of lawyers that actually wrote the Report, primarily based on the FBI’s original investigation and additional testimony—claimed that the single bullet theory wasn’t essential to this conclusion, but that’s simply not correct.
The only thing almost all authors and historians who have written about JFK’s murder agree on is that the single bullet theory is required for the Warren Commission’s conclusion that Oswald did all the shooting.
Given the timing of the shots, it was simply impossible for Oswald and his old rifle to have fired more than three shots quickly enough—and that’s not even giving him time to aim again for his second and third shots.
Even among the seven members of the Warren Commission, the belief in the single bullet theory was not unanimous.
It’s now well documented that archconservative Senator Richard B Russell of Georgia strenuously objected to its inclusion and wanted to issue a dissenting opinion about it, until he was talked into compromise wording of the Report at the last minute.
Commission members Senator Sherman Cooper of Kentucky and Senator Hale Boggs of Louisiana also doubted the theory.
Others who actually witnessed the shooting or its aftermath opposed the single bullet theory even more adamantly, and they understood that without it there must have been at least two shooters.
Governor John Connally always stated that he was struck by the first shot and that a separate shot struck JFK, and Nellie Connally agreed in her testimony.
JFK’s personal physician, Admiral George Burkley, the only doctor present at both Parkland Hospital in Dallas and in the autopsy room at Bethesda Naval Hospital, just outside Washington, DC, filled out Kennedy’s death certificate.
He described JFK’s back wound as being too low for the bullet to have exited just below his Adam’s apple, as the autopsy photos clearly show.
Even the three official autopsy doctors—James Humes, Pierre Finck, and J Thornton Boswell—testified to the Commission under oath that they did not believe the bullet that shattered Connally’s rib and wrist was the same one that struck JFK in the back.
Noted forensic pathologist Cyril Wecht shared that conclusion when he served on the Forensic Pathology Panel of the House Select Committee on Assassinations in 1978.
While the number of shots claimed by all the known Dealey Plaza witnesses ranged from two to five, in 1966 author Josiah Thompson found that “with no exceptions, all those witnesses who were deep inside the Depository report hearing fewer than three shots”—either just one shot or two.
Many more such claims have emerged since then, and the witness intimidation/alteration always favored the theory—stated as fact by the FBI within hours of the crime—that Oswald was the lone assassin.
JFK’s autopsy records and clothes show that his back wound was almost six inches below his collar.
Even the 1964 attempt to restage the shooting by the FBI —which always slanted its investigation toward Oswald as a single assassin— depicted the wound on its test subject accurately, about six inches below the collar.
The Warren volumes even included a photo of that FBI reenactment with the back wound accurately placed, yet the Commission ignored it when adopting the single bullet theory.
Yet for the “lone nut/magic bullet theory” to work, that same bullet had to cause the wound just below JFK’s Adam’s apple—a wound that is significantly higher than the wound in JFK’s back.
Even if the bullet somehow ricocheted off one of JFK’s bones, theoretically turning upward to exit JFK’s throat, it would have been impossible for the bullet to change course in midair to dive down to hit Connally.
In 1997 Warren Commissioner Gerald Ford admitted to the Associated Press that he had changed the description of the “back wound” in the Warren Report into a “back of the neck” wound.
Raising the back wound almost six inches made the single bullet theory appear more viable.
Anyone can disprove the single bullet theory by simply sitting a person in a chair.
With your test subject in a chair, measure six inches below the top of his collar and put a mark there.
You don’t even need to figure the exact downward angle of the bullet, which is a matter of some debate.
The autopsy physician who probed JFK’s back wound said the downward angle was 45 to 60 degrees, but all experts agree that the angle was downward at least 15 to 20 degrees, possibly much more.
On a normal-sized adult male, the wound just under the Adam’s apple would be significantly higher than a back wound almost six inches below the collar.
Thus the single bullet theory is physically impossible and should rightly be called the “magic bullet” theory.
A theory is a well-supported and well-tested hypothesis or set of hypotheses. the Commission’s one-bullet construction never met these demanding standards.
It was an ad-hoc invention or fabrication to meet the Commission’s requirements for a lone-assassin, no conspiracy explanation of the Kennedy assassination.
McKnight devoted many pages of his acclaimed Warren Commission critique Breach of Trust to the many other reasons the “magic bullet” theory is impossible.
Some of this information comes from files unavailable until recent years, but most of it has been known for decades yet ignored or glossed over by “magic bullet” theorists.
One obvious disproof of the “magic bullet” theory is visible to anyone watching the Zapruder film.
Notice JFK, when he emerges from behind a sign, clearly shot in the throat as he raises his arms to his neck.
At that exact instant— and for several moments more—John Connally is seen just as clearly holding his white Stetson hat with his right hand, even though the “magic bullet” has supposedly already smashed his rib and shattered his right wrist.
In addition, doctors testified that more small bullet fragments were removed from Connally’s wounds than were missing from the almost pristine bullet.
The amount of material missing from the “magic bullet” was about the weight of a postage stamp, far less than the weight of those bullet fragments.
As for JFK’s throat wound, the Dallas doctors called it a small wound of “entrance,” meaning JFK was shot from the front.
Chapter Sixteen explains how that tiny neat entrance wound seen by the Dallas doctors became the much larger, jagged wound seen in JFK’s Bethesda autopsy photos.
Since the Bethesda doctors couldn’t find a bullet while probing JFK’s back wound during the autopsy, they were relieved to hear that the almost pristine “magic bullet” had been found in Dallas.
David Osborne—later an Admiral and Deputy Surgeon General of the Navy—told Congressional investigators that he saw “an intact bullet roll . . . onto the autopsy table” when JFK was first removed from his casket, before the start of the official autopsy.
However, the “magic bullet” wasn’t at Bethesda but many miles away at the FBI laboratory.
Like so much other crucial evidence, including JFK’s brain, the Bethesda bullet vanished from the official record, for reasons explained in later chapters.
When the Army provided the Warren Commission with its top wound ballistic expert, Dr.
When they fired Oswald’s actual Mannlicher-Carcano “into ten cadaver wrists . . . in each and every instance the bullet was ‘markedly deformed’” and not pristine.
Instead, Warren Commission assistant counsel Arlen Specter—the creator of the “magic bullet” theory—trelied on a veterinarian’s tests, which involved shooting into horse meat, gelatin blocks, and goat carcasses, to “prove” his theory.
Decades later, a wound ballistics expert said he was finally able to produce a relatively unmarred bullet after firing into a cadaver’s wrist, but only by reducing the bullet’s speed by half and not firing it through a rib first.
In a desperate attempt to make the “magic bullet” theory work, some authors claim that JFK was leaning very far forward in his seat or had his suit coat and shirt greatly bunched up along the back of his head, but photos and the Zapruder film show that that was clearly not the case.
The bunching was minor, which is why the wound in the autopsy drawing and photograph lined up perfectly with the bullet holes in JFK’s shirt and suit coat, all almost six inches below the top of the collar.
When computer animation was used in a major television special to try to make the “magic bullet” theory work, JFK’s neck and shoulders were so distorted that he almost didn’t look human.
In one Discovery Channel special , when JFK’s shooting was restaged accurately, it showed that the bullet striking JFK in the back would have exited through his heart, not just below his Adam’s apple.
In addition, that Discovery crew had trouble getting its Mannlicher-Carcano rifle to fire, even though it had been worked on by a top gunsmith, unlike Oswald’s cheap mail-order rifle.
The problem wasn’t just the rifle’s age, since a 1967 special by CBS had the same problems, even though CBS used a rifle that fired faster and was in better condition than Oswald’s weapon.
More than a third of the attempts had to be disqualified “because of trouble with the rifle,” as documented by author Michael T Griffith.
Not only that, but in the case of CBS, “not one of the eleven participating expert marksmen scored at least two hits (as the ‘magic bullet’ theory requires) on his first attempt.
Accounts supporting the “magic bullet” theory and Oswald as the lone assassin usually mention that Oswald earned a rating of “marksman” when he was in the Marines, leaving the impression that he was a crack shot.
That’s an important part of the “magic bullet/lone nut” theory since in all the years since the assassination, no sharpshooter has ever duplicated the shooting attributed to Oswald on his first try and with an accurate moving target.
However, the reality is that “marksman” is the lowest of the three Marine shooting titles.
The lowest possible score on the test is 190, with the highest being 250.
Before Oswald left the Marines, he scored only one point above the minimum and sometimes missed not just the bull’s-eye but the entire target.
Finally, the evidence is clear that the “magic bullet” was not even found on Governor Connally’s stretcher.
At Dallas’s Parkland Hospital, an hour and fifteen minutes after JFK was shot, Senior Engineer Darrell Tomlinson found the nearly pristine bullet.
It was on one of two stretchers close together in a hallway, one of which had probably been used to transport Connally.
Tomlinson initially told Arlen Specter that he had found the bullet on the stretcher that had NOT held Connally.
But after being pressured and intimidated by Specter to reverse his testimony, Tomlinson claimed uncertainty, still refusing to say the bullet came from Connally’s stretcher.
McKnight’s recent analysis of the testimony of Parkland nurse Jane C Wester and orderly R J Jamison corroborates Tomlinson’s initial statement “and strongly supported the conclusion that” the bullet had NOT been found on Connally’s stretcher.
Both stretchers had probably been unattended for thirty minutes, in a hall where various people were milling about.
The non-Connally stretcher might have had enough bloodstains to cause a person to think it had been Connally’s or even Kennedy’s stretcher.
Someone could have easily planted the “magic bullet” to incriminate Oswald.
Around 1:30m., about fifteen minutes before the “magic bullet” was discovered, two reliable witnesses at Parkland Hospital saw Jack Ruby, a lowerlevel member of Carlos Marcello’s organization.
One of the two witnesses, journalist Seth Kantor, even spoke to Ruby, as he later told authorities and confirmed to me.
However, Ruby later lied to authorities about the encounter, saying that he hadn’t gone to Parkland that day.
That raises the question of why Ruby would deny his presence there—unless he was engaged in some illegal activity, such as planting evidence.
Ruby might have planted the “magic bullet” or might have given it to someone else to plant.
Regardless of who placed the pristine bullet on the non-Connally stretcher, it was used to link Oswald’s rifle to the shooting of JFK and Connally.
THE WARREN REPORT went out of its way to stress that Oswald’s “commitment to Marxism and communism appears to have been another important factor in his motivation” to kill President Kennedy.
The Commission related information saying that Oswald had become a Marxist/Communist when he was a teenager and had continued a fascination with Russia when he joined the United States Marines.
According to the official story, after getting an early discharge by claiming he needed to financially provide for his mother, he defected to Russia in 1959.
After marrying a Russian woman, Marina Prusakova, he returned to the United States in 1962.
He worked at a photographic map firm in Dallas in the fall and moved to New Orleans in the spring to live with his uncle, after ordering the rifle and pistol he would allegedly use on November 22, 1963.
Marina eventually joined him in New Orleans, where he worked for a relatively short time at a coffee company before being unemployed during August 1963.
In that month he got a surprising amount of publicity for his local chapter of the pro-Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
After sending Marina and their child to live with a friend in Dallas, Oswald made a mysterious trip to Mexico City, visiting the Russian and Cuban Embassies there before heading to Dallas himself.
He lived for a time in a Dallas YMCA before moving to a rooming house in the Oak Cliff section of the city, visiting Marina on the weekends.
For decades, authors ranging from Gerald Posner to Bill O’Reilly have repeated and expanded on this version of the story.
However, questions about that scenario—and Oswald’s motivation, or lack of it—surfaced soon after his murder by Jack Ruby, and they’ve been growing ever since.
The Warren Report’s depiction of Oswald as a teenage Marxist who grew into a troubled, murderous loner doesn’t stand up to modern scrutiny.
In addition to the Warren Commission’s Report and twenty-six volumes of evidence, thousands of additional pages of Warren Commission documents were eventually released.
These make it clear that the FBI—and especially Naval Intelligence and the ClA—withheld much crucial information about Oswald.
Today we have thousands of pages of additional material from the House Select Committee’s investigation, and those have been supplemented by millions of pages of additional files.
It’s shockingly easy to debunk the Warren Report depiction of Oswald as a teenage Marxist.
Oswald had even been so desperate to join that he tried to enlist before he was legally old enough.
Even the Warren Report admits that his fellow Marines called him Oswaldskovitch.
Yet not once was Oswald ever written up or disciplined for his outrageously pro-Russian behavior, not even when he was based at the sensitive U-2 spy plane base in Atsugi, Japan.
This man was a man with a security clearance; this man was a man who had access to highly sophisticated materials; and he is now showing an interest in Marxism.
Blakey was right to be concerned since Oswald had been a radar operator for the Marines at Atsugi, where the CIA’s supersecret U-2 spy planes were based for their flights over Russia.
The firm made the lettering used on the large display maps shown in televised presentations by United States officials, including President Kennedy.
The Warren—Posner—Bugliosi— O’Reilly version asks us to believe that the FBI and CIA saw no problem with former defector Oswald working at the U-2 map firm at that dangerous time.
Yet, later Congressional investigations showed that that was a time when thousands of American Communists, leftists, Socialists, progressives, and liberals in nonsensitive jobs were routinely subjected to domestic surveillance.
Oswald’s actions make perfect sense only when viewed in light of all the facts, not just a select few.
To be fair, it’s also easier to evaluate Oswald accurately now that we’re decades removed from the Cold War and the “better dead than Red” mind-set of many, if not most, Americans of the early 1960s.
He looked up to his older brothers, both of whom joined the military, with one serving in an intelligence service that ferreted out Communists.
Oswald’s favorite TV show when he was young was I Led Three Lives, based on a true story about a seemingly ordinary American who went under deep cover for years as an apparent Communist only to emerge to fame and fortune when it was revealed that he was really a United States government agent.
Oswald had an above-average IQ, but learning disabilities apparently hindered his schooling, so his prospects were limited.
He grew up in less-savory parts of New Orleans, where his mother knew members of the Marcello crime organization and where his only father figure was a favorite uncle—“Dutz” Murret—who worked as a bookie for Marcello.
Oswald’s limited options apparently led him to follow in the footsteps of the protagonist of I Led Three Lives, and there is a great deal of evidence, including statements from fellow Marines, that he was recruited by military intelligence while in the Marines.
Also, author Dick Russell points out that when Oswald went to Russia in 1959, he was one of seven young American men who “defected” around the same time, and six of those later returned to the United States with Russian wives.
For years the CIA denied debriefing Oswald when he returned to the United States, even though the Agency routinely debriefed other far less potentially damaging travelers to Russia.
Helms and other officials had lied about that to government committees from the Warren Commission to the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
Bill O’Reilly’s book Killing Kennedy acknowledges that an unusual Dallas man—an erudite and sophisticated anti-Communist White Russian named George DeMohrenschildt—helped Oswald get his job at the U-2 map firm in Dallas.
But O’Reilly leaves out the well-documented fact that DeMohrenschildt was an admitted and well-documented CIA asset who was in contact with the head of the CIA office in Dallas about Oswald’s activities.
In addition, one of Oswald’s files prominently included a CIA phone number to call in case he was ever in trouble, indicating that the CIA was utilizing or planning to utilize Oswald in some fashion.
The monitoring of Oswald couldn’t be obvious, because Naval Intelligence wanted to see how the KGB might try to recruit Oswald or his wife.
That was probably also true for most of the other recently returned defectors.
Because Oswald was working for Naval Intelligence and had some CIA role, Helms and the Agency used that justification to essentially lie to the Warren Commission and Congressional investigators about debriefing Oswald—and, as Newman learned, about other matters as well.
However, just as it had in Russia, the KGB saw through the ruse of having Oswald work at the U-2 map firm and made no contact with Oswald.
That Oswald was willing to contact such people and organizations only by mail smacks of building a cover for himself by leaving a paper trail at the direction of his handlers.
That’s especially true when we consider that his best friend in Dallas was the staunchly anti-Communist George DeMohrenschildt and that Oswald would soon find himself working for two men who were stridently anti-Communist and anti-Castro.
Ironically, buried in the twenty-six Warren volumes are Oswald’s own notes for his “big reveal,” in which he admits hating Communism, something he could publicly proclaim only after the success of his anti-Castro work, when he emerged from his deep undercover work to fame and fortune.
After being fired from his job at the map firm on April 6, Oswald made a well-documented move to New Orleans on April 24, 1963.
He left Marina in Dallas and went to live with his uncle Dutz Murret, a bookie for Carlos Marcello.
However, even before his move to the Crescent City, an INS agent interviewed Oswald in the New Orleans jail.
The interview had to have been in February or March—and before Oswald’s move and even before he lost his job —because the INS agent was transferred away from New Orleans on April 1, 1963.
The INS agent didn’t recall why Oswald was in jail, but the charge—if any —must have been minor, since no record of it was kept.
During the interview, Oswald, probably using a Hispanic-sounding alias, pretended to be a Cuban national even though he couldn’t speak Spanish.
It sounds absurd, except that Oswald would soon join the tiny national pro-Castro organization known as the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, a group that the CIA had targeted for harassment and penetration since at least 1961.
Also in early 1963, Oswald ordered through the mail the cheap rifle and pistol he would later be accused of using to kill JFK and Officer Tippit.
For any type of true believer— especially someone like Oswald who had lived in Russia—it made no sense.
However, here and throughout his life, all of Oswald’s activities (and claimed activities) related to Communism and Marxism are consistent with someone building and maintaining a cover, like his childhood idol who inspired I Led Three Lives.
Marcello’s private detective, Guy Banister, and Marcello’s pilot and investigator, David Ferrie.
Both loom large in assassination literature, yet much of it ignores their connection to Carlos Marcello, who admitted to Congressional investigators that he knew both men.
Ferrie had been an Eastern Airlines pilot who had known Oswald as a teenager, when Ferrie helped supervise Oswald’s Civil Air Patrol unit.
There is also some evidence that Ferrie originally encouraged Oswald to join the Marines.
By 1963 Ferrie had lost his job at Eastern Airlines because he had been accused of molesting a fifteen-year-old boy.
Ferrie officially worked for Marcello’s New Orleans attorney, but Marcello admitted working with Ferrie directly on the two weekends prior to JFK’s assassination.
Marchetti said that his boss “ Helms stated that David Ferrie was a CIA agent” in the fall of 1963.
Michael Kurtz, Deputy Chief of the New Orleans CIA Station Hunter Leake confirmed Ferrie’s 1963 CIA work to him.
Leake also confirmed that Guy Banister performed work for the CIA related to Cuba.
Banister had many more, and more highly placed, intelligence connections than his associate David Ferrie, and they were developed before both men began working for Carlos Marcello.
A former FBI Chief of Chicago in the early 1950s, the hard-drinking Banister had been Assistant Superintendent of the New Orleans Police Department for two and a half years before being fired for erratic behavior caused by his drinking.
Banister then opened a detective agency, though he focused far more on intelligence work, strident anti-Communism, and white supremacist causes than any traditional private detective.
He maintained good relations with the New Orleans office of the FBI and with Naval Intelligence, as well as taking on work for the CIA—tasks that revolved around Cuba.
Banister led his own group, the Anti-Communist League of the Caribbean, which was involved in a plot against Fidel Castro in December 1960.
Four months earlier, when the C[A—Mafia plots with Trafficante and Marcello were in the planning stage, the CIA had considered Banister for a covert assignment providing cover for a sensitive CIA operation.
That job went instead to Howard Hughes aide Robert Maheu, who only a few years earlier had been Banister’s partner, before Banister went to New Orleans.
While in the FBI in the 1930s, Banister had even served on two cases with General Joseph Carroll, who in 1963 was heading the recently created Defense Intelligence Agency, which was supposed to oversee Naval Intelligence and the other military intelligence agencies.
On January 20, 1961 , one of Banister’s organizations even bought trucks in New Orleans for an anti-Castro operation using the name “Oswald,” a safe alias since the real Oswald was still in the Soviet Union.
Banister and Ferrie’s work on Cuban operations for the CIA continued into 1963, and by that summer Oswald was working for them.
In 1999 scholar and former Arizona Secretary of State Richard Mahoney published a book about John and Robert Kennedy—Sons and Brothers—after gaining special access to files at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library.
Mahoney wrote that six witnesses saw Oswald with Ferrie or Banister in the summer of 1963, when Oswald gamered an unusual amount of TV, radio, and newspaper publicity for his phony one-man New Orleans chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Since that time, Kurtz has added another three people to the list of witnesses who saw Ferrie and Banister together, including Deputy New Orleans CIA Chief Hunter Leake.
Leake said that not only did Ferry and Banister work together but that Lee Oswald did small jobs for the CIA as well.
Helms was essentially the CIA’s highest operational officer in 1963 and later became CIA Director.
That was an understatement, but what happened to the CIA’s extensive files in New Orleans about Oswald, Ferrie, and Banister is explained in a later chapter.
Banister and Ferrie could have manipulated Oswald in a variety of ways.
And he needed another intelligence assignment if he ever wanted to profit from a successful “big reveal,” after his long years of undercover work.
However, Congress was holding hearings about mail-order gun sales around the time Oswald ordered his guns through the mail—and hearings about the Fair Play for Cuba Committee around the time he started his one-man New Orleans chapter of that organization.
So the well-connected Banister may have initially told Oswald that ordering guns and joining Fair Play for Cuba could help those hearings.
It’s also possible—even likely given that at least nine people saw them together in New Orleans just months before JFK’s murder—that Ferrie and Banister were helping to monitor Oswald for the CIA and Naval Intelligence.
Someone was monitoring Oswald for Naval Intelligence, and doing so would put Banister and Ferrie in the perfect position to manipulate Oswald, who would think he was simply getting ready for his next intelligence assignment.
In reality, though, Ferrie and Banister could have been controlling Oswald to set him up as the fall guy for the murder of President Kennedy.
As we will see, just a few months before Oswald ordered—or was told to order—the rifle and pistol, Carlos Marcello had made a threat to kill JFK to end RFK’s prosecution of him.
An FBI informant heard Marcello’s threat and reported it to his contact at the Bureau.
Though that report has yet to surface in any released FBI files, the House Select Committee looked into the informant’s account and concluded that the incident did occur.
If Banister and Ferrie were manipulating Oswald for Marcello, under the nose of the CIA and Naval Intelligence, this would resolve many of the lingering mysteries about Oswald’s unusual activities in 1963.
In August of that year, while being seen with Banister and Ferrie, Oswald received a surprising amount of TV, radio, and newspaper publicity from a fight Oswald provoked with a Cuban exile leader on the streets of New Orleans.
The publicity Oswald secured seems highly unusual given how hard it was for left-wing groups to get any type of press coverage in the early 1960s in politically conservative states like Louisiana and Texas.
When Oswald was arrested after the fight, an associate of Carlos Marcello bailed him out of jail.
Oswald, Banister, and Ferrie did make one small mistake by using the address of a side entrance to Banister’s office building on some of the pro-Castro flyers that Oswald made a big show of distributing on the streets of New Orleans.
The CIA had a media-propaganda expert who easily could have arranged such publicity for Oswald.
He was David Atlee Phillips, an expert in overthrowing Latin American governments for the CIA and a good friend to CIA officer E Howard Hunt.
In fact, Guy Banister had met with Phillips a couple of years earlier about anti-Castro publicity.
Remarkably, Phillips would also reportedly meet with Oswald and Cuban exile leader Antonio Veciana in Dallas in late August or early September to discuss killing Fidel Castro.
Congressional investigator Gaeton Fonzi confirmed that meeting, as did my research associate in an interview with Veciana.
It’s important to note that Richard Helms was continuing the CIA—Mafia plots in 1963 without telling his own CIA Director , Robert Kennedy, or President Kennedy.
Those plots included Marcello and Trafficante, as well as their confessed partner in JFK’s murder, Johnny Rosselli, who also visited Guy Banister that summer.
Oswald’s unusual adventures in Mexico City—David Atlee Phillips’s primary base, though he did missions for Washington that didn’t involve the Mexico City CIA Station Chief—can be explained the same way.
Oswald spoke fluent Russian and poor Spanish, but after he visited the Russian and Cuban embassies in an attempt to get to Cuba, someone made calls in excellent Spanish and poor Russian that seemed designed to ensure that Oswald would not get permission to travel to Cuba.
It was as if someone wanted him to stay in the United States so he could be of use to them later in the fall.
The Mexican Federal Police helped the CIA monitor phone surveillance of the Russian and Cuban embassies.
However, the DFS was corrupt and involved in the same heroin network used by Trafficante and Marcello.
In addition, a CIA asset involved in the CIA—Mafia plots with Trafficante and Marcello had actually bugged a Communist embassy in Mexico City for the CIA not long before, so he would have known much about the monitoring and bugging of Communist embassies there.
Oswald’s exact actions on the day of the assassination are detailed in Chapters 14 and 15.
Naval Intelligence staff in charge of monitoring secret surveillance reports on Oswald began destroying their files on him.
My Naval Intelligence source was called back to his office in Washington and ordered to sanitize and destroy much of their Oswald surveillance file.
That destruction continued until midday Sunday, November 24, and confirmation for that can be found in an FBI memo from several months later.
However, the destruction of files ended after Washington received word that Oswald had been killed.
Since no trial lay ahead, the rest of the records wouldn’t have to be destroyed, just hidden from the prying eyes of other agencies.
Longtime researcher Paul Hoch, who has assisted several of the government’s JFK investigations, later found indications in declassified government memos that there were more Naval Intelligence files on Oswald than were provided to the Warren Commission.
He found references to three files as well as a “supplemental file” on Oswald—one that was never explained or provided to any government committee.
After Jack Ruby murdered Oswald and it was clear there would be no trial, Naval Intelligence and Marine Intelligence decided to conduct their own secret investigation of Oswald.
To maintain strict secrecy, even within Naval Intelligence, they used the same men who had been compiling the “tight” surveillance of Oswald, including my confidential source.
The investigation began on November 24, 1963, immediately after Oswald’s death, and lasted for six weeks.
Given that Oswald had been under top-secret surveillance by Naval Intelligence, it’s not surprising that the organization wanted to know how he could have been involved in JFK’s murder.
Even without a trial, if word ever leaked to the press or public about Oswald’s intelligence work or the tight surveillance, it would have been a public relations nightmare for military intelligence and for agencies such as the CIA that had assisted with Oswald’s surveillance.
Military intelligence leaders would have to be ready with as many facts as possible in case President Johnson or Congressional leaders called them to account.
The military investigation was highly secret, even within Naval and Marine Intelligence circles, and all of the investigators had to sign strict confidentiality agreements that threatened them with court-martial for any disclosure.
No word leaked about the military investigation at the time, and the Warren Commission was never told about it.
In 1978 the wife of a military navigator who had helped fly the investigators to their destinations finally tipped off the House Select Committee on Assassinations about the secret military investigation of Oswald.
When the former Marine navigator testified to House Committee staff, he confirmed his participation in the military investigation and provided Committee staff with a great deal of specific information about his former commanders, the size of the investigation force, and their travel while they probed Oswald’s history.
However, as recounted in the House Committee’s report, when Congressional staff tried to run down those leads, Defense Department officials stonewalled them until the Committee’s term was almost over.
The first piece of official confirmation for the existence of the military investigation was provided only when the Committee’s efforts were ending.
This confidential ex-Navy source was the son of an Admiral who, thanks to his father’s high position, had been assigned to a comfortable office job at a major United States naval base in the Pacific.
While handling files, he noticed the report and, intrigued, read the entire file.
He told me that the report was probably being kept so far from Washington to ensure that word of it didn’t leak and so it wasn’t seen by civilian political officials who might talk to journalists.
Those conclusions meshed with off-the-record comments of United States officials who expressed doubts about the evidence against Oswald in private conversations, even as they publicly proclaimed his ironclad guilt.
These comments came from the highest levels of government, as shown by a private, taped conversation between President Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover soon after the assassination.
At the same time, Hoover was pushing Oswald’s guilt to journalists, the public, and other officials.
Right after JFK’s murder, Curry’s public statements—like Hoover’s—had shown no such doubt.
But to himself at the time, and in public years later, Curry admitted that he thought “Oswald had been trained in interrogation techniques and resisting interrogation” and that Oswald was some type of agent.
However, as has been well documented since the publication in 1966 and 1967 of the first critical analyses of the Warren Commission’s own twenty-six volumes of supporting materials, the evidence fails to support the Commission’s most important claims about Oswald’s guilt.
For example, other employees also left the building after the shooting, Oswald had no getaway car (or even a driver’s license) and initially left by public transit bus, and he had only $13.87 in his pocket when he was arrested at the Texas Theatre.
In contrast, much compelling evidence—including testimony from the Warren Commission volumes—places him in the Depository’s lunchroom at the time of the shooting, near a pay phone, as if waiting to receive or make a call.
As detailed later, all the evidence and eyewitness testimony against Oswald in Dealey Plaza and the Tippit case are very problematic and far from conclusive, while Oswald’s actions at the Texas Theatre, where he was arrested, smack of someone trying to locate a prearranged contact.
In fact, John Martino—a mobster associate of Marcello and Trafficante—confided to a friend that “Oswald was to meet his contact at the Texas Theatre.
When we look at Oswald in isolation as a suspect in JFK’s murder, he can appear unusual.
In Chicago, Thomas Vallee, a seemingly troubled former Marine, was arrested on November 2, 1963, on the morning of JFK’s planned motorcade through that city.
As people started to line the streets in anticipation of seeing JFK, the motorcade was suddenly called off—with two different phony excuses hurriedly given—because the Secret Service had learned that four possible assassins were at large.
When arrested, Vallee had “an M-1 rifle, a handgun, and 3,000 rounds of ammunition in his car,” according to the House Select Committee.
In interesting parallels with Oswald in Dallas, Vallee had recently taken a job in a warehouse overlooking JFK’s Chicago motorcade route, had moved into a YMCA in the fall of 1963 around the same time as Oswald, and had contact with a CIA-supported anti-Castro Cuban exile group, as had Oswald earlier in 1963.
For the attempt to kill JFK in Tampa on November 18, 1963, there were even more parallels between Oswald and Gilberto Lopez, a young man living there at the time.
On the day of JFK’s Tampa motorcade, Lopez was working not far from the motorcade route.
Oswald and Lopez were about the same age and had the same general physical description.
In all, government files and sources show there were nineteen parallels between the two men, including having highly unusual ties to the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, getting into fistfights over seeming pro-Castro sympathies, making an unusual trip to Mexico City to try to get into Cuba, not owning a car or even being able to drive, and moving to a new city and leaving a wife at the same time, just a few months before JFK’s assassination.
After the attempt to kill JFK in Tampa was called off and JFK successfully completed his motorcade, Lopez left Trafficante’s home base and reportedly went to Dallas, which was in Marcello’s territory.
Lopez would be secretly investigated for JFK’s murder by both the FBI and the CIA, and their reports on Lopez were provided to Naval Intelligence.
Had JFK been killed on November 2, 1963, in Chicago (home of Rosselli’s mob family) or in Trafficante’s base of Tampa on November 18, 1963, someone remarkably like Oswald was apparently positioned to “take the fall” in either of those cities, just like Oswald in Dallas.
Aside from someone to take the blame, the other personnel were mostly the same, regardless of which city would be the scene of the assassination.
Oswald has been a mystery to many on all sides of the JFK assassination controversy, but when looked at through the lens of Carlos Marcello and his associates—and that of United States intelligence—his documented actions as they unfold in this book finally make sense.
The only viable explanation for why Oswald worked for strident anti-Castro anti-Communists like Banister and Ferrie and was friends with anti-Communist George DeMohrenschildt is that he was an anti-Communist United States intelligence asset.
In that role, he was one of several United States intelligence assets sent to the Soviet Union to come back to America with a Russian wife.
Meanwhile, intelligence assets Banister and Ferrie began to manipulate Oswald for nonintelligence reasons.
Both were also working for Carlos Marcello, who was planning to kill President Kennedy to end Robert Kennedy’s war against the godfather and his mob allies.
Oswald would have been focused on what he thought was his impending mission to Cuba—and his “big reveal,” when he would finally emerge from years of undercover work to fame and fortune.
Yet the very actions that helped him build a pro-Castro, pro-Communist image in public for his intelligence work would also make him look instantly guilty if he were ever accused of murdering the President.
On the day an investigator for the House Select Committee on Assassinations was trying to interview him, DeMohrenschildt committed suicide.
That same day, Chicago hit man Charles Nicolettimwho worked with Johnny Rosselli on the CIA—Mafia plots in 1963 and was alleged to be in Dallas when JFK was assassinated—was murdered, gangland style.
He had also been scheduled to talk to investigators for the House Select Committee.
Aside from those two, no one was in earshot as he hurled curses at the long-dead Kennedy brothers.
He had done that before, but this time—since Marcello trusted the two men—he went further than usual in his anti-Kennedy tirade.
First they’d hauled him before Congress, then briefly deported him to Central America, and finally they had him prosecuted in New Orleans, the center of his multistate criminal empire.
Carlos Marcello had become America’s most powerful godfather by being not just ruthless but also cautious and discreet, and he paused his diatribe after his remarkable confession.
Realizing that even though he trusted his two associates he had crossed a line, Marcello turned away from them and simply walked off.
After Marcello left, his deadly admission hung in the air between the two stunned men who’d heard it.
They knew Marcello well enough to know what could happen to them if they ever revealed what they’d just heard.
With that, he walked away as well, leaving fifty-six-year-old Jack Van Laningham alone in the prison yard’s gazebo to ponder the gravity of his situation.
Van Laningham was Marcello’s cellmate at the Texarkana Federal Correction Institute, where both men were incarcerated.
The two men had grown close, and Marcello had come to regard Van Laningham almost like a son, as someone he protected and to whom he dispensed fatherly advice.
After the House Select Committee on Assassinations officially concluded in 1979 that Carlos Marcello—along with his closest mob ally, godfather Santo Trafficante—had the “motive, means, and opportunity to assassinate President Kennedy,” it referred the matter to the Justice Department for further investigation.
It appeared to the press and public that nothing was done with the Committee’s referral and that Justice officially closed the matter in 1988.
However, we now know that a major, extremely secret undercover investigation of Marcello—code-named CAMTEX (for CArlos Marcello, TEXas)—did go forward from 1985 to 1986.
The tapes include Marcello describing how he committed the crime, including his pre-assassination meetings with Lee Oswald and Jack Ruby.
The Review Board created by the JFK Act was set to expire in September 1998, and the FBI waited until near the end to dump almost a hundred pages of CAMTEX files on the Board staff.
It’s doubtful that any Review Board members saw Marcello’s confession files or that any of the Board’s staff—overwhelmed by even larger last-minute document dumping by the CIA—got more than a cursory glance at a few pages of CAMTEX files before their office closed for good.
Finally, in 2006, after months of intense effort and with the help of National Archives staff, I located the main trove of CAMTEX files given to the Review Board, and they were almost completely uncensored.
The public first heard about Marcello’s JFK confession files in TV news and newspaper coverage accompanying the 2008 publication of the hardcover of my book Legacy of Secrecy, which also contained interviews with key CAMTEX FBI personnel.
In 2009 I partnered with a division of NBC News for a Discovery Channel special (Did the Mob Kill JFK?), which also involved locating Jack Van Laningham, who had maintained a very low profile since his release from prison.
This book contains startling new revelations about Marcello’s confession and CAMTEX from declassified FBI files, from former Bureau informant Jack Van Laningham, and from key FBI personnel involved in the undercover operation.
Since 2009 I have conducted numerous exclusive in-person and phone interviews with Van Laningham, adding to and clarifying important parts of the story told by the FBI files and by the FBI agents involved.
In turn, the Committee’s findings, other government investigators, and noted historians and journalists buttress almost all the key points of the new CAMTEX revelations.
Credibility is always important in evaluating information about JFK’s assassination, and the CAMTEX revelations about Marcello are extremely reliable.
As noted, all the CAMTEX files referenced in this book came from FBI files at the National Archives, and all had been officially declassified.
CAMTEX involved several FBI agents and supervisors, as well as court-authorized wiretaps on Marcello.
The dangerous undercover operation was fully authorized by the FBI and Justice Department.
CAMTEX lasted from 1985 to early 1987 and targeted not only Carlos Marcello but also members of his family, including his brother Joe.
The operation succeeded in persuading a Marcello family member to pay two bribes to an undercover FBI agent who posed as a crooked friend of Van Laningham.
As for Jack Van Laningham, more than twenty-five years later, he retains an excellent memory of those events, which can be verified by comparing his comments now with his extensive remarks contained in FBI files from the 1980s.
When first interviewed by NBC and me, Van Laningham hadn’t seen his own notes—now in the FBI files—in over two decades.
In fact, I extensively interviewed Van Laningham on many occasions before giving him copies of those notes, yet his unaided recollection was very much in sync with what he had typed up all those years before.
In addition, after his release from prison in early 1989, Van Laningham took and passed an FBI polygraph test regarding Marcello’s JFK confession.
In fact, until shortly before meeting Marcello in prison, Van Laningham was a successful family man with no criminal record at all.
In 1985 Jack Van Laningham was fifty-six years old and had spent much of his adult life as a civilian air traffic controller for the United States Air Force.
In the 1970s, he’d switched to selling cars in California and was successful at that as well, supporting his English-born wife and three children.
However, Jack’s wife was a troubled alcoholic who left him in the early 1980s.
By the time he hit bottom, he was regularly drinking heavily and living in a small motel in Tampa, Florida.
When his money ran out, he committed his first—and only—crime during a drinking spree, robbing a small bank branch using a bag of dirty laundry and a TV remote control, which he told the tellers were a bomb and a detonator.
Van Laningham got away scot-free but was soon so overcome with guilt that he called the authorities to turn himself in.
When he was taken into custody, a Tampa FBI agent admitted that they would have never found Jack on their own.
Nonetheless, Van Laningham was sentenced to eight years in federal prison for armed robbery and wound up at the federal prison in Texarkana to serve his sentence.
Van Laningham wrote that while he shared “a crowded dorm with a hundred other guys,” Marcello was one of the few lucky inmates who shared a two-man cell.
In addition, Marcello’s “clothes were new and pressed and his shoes were shined.
Van Laningham had no idea who Marcello really was and knew nothing about his criminal empire.
He didn’t know that in the late 1970s the FBI and Justice Department had targeted Marcello as part of a larger undercover operation codenamed BRILAB, which grew out of investigations related to several Watergate figures.
The BRILAB charges were obtained with the help of an earlier Bureau informant, a business associate of Marcello named Joe Hauser.
Hauser wore a wire for the FBI when he met with Marcello in the late 1970s, a major accomplishment since the Bureau—for reasons that will shortly become clear— hadn’t wiretapped or bugged Marcello at all in the 1950s, 1960s, or most of the 1970s.
The godfather was initially incarcerated at the United States Medical Center for Federal Prisoners in Springfield, Missouri.
Twelve years earlier, Marcello had spent a comfortable and unusually short sentence there, serving only five months when he was supposed to serve two years.
The prison was minimum security , and after his original stay in the early 1970s, Marcello emerged in improved physical condition and ready for his most prosperous decade of crime.
After a year at Springfield, he was moved to the far more secure and harsher level-three federal prison at Texarkana.
The move may have been occasioned because officials suspected that Marcello was continuing to run his vast criminal empire from prison.
He had left his younger brother Joe Marcello nominally in charge, but Carlos still made the major decisions for a domain that included all of Louisiana, much of Texas, and the lower half of Mississippi.
In addition, Marcello had built his power by forging alliances with surrounding Mafia godfathers, such as the boss of the Kansas City mob and Trafficante in Florida, stretching his clout and influence even farther.
Marcello’s recent trials and imprisonment—and the changing nature of organized crime in the 1980s—had no doubt taken a financial toll on his huge enterprise, which had grossed $2 billion a year at its peak but was still massive.
Jack Van Laningham didn’t know any of that when he first saw Marcello in prison, since the godfather was not then as well known as he is today.
In 1985 there had as yet been no books devoted to—or TV documentaries about— Marcello.
Instead, the media focused on high-profile mob figures such as John Gotti.
But Van Laningham’s own observations, coupled with the comments and actions of other inmates, quickly made it clear to him that Marcello was a figure to be reckoned with, even in prison.
Marcello received special gourmet food, wore the aforementioned pressed clothes, and even held sway over work assignments and who got the coveted two-man cells instead of being placed in the massive dorms.
In addition, Van Laningham, like Marcello, was much older than the typical inmates at Texarkana, many of whom were in their twenties.
In fact, Van Laningham was the second-oldest inmate at Texarkana, and Marcello—nineteen years older— was the oldest.
One day in March 1985, Van Laningham just happened to sit next to Marcello.
Marcello was holding a newspaper and asked if Van Laningham had heard anything about the trial of a political figure then in the news.
The two men soon struck up an acquaintance, and not long after, Marcello had Van Laningham read him the newspaper each day.
Because of Marcello’s age and relative lack of formal education, reading was difficult for the godfather.
Marcello was interested not only in news about the political figure’s trial but also in reports of criminal activity from other parts of his empire.
Since he was closer in age to Van Laningham than any other inmate, they had similar tastes in things like music.
Like Marcello, Van Laningham was part of the “big band” generation, and neither was a fan of the rock music preferred by the other inmates.
Instead they remembered—and could reminisce with each other about —radio shows, movie palaces, World War II, and a dozen car companies no longer in business by the 1980s.
In addition, the first crime both men had been arrested for was bank robbery, and while Marcello laughed at Jack’s hopelessly amateur effort, he admired the courage of anyone willing to rob a bank with nothing but a bag of laundry and a TV remote.
Also in Van Laningham’s favor were that he had lived in Tampa, the city run by Marcello’s closest mob ally, Trafficante, and that unlike the other inmates, he wasn’t constantly trying to curry favor with Marcello.
Finally, Marcello felt he could trust Van Laningham because—much to Jack’s surprise—his power was such that he could show Jack his own prison file, which had the details of Jack’s arrest and personal history.
Not all the prison staff had been corrupted by Marcello’s influence, and one reported the growing closeness of Van Laningham and Marcello to an official at the prison.
That word eventually reached Thomas Kimmel, a Unit Director at FBI headquarters in Washington whose territory included Texas.
I was the first to interview Thomas Kimmel about CAMTEX, and he confirmed and illuminated much of the material in the FBI file.
He had a special interest in organized crime and would eventually head the FBI’s Labor Racketeering Section.
Kimmel’s territory included three prisons, and he was well aware of Marcello’s presence at Texarkana and the fact that the House Select Committee had focused attention on Marcello’s possible role in JFK’s murder.
Kimmel knew he couldn’t sell FBI headquarters on an investigation focused on the assassination since the FBI had publicly maintained since soon after JFK’s shooting that there was no conspiracy.
Instead, Kimmel proposed to his superiors an operation designed to see how “Marcello was still running” his organization from prison, something the godfather had done during his brief 1971 incarceration.
FBI headquarters approved, and Kimmel became “the driving force behind” the new CAMTEX operation targeting Marcello at Texarkana.
Kimmel learned of Van Laningham’s friendship with Marcello when he was already looking for a way to get to the godfather.
Kimmel could use Van Laningham to pierce the normally impenetrable wall of secrecy that surrounded the hypercautious godfather.
However, there were several reasons Kimmel was willing to go on record as the first FBI veteran ever interviewed about CAMTEX and Marcello’s confession.
First, since so many pages of uncensored files had already been released, Kimmel agreed to discuss what was in those files.
After all, the daring CAMTEX operation had been successful in some ways, yet the public, Congress, and even most in the Bureau knew nothing about it.
In addition, Kimmel had seen how excessive secrecy could actually hinder national security.
In 1999—two years prior to the arrest of Robert Hanssen, an FBI agent and Soviet spy—Kimmel tried to alert FBI Director Louis Freeh about a possible “mole” in the Bureau.
Kimmel used a “terrific” FBI agent based in Texas as one of those to handle the operation for him locally.
Completing the team was an older FBI agent, Tom Kirk, who was assigned to work undercover with Jack Van Laningham.
Jack was reluctant, but he was told that on visiting day at the prison, someone would talk with him.
When visiting day came around, FBI agent Tom Kirk posed as an old friend of Van Laningham’s.
He pretended to be a shady businessman looking for opportunities, even if they weren’t legal.
When Kirk first approached him, Van Laningham was initially very apprehensive about the operation.
The book, about organized crime, had fewer than a dozen pages about Carlos Marcello, since only a few books at that time had even that much information about the godfather.
After receiving it, Jack “read up on Carlos Marcello all the things that this man had done.
He had raped the people of Louisiana, he had bribed and cheated and if that did not work, he resorted to murder.
Surprisingly, Van Laningham revealed that “I read pages of the book to Marcello and he would listen, completely engrossed.
These and many other quotes from Jack Van Laningham come directly from his declassified FBI file, from letters and summaries soon after the events described that he either wrote by hand or later had a trusted inmate type up for him.
The information in the book Kirk sent had the effect that Kimmel had hoped for.
Van Laningham “was convinced that no matter what the FBI said, I must be careful or I would be dead.
Van Laningham would eventually be proven right, but that was still several years in the future.
Once Van Laningham became an FBI informant, he continued growing closer to Marcello, who talked more and more to Jack about his array of criminal activities.
FBI files show that Van Laningham and Kirk gradually tried to draw Marcello into a series of illegal business schemes based upon ongoing criminal operations that Marcello had revealed to Jack.
Marcello didn’t go for any of the schemes for various reasons, including the innate caution he had developed during his more than fifty years of successful criminal activity.
To get Van Laningham even closer to Marcello, Jack wrote, “he FBI asked the Unit Manager to move me into Marcello’s room with him.
Van Laningham was soon told by Kirk that reports about his work were going all the way up to the United States Attorney General, Edwin Meese.
To fill the long hours in their cell, Marcello began opening up even more to Jack, giving him fatherly advice while revealing more of his crimes and even telling Jack his hopes for the future.
In contrast to the shady deals Kirk had proposed to Marcello, Van Laningham learned that “the only thing Marcello was really interested in was getting out of prison.
The new CAMTEX plan was to get Marcello to pay a bribe to Kirk to get to a nicer and less-secure level-two prison and then another bribe to get to a level-one “country club” prison.
The hope was that either Marcello—facing essentially a life sentence—a family member, or an associate would “flip” at that point and start providing information to the FBI in return for reduced or dropped charges.
But even before the FBI’s plan got to the final stage, the agents would also learn how Marcello communicated with his subordinates.
To help document Marcello’s words and actions, Kirk told Van Laningham “he was going to report to his boss and try for a wiretap of the prison” cell that Marcello shared with Jack.
Van Laningham was told that “the Unit phone in the hall would be bugged” and more importantly “that I would have a bug in the room that I shared with Marcello.
I bought the radio and said that he would have to take the radio away to see if it was legal for me to have.
I called Kirk and he told me that the bug was being installed in the radio and it would be returned when they were finished.
On the 17th of September brought the radio back and told me that I could have it. . . . thought to myself, here I am in this little room with the head of the Mafia from New Orleans, with a radio with a bug inside.
Van Laningham wrote at the time—and told NBC News for the Discovery Channel—that the Marcello bugging operation yielded “hundreds of hours” of tapes, which Kimmel confirmed.
Kimmel told me that while the FBI listened to every tape, they would transcribe a tape only if Marcello mentioned something of interest.
Another CAMTEX FBI agent I interviewed said he was the one who actually listened to every secretly recorded tape.
Even as their private conversations were being recorded, Marcello continued to grow closer to Van Laningham.
Marcello shared with Jack intimate aspects of his personal life, from his many girlfriends and mistresses to details about his family.
The godfather also saw that Van Laningham got well-fitting clothes, avoided bad work assignments, and gained protection from the other inmates, including those jealous of Jack’s close friendship with the godfather.
Marcello even dispensed fatherly advice to Van Laningham about his future outside of prison.
For all those reasons, Van Laningham grew to like some aspects of Marcello’s personality.
Yet all that changed once Jack heard Carlos Marcello’s chilling confession to JFK’s assassination.
It brought home to Jack just how much Marcello had come to trust him—and how deadly the godfather could be.
Kimmel, Commander of the United States Naval Base at Pearl Harbor when it was attacked on December 7, 1941.
Admiral Kimmel was scapegoated for the disaster, which was the subject of excessive government secrecy at the time and for many decades afterward.
He ruled his empire without challenge from the late 1940s to the early 1980s, a remarkable tenure for such a deadly profession.
A close look at Marcello’s early life shows how he developed the incredible confidence needed to order JFK’s assassination and how he gained the experience to get away with it.
Marcello wasn’t like Mafia chiefs in other cities, because the history of his mob “family” was very different.
The New Orleans Mafia is the oldest Mafia family in the United States, having begun in the 1860s.
In addition, the New Orleans Mafia was one of the few mob families to conduct hits on government officials; the only others who dared to take such measures even occasionally were Trafficante’s Tampa mob and the Chicago Mafia, both allies of Marcello in drug trafficking and the JFK hit.
In the 1800s, soon after the Civil War, New Orleans became a favored American destination for immigrants from Sicily, the birthplace of the Mafia, because the climates of the two regions were so similar.
One hundred was also the number of members in the New Orleans Mafia by October 15, 1890, when mob hit men shot the city’s Police Chief, David Hennessey, using a shotgun and a revolver.
He died the following day, and though nineteen mobsters were indicted for the hit, all were acquitted thanks to witness intimidation and bribed jurors.
In response to Hennessey’s assassination and the resulting acquittals, the public rioted and killed eleven of the Mafia men.
But within two years, the New Orleans Mafia had fully recovered and was stronger than ever.
Carolla served only two years in federal prison for the crime and emerged to continue heading the organization into the 1930s and mid-1940s.
Carlos Marcello was born Calogero Minacore on February 6, 1910, in Tunisia, the son of a Sicilian mother who soon joined her husband in New Orleans.
After dropping out of school at age fourteen, Carlos helped his large family of six brothers and two sisters by delivering vegetables from the family’s farm to the New Orleans market, which was controlled by the Mafia.
Carlos soon saw crime as a greater opportunity than farming, and at age nineteen he and three friends robbed a bank of $7,000.
However, after they were caught and forced to return the money, all the charges were dropped.
Marcello quickly learned that it was better to have others commit his crimes, so he had two teenagers rob a grocery store.
While Marcello was planning a follow-up crime with the two—another bank robbery—the teens were arrested.
One of them told the authorities everything, and the police also arrested Marcello.
In the future, Marcello would come to rely on only close family members and associates who could be trusted not to talk.
He had a lot of time to think about such things after “he was sentenced to nine to twelve years in prison,” a term he began serving in May 1930 when he was just twenty.
Thanks to a corrupt governor, Marcello was pardoned after only four years.
After leaving prison, Marcello bought his first bar, beginning a pattern that would eventually see him owning or controlling dozens of bars, clubs, and restaurants in cities ranging from New Orleans to Dallas, where he would secretly control even gay bars and Jack Ruby’s Carousel Club.
The following year, in 1936, the twenty-six-year-old Marcello officially joined the New Orleans Mafia and married the daughter of one of Sam Carolla’s underbosses.
Less than two years later, Marcello was arrested again, this time for selling twenty-three pounds of marijuana from his bar.
He was sentenced to a year anda day and ordered to pay a fine of $76,830, but thanks to the mob’s influence, he paid only $400 and was released after just nine months.
In the future, Marcello would leave the actual trafficking of drugs to others to insulate himself from risk of arrest.
After his release, Marcello focused on a music company he owned with one of his brothers.
It was just a front for putting their jukeboxes and pinball machines in bars, restaurants, and clubs in the cities of Gretna and Algiers, just outside New Orleans.
Any owners who didn’t want Marcello’s machines were dealt with brutally.
Carolla ordered Marcello to get a fourth of the machines into New Orleans’s west side.
In return, Marcello would keep twothirds of the money while Costello got one-third.
The deal was incredibly profitable for both thanks to Marcello’s fearsome reputation among bar and club owners.
At this time Marcello made his first steps at large-scale bribery of public officials.
He later boasted that he gave the Gretna Police Chief “$50,000 in cash every few months,” as well as distributing much smaller bribes to lower-level police.
Marcello was so ruthlessly efficient and the slots so profitable that when Costello and Meyer Lansky decided to build a plush gambling casino called the Beverly Country Club near New Orleans, they made Marcello a 12. percent partner.
The club opened in 1945 and soon featured top nightclub acts of the day, including such Hollywood stars as Jimmy Durante.
Marcello was soon managing not only the club but all of Costello’s gambling operations in the New Orleans area.
When it came to keeping his men in line, as well as the many other business owners he dealt with, Carlos Marcello could rely on his violent reputation.
One victim was a hoodlum who used the names Constantine Masotto and Thomas Siracusa.
In 1943 Marcello sent a clear message to mobsters, business owners, and law enforcement when he personally helped torture and murder Siracusa in semipublic fashion at the Willswood Tavern, a rustic restaurant just outside New Orleans owned by Marcello’s family.
Davis briefly mentioned the torture/murder in his landmark 1989 biography of Marcello, a key source for information about Marcello’s history in this chapter.
But here, quoted from FBI files for the first time, is an eyewitness account from a woman who had been dining at the restaurant that evening.
Twenty-four years later, when she finally told the FBI what she had seen, she was still so afraid that she refused to testify in court and requested that the FBI not identify her.
When “Siracusa walked . . . back into the kitchen,” Marcello and three other men “immediately” followed him.
One of Marcello’s men “was holding a snub-nose revolver which was pressed against Siracusa’s temple.
She was sent “to see Sheriff Clancy .. . and told him what she had seen and that she was scared.
Sheriff Clancy told her that if she kept her mouth shut, she would not get hurt.
She later went to see Captain at his home told her to keep her mouth shut about what she had told him, as they would kill her.
That report said that Siracusa “had been beaten to death with rubber hoses by Carlos Marcello and an accomplice.
That type of murder and body dumping became standard retaliation for anyone in Marcello’s organization who displeased, disobeyed, or withheld money from the crime boss.
Word of Marcello’s murder of Siracusa spread throughout the criminal underworld and beyond, to those who did business with Marcello and to all levels of law enforcement, helping to keep all of them in line.
That use of fear and corruption was a template for many of Marcello’s future crimes, though the mob boss later kept his hands technically clean by relying on his men and professionals to take care of the actual murders.
At the same time, Carlos Marcello could also be extremely personable with family, friends, and business associates.
Given the many murders for which he was responsible, it’s tempting to say that Marcello combined the traits of both a sociopath and a psychopath.
However, a better analogy might be that Marcello was simply like a great white shark, which must keep swimming forward or die.
Jack Van Laningham later characterized Marcello by saying, “ more cruel and vicious egomaniac I have never met.
He added that Marcello “seemed to want to win all the time, even if he had to cheat,” and this impulse applied even to the friendly games of gin rummy they played in prison.
So for Marcello, killing may simply have been part of winning, of always moving ahead.
After all, he hadn’t achieved his position in the Mafia by inheriting it from his father, as had his friend Santo Trafficante.
Instead, Marcello had to earn his own power and then keep earning it to fend off potential local rivals and mob bosses from other areas.
As Marcello gained experience, he also became better at avoiding prosecution.
John H Davis points out that in the late 1930s and early 1940s, “Carlos had been charged with two more assaults and robberies, violation of the federal Internal Revenue laws, assault with intent to kill a New Orleans police officer, sale of narcotics, and armed assault of a New Orleans investigative reporter.
The top Mafia figure of the 1930s had been Charles “Lucky” Luciano, who eventually left Costello temporarily in charge while Luciano was in prison.
Costello and the other high-ranking mob bosses clearly liked what they saw in Carlos Marcello because when local boss Sam Carolla was slated for deportation back to Sicily in May 1947, Marcello was chosen to take over the Mafia in Louisiana.
Ostensibly, Marcello was to be Carolla’s “de facto successor,” since Carolla would still technically be the local godfather.
But with the same merciless determination that had taken him that far, Marcello continued to expand his power and his contacts.
Within a few years, he was indeed godfather of a rapidly expanding empire.
Marcello became more prominent on the national Mafia scene when “Costello mob financier and adviser Meyer Lansky agreed to establish a national underworld communications center in New Orleans, and later a national clearinghouse for underworld money laundering .. . in the Crescent City,” according to Davis.
Marcello became more powerful, wealthier, and more influential in the Mafia —and in Louisiana politics—with each passing year.
At that time, officials ranging from United States Attorney General Howard McGrath to FBI Director J Edgar Hoover publicly expressed skepticism that the Mafia even existed.
However, Tennessee Democratic Senator Estes Kefauver knew the Mafia was a very real threat, so in 1950, as Chairman of the Special Committee to Investigate Organized Crime in Interstate Commerce, he began a_ well-publicized investigation.
In addition to targeting national crime figures such as Frank Costello, Kefauver called Marcello “the evil genius of organized crime in New Orleans” and held hearings there, on the mob boss’s own turf.
Kefauver possibly singled out Marcello not only because of New Orleans’s long-standing reputation for vice but also because of an article by prominent muckraking newspaper columnist Drew Pearson, who described the low-public-profile Marcello as “the crime czar” of the city.
On January 25, 1951, Carlos Marcello was forced to appear before Senator Kefauver’s hearings in New Orleans.
His New Orleans attorney, G Wray Gill, was sitting right beside him, as he would continue to do for years to come, including when Marcello was in federal court the day JFK was shot.
Carlos Marcello was charged and convicted of contempt of Congress for taking the Fifth so many times, though that conviction was eventually overturned on appeal.
It took two years, but “in 1953 the federal government issued its first deportation order against Marcello,” a matter that would reach a critical turning point soon after John F Kennedy took office as president.
In the meantime, Marcello grew even more powerful under the new Republican administration of President Dwight Eisenhower and especially his vice president, Richard Nixon.
The 1953 deportation order against Carlos Marcello didn’t produce results while Nixon and Eisenhower were in office, for reasons that remain unclear.
Marcello did eventually hire a powerful Washington attorney, Jack Wasserman, to help with his deportation case, and he also retained his own Washington lobbyist.
But it’s possible that Marcello wasn’t deported because of one or more high-level bribes, since he was so experienced at funneling money to politicians in Louisiana and, as his territory expanded, Texas.
In general, as long as Nixon was vice president, Marcello and the Mafia flourished, not just in the United States but also in countries ranging from Cuba to Guatemala.
Marcello—and his closest mob ally, Florida’s Santo Trafficante— was even associated with attempted hits on government officials in 1954 and 1955.
By 1955 Sheriff Clancy was reportedly “talking to federal agents about Louisiana gambling,” according to one Mafia history.
In April 1955 Clancy was hospitalized for a medical condition, but the “guard outside his door” was removed on a pretext.
Then the patient in the room next to Sheriff Clancy, a bank teller, had his skull smashed open “with a cleaver” while he lay in his hospital bed.
It’s unclear whether the hit man simply mixed up the rooms and killed the wrong person or if the murder of the man in the next room was meant to send a message to Clancy.
No one was ever arrested in the hospital murder case, and the same type of witness intimidation would occur after JFK’s assassination.
Carlos Marcello became increasingly involved with Santo Trafficante and his operations as the 1950s progressed.
Both men preferred to avoid publicity and to wield their growing power away from the limelight.
Like Marcello, Trafficante was ruthless with his enemies; testimony given at the Kefauver Committee hearings tied Trafficante’s mob family to at least fourteen murders over two decades.
Among those killed was a Kefauver Committee witness, who was murdered before he could testify.
Unlike Marcello, Santo Trafficante had long been groomed to take over for his father, Santos Trafficante Sr., whose accomplishments included creating the American side of the French Connection heroin network.
In the 1950s Marcello’s organization was part of that network, bringing in heroin through ports in Louisiana and Texas, as well as across the border from Mexico.
Trafficante Sr. had sent his son to Cuba in 1946 both to help with the heroin trafficking that resumed after World War II and to gain a piece of the Havana casino action.
Santo Trafficante managed casinos for his father until the elder Trafficante’s death in 1954, at which point Trafficante assumed control of the mob family.
Santo Trafficante spoke fluent Spanish and continued to spend time in Cuba as well as Tampa, with frequent visits to the “open” mob city of Miami.
Because of his lack of a passport and United States citizenship, Marcello could not easily or safely travel to Cuba, which by the 1950s was the Mafia’s gambling mecca for wellheeled travelers from the United States.
Trafficante was one of the two main casino owners in Havana with the other being mob financial genius Meyer Lansky.
Trafficante completely controlled one casino, the Sans Souci, and had shares in three more.
For years it was thought that Marcello’s inability to travel to Cuba prevented him from holding a share in the mob’s Havana gambling industry, but as revealed here for the first time, that wasn’t the case.
Mafia casinos in Cuba had flourished under the brutal dictatorship of Fulgencio Batista, whose regime was embraced by Vice President Richard Nixon and tolerated by President Eisenhower.
Nixon reportedly had business interests on the island with his mob-connected best friend, Charles “Bebe” Rebozo.
Nixon had visited the Mafia casinos and had been given honors by Batista.
The repressive Cuban dictator had partnered with mob bosses like Meyer Lansky and Santo Trafficante, who gave him a lucrative piece of the growing Havana casino industry.
Meanwhile, much of the Cuban populace suffered from bad nutrition, low wages, and Batista’s vicious police state.
By 1957 Cubans Fidel Castro, his brother Raul, and Juan Almeida—as well as Argentinean doctor Che Guevara—were leading a small but growing guerrilla movement in Cuba’s Sierra Maestra.
While the charismatic Fidel got the lion’s share of favorable press attention, other rebel leaders and groups also fought against the regime, putting more and more pressure on Batista’s corrupt police state.
When Eisenhower established an arms embargo, it didn’t slow the fighting but only allowed the Mafia and the CIA to fill the void by providing weapons, and not just to Batista.
Surprisingly, the CIA and Trafficante played both sides, providing small quantities of arms to Fidel Castro and his men.
However, all the fighting occurred far from the plush Havana casinos, which continued to flourish and expand in 1957.
Frank Costello had been forced into retirement, meaning that Trafficante couldn’t turn to Marcello’s old mentor for help.
Even though the Washington Post described him as the “leading suspect” in arranging Anastasia’s murder, he was never charged.
The ever-cautious Carlos Marcello didn’t attend and instead sent “his most trusted brother, Joe” and his top two Dallas lieutenants, Joseph Civello and Joe Campisi Sr.
Their agenda ranged from replacing Anastasia to providing assistance for Batista and Fidel Castro.
Marcello’s caution proved to be justified when local officers raided the unusual meeting, arresting fifty-eight mob leaders, including Trafficante and Joe Marcello.
They were detained only briefly, but the huge meeting, combined with the recent sensational front-page news of Anastasia’s assassination, only served to fuel the frustration of many Americans—and some members of Congress— that the Mafia seemed to operate with near impunity under J Edgar Hoover’s FBI and the rest of the Eisenhower—Nixon Administration.
IN THE 1950S, two successful assassinations of government officials were linked to close associates of Carlos Marcello; one took place the same year as Apalachin, 1957, and the other in 1954.
Though Marcello was not the driving force in either, both are important for understanding how the godfather later murdered JFK, and they show how Marcello partnered with, and learned from, his fellow mob bosses.
Marcello’s partner Santo Trafficante was one of the vice lords behind the highly publicized assassination of Alabama’s Attorney General—elect in 1954.
The hit occurred in Phenix City, Alabama, long known as the most corrupt town in America.
Prior to World War II, Franklin Roosevelt had sent General George Patton to clean up the town, but to no avail.
Santo Trafficante had a major influence in Phenix City through one of his longtime lieutenants, and Marcello had criminal interests in Alabama as well.
State officials either looked the other way or—in the case of Alabama’s sitting Attorney General— were part of the criminal operation.
In 1954 Phenix City’s Albert Patterson ran for Attorney General of Alabama on a promise to clean up the town.
He won the Democratic nomination, which in 1950s Alabama made him the Attorney General-—elect, but Patterson was quickly assassinated by gunfire.
The confident crime lords hadn’t bothered to use any type of patsy to take the blame, so it was immediately clear that organized crime was responsible for the murder.
The assassination of Attorney General—elect Patterson generated huge headlines across the country.
Though the Eisenhower—Nixon Administration, including FBI Director J Edgar Hoover, had basically taken a hands-off approach to organized crime, National Guard General Walter Hanna pressured the Alabama Governor, who finally got Eisenhower to take action.
Phenix City was placed under “Martial Rule” by the National Guard, putting the city under United States military occupation.
That drastic step finally ran the rackets out of Phenix City, though after a time they simply reorganized on a smaller scale across the river in Columbus, Georgia.
Bringing the assassins of Attorney General—elect Patterson to justice was another matter.
After the court indicted Garrett, he stayed either in Texas or Mississippi until 1963, when all charges against him were inexplicably dropped.
As with other hits involving Trafficante and Marcello, witness intimidation and murder kept the investigation from ever reaching the level of the two bosses.
Of the four men indicted, just one was convicted of murder, eventually serving only seven years, while one was acquitted and a third was allowed to plead nolo contendere to a minor charge.
One might think the Phenix City assassination would have caused the Eisenhower—Nixon Administration to declare war on organized crime, but it didn’t.
J Edgar Hoover continued to turn a blind eye toward the Mafia in general and Marcello in particular.
Time magazine in 1975 first revealed secret meetings and friendship between Hoover and mob boss Frank Costello, which were confirmed by William Hundley, the Justice Department organized crime chief during the Kennedy Administration.
Hoover’s predilection for gambling on horse races is now well known, and it’s also possible Hoover was blackmailed by the Mafia over his closeted homosexuality.
Carlos Marcello’s partners had gotten away with murder, but they had lost the lucrative cash cow that was Phenix City.
However, they learned from their mistakes, and the next time Marcello’s associates assassinated a government official, a patsy would be on hand to be quickly blamed and killed to divert suspicion from organized crime.
IN ADDITION TO Trafficante, another important mob figure with whom Carlos Marcello became involved in the 1950s was Johnny Rosselli, the Mafia don who handled the Chicago mob’s interests in Los Angeles and Las Vegas.
Rosselli was a smooth operator who in the 1940s had hobnobbed with movie studio chiefs until he was caught running a union shakedown operation for the mob.
After Rosselli’s release from federal prison, he still had clout in Las Vegas, but the studio heads had to distance themselves from him.
Court records show Rosselli was Still influential enough to be an executive producer on three low-budget film noirs in the late 1940s, though his name couldn’t be listed in the credits.
One of the films, He Walked by Night, featured a crazed ex-serviceman who turned killer.
The young ex-serviceman kept his long-barreled weapon hidden away, wrapped in a blanket, but he carried a pistol and used it to shoot a policeman in his patrol car.
Rosselli later credibly confessed his role in JFK’s murder, which had a similar scenario involving Lee Oswald and Officer Tippit.
Before leaving the movie business for the greener pastures of Las Vegas and Cuban casinos, Rosselli helped get his friend Frank Sinatra a dramatic role in From Here to Eternity, which reignited Sinatra’s career.
Rosselli’s biographers say the pressure he applied on Sinatra’s behalf inspired the famous “horse’s head in the bed” scene in the first Godfather novel and film.
Johnny Rosselli was very active in Guatemala in the mid-1950s, and his biographers documented from two sources that “Rosselli’s primary concern in Guatemala was to protect and advance the interests of” a New Orleans company with ties to Carlos Marcello.
President Castillo Armas ruled the country, having been installed as dictator after the Eisenhower—Nixon Administration used the CIA to overthrow the liberal government of the democratically elected Jacobo Arbenz in 1954.
Carlos Marcello paid $100,000 to Guatemala’s prime minister and his former law partner for his fake birth certification and citizenship papers.
There was also casino gambling in Guatemala run by Ted Lewin, Johnny Rosselli’s associate from Los Angeles.
President Armas tried to close the casinos, and he jailed Rosselli’s friend Lewin.
Four days later, in July 1957, Armas was assassinated, apparently by a lone Communist assassin.
The United States government and news media, still in the thrall of the McCarthy— Nixon “Red Scare,” which saw hundreds blacklisted or graylisted in Hollywood and elsewhere, quickly accepted that a seemingly lone Communist had murdered President Armas.
However, historians point out that a letter supposedly found on the patsy’s body, said by authorities to be the bodyguard’s correspondence with Moscow about his assassination assignment, was actually only a form-letter postcard from Radio Moscow.
Another US-backed right-wing dictator quickly took Armas’s place, and Marcello kept his fake citizenship papers.
At the time of the assassination, Marcello was involved in a business venture with Rosselli in Las Vegas, the godfather’s only direct foray into that city.
Vegas needed that luxury to compete with the burgeoning Mafia casinos being built in Havana.
Rosselli was only a Mafia don, not a mob boss or godfather like Marcello, but he was the consummate dealmaker, and he managed the Tropicana for a time.
However, Rosselli and the Mafia were still learning how to hide mob ownership from the Nevada Gaming Commission.
As Marcello later explained to Jack Van Laningham, he “tried to get into gambling in Vegas” using a front man, and “all was going good until the Nevada Gaming Commission learned that Carlos Marcello was involved.
Marcello always tried to stay out of the limelight and the newspapers, and he could have all the gambling he wanted in Louisiana without worrying about a state Gaming Commission.
Marcello stayed out of Las Vegas after that, even in the 1970s when he had a chance to put up money for the real casino depicted in Martin Scorsese’s film Casino.
Instead, Marcello simply brokered that deal to the Kansas City mob, getting an enormous onetime “finder’s fee” in the process, something the FBI learned but never revealed to the public.
Even after the Tropicana problem, Marcello continued to deal with the smooth, articulate Rosselli.
In addition to Sinatra, Rosselli was close to Dean Martin, Marilyn Monroe, and other celebrities.
Furthermore, like Marcello, Rosselli wasn’t an American citizen, having been born Filippo Sacco in Esperia, Italy, on July 4, 1905.
But unlike with Marcello, the United States government didn’t realize Rosselli wasn’t a citizen, and it wouldn’t learn that until 1966, setting off a chain of events that would help trigger Watergate and lead to Rosselli’s gruesome 1976 murder on Trafficante’s orders, with Marcello’s support.
But in 1957 the fifty-two-year-old Rosselli and the forty-seven-year-old Marcello still got along well.
Marcello and Rosselli had something else in common—neither hesitated to kill those who got in his way or who incurred his wrath.
By the mid-1950s, Willie Bioff—the key witness whose testimony had sent Rosselli to prison and ended his glamorous Hollywood lifestyle—was living in Phoenix and was good friends with Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater.
Three years later Rosselli approved the murder of another good friend of Goldwater’s, Gus Greenbaum, owner of the Riviera casino and “mayor” of the Las Vegas strip.
So on December 3, 1958, Greenbaum was almost completely “decapitated” while his wife, Bess, had “her throat slashed with a butcher knife” according to crime writer Ovid Demaris.
Senator Goldwater attended Greenbaum’s funeral, but there was no arrest.
Several years later DeMaris documented the arrival of two hit men from Miami shortly before the murder.
Rosselli may well have used his mutual associate with Marcello—Santo Trafficante—to provide the hit men.
Employing out-of-town hit men was a technique both Trafficante and Marcello increasingly used since it was difficult to tie them to a crime and locale.
CARLOS MARCELLO’S EMPIRE continued to grow and would soon be bringing in “$2 billion annually from criminal operations in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas,” according to his biographer.
Anyone that got in the way of what he wanted was eliminated one way or another.
Marcello would send men to see the owner that he wanted to do business with.
If the bar owner made trouble or refused, fights were staged, furniture broken up, and the guests harassed.
The owner of the bar either went out of business or went into partnership with Marcello.
Marcello had his own still in New Orleans and also shipped liquor in from Texas, in five-gallon cans.
Since all of the police were on the payroll, it did no good to call them, he had them all in his pocket, along with the judges.
That pattern was repeated dozens, probably hundreds, of times, and not just in the bar and restaurant business but also in the companies that supplied them.
Marcello also explained to Van Laningham that “the way to make and keep money was to buy ground”— in other words, land.
Marcello’s real estate holdings in Louisiana and cities such as Dallas were extensive and growing.
They included his secluded and massive sixty-fourhundred-acre Churchill Farms estate.
Once mostly swamp, part of the land had been drained, and Marcello used the remote farmhouse in the middle of it for some of his most sensitive meetings—including several concerning plans for JFK’s assassination.
By 1957 Marcello had set up his daily office at the nondescript Town and Country Motel, a location he would use for routine business for the next two and a half decades.
Located on the equally nondescript Airline Highway connecting the city to Moisant Airport, it was an appropriate venue for the publicity-shy godfather; the road was described by his biographer as an “ugly . . . endless procession of gas stations, parking lots, billboards, striptease joints, sleazy bars, cheap motels, and neon signs”—the kind of area that could be found in most larger cities throughout America at that time.
Marcello’s private office behind the motel was the site of most of his weekday meetings when he wasn’t traveling through his extensive empire, where he also maintained smaller offices and mistresses.
THREE CAN KEEP A SECRET IF TWO ARE DEAD When frustrated New Orleans citizens tried to bring in experienced law enforcement help from the outside, even there they were thwarted.
The former FBI agent in charge of Chicago, Guy Banister, was brought in to be New Orleans’s Assistant Police Superintendent, focusing on the ties between organized crime and the department.
However, the extremely conservative and racist Banister seemed more interested in going after left-wingers and alleged Communists.
Carlos Marcello was free to expand his criminal empire, using murders when needed, and according to the New Orleans Crime Commission those included “the gangland-style killing of two of Marcello’s narcotics associates,” according to John H Davis.
The heroin network Marcello shared with Trafficante was their most lucrative, most secret—and thus most deadly—enterprise.
Marcello continued to rely on his own brothers and extended family when possible.
But each of the others—Pete, Pascal, Vincent, Tony, and Sammy—also played key roles in helping manage Marcello’s ever-expanding empire.
There appeared to be no concerns for Carlos Marcello on the federal front since Richard Nixon enjoyed increasing power and respect as the 1950s advanced, due to a series of health issues plaguing President Eisenhower.
Nixon had weathered the only two potential scandals he’d recently faced, aided in one case by his longtime patron, billionaire Howard Hughes.
The other scandal involved exposure of the mob ties of attorney Murray Chotiner, Nixon’s closest advisor.
Richard Nixon and Murray Chotiner had longtime and well-documented links to the Mafia.
Los Angeles mobster Mickey Cohen admitted giving Nixon $5,000 in Nixon’s first race for Congress in California, in 1946.
Chotiner, Nixon’s chief political aide and strategist from 1946 until the time of Watergate, had arranged those payoffs.
Richard Nixon’s best friend from the 1950s until his death—Charles “Bebe” Rebozo—had extensive banking, real estate, and business ties to the mob, including associates of Meyer Lansky and Santo Trafficante.
Evidence, including later admissions by former government officials such as John Mitchell, shows that Rebozo often fronted businesses and shady deals for Nixon in locales ranging from Cuba to Florida to the Bahamas.
However, Chotiner’s role as an advisor to Vice President Nixon had caught the eye of Democrats in Congress.
As it happened, a Congressional committee probing Chotiner publicized the case before having enough evidence against him, and Chotiner avoided any charges.
He did have to assume a less prominent role for the Vice President, away from the public eye, but Nixon’s other Mafia ties remained unexposed.
One of the counsels on the committee investigating Chotiner was a young Robert F Kennedy, and he learned from the mistakes he saw in that investigation.
In 1957 Robert Kennedy teamed up with his brother, Senator John F Kennedy from Massachusetts.
They were investigating Teamster corruption starting with union president Dave Beck, the only major union leader to support the generally anti-union Eisenhower—Nixon ticket.
After corruption charges forced Beck to step down, John and Robert Kennedy focused on his successor, Jimmy Hoffa.
The Kennedys’ investigation of Hoffa would have crucial ramifications for all concerned.
The corruption and Mafia ties the brothers uncovered would lead them to focus on exposing Hoffa’s crimes, first through Congressional hearings and later through prosecutions that would eventually send Hoffa to prison.
Their actions began a blood feud between the Kennedys and Hoffa that would last until JFK’s assassination, followed five years later by Robert’s.
Finally, the Mafia ties uncovered in 1957 by the Kennedy brothers’ Hoffa investigation soon led them to focus extensively on fighting organized crime.
Some say that effort was a way for the politically ambitious John to counter rumors about his own immensely wealthy father’s ties to or friendship with members of organized crime.
Others claim that JFK pursued the mob to garner publicity, and it is true that he generated huge amounts of media coverage for the anti-Mafia hearings he pushed.
But from newspaper headlines alone, there was clearly a need for someone to take on the Mafia in America since J Edgar Hoover and the Eisenhower—Nixon Administration seemed so reluctant to do so.
The Kennedys wasted no time in going after Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante, both soon to be close allies with the new Teamster leader, Jimmy Hoffa.
Senator Kennedy dispatched a trusted investigator, former journalist Pierre Salinger, to New Orleans to look into Marcello’s criminal activities firsthand.
Before his death, Salinger spoke to me about that and described the fear and intimidation he encountered in New Orleans in the late 1950s.
While Salinger could document a clear paper trail, people at all levels were afraid to talk; he himself worried that he wouldn’t survive the experience.
However, aided by the New Orleans Crime Commission, a group of concerned local citizens headed by Aaron Kohn, Salinger helped the Kennedys put together a remarkable list of Marcello’s criminal enterprises.
The Kennedys knew one thing Marcello feared was publicity, so they arranged to force him to come to Washington to testify before the Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management, chaired by Arkansas Senator John McClellan.
However, the Kennedys were its driving force, and they received the lion’s share of the enormous radio, newspaper, and television publicity the hearings generated.
The Kennedys and Salinger knew that Marcello would simply take the Fifth, so they devised a strategy designed to convey Marcello’s story to the American people anyway.
First they extensively questioned Aaron Kohn of the Crime Commission, whose answers gave a detailed overview of Marcello’s life and numerous crimes.
Next they questioned Salinger, who provided more documentation and details about the complex web of companies controlled by Marcello.
Finally, on March 24, 1959, Carlos Marcello himself was forced to go before the glare of television lights in Washington to confront the Kennedys’ Senate committee.
RFK was the brash, blunt-spoken Chief Counsel of the Senate Select Committee on Improper Activities in Labor and Management, which now focused on organized crime.
But he still maintained what was often described as a boyish demeanor, and that was especially true when compared with his older brother, Senator John F Kennedy.
However, on that day both JFK and Senator Barry Goldwater had other business to attend to and were not at the hearing.
That left RFK in full command of the interrogation of Carlos Marcello, the first of a series of events involving the godfather that would result in tragedy for RFK, his brother, and at times even Marcello.
Attired in a well-tailored, expensive-looking pin-striped suit, the forty-nineyear-old godfather sat at the witness table.
Dark glasses concealed his eyes, and he would wear them for the entire hearing.
Though Marcello tried to maintain a relaxed image in his rare public appearances, he could be quick to anger; perhaps the dark glasses were intended to make it harder for RFK and the Senators to read his reactions.
Seated beside Marcello was his top Washington attorney, Jack Wasserman, one of the country’s best immigration attorneys.
The fact that he chose Wasserman instead of a criminal defense attorney or a _ high-profile Washington power attorney showed that what Marcello feared most was his lack of citizenship.
Unlike Santo Trafficante, Marcello couldn’t duck the Kennedys’ subpoena by traveling to another country.
As a noncitizen, if Marcello ever left the United States he might be denied reentry, so Wasserman told him he had no other recourse than to report for the hearing.
With his bow tie and glasses, Wasserman looked nothing like a typical mob lawyer and more like a university professor.
Next to Wasserman was one of the godfather’s brothers, Vincent Marcello, who ran the slot machines for his brother’s empire.
In contrast to his compact, portly brother, Vincent was taller and more conventionally handsome.
Still, with his Roman profile and imperious attitude, Carlos Marcello was a commanding presence in the hearing room.
But Robert Kennedy—who had already sparred with Jimmy Hoffa in earlier hearings—remained focused on his carefully prepared questions, designed to reveal to the American public the huge scope of Marcello’s criminal empire.
Along with another Dallas Marcello underboss, restaurateur Joe Campisi Sr., Civello conveyed Marcello’s orders to lower-level mobsters in Dallas, such as Jack Ruby.
However, other witnesses and huge charts clearly showed the importance of Marcello and New Orleans to what would soon become known as the French Connection narcotics trade.
Once again, Marcello fell back on his right to avoid incriminating himself, as he would for almost all the questions that day.
Since RFK had said that “Mr Carlos Marcello has been under orders of deportation from the United States since about 1953,” much of their questioning centered on why he was still allowed to live in the United States.
Kohn had earlier testified that Marcello had “been in court some 37 times in various appellate proceedings, and in various hearings” to avoid deportation, but it’s clear that some Senators felt some factor other than Jack Wasserman’s legal skill accounted for the current Administration’s failure to deport Marcello.
Even so, Marcello left the hearing unbowed, and despite all the publicity, as long as President Dwight Eisenhower and Vice President Nixon remained in office, no serious additional efforts were made to deport the godfather.
However, John and Robert Kennedy weren’t through with the Mafia, and Chicago mob boss Sam Giancana was set to receive the same treatment accorded Marcello.
He wasn’t a godfather like Marcello but essentially ran the day-to-day operations of the Chicago mob for two elder Mafia chiefs.
Giancana’s influence extended beyond Chicago, to Las Vegas, Hollywood, and Reno, with the help of his Mafia don, Johnny Rosselli.
On June 9, 1959, RFK verbally sparred with Sam Giancana, trying to draw him into a revealing response.
RFK was unable to prod Giancana to do more than plead the Fifth, which Giancana did over three dozen times.
Nevertheless, as with Marcello, RFK was still able to expose Giancana’s criminal network, which included narcotics trafficking, something the Chicago Mafia for years disingenuously continued to claim it avoided.
RFK also relied on questioning Pierre Salinger before the Committee to put even more of Giancana’s crimes on the record.
As they sought to question additional mob leaders, Senator Kennedy and RFK were stymied on one occasion by the CIA, foreshadowing problems with the Agency that would plague the two men even after JFK become President.
When RFK and his aides tried to question him in private, the Mafia chief replied, “You can’t touch me.
RFK must have been stunned, but after looking into it, he found that “the CIA had made a deal with” the mob boss.
As eventually documented in the 1970s by Hoffa expert Dan Moldea, in 1959 the CIA was working with three mob bosses from the northeastern United States, trying to assassinate Fidel.
Those mob bosses—James Plumeri, Russell Bufalino, and Salvatore Granello—were contacted and handled by Teamster President Jimmy Hoffa, who acted as a “cutout” for the CIA in the transaction.
Hoffa was a logical choice because both new Cuban President Fidel Castro and the Mafia viewed him as an ally.
Before Castro and his allies assumed power on January 1, 1959, Hoffa had been involved in CIA-sanctioned arms smuggling to Cuba.
By the early summer of 1959, Hoffa was participating in a complex deal, one that John and Robert Kennedy tried to unravel using their hearings and investigators.
In the deal, Hoffa’s mob associates sold surplus planes to Cuba, financed by Teamster money and it also involved stolen securities.
The Kennedys’ investigation hit a stone wall because they couldn’t locate a mysterious “Jack La Rue,” apparently the alias of a Hoffa associate involved in the deal.
Hoffa’s complicated transaction was also likely used to provide cover for his work on the 1959 ClA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel.
Those Hoffa-brokered plots would last for almost a year, but because the northeastern mobsters didn’t have extensive resources in Castro’s Cuba, their assassination plans made little progress.
As part of their hearings, John and Robert Kennedy wanted to question godfather Santo Trafficante about the murder of Albert Anastasia.
Though Trafficante fled to Cuba to avoid testifying, in his place the Kennedys heard testimony from the Miami Crime Commission chief.
Like the others, it would never be solved On June 9, 1959, Fidel ordered that Trafficante be placed in a comfortable detention center in Havana, along with several of his mob associates.
Trafficante’s confinement was comfortable, and he was even allowed to attend his daughter’s lavish wedding at the Habana Hilton.
One account says that once the godfather was released, Trafficante continued to visit Havana for almost three months.
However, other historians cite Trafficante’s later testimony—and information from some of his associates—to the effect that his detention wasn’t voluntary and that at times he feared for his life.
Given these conflicting views, it’s probable that his detention was initially unexpected and potentially dangerous, but as time went by, a financial accommodation was gradually reached, leading to his release.
His stay in Cuba lasted until the Kennedys’ committee had finished its work.
When Trafficante was in detention, it was hard for him to access his considerable wealth, and he had no easy way to communicate with his most powerful ally, Carlos Marcello.
The only way to get Marcello’s help was to use trusted messengers who could freely travel from the United States to Cuba and back without arousing the suspicion of United States or Cuban authorities.
Ruby’s role was confirmed by a Britsh man named John Wilson Hudson who was detained with Trafficante.
Unlike most of the others in detention, Hudson did not have a criminal record.
Hudson said the man visited the detained Trafficante “frequently” and that man was Jack Ruby.
TO UNDERSTAND HOW Ruby came to be a messenger between Marcello and Trafficante in 1959—and how he came to play a critical role for both men in their 1963 murder of JFK— it’s important to look closely at his background.
Knowing who Jack Ruby really was, and the role he played in organized crime for decades, is crucial to understanding JFK’s assassination, since Ruby’s actions before, during, and after the tragedy were dictated by the Mafia.
Originally born Jack Rubenstein in Chicago on March 25, 1911, Jack Ruby dropped out of high school and began working for the mob.
Investigator Scott Malone says that “Ruby moved from Chicago to Los Angeles in 1933 and began selling handicappers’ tip sheets at Santa Anita racetrack.
Even though the victim was Ruby’s friend, he gave no useful information to the police, showing those in power that he could be trusted not to talk.
Malone points out “that murder enabled the mob, and eventually the Teamsters, to take over the union.
That was at a time when Marcello was just taking over control of the New Orleans Mafia.
After Marcello was in firm control of the rackets in Dallas, Ruby began to perform work for his organization.
The Jewish Jack Ruby could never aspire to the heights of non-Sicilian mob heavyweights like Meyer Lansky or Mickey Cohen, so the low-level mobster basically had to scramble, to do whatever he could for the local mob powers.
In 1950 Jack Ruby “briefed the Kefauver Committee about organized crime in Chicago,” according to Luis Kutner.
This was the first of many times Ruby would appear to cooperate with authorities in return for protecting his—and his superiors’—criminal activities or to find out what authorities knew.
FBN agent “Jack Cusack had informed the McClellan Committee in January 1958 that Mafioso Joseph Civello ran the heroin business in Dallas,” and “Cusack linked Civello with Marcello, Trafficante, and Jimmy Hoffa,” according to Valentine.
Civello, as noted earlier, was Carlos Marcello’s top underboss in Dallas.
Jack Ruby’s close relationship to law enforcement, a major factor in the aftermath of JFK’s assassination, began to develop in the 1950s.
It’s clear now, and confirmed by Carlos Marcello’s own comments about Ruby during CAMTEX, that Ruby was Marcello’s pay-off man for the Dallas Police.
The police corruption wasn’t just about money, since Ruby was soon involved in various nightclubs and with strippers and prostitutes.
It was said that policemen never had to pay for a drink at Ruby’s club and sometimes were even provided with women.
Ruby was “very close friends” with Dallas Police Captain Will Fritz, who headed the Homicide Bureau.
But Ruby had even higher friends on the Dallas Police Force, and an FBI document says that Ruby “took the Chief of Police” of Dallas to “Hot Springs, Arkansas,” in 1956, when it was a gambling mecca.
Jack Ruby took advantage of his law-enforcement ties whenever he could.
According to one Warren Commission document, Ruby was active in the Dallas segment of Trafficante and Marcello’s French Connection heroin network, the same network that John and Robert Kennedy investigated in their 1959 hearings.
Ruby appears to have had a small role in making sure Marcello’s heroin that flowed through Dallas from Mexico and the Texas ports stayed en route to Chicago.
One female heroin courier who worked for Ruby tried to expose the plot to assassinate JFK just prior to his murder.
A major French heroin trafficker—Michel Victor Mertz—would be in Dallas when JFK was shot.
Mertz’s associate, French Canadian heroin kingpin Lucien Rivard, was imprisoned with Trafficante in Havana in 1959.
He also noted “Ruby’s close friendship” with the head of “the special Dallas Police unit charged with investigating organized crime cases as well as narcotics and vice,” whom “Warren Commission testimony shows regularly visited” one of Ruby’s strip clubs.
Also in the late 1950s, FBI files—most provided to the Warren Commission— show that Ruby became involved in gunrunning to Cuba with several associates of Santo Trafficante, among them gangsters Norman Rothman and Dominick Bartone, as well as corrupt former Cuban president Carlos Prio.
The FBI documented numerous ties between Ruby and Cohen’s girlfriend, a well-known burlesque dancer from Texas whose stage name was Candy Barr.
IN 1959 RUBY’S Cuban gunrunning and arms deals with Castro’s men made him an excellent candidate to be a courier/messenger between Ruby’s boss Marcello and the detained Trafficante.
In March of 1959, Ruby had been interviewed by the Bureau and asked to become an informant.
Ruby, no doubt after checking with mob superiors in Dallas such as Civello or Campisi, agreed.
Such an arrangement could give him an extra degree of protection for his illegal activities and a way to find out what crimes the FBI was interested in.
In 1959 Ruby reported to the FBI “on at least eight occasions,” but according to historian Gerald D McKnight, the Warren Commission hid that fact from the American public.
It was “not until twelve years after the Warren Report was published that the American people” learned that Ruby had been an FBI informant.
The fact that Ruby’s tenure as an informant overlapped with his trip to Cuba to visit Trafficante might explain why the Warren Commission refused to reveal Ruby’s role as informant for the Bureau.
Ruby met with his FBI handler on July 2, 1959, less than a month after Trafficante was detained.
Trafficante originally had another messenger he could rely on, electronics expert John Martino.
Those funds were essential for any attempt to buy Trafficante’s release from his Cuban detainment.
But Martino was arrested in Cuba on July 23, 1959, after a flurry of trips between Miami and Cuba.
Unlike Trafficante, Martino was sent to a Cuban prison, serving three years in what he considered hellish conditions.
Martino’s absence made someone like Ruby even more important as a_ potential messenger/courier.
Other accounts say that “Carlos Marcello attempted to free Trafficante,” so his underling Jack Ruby was apparently part of that effort.
While Trafficante was in jail in Cuba, Jack Ruby attempted arms deals to help secure Trafficante’s release, according to several accounts.
Even after the Revolution, McWillie was one of many mobsters still operating in Cuba.
While most people think that Fidel Castro shut all the Mafia casinos when he took over, that’s only partially true.
Frank Fiorini , a Trafficante hoodlum who’d fought alongside Fidel, was made the liaison between the Cuban government and the mob bosses who still ran—even if they no longer owned—the casinos.
Jack Ruby admitted frequently that Lewis McWillie was his “idol,” someone he almost worshipped as the personification of mob power and high-level access that Ruby could only dream of.
Many years later, when interviewed under oath by the House Select Committee on Assassinations, McWillie prevaricated when asked if Ruby had accompanied him on his visits to Trafficante in prison.
I don’t know for sure . . . | went out there with someone but I don’t recall who it was.
McWillie testified shortly after the murders of numerous Marcello and Trafficante associates and government witnesses—Giancana, Rosselli, Hoffa, Nicoletti, and others.
Since Marcello and Trafficante were still alive and in power when McWillie testified—and he was still working at casinos—his equivocation is as close to a “Yes, Ruby went with me” as the Committee could possibly expect.
Official United States and Cuban records show a confusing array of several trips by Ruby to Cuba in the late summer of 1959, with unexplained gaps in the travel records indicating that some of his entrances and exits were surreptitious.
Two days later, on August 8, Ruby flew to Cuba from New Orleans, listing the Capri Hotel and Casino as his destination.
Ruby may well have helped with that bribe, and/or its aftermath, as his mysterious trips to Cuba continued into September.
After his Cuba visits ended, Ruby ceased being an FBI informant on October 2, 1959.
The Hoffabrokered plots between the CIA and the Mafia to kill Fidel that began in 1959 were continuing in the early months of 1960, though neither Trafficante nor Ruby’s boss Marcello had any documented role in those plots.
However, former Cuban mob powerhouse Meyer Lansky had reportedly placed a million-dollar bounty on killing Fidel Castro, since, unlike Trafficante, Lansky had been unable to reach an accommodation with the Castro brothers.
In January 1960, Tropicana casino manager Lewis McWillie asked Jack Ruby to legally buy four Colt Cobra revolvers in Dallas and bring them to Havana.
Jack Ruby was then the manager of two small Dallas nightclubs, including one he fronted for Carlos Marcello’s organization.
Because so much gunrunning to Cuba had been going on, the Colt revolvers could have been easily obtained by a gangster like McWillie in Havana.
Likewise, Ruby—a career criminal—could have easily obtained such weapons illegally in Dallas.
But for some reason McWillie needed these pistols to be easily traced back to a legal purchase in Dallas so that it was clear they weren’t linked to organized crime or any illegal— or C[A—gunrunning operation.
On that occasion, Jack Ruby for some reason balked at McWillie’s request to go to Cuba even though he had visited Cuba several times the previous summer.
After Ruby’s refusal, the Tropicana’s McWillie asked Ruby to ship the four pistols to him in Havana.
What is known definitively is that Ruby purchased at least one Colt Cobra.
Some evidence does indicate that the episode could have been part of the continuing plots to kill Fidel brokered by Hoffa between the CIA and the Mafia.
Gangster Lewis McWillie had been part of Ruby’s Cuban venture with Hoffa associate Dominick Bartone the previous year, and government files show that McWillie had solid Mafia connections to Meyer Lansky, who also wanted Castro killed.
Cuban authorities arrested a “gangster” and his associates for attempting to kill Fidel later in 1960, and among the weapons photographed was a pistol resembling the Colt Cobras McWillie pressed Ruby to buy.
One Colt Cobra definitely purchased by Jack Ruby in January 1960 would find greater infamy more than three years later.
It was the pistol Ruby used to shoot accused assassin Lee Oswald on live television on November 24, 1963.
Ruby’s notorious gun at the very least came out of his involvement with the Mafia and possibly from the mob’s early work with the CIA to kill Fidel.
Another important factor in Ruby’s character and in JFK’s assassination—the Carousel strip club that Ruby managed in Dallas, across from the posh Adolphus Hotel—also began in 1960.
New information for the first time shows that Carlos Marcello and his organization actually controlled the Carousel Club, not Jack Ruby.
Ruby was only the club’s manager, but the timing indicates that being allowed to manage the Carousel—and to present himself as its owner—might have been Marcello’s reward to Ruby for his activities in Cuba with Trafficante.
Ruby ran a string of failed clubs before the Carousel, and for decades it was assumed by authorities and historians that Ruby had at least one investor, his good friend Ralph Paul, who kept lending Ruby huge sums of money for his money-losing ventures.
Ruby also owed large sums to the IRS throughout the early 1960s, first approaching $20,000 and by 1963 $40,000.
Yet the House Select Committee on Assassinations found that Paul repeatedly loaned Ruby money, “which eventually may have totaled $15,000” plus an additional “larger sum of money (allegedly $15,000 to $17,000) to assist Ruby” with his taxes.
Yet Ralph Paul was only the owner of a relatively small restaurant in Dallas, the Bull-Pen Drive-In, and it’s impossible to imagine he could have come up with those sums let alone continue to loan money to a man who owed the IRS so much money.
Even more bizarre, despite the best efforts of the FBI and the Warren Commission, no one could ever determine who owned the other 50 percent of the Carousel Club.
More unusual still, after Ruby became famous for shooting Oswald and the Carousel Club became known nationwide, Ralph Paul simply gave up his 50 percent ownership in the club.
Instead of profiting from what could have been a must-see tourist stop (even if Dallas had pulled the club’s liquor license), Ralph Paul simply walked away from his 50 percent ownership of the club and the $180,000 he’d sunk into the club and Jack Ruby.
We now know from Carlos Marcello’s admission to Jack Van Laningham during CAMTEX that Marcello’s organization controlled the Carousel Club.
One of Marcello’s underbosses in Dallas—most likely Joe Campisi Sr.— funneled the money to Ralph Paul to launder the funds for the Carousel.
Campisi’s Egyptian Restaurant was large and popular, and Campisi was powerful, so he certainly didn’t need Ralph Paul as a partner.
However, Joe Campisi’s comment makes perfect sense if he was funneling Marcello money to Paul as part of Paul’s fronting ownership of the Carousel for the mobsters.
However, this arrangement would have huge ramifications for Marcello less than three years later, when it gave the godfather leverage to get Ruby to risk his life for the godfather after JFK’s murder.
These new CIA—Mafia plots involving Trafficante and Marcello were the dark secret in the covert war the United States was waging against Cuba.
Most of those involved in JFK’s assassination had some role in these new plots, so it’s important to see how they originated.
In 1960 John F Kennedy was running for President, having announced his candidacy in the same Senate hearing room where Carlos Marcello had been grilled the previous year.
One of the few areas where President Eisenhower allowed Nixon major input on United States policy was Cuba.
Eisenhower had left Washington the previous year when Fidel Castro had come to the United States, leaving it to Nixon to meet with the new Cuban leader.
Instead of offering United States financial aid as Castro had hoped (since the former US-backed dictator, Fulgencio Batista—a friend of Nixon—had fled with much of the Cuban treasury), Nixon had lectured Castro and offered no help.
Nixon had also confided to others that he felt Castro was dangerous, and soon after that the CIA began working with Jimmy Hoffa to have the three northeastern mob leaders kill Fidel.
Those plots had not worked, and now the 1960 election was rapidly approaching.
Vice President Nixon apparently thought that if Castro was killed before the election, and United States troops had to be sent into Cuba to protect Americans and American interests, the voting public would chose the eight-year veteran Vice President over the young and relatively inexperienced Senator Kennedy.
Nixon told “a press aide the toppling of Castro would be ‘a real trump card’” for the election, according to Anthony Summers.
As Eisenhower, the former General in command of America’s D-Day forces and now elder statesman, prepared to end his last term as President, he was cautious about Cuba.
He clearly didn’t want to leave office in the middle of a war with the island nation, but he delegated some aspects of Cuba policy to his Vice President, Nixon.
According to many sources—including President Eisenhower—the March 1960 meeting of the National Security Council authorized neither a huge Bay of Pigs invasion force nor the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel.
Instead, its general resolution involved support for anti-Castro operations and the creation of a US-backed coalition of exile groups.
Among those helping to coordinate that coalition were two veterans of the CIA’s 1954 Guatemala coup, friends E Howard Hunt and David Atlee Phillips.
Nixon, however, seemed to press for more direct action, and the CIA met with him dozens of times about the Cuban problem, conferences for which the notes have never been released.
The original CIA—Mafia plots, which began in 1959, were so cautiously structured at arm’s length, using Hoffa as a cutout, that they hadn’t been effective.
It’s also likely that President Eisenhower didn’t even know about them.
Nixon apparently believed that more direct action was needed, and soon.
He ordered his National Security Aide, General Robert Cushman, to meet with Hunt.
Later Hunt admitted that he had written one of the first CIA memos calling for the assassination of Fidel Castro, though it—like so much other CIA information about Hunt—was withheld from Congressional investigators and has still not been released.
Hunt later wrote that “Cushman had urged me to inform him of any project difficulties the Vice President might be able to resolve.
Cushman told Hunt that Nixon was the “chief architect . . . the honcho” of the United States effort to topple Fidel.
That was confirmed years later when President Nixon told a White House aide that he had been “deeply involved” in the Cuban operation.
Given Hunt’s positive previous meetings with Nixon and Hunt’s key role in the successful Guatemala coup, it’s logical that Nixon would have viewed Hunt—and his proposal— favorably.
Nixon also probably knew that the United States had been trying without success to assassinate Fidel, as Hunt wanted, since the previous year.
If Hunt wasn’t involved in helping plan Fidel’s assassination before his meeting with Nixon’s aide, he almost certainly was after it.
Hunt, like Nixon, publicly denied knowing about, let alone working on, the ClA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel.
Yet Hunt’s mentor—and Nixon’s future CIA Director—Richard Helms disagrees.
Robert Maheu later admitted that Richard Nixon was personally behind the ramped-up CIA—Mafia plots to assassinate Fidel Castro and that Nixon had chosen Maheu to be the CIA’s new cutout to the Mafia.
It was logical that Nixon would want Maheu on the project, since he’d worked with him on two previous, successful covert operations.
Also, Howard Hughes, Maheu’s main client, was closer to Nixon than he was to any other politician.
Though Hughes had vanished from public view, a Nixon memo confirms that the reclusive billionaire had actually met with Nixon the previous year.
In 1973, during the height of the Watergate investigation, Trafficante was being represented by famed attorney F Lee Bailey, according to Daniel Sheehan, the noted activist lawyer who was then working for Bailey.
Sheehan says that Trafficante explained to Bailey’s Chief Investigator that in the summer of 1960, Vice President Nixon had originally reached out for help to his longtime patron, the reclusive billionaire Howard Hughes.
Hughes, who did extensive work for the United States government, assigned his key aide, Robert Maheu, to handle the matter.
Maheu, a longtime CIA asset, reached out to Mafia don Johnny Rosselli, who in turn asked Santo Trafficante to join the operation.
Trafficante still maintained extensive contacts in Cuba, since his former casinos remained open.
However, Trafficante was leery of the operation, since he—of all the mob bosses who had left Cuba—had worked out a type of accommodation with the new Cuban regime.
Trafficante told Rosselli and Maheu that he wanted some form of personal assurance that Vice President Nixon was actually behind the operation.
At Trafficante’s third meeting about the plots with Rosselli in Miami, a CIA security official joined them and confirmed to Trafficante that Vice President Nixon had personally ordered the Castro assassination operation.
Trafficante agreed to join the venture and to use his men in the operation.
Rosselli’s boss Sam Giancana also joined the plots and, later, so did Carlos Marcello.
Nixon’s September 1960 ClA—Mafia plots with Trafficante, Rosselli, and Giancana were hidden from the Warren Commission and wouldn’t be officially exposed until Congressional hearings in 1975, a year after the Watergate scandal forced Nixon to resign.
Those CIA—Mafia plots were never publicly linked to Watergate, even though in 2012 I first published memos showing that Senate Watergate investigators had learned of the connection eight months before Nixon resigned.
However, Marcello’s role in Nixon’s ClA—Mafia plots remained unexposed until 1989 and is still overlooked by most historians today.
The CIA— Mafia plots were first linked to JFK’s assassination in 1975 and led to two Congressional investigations of the assassination.
But because Marcello’s role in the ClA—Mafia plots was hidden from those investigations, the full connection between those plots and JFK’s murder hasn’t been available until now.
ONE IMPORTANT PART of the ClA—Mafia plots that began in 1960 wasn’t connected to those plots until 2012.
This was the fact that the mob bosses involved in the plots—including Marcello, Trafficante, and Giancana—paid a huge bribe to Vice President Richard Nixon the same month the plots began.
Nixon’s background shows how that bribe came about and why Nixon turned to the Mafia to kill Castro in the first place.
Cohen confessed that Nixon received even more Mafia money for his races after that, while author Anthony Summers documented many additional Mafia ties that Nixon developed in the 1950s.
When Nixon first ran for Vice President, with Dwight D Eisenhower heading the ticket, “Sam Giancana, then a rising power in the national crime syndicate, ‘I like Ike.
At that time, “Our guys out in California” meant Johnny Rosselli and his associates.
Nixon also received support from his first race onward from billionaire Howard Hughes.
Once Nixon became Vice President, he received even more favors and illicit money from Hughes.
Twice Hughes had his top covert operative, Robert Maheu, help Nixon with difficult problems.
Marcello clearly had every reason to want to see JFK defeated and Nixon become president.
Marcello and Trafficante wanted to do all they could to ensure a Nixon victory, especially since their ally Jimmy Hoffa was soon expected to face a federal indictment as a result of all the attention the Kennedys’ hearings had focused on him.
Accordingly, Marcello began to gather money for Nixon, and in addition to Trafficante, Giancana later claimed that he had contributed, as did Tony Provenzano, a Mafia Teamster official in New Jersey who was close to Marcello.
In September 1960, Richard Nixon received a bribe of at least $500,000 from the same mob bosses who began working that month on his CIA—Mafia plot to kill Fidel.
The Florida mobster contributing was Santo Trafficante, who was at the time joining the CIA—Mafia plots.
Among the “mob boys” in New Jersey was Mafia capo Tony Provenzano, who was close to Marcello.
The September 1960 Mafia—Hoffa—Nixon bribe was extensively documented by the Justice Department.
Though the 1960 Mafia—Hoffa—Nixon bribe would also be independently verified by Senate investigator Michael Ewing, the public would not learn about Nixon’s bribe until 1978, long after the Watergate investigations ended.
Marcello’s huge bribe to the Vice President also raises the possibility that an earlier payment to Nixon might have been the reason Marcello hadn’t been deported during Nixon’s Vice Presidency.
The bribe given by Marcello, Trafficante, and the others produced other benefits as well.
DECLASSIFIED CIA FILES and reports show that Nixon’s ClA—Mafia plots had kicked into high gear by late September 1960, with the CIA wanting Trafficante and the others to kill Fidel Castro in classic gangland fashion.
That was really a primary reason the CIA wanted to use the Mafia in the first place, to give the public an entity other than the CIA or the United States government to blame for the murder.
Because the mob bosses knew the Cuban people wouldn’t tolerate the mob retaking control of its casinos if they blamed the Mafia for the death of the popular Cuban leader, Trafficante, Rosselli, and the others focused on lowprofile types of assassination, such as poisoning.
The CIA later admitted having its scientists work on developing deadly toxins to use in the plots.
Two plots to poison Fidel can be documented in the weeks leading up to the 1960 Presidential election.
One involved Richard Cain, a “made” Chicago mobster who also worked in Chicago law enforcement.
The other effort included Frank Fiorini, the mob associate who had fought for Fidel’s forces and then become the liaison between Fidel and the mobsters who ran the Havana casinos.
Years later Fiorini would change his name to Frank Sturgis and become infamous as one of the Watergate burglars working for E Howard Hunt.
Though Fiorini’s mob and CIA ties have since been documented, those links would not become widely known during the Watergate scandal.
CIA officer E Howard Hunt played a major role in the Agency’s covert plot to eliminate Fidel in the fall of 1960.
If Castro was killed by mob assassins and United States military forces were deployed to protect Americans in Cuba, it would take only a small group of trained exiles to help install another US-backed strongman or dictator.
Though experienced with coups, at that point Hunt had no experience with the Mafia.
To address that issue, in September 1960 longtime mob associate Bernard Barker was assigned as Hunt’s assistant, a position he would maintain for years.
The son of an American father, Barker had been born in Cuba and had attended school in the United States.
He originally had dual American—Cuban citizenship but because of his service in Cuba’s brutal and corrupt secret police, his United States citizenship was revoked in the mid-1950s.
Barker and Hunt say that Barker worked for the CIA for several years in the 1950s, though according to Barker’s released CIA file, he began working for the Agency only in the spring of 1959, when he was forty-one.
Hoover’s description perfectly matches other descriptions of Frank Fiorini’s part of the C[A—Mafia plot.
Nixon’s plotting with the CIA and the Mafia continued right up until the 1960 election, but his effort was not successful.
Sam Giancana would later claim that he gave Kennedy his close win, but Giancana’s boast has since been debunked.
That the son of one of America’s richest men would need Giancana’s help to win in heavily Democratic Chicago, whose powerful Mayor, Richard Daley, was JFK’s close ally, strains credibility.
Unlike Marcello, Giancana was open to the possibility of a Kennedy presidency, and had tried—and would continue to try— to use mutual associate Frank Sinatra to influence JFK’s tough stand on the Mafia.
Sinatra had also introduced JFK to one of his mistresses, Judith Campbell, earlier in 1960.
However, it was to no avail, since JFK—and his new Attorney General Robert Kennedy—wasted no time in declaring war on the Mafia.
Press accounts show that singled out for special attention in that war were Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante, who were soon targeted by RFK’s hugely increased staff of Justice Department Mafia prosecutors.
Despite those stories in the press, the Agency continued the CIA—Mafia assassination plots into December of 1960 and into 1961 without telling the new President.
That month New Orleans private detective Guy Banister was linked to a CIA plot to stage a fake attack on the United States naval base at Guantanamo, Cuba, to provide a pretext for a United States attack on Cuba.
However, Cuban authorities got wind of the plot and arrested forty Cubans involved.
In the press, the Cuban government “unmasked the CIA’s participation” and denounced the organization involved in the fake attack, “the Anti-Communist League of the Caribbean,” which was largely controlled by Banister.
Cubela had several ties to the C[A—Mafia plots and to Trafficante associates.
In addition, “in late 1960, the Agency sent a sniper rifle to Havana via diplomatic pouch,” according to CIA Congressional testimony uncovered by historian David Kaiser.
That was only some of the crucial information the CIA hid from Presidentelect Kennedy, and the Agency would continue to deceive him after he took office.
The CIA was also using ZR/RIFLE to try to assassinate another foreign leader, the charismatic Patrice Lumumba of the Congo, an attempt that succeeded shortly before JFK was sworn in.
As detailed later, QJWIN would also be used in the plots to kill Fidel Castro and would surface in relation to JFK’s murder.
CIA Director Allen Dulles, a close associate of Richard Nixon, never told JFK that he was continuing the CI[A—Mafia plots.
He did want JFK to continue major covert action to overthrow Fidel Castro, but the four hundred Cuban exiles then being secretly trained by the CIA in Central America clearly couldn’t do the job.
Dulles instead told JFK they were planning a Cuban exile invasion of Cuba, and Dulles quickly escalated the number of exiles being trained, which eventually reached two thousand.
Dulles knew that even two thousand Cuban exiles had no chance of staging a viable invasion against one hundred thousand members of the Cuban army and militia and against a Cuba populace that largely backed Fidel Castro.
As a backup to the CIA—Mafia plots, he had CIA officers such as David Atlee Phillips begin a new plan that recycled the failed “fake Guantanamo attack” from December.
JFK was told that the exiles being trained there were for a “diversionary landing” force that would stage a decoy attack on Cuba, far from the main exile force, to draw the attention of Cuban military forces.
After being trained at the secluded thirty-five-hundred-acre camp adjoining the Mississippi River, the exiles would sail into Cuba on their own ship, the Santa Ana.
Like JFK, they believed they were going to stage a diversionary landing on the far eastern shore of Cuba to distract Fidel from the main force.
Not until they neared shore would their CIA commanders break out Cuban military uniforms and explain they were to attack the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay in the guise of Castro’s forces.
E Howard Hunt’s associate David Atlee Phillips was handling propaganda for the whole Cuban operation and could ensure that the United States and the world quickly heard about Castro’s supposed attack on Guantanamo Bay.
Even if the Mafia failed to assassinate Fidel before the CIA’s exile invasion, that fake attack was designed to force JFK to break his public pledge not to use United States military force against Cuba.
The secret CIA exile training going on outside New Orleans gave Guy Banister and David Ferrie opportunities to become involved in the covert operation.
In an unusual foreshadowing of events to come, it’s well documented that one of Banister’s associates even used the name “Oswald”—then in the Soviet Union—as an alias when trucks were purchased for Cuban exiles at a New Orleans Ford dealership.
One of Banister’s associates involved had briefly employed Oswald when he was a teenager, which is probably why the name of the well-publicized defector was used.
More important, as New Orleans became a center of covert Cuban exile activity—a role that would continue into 1963—Marcello became involved in those operations.
In addition to being part of the ClA—Mafia plots, Marcello donated money to Cuban exile groups.
As he developed ties to Guy Banister and David Ferrie, Marcello’s access to covert United States anti-Castro operations only increased.
As for David Ferrie, in early 1961 he was still an Eastern Airlines pilot, but he claimed he took leave from that position to assist with the exiles’ Cuban invasion plans.
E Howard Hunt and his assistant, Bernard Barker, played two roles in those invasion plans in the early months of 1961, after JFK became President.
Officially, Hunt worked with exile leaders such as Tony Varona and Manuel Artime , who were supposed to run Cuba after Fidel was gone.
However, the CIA admits that Varona was also working at the same time on the ClA—Mafia plots with his associate Santo Trafficante, as was Artime.
Much evidence shows the same was true for Hunt and Barker, who were also involved in the CIA—Mafia plots since the new exile leadership of Cuba would have to be ready to take over as soon as the Mafia assassinated Fidel.
Stockton’s account shows that E Howard Hunt was working with Johnny Rosselli on assassination plotting, even as the CI[A—Mafia plots were actively under way.
In early 1961 CIA Director Allen Dulles was confident that Castro would be killed by the CIA—Mafia plots or that JFK would be forced to commit United States military forces because of the fake attack on Guantanamo.
On March 7, 1961, another CIA memo stated that “Major Juan Almeida, Chief of Staff of the Cuban Army, has been approaching certain Latin Ambassadors in Havana to determine whether he would be accepted” for political asylum.
Both reports about Almeida’s dissatisfaction with Castro went to CIA headquarters in Washington.
Commander Almeida was extremely popular in Cuba and was far more powerful than Che Guevara, who wasn’t even Cuban.
In a population that was 70 percent of African heritage, Almeida was the highest-ranking black Cuban official.
He was essentially the third-most-powerful man in the country, after Fidel and his brother Raul, and could have been an incredible covert ally for the United States.
Yet CIA Director Dulles was apparently so confident in the CIA—Mafia plots and the fake Guantanamo attack that the Agency made no approach to Commander Almeida.
The CIA did not even tell President Kennedy what it had heard about Almeida.
The CIA memos about Commander Almeida’s offers were not revealed during investigations, later that year, into the failure of the invasion, not even to the Agency’s own Inspector General.
In fact, the memos were so sensitive that they weren’t declassified for decades.
Even as the CIA Director ignored Commander Almeida’s comments and kept them—and the CIA—Mafia plots and fake Guantanamo attack plans—secret from JFK, President Kennedy expressed his dissatisfaction with the CIA’s proposed landing site near the city of Trinidad.
Given what little the CIA was telling him, JFK, a combat veteran from his PT boat days, thought a more secluded landing spot made more sense.
Accordingly, the CIA chose a new beachhead on Cuba’s southwest coast in an area called the Bay of Pigs.
In a tragic irony of history, when Fidel divided command of Cuba into thirds for defense against the anticipated invasion, Commander Almeida was given control of the portion of Cuba that included the Bay of Pigs.
If the CIA had told JFK about Almeida, who could have been encouraged to remain in place and assist the United States, history could have been radically different.
Even as planning for the Bay of Pigs continued, Carlos Marcello was firmly in the sights of new Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
With the start of RFK’s highly publicized war on organized crime, the head of the Immigration and Naturalization Service finally began to target Carlos Marcello for strong action.
RFK insisted on more aggressive action against the Tunisian-born Marcello, who wasn’t a citizen and had only falsified birth records from Guatemala.
Attorney General Kennedy decided to use Marcello’s own forgeries against him and had the INS arrange Marcello’s deportation to Guatemala.
On April 4, 1961, when Carlos Marcello went to the local INS office for what he thought was a routine visit, he was detained and then flown to Guatemala without a hearing.
Just seven months earlier, Marcello had given a half million dollars to the man he thought would be the next President, and now the enraged godfather found himself in Guatemala, the same small country where the CIA was training Cuban exiles for the upcoming Bay of Pigs invasion.
The US-backed dictator of Guatemala, already under pressure from his country’s press and populace for allowing the US-supported Cuban exile training, faced new scrutiny for allowing a notorious American godfather to reside in the country.
He ordered Marcello and his American attorney detained and escorted to the border.
The man who was America’s most powerful godfather now had to scramble through the junglelined back roads of Honduras in his expensive Gucci shoes.
He collapsed three times in the dust, complaining that he could not go on any farther, that he was finished, and that it was that rich kid Bobby Kennedy who had done this to them.
Carlos told at one point as he lay exhausted in a roadside gutter, ‘tell my brother when you get back, about what dat kid Bobby done to us.
Before arriving at a small airport, the exhausted Marcello plunged “down a pathless slope.
Carlos Marcello, a hugely wealthy godfather who commanded an empire the size of General Motors, was now forced to struggle in the sweltering heat of the Honduran jungle, battling pain, thirst, hunger, and swarms of tropical insects.
As the overweight Marcello trudged the muddy, desolate jungle road, with every painful step his thoughts were no doubt consumed with the two men he saw as responsible for his plight, John and Robert Kennedy.
Years later, the searing experience still haunted Marcello, and he talked of it often in prison to Jack Van Laningham during the CAMTEX operation.
Planning JFK’s Murder As GODFATHER CARLOS Marcello trudged the jungle roads of Honduras while swearing vengeance against the Kennedys, the CIA and President Kennedy were in the tense days leading up to the supposedly secret exile invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.
Reports of the impending exile invasion were rampant in Miami and among reporters, and JFK had publicly pledged that United States military forces would not be used to attack Cuba.
Getting wind of the threat, Fidel Castro ordered the arrests of dissidents and suspects throughout Cuba as a precaution.
Shortly before President Kennedy took office, Eisenhower had closed the United States Embassy in Havana, depriving the United States—and President Kennedy—of a valuable listening post in Cuba.
This lack of clandestine information from observers on the scene left JFK almost completely at the mercy of CIA officials regarding the situation in Cuba.
Director Dulles still depended on the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel just before the invasion.
The killing was supposed to throw that country into chaos and force JFK’s hand, but a communications mix-up doomed that plan.
The mistake happened after right-wing CIA officer E Howard Hunt dropped out of the Bay of Pigs operation at the last minute, to protest the inclusion of a liberal in the prospective post-Fidel government.
Even without Hunt, the CIA—Mafia plots continued, with Cuban exile leader —and Trafficante associate—Tony Varona playing a key role.
A Varona contact inside Cuba agreed to place a ClIA-provided poison pill in Fidel’s food just before the invasion, after receiving a signal from Varona.
However, the abrupt departure of Hunt—who handled exile leaders like Varona—left only a few officials who knew about the highly secret C[A—Mafia plots.
Because Hunt was no longer involved, Varona was placed in a secure United States military facility with the other exile leaders to await the outcome of the invasion and was unable to give the signal to poison Castro.
That still left Dulles the fake attack plan on Guantanamo, set to be staged by the exiles trained near New Orleans.
Once their transport ship neared Guantanamo, the Cuban exiles were told that they were to put on the uniforms of Castro’s troops and stage an attack on the American base while thus disguised.
This provocation would let the CIA and United States Navy press JFK, who did not know about the operation, to respond against Castro with massive United States military force.
However, the Cuban exiles refused to undertake the bizarre, possibly suicidal landing and attack.
They were there to risk their lives fighting Castro’s troops, not the United States military.
The failure of those two operations, along with the lack of real secrecy about the operation and the CIA’s refusal to take advantage of Cuban Army Commander Almeida’s offer, primarily caused the Bay of Pigs disaster.
Internal investigations followed, though they would not uncover the ClA—Mafia plots, the fake Guantanamo attack, or Commander Almeida’s offers.
However, CIA Director Dulles and his second-in-command were eventually forced to resign.
Even so, the CIA—and possibly Johnny Rosselli and E Howard Hunt—did manage one success in the weeks following the Bay of Pigs disaster, though it was one the Agency couldn’t boast about.
On May 30, 1961, Rafael Trujillo, dictator of the Dominican Republic, died in a spectacular gangland-style slaying in his car—a hit carried out the same way the CIA had originally wanted the Mafia to kill Fidel.
Years later Trujillo’s security chief claimed that Hunt and Johnny Rosselli had been involved.
However, the earliernoted information about Johnny Rosselli and E Howard Hunt’s joint mission to the Dominican Republic, along with other CIA information about the two, had been withheld from that Committee.
Surprisingly—or perhaps because of the success of Trujillo’s assassination— the CIA—Mafia plots to assassinate Fidel continued even after the Bay of Pigs, with Trafficante, Rosselli, Varona, and others continuing their roles.
DURING THE BAY of Pigs disaster and the run-up to Trujillo’s assassination, Carlos Marcello continued his ordeal in Central America.
In Honduras, Marcello—nursing his three broken ribs—barely managed the seventeen-mile trek to a tiny village and another slog through the jungle before finally reaching a small airport.
The FBI was fairly certain Marcello had been flown to Miami on a Dominican air force jet.
Marcello still had to regain the relative safety of Louisiana, and a Border Patrol report says that pilot David Ferrie was involved in Marcello’s return.
Marcello told Van Laningham that “he hid out for a long time and moved around, so he could not get caught.
Marcello returned home and resumed running his vast criminal empire from his office at the Town and Country Motel.
THROUGH THE REST of 1961 and into 1962, Carlos Marcello’s associates Santo Trafficante and Johnny Rosselli continued to work for the CIA on the Agency’s plots to assassinate Fidel Castro, though President Kennedy remained unaware of them.
CIA officer William Harvey was now running the Castro assassination operation.
That program continued to employ assets such as QJWIN, the European assassin recruiter linked to narcotics trafficking.
On November 19, 1961, JFK finally replaced CIA Director Allen Dulles with John McCone, the former head of the Atomic Energy Commission.
However, when McCone joined the Agency, no one told him about the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel—either that they had occurred or that they were continuing.
In December 1961, within weeks of assuming office, McCone decided to make Richard Helms his new Deputy Director for Plans, though Helms did not officially assume that position until February 1, 1962.
The Deputy Director for Plans was essentially the highest operational position in the CIA, with higher posts like Director being concerned more with administrative and political tasks.
Richard Helms had no documented taint from the Bay of Pigs fiasco, though an unconfirmed report from noted CBS reporter Daniel Schorr linked him to the start of the 1960 ClA—Mafia plots.
That may be why Helms wouldn’t tell McCone about his use of the Mafia even when Helms began to expand the plots.
To a later Senate committee, John McCone “testified that he was not briefed about the assassination plots by Dulles, Bissell, Helms, or anyone else,” something Helms confirmed in his own testimony.
Also kept in the dark about the plots’ continuation were President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy.
In working with William Harvey on the plots, Helms wanted him to focus on just Johnny Rosselli, easing Trafficante, Giancana, and the others out of the operation.
However, the Mafia doesn’t work that way, and there are plenty of indications that the other mob bosses—including Carlos Marcello—remained active in the CIA—Mafia plots into the fall of 1963.
Those plots would play a central role in helping Marcello and his partners kill JFK in a way that would force high CIA officials such as Richard Helms to cover up crucial information after JFK’s assassination.
Apparently no longer involved in the CI[A—Mafia plots was E Howard Hunt, a protégé of Richard Helms.
However, Bernard Barker remained Hunt’s assistant —in addition to fulfilling other Miami-based CIA duties—and Barker also continued his work for Santo Trafficante.
IN 1962, A problem with the CIA—Mafia plots finally brought their existence to the attention of President Kennedy and Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
The prosecution of Cain’s associate had to be suppressed to avoid exposing the ClA—Mafia plots to kill Castro, which meant that RFK would have to be told something about the plots.
On May 7, 1962, the CIA’s General Counsel and the Agency’s Director of Security told an angry Robert Kennedy about the CIA—Mafia plots from October 1960 to the Bay of Pigs and even into early 1962.
There are indications that a year earlier, RFK had learned in general terms about the CIA’s use of Giancana in some capacity during the Bay of Pigs, but it’s unclear whether he knew that Giancana was involved in assassinations or thought he was just helping to provide intelligence.
In any event, the CIA admits that RFK was not told the plots were continuing even after he was assured they were over.
That was a serious matter for Robert Kennedy, since the Chicago Mafia had been a particular target of his everincreasing war against organized crime, along with Trafficante’s empire in Florida and Marcello’s organization in Louisiana.
As Robert Kennedy faced the two CIA men in his office on May 7, 1962, he demanded that they check with him first if the CIA ever decided to work with the Mafia again.
They passed the message along to Richard Helms, who ignored it and continued to have William Harvey work with Johnny Rosselli and exile leader Tony Varona.
The CIA has admitted that in June 1962 Rosselli told Harvey that Varona had sent a three-man assassination team into Cuba.
Also in the spring of 1962, Marcello and his Mafia partner lost two other potential methods of influencing or pressuring JFK to back off on his war on organized crime.
The relationship between Sam Giancana and Frank Sinatra became so close that JFK decided to terminate his friendship with Sinatra.
The FBI—now wiretapping mobsters because of pressure from RFK—had even recorded one Mafioso talking about Sinatra’s fruitless attempt to persuade JFK to ease up on the mob.
In 1960 Sinatra had also introduced JFK to Judith Campbell, who later became his mistress.
Shortly before JFK ended his friendship with Sinatra, J Edgar Hoover sent “a top-secret memorandum to” Robert Kennedy “that summarized Judith Campbell’s telephone contact with the President as well as her association with Sam Giancana.
I interviewed Courtney Evans, the FBI liaison between Hoover’s FBI and RFK, and he confirmed details of the strained relationship between RFK and the FBI Director.
RFK wanted Hoover to be replaced or forced to retire when he met the mandatory federal retirement age, which was rapidly approaching.
But because of Campbell, JFK was in no position to force Hoover to leave.
By the following year, Hoover had received from JFK the confirmation he sought, leaving him secure as FBI Director even if JFK served a second term.
The fact that President Kennedy ended his relationships with two of Johnny Rosselli’s close friends was a critical blow to Marcello and Trafficante.
Campbell and Sinatra had potentially represented ways that John or Robert Kennedy might have been pressured—or blackmailed—to back off from their massive assault on the Mafia.
Now the mob bosses had few options to stop the Kennedys’ ever-increasing pressure on them.
Even before RFK and JFK began to learn of the ClA—Mafia plots, the Kennedy brothers had developed their own effort to topple Fidel Castro.
Not willing to trust a CIA official to oversee the operation after the Bay of Pigs fiasco, the Kennedys instead picked General Edward Lansdale, fresh from the Vietnam conflict.
Operation Mongoose was in some ways a joint CIA— United States military effort, though by far the lion’s share of the operation fell under CIA control.
By early 1962, “the CIA station in Miami quickly expanded into the world’s largest six hundred case officers and as many as three thousand contract agents,” according to Helms biographer Thomas Powers.
Operation Mongoose was a loose collection of actions directed at Cuba, including support for exile groups, sabotage, and plans for military action.
As an outsider, Lansdale was not part of Richard Helms’s ongoing CIA—Mafia plots, and neither was CIA Director John McCone.
In addition to the assassination team sent in by Johnny Rosselli and Tony Varona mentioned earlier, in the summer of 1962 the CIA resumed contact with Rolando Cubela, the disgruntled mid-level Cuban official the Agency had first dealt with regarding an assassination plot a year and a half earlier.
Cubela made no progress in 1962, but in 1963 the CIA would once again ask for his help in assassinating Fidel.
These contacts always seemed to coincide with developments in the CIA—Mafia plots, which—along with Cubela’s ties to Trafficante’s associates—indicates that in many ways they were simply another aspect of the CIA—Mafia plots.
In the early days of Mongoose, United States military leaders proposed a bizarre array of actions the United States could take against Cuba.
Declassified only in the 1990s, one proposed action was code-named Operation Northwoods.
Neither President Kennedy, the CIA’s Inspector General, nor JFK’s new CIA Director had ever learned about the CIA’s fake Guantanamo attack planned for the Bay of Pigs.
The inclusion of a similar idea in the Joint Chiefs’ Northwoods proposal in 1962 suggests that the head of the Joint Chiefs in the spring of 1962—General Lyman L Lemnitzer, who’d had that same position in 1961—had been a witting participant in the CIA’s original Guantanamo provocation.
From a practical point of view this makes sense, so the fake CIA attack could have been coordinated with the United States military at a high level.
The Northwoods proposals shocked President Kennedy, and he rejected them all.
The plan apparently showed JFK that some of the Joint Chiefs—especially its Chairman, General Lemnitzer—were very much out of touch with JFK’s view of the world.
Within months, JFK replaced Lemnitzer with General Maxwell Taylor, who had headed JFK’s Bay of Pigs investigation.
General Taylor would remain Chairman of the Joint Chiefs throughout JFK’s Presidency and was so admired by RFK that he named one of his sons after him.
Still, in many ways it was the culmination of three years of United States covert action against Cuba, including the ClA—Mafia plots, massive United States military exercises in the Caribbean in the summer of 1962, and small raids into Cuba sponsored by Operation Mongoose.
The first United States official to sound the alarm about Soviet missiles in Cuba was CIA Director John McCone on August 10, 1962, even though his more experienced subordinates believed he lacked evidence.
At first no one knew whether or not the Soviet missiles had nuclear warheads, but by September 19 evidence that they did had started accumulating.
On September 27 the United States military began preparing contingency invasion plans for Cuba.
JFK was briefed on October 16 that “hard photographic evidence” from a U-2 spy plane flight confirmed that Soviet medium-range nuclear ballistic missiles were being installed in Cuba.
He made plans to reveal the Crisis to the nation six days later, after having daily consultations with a full range of top military and civilian advisors.
On October 22, 1962, at 7m. , President John F Kennedy went on national television to tell the American people the country was on the brink of nuclear war.
Families across America were riveted to their television screens as Kennedy described the missiles and the blockade of Cuba he was instituting to be sure that no more “offensive military equipment” reached the island.
Essentially, JFK drew a blockade line around Cuba, one that several Soviet ships were fast approaching.
The firm’s sensitive work would be visible on television throughout the Crisis, which makes it incredible that Oswald would be allowed to work there unless he had United States intelligence connections.
Thomas Powers writes that “on October 21 , the day before President Kennedy announced a blockade of Cuba in a televised speech, a CIA team headed by future Watergate burglar Eugenio Martinez landed two agents on the northern coast of Cuba.
Robert Kennedy was furious when he found out and wanted CIA Director McCone to immediately fire Harvey, “but Helms talked” both men out of it.
The CIA, in particular Richard Helms, would take similar unauthorized action the following year in a way that inadvertently aided the plans of Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli to assassinate President Kennedy.
WHILE THOSE EVENTS were building and unfolding, Marcello and Trafficante were consumed by the Kennedys’ war against them and the rest of the Mafia.
Marcello faced an $850,000 tax assessment, as well as “indictment for illegal reentry, McClellan committee hearings, indictment. . . for conspiracy and perjury, and now the deportation order upheld after an unsuccessful appeal,” wrote John Davis.
The IRS busted Santo Trafficante’s Orlando gambling operations and even arrested two of his family members.
Rosselli’s boss, Chicago godfather Sam Giancana, was also facing pressure from the FBI, at RFK’s urging.
Jimmy Hoffa, who had a number of criminal activities with Marcello and Trafficante, was under such intense pressure from the Kennedys that he decided to kill Robert Kennedy.
Instead, assassinating JFK was the way to end RFK’s war against the mob bosses.
BY THE FALL of 1962, Carlos Marcello had been safely back at home in Louisiana for more than a year, following his humiliating ordeal in the jungles of Central America.
His organization had quickly recovered from his absence and was more profitable than ever.
However, John and Robert Kennedy had only increased their pressure on Marcello and his Mafia allies and were now mounting the largest assault on organized crime America had ever seen.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy had finally persuaded FBI Director J Edgar Hoover to begin fighting the mob.
Not content to depend on the aging and imperious Hoover, RFK had hired ten times more Justice Department Mafia prosecutors than were employed during the Eisenhower—Nixon Administration.
The Kennedys’ pressure on Marcello, and on his close partners Santo Trafficante and Jimmy Hoffa, was unrelenting.
In October 1962, Marcello briefly and unexpectedly explained his solution to the Kennedys’ war on the Mafia.
The godfather was with two of his most trusted associates in the place he felt safest, the middle of his secluded sixty-fourhundred-acre Churchill Farms property outside New Orleans.
With Marcello were his trusted longtime driver, Jack Liberto, and his favorite nephew, Carlo Roppolo.
Joining the three was Ed Becker, a former public relations man for two Las Vegas casinos.
Marcello felt comfortable talking to Becker not only because he’d worked for mob-run casinos but because Becker was now in business with Roppolo, who vouched for him.
According to Becker, Marcello “pulled out a bottle and poured a generous round of scotch.
The conversation wandered until Becker made an off-hand remark about Robert Kennedy and Marcello’s deportation.
Marcello didn’t speak Sicilian but was repeating an old saying he had heard many times from those who did.
Becker says the implication was that “Bobby was the tail” and “if the President were killed then Bobby would lose his bite.
Many people knew that Robert Kennedy and Vice President Johnson hated each other, and one of them was the politically savvy Marcello, who “owned” United States Senators, members of Congress, governors, and judges.
If Marcello killed President Kennedy, then RFK’s status as the second-most-powerful man in America—with far more power than a typical Attorney General—would end, and with it so would RFK’s extraordinary war on Marcello and the Mafia.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations investigated Becker’s story, took his sworn testimony, and found him and his account credible.
IN THE FALL of 1962, around the same time Marcello told Ed Becker about his plan to assassinate JFK, godfather Santo Trafficante made a similar comment to an associate named Jose Aleman.
Trafficante confirmed to Congressional investigators that he knew Aleman and acknowledged having met with him on business approximately three times, although some accounts put the number much higher.
Aleman’s family had recently helped Jimmy Hoffa gain control of a Miami bank that Hoffa could use to launder money from his criminal activities.
Also, Aleman knew Rolando Cubela, the disgruntled midlevel Cuban official and CIA asset, who had his own ties to Trafficante associates.
But after losing “his land holdings in Cuba to the revolution” and the death of his father, Aleman “was forced to sell the Miami Stadium” and other Miami real estate, except for “the three-story . . . motel” where Aleman would meet with Trafficante in 1962.
By the fall of that year, Aleman “was in debt,” though his contacts and reputation could still be of use to someone like Trafficante, who was always looking for seemingly legitimate fronts for money laundering and other scams.
The Post notes that “Aleman . . . became involved with Trafficante in 1962 through his cousin, resourceful lawyer” for Trafficante.
Aleman said he was initially reluctant, since he “had to testify against Santo’s people in 1960” in a complex case involving Trafficante associates.
Aleman had been a reluctant witness, and his testimony had not been especially damaging.
Kennedy would be reelected,” Trafficante said, “You don’t understand me.
The Washington Post notes that after Aleman testified for the state, “Aleman’s relationship with the Bureau grew very close.
Declassified files I found bear that out and show that Aleman continued to provide information about Trafficante to the FBI through 1964.
In addition, the House Select Committee found that “examination of the FBI’s electronic surveillance program of the early 1960s disclosed that Santo Trafficante was the subject of minimal, in fact almost nonexistent, surveillance coverage.
During one conversation in 1963, overheard in a Miami restaurant, Trafficante had bitterly attacked the Kennedy Administration’s efforts against organized crime, making obscene comments about ‘Kennedy’s right-hand man,’” who had recently coordinated various raids on Trafficante gambling establishments.
Soon Johnny Rosselli joined them in their plotting, and new developments in the secret war between the United States and Cuba gave the three mob bosses a way to kill JFK while forcing high United States officials to withhold crucial evidence from the press, the public, and each other.
Nuclear-armed Soviet missiles in Cuba were aimed at the United States, just ninety miles away, and at the height of the Cold War any miscalculation could spell disaster.
The United States secretly agreed to remove United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey targeted at Russia while Khrushchev would remove the Soviet missiles from Cuba.
But as the National Security Archive historians documented, “Cuba did not allow onsite inspection” by the United Nations to verify the removal of the Russian missiles, so the pledge never took effect.
JFK’s Secretary of State at the time, Dean Rusk, confirmed that to me in a 1990 interview, explaining that Fidel Castro had been angry that he wasn’t consulted before Khrushchev made the deal with JFK and therefore refused to allow UN weapons inspectors into Cuba.
In JFK’s November 20, 1962, primetime press conference, he reaffirmed the need for UN inspections before putting a “no invasion pledge” into effect.
Harry Williams, as he liked to be called, was a wounded survivor of the Bay of Pigs.
He was one of sixty injured men Castro had released seven months earlier to spur United States efforts to ransom the remaining prisoners, an effort that had been constantly thwarted by Richard Nixon and other conservatives.
Before Williams and the others were released, Cuban authorities told the men they had to return to prison in Cuba by the end of 1962 if the United States did not ransom the remaining prisoners.
Worse, they were told that one Bay of Pigs prisoner would be shot for each released prisoner who didn’t return.
He had been a mining engineer raising a family in Cuba before the Revolution.
After his release in 1962, Williams took a leading role in trying to win the release of his comrades who remained in prison.
The Kennedys were sympathetic, and Harry developed a working relationship with Robert Kennedy while trying to find some way to free the prisoners.
Both JFK and RFK admired Williams because of his courage, which he had demonstrated on two notable occasions during and immediately after the Bay of Pigs disaster.
Once ashore in Cuba, Williams “fought bravely” and was “blown into the air by an enemy shell . . . and hit by more than seventy pieces of shrapnel.
Both of his feet were smashed and he had a hole near his heart and a large one in his neck,” according to one Cuban exile historian.
Williams was near death when Castro’s army brought him to a makeshift field hospital.
As Williams told me, and as other exiles confirmed to Haynes, Williams gathered enough strength to point the weapon at Castro and—at almost point-blank range—to pull the trigger.
Earlier, William’s compatriots had worried that he might be in such pain from his wounds and so depressed over the failure of the invasion and their capture that he might use the gun on himself, so they removed the bullets while Williams was unconscious.
Castro’s men quickly set upon Williams, but Fidel ordered them not to harm the gravely injured man and instead ordered that Williams and the other wounded men be taken to a hospital in a nearby city.
There, an old friend, Cuban Army Commander Juan Almeida, visited Williams.
Almeida was no doubt frustrated that the United States had never acted on his clear signals of dissatisfaction with Castro.
Commander Almeida told Williams that the time for action against Fidel was not right, that he was too powerful in the wake of his victory at the Bay of Pigs.
The Missile Crisis put on hold Williams’s efforts to persuade John and Robert Kennedy to ransom the remaining Bay of Pigs prisoners.
Robert Kennedy was impressed when Williams volunteered to guide United States troops on a mission to rescue the remaining prisoners if the United States had to attack Cuba during the Crisis, to take out the Soviet missiles.
After the Missile Crisis, as Castro’s end-of-the-year deadline approached, Robert Kennedy was shocked when Williams began making preparations to return to Cuba.
Castro had given Williams and the others only until the end of the year to ransom the remaining prisoners.
If the ransom was not paid, they had to return, and one prisoner would be shot for each man who did not.
As documented by Haynes Johnson, Robert Kennedy moved heaven and earth in December 1962 to try to win the prisoners’ release, searching for a ransom acceptable to both Fidel Castro and JFK’s Republican opponents.
JFK, RFK, their aides, and Williams were successful, and $53 million in food and medicine was transferred to Cuba.
Operation Mongoose was officially over, but six months later, JFK, RFK, and Williams would have a new plan to topple Fidel, one that would trigger much of the secrecy that still surrounds JFK’s assassination.
United States covert operations against Cuba would give Banister and Ferrie a way to accomplish that task.
Though Operation Mongoose had ended, small-scale United States covert actions against Cuba continued, and JMWAVE, the huge Miami CIA station, remained active.
The United States also continued to distribute hundreds of thousands of dollars a month to a variety of Cuban exile organizations and leaders, including Tony Varona.
According to the CIA’s Deputy Chief in New Orleans, Hunter A Leake, both Banister and Ferrie continued to work for the CIA, and Cuba seems to have been their main focus.
According to historian Michael Kurtz, Leake had admitted to him that Banister “served as a key CIA liaison with many anti-Castro Cuban refugees in southern Louisiana.
Banister often handled details of the training and supplying of various anti-Castro organizations.
The reasons for that building’s infamy were noted in Chapter Two and are explained later.
The latter would have been easy for Ferrie in 1963 since he—like Banister—was working for Carlos Marcello.
The testimony was first obtained in 1975, meaning that critical information was not available to the Warren Commission.
Oswald’s visit had occurred in March, February, or perhaps as early as January.
His trip there involved some sort of Cuba-related activity, resulting in his being jailed in New Orleans and claiming to the INS to be a Cuban exile, even though he couldn’t speak Spanish.
Within a few months, numerous witnesses would place Oswald as working with Guy Banister and David Ferrie.
However, Oswald’s unusual visit to New Orleans in early 1963— missing from Warren Commission records—suggests that he’d had contact with them well before that, which might even explain his later move to New Orleans.
In early 1963, Oswald engaged in several unusual activities that provoked controversy for decades.
However, when viewed through the lens of the intelligence connections of Banister and Ferrie—and their work for Carlos Marcello—Oswald’s actions make perfect sense.
Oswald’s suspicious activities in the space of less than two months included apparently using an alias to order a pistol and a rifle through the mail; photographing himself holding both weapons and two Communist newspapers ; being linked to a shooting at the home of far-right, racist, retired General Edwin Walker; and writing letters to the head of the pro-Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Some of those activities are consistent with simply maintaining and building his cover as a Communist/Marxist while continuing to avoid meeting or talking to any real American Communists or Socialists.
Other actions appear to have been undertaken in cooperation with—or on the orders of—someone else.
First, it seems odd that Oswald would order guns through the mail when cheaper and more reliable weapons were easily available in Dallas.
Likewise, it seems strange for Oswald to suddenly develop a great interest in Cuba and to begin a phony one-man chapter of a small organization called the Fair Play for Cuba Committee when both Dallas and New Orleans had legitimate far-left and Socialist organizations that he could have joined.
In early 1963—as Marcello and ‘Trafficante were making plans to assassinate JFK—two_ related Congressional committees were looking into the Fair Play for Cuba Committee and into mail-order gun sales by the very firms from which Oswald ordered.
Not only were both hearings in the newspapers of the time—making it easy to see where Banister or his associates got the idea to take advantage of them—but members of both Congressional committees had ties to Trafficante operatives Frank Fiorini and John Martino.
Martino, who had finally been released from his Cuban prison the previous fall, was very bitter over his experience, blaming the Kennedy Administration for not securing his release sooner.
In addition to his work for Trafficante, in 1963 Martino also became close to Johnny Rosselli, and the CIA admits that Martino—like Rosselli—became a CIA asset.
Also like Rosselli , late in life Martino admitted his involvement in the JFK assassination plot.
Both during Oswald’s early 1963 trip to New Orleans and after he moved there in late April, Banister and Ferrie were well positioned to assist the CIA and Naval Intelligence with that surveillance.
Oswald was probably encouraged first to write and then to join the Fair Play for Cuba Committee to further legitimate United States intelligence objectives for the CIA and Naval Intelligence.
These include making him more attractive for KGB recruitment, laying the groundwork for involving Oswald in anti-Castro operations, and making him part of CIA officer David Atlee Phillips’s efforts to penetrate and compromise the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Oswald probably ordered the weapons at the behest of someone working for the Mafia, such as Banister or Ferrie.
Given their work for Marcello at the time, it was all too easy for them to manipulate Oswald under the guise of furthering some United States intelligence activity.
As for the shooting at General Walker’s home, Banister belonged to the same white supremacist circles as General Walker, and associates of the two had been at a white supremacist conference in New Orleans just four days before someone shot into Walker’s home.
Any role Oswald had in that incident was probably at Banister’s behest, an effort to plant evidence that would make Oswald look murderously violent after he was arrested for JFK’s assassination.
A closer look at the timing of all these events shows just how intertwined they were and reveals other links to the Mafia’s role in JFK’s assassination.
On March 31 Oswald’s wife, Marina, photographed him in his backyard holding both weapons and the two Communist newspapers.
On April 24 Oswald moved to New Orleans, where he initially lived with his uncle, a bookie for Carlos Marcello.
As for the guns, journalist Henry Hurt wrote that the theory “that Oswald chose to acquire his guns by mail order has never made much sense.
Hurt points out that under the laws at the time, “there would have been no record of his purchase and ownership” had he bought the guns at a store, as there would be for mail-order guns.
By using the mails, Oswald appears to have deliberately left much more of a trail than if he had made the same purchase by spending a few minutes at a busy gun shop’s counter.
The mail-order guns also tied Oswald’s actions to a Senate committee investigating mail-order weapons; some of the committee’s members were at the same time investigating the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Guy Banister had worked for racist Mississippi Senator James O Eastland, Chairman of the Senate committee investigating Fair Play for Cuba.
Eastland would soon be working on a covert CIA operation involving John Martino, Johnny Rosselli, and Santo Trafficante.
Trafficante operative Frank Fiorini “later admitted to having intelligence connections to” Eastland’s Senate committee.
Those connections and the newspaper headlines the hearings generated would have made it possible for Guy Banister to manipulate Oswald into thinking he was assisting those committees by ordering the guns and writing to the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Historian George Michael Evica notes that between Oswald’s conveniently timed mail-order gun purchases and his contact with the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, “Oswald could not have set up a more consistent pattern had he been working for’ the Senate committees.
Oswald may well have thought that if he followed the orders of Banister and Ferrie, he might someday be testifying before Congress like his boyhood hero from I Led Three Lives.
Under that scenario, Oswald would think he was assisting the committees—by showing that a former Russian defector and a Fair Play for Cuba Committee member could easily order a rifle and pistol through the mail— when in actuality he was being set up.
Newman also notes that word of the FBI investigation of the FPCC “was transmitted to the CIA” for some reason, something that was not always the case.
There were more Fair Play for Cuba Committee hearings on March 13, 1963—the same day Oswald appears to have ordered his rifle.
On March 31 Lee Oswald wrote his first letter to the head of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
That was also the day Oswald had his wife, Marina, take the famous photos of him holding his recently arrived mail-order rifle.
More Senate Fair Play for Cuba Committee hearings were held on April 3, 1963, and just over two weeks later Oswald wrote another letter to the head of that organization.
In the meantime, someone had fired a shot into General Walker’s home on April 10.
Oswald moved to New Orleans on April 24, 1963, after surreptitiously visiting the city earlier that year.
The shooting at General Walker’s was termed “an assassination attempt” by Walker and the Warren Commission, and when word of it emerged soon after JFK’s assassination, it seemed to some to clinch the case against the deceased Oswald.
However, Walker’s background, the evidence, and the actions of Marcello associates such as Oswald and Ruby suggest a different interpretation of the shooting.
General Walker became controversial in 1961 when JFK removed him from command of the Twenty-fourth Infantry Division in Germany for indoctrinating his soldiers with inflammatory material from the John Birch Society.
Walker’s opposition march erupted into a riot that left two dead and seventy injured.
The Kennedys had Walker arrested and placed under psychological observation, but after his release he returned to his home in Dallas and ran for Governor of Texas.
Following his defeat, Walker continued making outrageous claims in speeches as he railed against the Kennedys, civil rights, and Castro.
Walker flew the Confederate flag in front of his home and later made a wellpublicized visit of support to Byron de la Beckwith, Medgar Evers’s assassin.
The Walker shooting occurred soon after Ruby’s last visit to Walker’s house.
Otherwise, a shot fired into an empty room would be little more than a case of serious vandalism.
Walker’s long-standing pattern of public lies and exaggerations in regard to civil rights and minorities calls into question his overly dramatic story of lowering his head just as the bullet was fired into the room.
The Warren Commission and others have tried to pin the Walker shooting exclusively on Oswald to show a propensity for murderous violence that is otherwise missing in Oswald’s background.
But numerous journalists and authors have pointed out serious problems with that theory.
Witnesses saw at least two people at the shooting, and at least two cars were involved in suspicious activity around Walker’s house.
In addition, Oswald couldn’t drive and didn’t own a car, raising the ludicrous spectacle of Oswald walking along the sidewalk or suspiciously skulking through suburban alleys with his rifle, or else taking his rifle on the bus to Walker’s home.
Even disassembled, the rifle would have been so long as to provoke the suspicions of those he encountered, at least the following day when they learned about the shooting and recalled seeing a young man in the area with an unusually long package.
While others were involved in the incident, Lee Oswald’s statements to Marina and to his CIA monitor George DeMohrenschildt make it clear that Oswald was as well.
In addition, research by Dick Russell and Anthony Summers strongly indicates that the Walker shooting was not an assassination attempt at all.
Instead, it was a stunt to publicize General Walker, who faced a fading career as a reactionary extremist.
Walker’s breathless story to reporters that he was almost killed—and would have been shot in the head if he hadn’t bent down at just the right moment—generated tremendous regional and national publicity.
Since Oswald had begun the Cuban phase of his covert activity just ten days before the Walker incident—with a letter to the national chairman of the small Fair Play for Cuba Committee—his actions in relation to Walker were probably designed to test his abilities for his new assignment.
Unlike Oswald’s previous “defect and return” Russian assignment, anti-Castro operations demanded a new set of skills, from surreptitiously arranging and attending meetings (and keeping them secret from his wife) to dealing with firearms in a covert way.
The Walker incident was a chance to see if Oswald, who had never served in combat, could handle that type of assignment.
Given Oswald’s dramatic increase in Cuban activity in the months after the Walker incident, he obviously passed the test, whether he fired the shot or was involved in some other capacity.
By late April 1963, Oswald was living with his uncle Dutz Murret, a bookie for Carlos Marcello, and he would do so for two weeks, until Marina Oswald joined him in New Orleans and they got their own apartment.
WHEN OSWALD MOVED in with Carlos Marcello’s bookie, the godfather himself was waiting on word about his appeal to the Supreme Court regarding a new deportation order, which had been spearheaded by Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
With that defeat, “the pressure increased many times over” on Marcello to take action against the Kennedys in order to preserve his freedom and his empire.
As 1963 wore on, Marcello’s allies in the plot to murder JFK faced similar pressure from the Kennedys.
Santo Trafficante came under ever-increasing scrutiny from the Kennedys, who busted his operations and made increasing use of IRS tax liens against him.
RFK also made the very private and reclusive Trafficante the focus of major Congressional hearings.
Finally, by subpoenaing Trafficante’s wife, the Kennedys had broken what Trafficante considered an unwritten law.
Trafficante did plenty of philandering, as did Marcello, but the godfathers liked to maintain the image of being traditional family men, and their wives had been considered off-limits during the previous decade.
The FBI also still dogged Johnny Rosselli, except when he was working on the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Castro.
Rosselli’s power in Las Vegas and Hollywood flowed from Sam Giancana’s high position with the Chicago mob, so unless Rosselli could eliminate RFK’s pressure on Giancana, Rosselli’s own future looked dim.
Remarkably, even as the Kennedy brothers increased their attacks on the mob bosses, the crime families still conducted their deadly business as usual, even assassinating a government official in the United States.
A Chicago mobster who was a “close friend of Ruby” was “credited by law enforcement officials with the murder of Benjamin F Lewis,” as documented by investigative journalist Dan Moldea.
While lawenforcement officials knew who did the killing, no one was ever tried and convicted for the crime.
Such killings showed why Rosselli, Marcello, and Trafficante viewed a much more carefully planned hit on a much higher official as a Viable solution to their mutual problems with the Kennedys.
IN THE SPRING of 1963, Carlos Marcello made more documented remarks about assassinating President Kennedy, only this time his comments were not to Ed Becker.
They were made to a much closer associate and were not disclosed until the publication of John Davis’s biography of Marcello in 1989.
At that time, Marcello had been carefully planning JFK’s murder with his allies for about six months.
Marcello knew that if he killed the Attorney General, JFK would simply order the National Guard or the Army into Marcello’s strongholds, much as had happened in 1954 in Phenix City, Alabama, after Trafficante’s associates killed the Alabama Attorney General—elect.
That would render powerless the political figures in Louisiana and elsewhere that Marcello had corrupted and relied on for protection.
The animosity between RFK and Vice President Lyndon Johnson —who would be the new president—was well known, and Johnson had never made prosecuting the Mafia any sort of priority.
Confirmation of Marcello’s spring 1963 remarks about assassinating JFK comes from Atlanta businessman John Knight Sr., who grew up in Louisiana.
Knight’s father, a merchant in Lafayette, owned one-third interest in a forty-fivefoot boat docked at Grand Isle, a popular fishing area on the Gulf of Mexico, a hundred miles southwest of New Orleans.
After one of the boat’s other owners sold his fishing camp at Grand Isle to Carlos Marcello, the teenaged Knight was introduced to Marcello by Felix Kiger, forty-three years old, who cooked and looked after the camp.
Later that spring, Knight’s father was angry when he heard that Marcello was going to be using his boat.
Knight and his father raced to the dock, but the vessel was already pulling away.
They were told that a Los Angeles mobster was also on the boat with Marcello and Kiger.
The distraught cook said that he had been cooking while Marcello and the Los Angeles mobster were talking.
Knight asked Kiger why Marcello would want to do such a thing to President Kennedy.
Kiger replied that it was because of Robert Kennedy’s sudden deportation of Marcello and the harrowing ordeal Marcello had to endure.
Not long after Marcello managed to sneak back into the United States, Kiger saw the godfather and said his hands and knees were still raw from injuries he had suffered in Central America.
Marcello wasn’t linked to JFK’s assassination in the press until the late 1970s, so Knight didn’t fully appreciate the ramifications of what Kiger had told him for years.
Knight’s account appears credible and is full of additional specific names and details.
Campisi admitted meeting with Marcello at the camp, showing that the godfather felt secure conducting mob business there.
IN 1963 CARLOS Marcello actually had at least one face-to-face meeting with Lee Oswald.
Marcello’s meeting with the nephew of his longtime bookie, Dutz Murret, was revealed by the godfather to Jack Van Laningham twenty-two years later, during the CAMTEX undercover FBI operation.
Van Laningham later explained to me how Marcello’s admission came about, but he prepared a written account three years after Marcello’s remarks that can be found in the FBI’s_ declassified CAMTEX file.
In addition, a remarkable amount of independent evidence supports Marcello’s Oswald admission.
Jack Van Laningham explained that there was only one other inmate at the federal prison that Marcello felt comfortable talking to about his New Orleans activities.
Van Laningham said, “I had another friend at Texarkana that had worked for Marcello’s brother, as a bartender.
The ‘little man’ would let him come to our room and they would talk about New Orleans for hours.
He had been introduced to Oswald by a man named Ferris , who was Marcello’s pilot.
Additional confirmation of an Oswald—Marcello connection comes from another FBI informant.
BRILAB had grown out of the FBI investigation of a Teamster insurance scam involving Santo Trafficante.
As a result of that investigation, a businessman named Joe Hauser agreed to become an informant for the FBI against Carlos Marcello.
He wore a wire into Marcello’s office in the late 1970s, yielding the undercover BRILAB tapes that eventually sent Marcello to prison in the 1980s.
Marcello indicated that Oswald had worked for a time as a runner for his gambling network, the same one that involved Oswald’s uncle.
However, starting in early August, Oswald gained a high profile in the New Orleans media for his unusually well publicized pro-Castro activities, making it unlikely Oswald would have been used as a runner in politically conservative New Orleans at that time.
As for the meeting with Oswald that Marcello described to Van Laningham, the godfather may have ostensibly been talking to Oswald about gambling business while checking out for himself the person who would later take the blame for JFK’s murder.
It’s clear from other accounts that mobsters sometimes conducted Mafia business at restaurants in both New Orleans and Dallas.
Since the meeting place was his brother’s restaurant, Carlos Marcello would have felt secure there, especially since he could have had a private dining room and private entrance to avoid being seen with Oswald.
Besides, meeting with an associate’s nephew and giving him a temporary job would appear even to the restaurant’s trusted staff to simply be routine business.
Marcello almost certainly did not discuss the assassination of John F Kennedy with Oswald.
It’s highly unlikely that an experienced godfather like Marcello would spend a year carefully planning JFK’s assassination only to entrust the shooting to an inexperienced young man who was out of practice with a rifle and was not a very good shot the last time he was tested in the Marines.
In addition, Marcello told Van Laningham that he had brought two hit men over from Europe to shoot JFK, as mentioned in Chapter One and detailed in Chapter Twelve.
Marcello’s admission about the two hit men was recorded on FBI undercover audiotape.
Carlos Marcello’s account to Van Laningham about meeting Oswald fits with much information that would only become public knowledge years later with the 1989 publication of Mafia Kingfish, Marcello’s biography by John H Davis.
FBI memos first published in Davis’s Marcello biography describe Oswald getting money from one of Marcello’s men at the restaurant of the Town and Country Motel.
The nondescript motel on Airline Highway—far from the tawdry glitz of the French Quarter—served as Marcello’s headquarters.
That fits the time frame when Oswald was briefly in New Orleans, where he was interviewed in jail by the INS agent and claimed to be Cuban.
According to the FBI memos, Oswald was sitting in the mostly empty dining room when the FBI’s source saw the restaurant’s “owner remove wad of bills from his pocket, which he passed under the table to the man sitting at the table,” whom the source identified as Oswald.
The FBI’s source was a businessman from Darien, Georgia, named Gene Sumner.
His brother-in-law was a police lieutenant in the area, and several days after JFK’s murder, Sumner told him what he had seen the previous winter.
Sumner’s brother-in-law then contacted the FBI, as recorded in a November 26, 1963, memo.
As with all the dozen-plus associates of Carlos Marcello that J Edgar Hoover’s FBI interviewed following JFK’s assassination, the investigation of this incident was cursory and routine.
Sumner described the man he thought was the owner of the restaurant —the man he saw giving Oswald money—as being six feet tall, which means he wasn’t Carlos Marcello.
One of Marcello’s brothers was the legal owner of the Town and Country, while a top lieutenant for Marcello—Joseph Poretto— managed the restaurant.
When the FBI sent the information to the Warren Commission, it excluded important details about the Mafia from the report.
This fits the pattern—noted by Congressional investigators and Hoover expert Anthony Summers—of Hoover’s FBI downplaying the organized crime ties of Marcello and his associates.
Hoover also withheld FBI field reports like this one from Attorney General Robert Kennedy, who would have immediately grasped its significance.
John H Davis was also the first to report that Marcello briefly mentioned the FBI interviews of his brother and Poretto to the FBI’s BRILAB informant, Joe Hauser.
Hauser’s credibility on this point is enhanced because at the time he heard the remarks, the Sumner incident had never been mentioned in any book.
Shortly after the payoff Sumner witnessed, Oswald moved to New Orleans to stay with his bookie uncle, Dutz Murret.
Murret, Banister, and Ferrie weren’t the only links between Marcello and Oswald.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations uncovered other ties between Oswald, his family, and the Marcello organization.
Lending further credence to Marcello’s remarks about Oswald is that fact that FBI files contain other accurate information that Van Laningham had written down that Marcello told him about Ferrie.
Ferrie admitted to authorities soon after JFK’s assassination that shortly before JEK was murdered, he had flown to Guatemala twice for Marcello regarding his deportation case.
At the time Van Laningham reported Marcello’s account to the FBI, Ferrie’s work for Marcello was not well known by the general public or even most historians.
CARLOS MARCELLO ALSO told Jack Van Laningham about his control of Jack Ruby, including an important meeting that took place in 1963, more than five months before JFK’s murder.
Marcello’s 1985 remarks about Ruby are briefly summarized in the CAMTEX FBI file, but Van Laningham added more important information in our talks.
By the spring of 1963, Jack Ruby owed a small fortune to the IRS—almost $160,000 in today’s dollars—and was desperate for money.
The IRS filed tax liens against Ruby on March 13, 1963, and Ruby faced ruin unless he could find another source of money to pay his bills.
According to Carlos Marcello, Ruby found the money he needed by taking it from cash that flowed through the Carousel Club.
As Marcello explained to Jack Van Laningham years later, his organization actually controlled the Carousel strip club; Ruby merely managed it.
Since the club was across the street from Dallas’s most distinguished hotel, the Adolphus, whenever conventions or company meetings were held at the hotel, business at the Carousel was especially brisk, and Ruby probably figured it would be easy to skim some of the proceeds for his own pressing financial needs.
Marcello had hidden ownership of several clubs in Dallas, and his financial operatives would have known what all the clubs should be making at particular times of the year.
When the Carousel came up short compared to in previous years or other clubs, it wouldn’t have been hard for Marcello’s people to confirm Jack’s ongoing theft.
Marcello would have been furious that a longtime mobster like Ruby would take such action, knowing the deadly consequences if caught.
However, just as in 1959, Jack Ruby was once again the right person in the right situation at the right time to help Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante.
Beginning in late April 1963, Ruby became of great interest to Marcello, and not just for his skimming.
Jack Ruby’s well-documented long-distance phone calls provide a clear record that he was becoming involved in something quite unusual by May 1963.
After making fewer than ten long-distance calls in April 1963, Ruby suddenly more than doubled that total to twenty-five in May and more than thirty in June.
Even in those calls, Ruby would have relied on coded words and phrases common in transacting Mafia business, often going through one or more intermediaries to get information to its ultimate destination.
Carlos Marcello gave Jack Van Laningham the godfather’s own unvarnished view of Jack Ruby.
According to the FBI file, in talking “about Jack Ruby,” Marcello said he “had met him in Dallas, Texas.
He said that Ruby was a homo son-of-a-bitch but good to have around to report to him what was happening in town.
Marcello told us that all the police were on the take, and as long as he kept the money flowing they let him operate anything in Dallas that he wanted to.
It’s important to remember that Ruby’s ties to the Mafia were completely unknown to the general public until the late 1970s, and even then most writers overlooked Ruby’s connections to several of Marcello’s close associates.
Even the landmark biography of Ruby by Seth Kantor, 1978’s Who Was Jack Ruby?, doesn’t mention Marcello, though it was the first book to outline Ruby’s ties to numerous other mobsters.
Dallas reporter Earl Golz was one of the first to clearly make the connection between Ruby and Marcello’s organization and Marcello’s control of vice in Dallas, a link soon confirmed by the 1979 House Select Committee on Assassinations report.
However, it was not until the extensive print and television coverage that accompanied the twentyfifth anniversary of JFK’s murder in November 1988—and publication of Marcello’s biography by John Davis in January 1989—that the general public really began to learn about Ruby’s ties to the mob.
It’s important to note that Van Laningham’s report on Marcello’s remarks about Ruby was written up and in FBI files well before that.
In contrast to the way the FBI presented Ruby to the public and the Warren Commission, the Bureau’s own files—from 1963 and earlier—confirmed Ruby’s close ties to the Mafia.
This was a type of tickler memo, highlighting problems and information the FBI knew it had withheld from the public and press.
In contrast to that secret, internal admission, the FBI essentially used statements from several of Ruby’s mob associates to claim to the Commission that Ruby had no mob associates.
With the FBI holding such information close to its vest, journalists and historians had to ferret out the details of Ruby’s involvement with the mob and Marcello’s men bit by bit.
Almost four years after Marcello’s 1985 admission to Jack Van Laningham—which was withheld from the public at the time and for the next twenty years—John H Davis detailed tantalizing connections between Ruby and several Marcello associates.
These included Marcello’s Dallas mob lieutenants Joe Civello and Joe Campisi Sr.
Campisi was the first person to visit Ruby in prison after he shot Oswald; he also met with Ruby the night before JFK’s murder.
Davis documented that in the months and weeks leading up to JFK’s assassination, Ruby visited or made calls to five people in Marcello’s organization.
In addition to those five, Davis writes, “It appears that Jack Ruby knew at least two of Carlos Marcello’s brothers” via the slot machine and strip club businesses.
The most startling admission about Ruby that Carlos Marcello made to Van Laningham concemed a dramatic meeting that Ruby was summoned to, where the godfather confronted Ruby about stealing his money—and made him an offer he couldn’t refuse.
Van Laningham is a large man with a deep voice, and he is normally good natured.
However, when he first related to me what Marcello told him about that meeting, he took on the menacing tone that Marcello conveyed to Ruby at that meeting.
Marcello confronted Ruby in the old farmhouse in the middle of his sixtyfour-hundred-acre Churchill Farms property.
Marcello disposed of the bodies of men who crossed him at Churchill Farms, a fact not lost on any member of the godfather’s organization summoned there for a meeting.
Ruby, knowing he was stealing money from Marcello, was probably already nervous when he arrived at the isolated farmhouse.
One can only imagine his fear and pleading when Marcello confronted him about his thievery, and the fury Marcello unleashed on him.
As Marcello described the scene to Van Laningham, Ruby was trembling and begging, willing to do anything to keep from paying the ultimate price for stealing from the godfather.
If it eventually meant going into a crowded police basement full of well-armed cops, pulling out his gun, and shooting a prisoner, Ruby had no choice but to do it.
As indicated by Ruby’s later remarks, it was likely not just Ruby’s life that was on the line but those of his family (two brothers, a sister, nieces, and nephews) as well.
An undoubtedly grateful Ruby left the meeting with his life but would become increasingly involved in the dangerous JFK plot.
As with any sensitive Mafia operation, Ruby’s participation would be on a need-to-know basis, getting only limited amounts of information about the plot when he needed to know it.
The FBI has released files with Marcello’s remarks about Ruby written in the 1980s, and we also have Jack Van Laningham’s videotaped oral history with additional details about Marcello’s Ruby comments.
Marcello’s revelations were also recorded by the FBI’s secret CAMTEX taping system.
However, none of the CAMTEX tapes or transcripts have been released as the 1992 JFK Act requires, and they should be so that the public can hear Marcello’s own words about the matter.
Using information compiled by the House Select Committee on Assassinations, it’s possible to pinpoint the likely time of Marcello’s confrontation with Ruby.
Committee investigators compiled detailed information on Ruby’s many calls and visits to New Orleans in 1963, usually to people or places connected to Marcello.
But they were unable to find out where Ruby stayed during his visit to New Orleans from June 5 to June 8, 1963.
One journalist has suggested that Ruby may have stayed at Churchill Farms during that time, which would account for the lack of any record.
Ruby had called a Marcello associate several times before that visit, and Ruby called a club run by one of Marcello’s brothers two days after he returned to Dallas.
FBI files show that “on June 22, 1963”—two weeks after Ruby’s visit to New Orleans—a horse trainer for one of Carlos Marcello’s brothers said he was in “a bookie joint” in New Orleans, where he worked part-time.
The horse trainer told the FBI that another one of Marcello’s brothers came in and spoke to the owner.
In 1963 as in 1959, Jack Ruby was not a major player but had been given an offer he couldn’t refuse because he knew the right people in the right places.
In Cuba, Ruby had met and tried to help Santo Trafficante, and he was familiar with Tampa, having once lived there and sometimes visiting the city while scouting strip acts.
Ruby had worked for Johnny Rosselli’s Chicago Mafia and knew that city well.
The mob bosses and Hoffa had more than a dozen associates in common with Ruby, making it easy to communicate with Ruby through intermediaries, as Ruby’s phone records confirm.
Ruby was also a small part of Marcello and Trafficante’s drug network, which would also figure into the JFK plot.
Finally, Ruby had the connections with the Dallas Police to arrange for anyone blamed for the assassination in Dallas to be quickly killed.
If that didn’t happen, Ruby would have to do the job himself, and the same would likely be true if the assassination occurred in a city besides Dallas.
In preparation for Ruby’s help with the JFK plot, and to provide cover for his activities, he may have been given a small role in the ClA—Mafia Castro assassination plots.
By the fall of 1963, Jack Ruby would be having face-to-face meetings with Johnny Rosselli in Miami while the ClA—Mafia plots to kill Castro were continuing.
Carlos Marcello had also apparently given Ruby a substantial financial incentive for producing results in his work on the JFK plot.
Several months after the Marcello meeting, and shortly before JFK’s trip to Dallas, Ruby began to make plans to move away from the lower-middle-class Oak Cliff neighborhood.
He planned for a new home in the most expensive and exclusive part of Dallas, Turtle Creek, where prominent citizens such as General Edwin Walker lived.
Also around that same time, Ruby talked to his tax attorney, claiming “he had a connection who would supply him money to settle his long-standing” and huge IRS debt.
In a few months, Ruby had gone from being desperate for money to being afraid of being killed to feeling like he was finally ready to hit the financial big time.
For Ruby, that fact was shown by numerous FBI memos and for Walker by his later arrest in Dallas for soliciting gay sex from an undercover officer.
But Cohen was in prison then, so the LA mobster was likely someone like Johnny Rosselli.
CIA Deputy Director for Plans Richard Helms was still hiding those plots from John and Robert Kennedy and his own CIA Director.
By using people linked to those operations in their still-developing plan to assassinate JFK, the Mafia chiefs could employ people and equipment for what appeared to be CIA operations—but later some would seem to be linked to JFK’s assassination, forcing CIA officials such as Helms to cover up or destroy much crucial information.
However, Marcello and the other mob bosses needed something more than the ClA—Meafia plots to trigger a truly widespread coverup, one that would ensure there could be no thorough and complete investigation of JFK’s murder.
Fear of revealing any possible link between the ClA—Mafia plots and JFK’s assassination would cause Helms and his close subordinates to hide important information from investigators.
However, the godfathers also needed a way to force CIA Director John McCone, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, and new President Lyndon Johnson to withhold crucial information from the press and public, to prevent a potential nuclear confrontation with the Soviet Union at the height of the Cold War.
THE CIA AND the Mafia worked together on two well-documented attempts to kill Fidel Castro in the spring of 1963, efforts that would later be linked to JFK’s assassination by the Mafia.
These two attempts aren’t well known and are missing from the CIA’s later accounts of the CIA—Mafia plots.
However, Cuban authorities extensively documented the two attempts, having captured many of the Cuban participants and much of their ClA-supplied armaments and communications equipment.
The Cubans photographed both men and material at the time, and the full details reached the American press a decade later.
Both of these attempts involved Mafia don Johnny Rosselli, operating under the supervision of CIA officer William Harvey.
Harvey, a hard-drinking, rotund agent sometimes called America’s James Bond, was becoming close friends with Rosselli, who was an expert at manipulating people for his own ends.
Cuban forces captured and photographed “lazookas, mortars, and machine guns,” along with an assassination team of five men, including one named as a CIA agent.
Naval War College historian David Kaiser documented that Johnny “Rosselli identified the team as his own” twice in later years.
Four years after the attempt, Rosselli and his attorney spread provocative stories to select journalists, accounts that reached President Lyndon Johnson and other high-ranking United States officials.
Rosselli would leak the story again in 1971, adding even more details, including William Harvey’s name.
In planting those and similar fake stories blaming JFK’s murder on Fidel, Rosselli, Trafficante, and Marcello not only diverted blame for JFK’s murder away from themselves but also ensured that it couldn’t be fully investigated without exposing dark secrets the CIA and other high officials didn’t want revealed.
At least three of the men were captured and photographed, along with a large array of weapons, including sniper rifles, machine guns, assault rifles, and pistols.
Based on Rosselli’s later remarks, that attempt was also part of his CI[A—Mafia plotting.
However, those two attempts wouldn’t have provided enough cover for Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli.
Because Robert Kennedy and the CIA Director didn’t know about United States backing for the attempts, they wouldn’t have had the same motivation as Richard Helms to cover up information if they were linked to JFK’s murder.
Martino found some powerful allies for his planned operation, including wealthy and influential William Pawley, a friend of former Vice President Richard Nixon, and Senator James O Eastland, who was investigating the Fair Play for Cuba Committee at the time.
Martino’s story was designed to appeal to the CIA and to JFK and was compelling though far-fetched.
The plan’s stated goal was to send a ten-man Cuban exile team into Cuba to bring back three Soviet technicians, who were supposedly ready to defect and reveal that Soviet nuclear missiles remained hidden in caves in Cuba.
The scenario sounded plausible to CIA officials because thousands of Soviet technicians and troops remained in Cuba.
Fidel had never allowed the UN weapons inspections, so there was no way to prove with absolute certainty that some missiles weren’t hidden in caves or underground, beyond the view of American U-2 spy plane flights.
For President Kennedy, if Cuba still held on to Soviet missiles, he wanted to be the first to know, before his political enemies used the information to attack him.
However, JFK, RFK, and their aides were skeptical of the story and didn’t become involved in the operation.
Martino and his mobster bosses pressed ahead with the plan, hoping one or more JFK aides might decide to support the operation.
Kaiser found that “Rosselli and Trafficante were using Martino to enlist the help of the CIA” for the operation.
Martino’s ten-man exile team to be sent into Cuba was originally going to include Loran Hall, a United States mercenary who had earlier spent time in detention with Santo Trafficante in Cuba.
Eventually a team of ten armed Cuban exiles headed off toward Cuba, watched by a photographer from Life magazine, two CIA agents, and John Martino.
The team never returned, and Cuban government officials claim the ten never landed in Cuba.
In reality, no Soviet technicians waited, ready to defect— the entire story had been a ruse by Rosselli and Trafficante, spread by Martino to CIA officials.
As noted by historian Mahoney, the mob bosses’ real goal was to provide cover for JFK’s assassination.
It’s important to note that by the spring of 1963, Trafficante, Rosselli, and Marcello would have no longer seen killing Fidel as their highest priority.
The pressure on the mob chiefs from JFK and RFK had increased by that time.
Carlos Marcello faced federal charges later in the year and knew he would be personally prosecuted by RFK’s men.
Trafficante’s operations were under increasing assault, and their ally Jimmy Hoffa faced three trials for various crimes.
Rosselli’s boss, Sam Giancana, was severely impacted by the FBI’s “lockstep” surveillance.
Killing Fidel Castro while JFK and RFK were still in power would do the mob bosses little good, which meant that murdering JFK was much more important—and time sensitive—for the Mafia chiefs.
Because they also knew nothing about the CI[A—Mafia plots in March and April 1963, RFK would have no incentive to protect those operations if they appeared linked to his brother’s murder.
Fortuitously for the mobsters, by the time Operation TILT ended in early summer 1963, a new United States operation against Cuba had evolved.
It was one the Kennedys fully supported and directed and that the three Mafia leaders would soon infiltrate.
In pentrating this operation, the mob bosses would gain access to sensitive information that could compromise various branches of government, stifling any real investigation of JFK’s murder until at least the late 1970s.
BY APRIL 1963, Kennedy Administration policy about Cuba had become muddled, according to accounts from the various subcommittees of the National Security Council dealing with Cuba.
Some officials pressed for strong action while others called for a more cautious approach.
That’s why he and his officials were careful not to remind the public that there was not yet a “no invasion pledge” because Fidel had not yet allowed UN weapons inspectors into Cuba.
Yet the secret war against Cuba, run out of Miami’s huge JMWAVE station, continued, with extravagant sums being spread among dozens of exile groups, large and small.
By the early spring of 1963, JFK had approved small exile raids against Cuban ships, but ships of other countries were not supposed to be attacked.
However, Richard Helms appears to have taken a harder line against Cuba on his own, again without telling JFK or CIA Director McCone, which caused problems for President Kennedy.
For example, one CIA-backed Cuban exile group that Helms supported made an unauthorized attack in Cuba that violated JFK’s guidelines.
On March 18, 1963, a group named Alpha 66, run by exile Antonio Veciana, “announced that it had a Russian ship and a Russian training area” in Cuba.
According to E Howard Hunt, Alpha 66 and Veciana were handled for the Agency by his good friend CIA officer David Atlee Phillips.
Veciana milked the operation for maximum publicity, Phillips’s specialty.
Outraged at the unauthorized and dangerous attack on a Russian ship, JFK had the United States State Department immediately condemn the raid.
It’s highly unlikely that Phillips would have ordered Veciana to undertake the attack, which could have led to a new confrontation between the United States and the Soviets, without Helms’s approval.
While the Kennedys wanted Alpha 66 and Veciana to receive no CIA assistance, Helms—without informing JFK or RFK—told Phillips to continue supervising Veciana and his group.
Also in 1963 Richard Helms approved an even more outrageous provocation, one that endangered the lives of three imprisoned CIA agents as well as JFK’s personal emissary, who was then trying to negotiate their release.
The three agents were among the last twenty-seven United States citizens still held in Cuban prisons.
Donovan had helped Robert Kennedy negotiate the release of the Bay of Pigs prisoners, and his rapport with the Cuban government soon translated to a working relationship with Fidel, which included accompanying the Cuban leader on skin-diving trips.
The CIA developed two plans to assassinate Fidel while he was skin diving with Donovan, something the Agency admitted both in internal reports and in Congressional testimony.
However, the shell would actually be “rigged to explode underwater,” killing Castro and anyone who might be with him.
CIA Technical Services—the same group that created the poison pills for the Mafia to use against Fidel—“explored” the idea but found too many problems.
The “second plan involved having James Donovan . . . present Castro with a contaminated diving suit” as a gift.
Donovan was already in some danger, since the CIA’s March 1963 and April 1963 assassination operations were being planned while he was in Cuba, negotiating with Fidel.
Ironically, Castro actually talked with Donovan about the CIA’s attempts to kill him while the men were on a skin-diving excursion.
For decades, and even today, former CIA personnel—in books and interviews —give the impression that the CIA undertook efforts to assassinate Fidel Castro only because President Kennedy and Robert Kennedy pressed it to do so.
The CIA fully admits to many welldocumented Castro assassination attempts that were not authorized by JFK, RFK, even CIA Director John McCone.
More importantly, the CIA’s attempts to assassinate Fidel began before JFK became President and continued long after he was dead.
Surprisingly, JFK “suggested that both options might simultaneously be pursued”—a dual strategy that would become a reality by the fall.
McCone followed up his meeting with a memo saying that “a military coup in Cuba the United States’ only hope” to resolve the Cuba situation.
Neither was producing results, especially since most of the power in Cuba was concentrated in the hands of a relatively small number of officials that Fidel trusted.
Frustrated by the lack of progress, having no clear strategy, and lacking time to give the difficult situation the attention it needed, JFK delegated Cuba to Robert Kennedy.
In addition, the extensive attention RFK gave to Cuban matters was on top of an already full plate of activities he had to oversee as Attorney General, issues ranging from civil rights matters to the war on organized crime.
Robert Kennedy turned to his exile friend Harry Williams, telling him he didn’t want any more Cuban exile leaders coming to RFK for money.
Instead, the exiles were to go through Williams, who would then identify for RFK the select few he thought were serious and deserved United States backing.
RFK turned to Williams because they had grown increasingly close since the Bay of Pigs prisoner release.
The fact that Williams was close to—and trusted by—RFK has been confirmed in accounts by Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Haynes Johnson, Newsweek editor Evan Thomas, and _ historian Richard Mahoney.
Years later Haynes Johnson wrote in the Washington Post that of all “the Cuban leaders of the Bay of Pigs invasion,” Williams “was the closest such person to the administration” in 1963.
Those wanting the support of either man would have to go through Williams.
Rosselli used mob money to fund a phony Cuban exile group, the JGCE , run by Paulino Sierra.
CIA agent Bernard Barker, also working for Trafficante, helped spread the word about the new group.
However, a journalist raised suspicions about Sierra’s Mafia funding in May 1963, and my interview with Sierra’s daughter confirmed Sierra’s ties to the mob.
Sierra’s group lingered for several months, but it never received the backing of Williams or the Kennedys and thus was of no real use in the JFK plot.
A new all-out drive to unify Cuban refugees into a single, powerful organization to topple the Fidel Castro regime was disclosed today by exile sources.
The plan calls for formation of a junta in exile to mount a threepronged thrust consisting of sabotage, infiltration, and ultimate invasion.
The exile sources said the plan had been discussed with Cuban leaders by United States Central Intelligence agents.
Varona, former Premier , said he had told Mr Ruiz Williams he would cooperate in plans to unify the exiles.
RFK and Harry Williams were furious when they saw the article revealing information about their secret plans.
The information was probably leaked by Tony Varona, who had volunteered to become the first exile leader to join Williams’s operation, no doubt at the urging of Santo Trafficante.
Varona had worked on the CIA—Mafia plots with Trafficante and Rosselli, and he was still working for Trafficante in 1963.
That Varona was working on behalf of Trafficante and the Mafia was confirmed soon after Varona began working with Williams when the CIA received a report that Rosselli’s associates had paid a bribe of $200,000 to Varona.
Neither RFK nor Williams knew about Varona’s work for Trafficante and Rosselli or about the ongoing CIA—Mafia plots, and the CIA never informed RFK about Varona’s bribe from the Mafia.
Thus the Kennedys’ covert plans for Cuba were penetrated by Trafficante almost from the Start.
However, the May 10, 1963, AP article quickly caught the attention of Commander Juan Almeida, Williams’s old friend in Cuba, still head of the Cuban army.
Commander Almeida reached out to Williams within forty-eight hours of seeing the article, getting a message to him to call a certain number in Cuba, a line that was safe from wiretaps.
At that time Almeida was in many ways the third most powerful official in Cuba, behind only Fidel and his brother Raul Castro, and he wielded far more authority and men than Che Guevara.
Commander Almeida told Williams that Fidel was becoming nothing more than a dictator, betraying the very Revolution they had all fought so hard for.
Then Almeida surprised Williams by offering to stage a coup against Fidel—if JFK would back him.
As soon as he got off the phone, Williams immediately called Robert Kennedy about Almeida’s offer.
Williams and RFK were in near daily contact by May 1963, and Williams appears often in RFK’s official Justice Department phone logs.
Robert Kennedy wasted no time in discussing Almeida’s offer with President Kennedy, since this appeared to be the big break regarding Cuba they’d been hoping for.
RFK’s official phone logs at the National Archives indicate some of the timing.
The logs show that on May 13, 1963, at 5:50m., RFK took a call from President Kennedy.
RFK told Williams that JFK had decided to accept Almeida’s offer to stage a coup to overthrow Fidel and that the United States government would give Almeida its full backing for the attempt.
That was the start of the JFK—Almeida coup plan, one of the most secret covert United States operations since D-Day.
Select officials at the Pentagon later played major roles in the JEFK—Almeida coup plan, with the CIA relegated to supporting status.
Williams and other aides to John and Robert Kennedy, including Secretary of State Dean Rusk , verified the JFK—Almeida coup plan to me.
Though the vast majority of files about the plan are still classified, a surprising number have slipped through.
They include a 1963 CIA report to the Agency’s Director, with information from Berard Barker about an “operation including Juan Almeida” designed to “overthrow” Fidel, who would be replaced by a new Cuban government to “be recognized immediately” by JFK’s administration.
Another CIA dispatch discusses a plan for “an internal uprising” in Cuba by “Cuban military figures, who are conspiring against Fidel Castro.
Hundreds of pages of files about the United States military side of the operation have been declassified.
The JFK—Almeida coup plan was designed to avoid the main problems that befell the Bay of Pigs operation, which had been a relatively open secret known to dozens of officials, aides, agents, and military officers in the United States government, as well as to numerous journalists and even partially to Fidel.
Only about a dozen people— including JFK, RFK, CIA Director John McCone, and CIA Deputy Director for Plans Richard Helms—would know the full scope of the plan.
The leading United States role in the coup plan was never supposed to be revealed, even after the coup succeeded—and not even years later, since United States officials hoped Almeida and trusted exiles might play roles in Cuba’s new government for decades to come.
After Almeida’s offer was relayed to the Kennedys, the planning took on a new sense of urgency.
In just the next four months, ten drafts were completed, some growing to more than eighty pages.
Officials at the CIA and State Department reviewed and approved them all.
At that point no one at State knew about Almeida, and Dean Rusk would be told about him only after JFK’s death.
Thus most—but not all—of those working on these drafts thought they were only contingency plans, just in case a ranking Cuban official could be found to lead a coup.
However, these drafts still give a surprisingly accurate overview of the coup plan.
The plan stresses that “it is important the revolt appear genuine and not open to the charge of being a facade for a forcible United States overthrow of Castro a well-planned and successful ‘rescue’ of a revolt could be made politically acceptable” to United States allies and the Soviets.
The leaders of the coup “would have announced via radio and other means the. . . establishment of a Provisional Government.
However, it’s important to point out that “full-scale invasion” was a worstcase scenario that JFK and others hoped wouldn’t happen.
It was possible that Commander Almeida could stage the coup without United States military forces.
A multiracial group of Cuban American Bay of Pigs veterans—commanded by a black exile officer—was soon training at Fort Benning and Fort Jackson.
They would be the first United States troops into Cuba if United States military forces were needed on the ground.
In fact, Commander Almeida could actually ask for the intervention of United States forces to help prevent a Soviet takeover of Cuba.
A careful reading of all the declassified files and of exclusive interviews with participants in the coup plan shows it was even possible that United States military forces could wind up fighting side by side with Commander Almeida’s Cuban troops against forces backing Raul Castro or old-line Cuban Communists.
JFK’s “Plan for a Coup in Cuba” with Almeida was vastly different from the CIA-—Mafia plots.
The United States wanted support from its allies, and the Kennedys’ ultimate goal was a free and democratic Cuba.
The “Provisional Government” would include the Cuban America exile troops and the leaders of four exile groups, who would secure bases outside the United States prior to the coup.
Among them, unfortunately, was Tony Varona, who was working for the Mafia.
Within several months, CIA memos began to describe those disparate groups as working on a major plot to overthrow Castro.
The American public knew nothing about the JFK—Almeida coup plan for decades.
Finally, some documents were declassified in the 1990s, but the few mentioning Almeida were separate from the files about the “Plan for a Coup in Cuba,” so most historians thought the plans were only a what-if contingency.
The JFK—Almeida coup plan didn’t start to become fully exposed until 2006, after the United States government sent me a written determination that some files describing Commander Almeida’s secret work for JFK could be released.
The secrecy surrounding the JFK—Almeida coup plan helps explain why so much related to JFK’s assassination stayed secret for so long.
Nonetheless, a surprising number of documents slipped through over the years, though some of their significance is clear to historians only now, in hindsight.
Among those documents are files about Tony Varona’s summer of 1963 $200,000 bribe from the Mafia.
JFK wanted to keep Cuba from becoming a “political football” during the 1964 campaign, which would begin in January 1964.
That meant they had to take action before the end of 1963, preferably at least a month before the Christmas holidays.
It’s critical to point out that for the JFK—Almeida coup plan to have worked, Commander Almeida could not take public responsibility for Fidel’s death and neither could Williams or the other Cuban exiles.
The Cuban populace could hardly be expected to rally around new leaders who boasted of having killed Fidel, whom the CIA admitted was still admired by many on the island.
Thus, Williams told me, someone else would “take the fall” for Fidel’s death.
Evidence gleaned from CIA memos and coup plan files indicates that Fidel’s death would have been blamed on a Russian or a Russian sympathizer, a way to help neutralize the thousands of Soviet personnel still in Cuba.
Many newspaper accounts noted increasing tension between Fidel and the Soviets in the second half of 1963.
As head of the army, Almeida knew the locations of all Soviet forces in Cuba, as well as Fidel’s security plans.
Almeida had enough personal prestige that if he went on Cuban TV and announced that their beloved Fidel had been killed by a Russian or Russian sympathizer, the Cuban people would accept his word, the same way most United States citizens at that time would accept a pronouncement by a trusted figure such as J Edgar Hoover.
In addition, Commander Almeida was the highest black official in a country estimated to be 70 percent of African descent, so it was felt the populace would more easily rally around him than someone like the Argentinean Che Guevara (struggling as an economic bureaucrat in 1963) or one of the white Cuban officials the Russians might back.
Yet they also continued to make increasingly detailed plans to overthrow Fidel.
As discussed in later chapters, by fall the Kennedys were pursuing two different, secret “peace feelers,” trying to jump-start peace talks with Castro.
When Secretary of State Dean Rusk confirmed the existence of the coup plan to Vanity Fair in 1994, the article’s authors asked Rusk about the Kennedys’ attempts to negotiate with Castro at the same time they were planning a coup against him.
Rusk told Vanity Fair, “Oh, there’s no particular contradiction there . . . it was just an either/or situation.
JFK’s earlier-noted comments to John McCone reflect this dual strategy, as does Robert Kennedy’s Oral History at Boston’s John F Kennedy Presidential Library.
Pursuing peace and war at the same time also reflected the indecisiveness of the American public about Cuba.
GIVEN THE DECADES of secrecy surrounding the JFK—Almeida coup plan, it’s shocking that a dozen associates of Carlos Marcello, Trafficante, or Rosselli knew about—and in seven cases actually worked on—the top-secret operation.
Learning about the coup plan gave Marcello’s group the deadly secret it needed to prevent a full and public investigation of JFK’s murder, if the effort to overthrow Fidel could be linked to JFK’s murder.
In addition, as plans for the coup and invasion progressed, there was also a chance that phony evidence implicating Fidel in JFK’s death could trigger a United States invasion of Cuba, one that the United States military had been preparing for months.
John and Robert Kennedy tried to bar the Mafia from any participation in the coup plan.
That included keeping the Mafia out of Cuba after the coup’s hopedfor success, when the mob would not be allowed to reopen their casinos.
Unfortunately, declassified files show that several associates of Carlos Marcello not only knew about the secret plan, but made documented comments about this otherwise top-secret operation.
An FBI report written just weeks after JFK’s assassination quotes Jack Ruby as talking about something he must have learned before being jailed for shooting Oswald.
That long-overlooked remark wasn’t in the Warren Report, but it was included in the twenty-six volumes of supporting evidence and documents that the Warren Commission issued.
To most in the Bureau and on the Warren Commission, and later to the relative few who read the twenty-six volumes, such a claim undoubtedly seemed absurd.
Those plans were withheld not only from the Warren Commission but also from the House Select Committee on Assassinations and all other Congressional investigating committees.
Remarkably, as detailed in the next chapter, Ruby was just one of twelve associates of Carlos Marcello, Trafficante, or Rosselli who knew important information about the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
Even more remarkable, seven associates of the Mafia chiefs were actually working on parts of the coup/invasion plan, even though John and Robert Kennedy had banned the Mafia from having anything to do with the operation.
Guy Banister, Marcello’s private detective, knew about the coup plan as well.
Manolo Ray,” who was one of five exile leaders chosen by RFK and Harry Williams to be part of the coup plan.
Michael L Kurtz, John Martino —Santo Trafficante’s technician—also worked with Carlos Marcello and Guy Banister in the summer of 1963.
In it Martino is quoted as saying—two months after JFK’s death—that when he died “Kennedy was embarked on a plan to get rid of Castro.
The OAS role, as detailed in several of the fourteen drafts of the top-secret “Plan for a Coup in Cuba,” drawn up under Robert Kennedy’s direction in the summer and fall of 1963, wasn’t declassified until 1997.
Yet Marcello’s associate Martino knew about that—and more—decades earlier.
Even Lee Oswald, who had connections to Marcello documented earlier, made an interesting remark about “an invasion of Cuba” by “the United States” at a time when almost no one was publicly speculating about such an operation.
In the summer of 1963, Oswald—accompanied by David Ferrie—reportedly visited a training camp near New Orleans that was affiliated with Manuel Artime, one of the key exile leaders for the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
CIA memos I first published in 2005 confirm that in the early 1960s, Manuel Artime was also working on the ClA—Mafia plots, which also involved Trafficante, Rosselli, and Marcello.
Artime, E Howard Hunt’s best friend, would soon become part of Trafficante’s drug trafficking network.
Artime was one of seven associates of the three mob bosses who were actually working on the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
The same is true for Tony Varona, the first Cuban exile leader to join Harry Williams’s operation, all while he was still working with Santo Trafficante and Johnny Rosselli on the CIA—Mafia plots.
It was their work on those unauthorized plots that allowed some of the mob bosses’ men to infiltrate the Kennedy brothers’ authorized operation, the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
E Howard Hunt has long been the subject of speculation and Congressional investigations regarding his possible involvement in JFK’s murder, though evidence remains elusive, as explained in the book’s final chapter.
Even Hunt’s taped “confession” isn’t really a confession at all but an account full of recycled theories, speculation, and important omissions—such as the Mafia ties of his best friend, Artime, and his longtime assistant Bernard Barker.
However, Barker was definitely involved in JFK’s murder, according to Harry Williams, RFK’s friend and aide for the JEFK—Almeida coup plan.
Long before files linking Barker to organized crime were declassified, Williams told me and my research associate that Barker had worked for Trafficante and was doing so in 1963—at the same time Barker was working on the JEK—Almeida coup plan.
As Williams explained to me, E Howard Hunt was one of two prominent CIA officers assigned to assist Harry Williams.
Kennedy aides, former FBI agent William Turner, and Vanity Fair all confirmed Hunt’s work with Williams.
Williams detailed to me and to William Turner the important role Barker played as Hunt’s assistant in 1963, something Barker himself indicated in published interviews.
Many of Barker’s 1963 CIA files, including all those involving his admitted work as Hunt’s assistant that year, remain unreleased.
President Kennedy’s government had reached its ‘peak’ in its efforts to overthrow Castro,” something not reflected in any history books or government reports at the time Barker made his comments.
Harry Williams said there were “dozens from May to November ” with E Howard Hunt and a CIA security officer assigned to the operation.
Bernard Barker arranged those meetings, most of them held away from Miami.
As the JFK—Almeida coup plan progressed, Barker assisted Hunt with two of the most sensitive parts of the plan.
Robert Kennedy had authorized the money in the event the coup was unsuccessful and Almeida had to flee Cuba; if he was killed, the money would alternatively provide for his wife and two children.
Secondly, Barker and Hunt were also part of a covert operation in which Almeida’s wife and two children left Cuba on a seemingly innocent pretext prior to the date set for the coup.
The plan was for Almeida’s family to wait out the coup safely in another country, under secret CIA surveillance.
RFK had also authorized Williams and the CIA to assure Almeida that if anything happened to him and his family couldn’t return to Cuba, his family would be taken care of.
In addition to providing for their safety, having the family in another country, under the watchful eye of the CIA, also ensured that Almeida didn’t double-cross the CIA and the Kennedys.
Even Barker’s routine CIA reports from the summer and fall of 1963 that have been declassified—the ones that don’t mention Hunt—show him submitting a stream of information linked either to the mob or the coup plan.
For example, Barker filed reports about a meeting between Manuel Artime and Tony Varona to discuss unity and noting Artime’s meeting with Trafficante “bagman” Frank Fiorini in Dallas to buy an airplane.
Barker’s CIA reports also mention Eloy Menoyo’s plan to overthrow Fidel and the operations of Manolo Ray.
Barker also reported on the efforts of Sam Benton, another private detective working for Carlos Marcello, to recruit an American mercenary, part of the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel.
The mercenary backed out when he learned that an associate of Johnny Rosselli was involved in the plot.
In 1963 Harry Williams—and Robert Kennedy—didn’t know that “Barker was connected to ,” as he later learned.
Williams was not privy to FBI and CIA files tying Barker to the mob; nor did he realize that his associates Tony Varona and Manuel Artime also had ties to Trafficante.
The JFK—Almeida coup plan gave Marcello and Trafficante the opportunity they needed to kill JFK in a way that would prevent even Robert Kennedy—as well as Lyndon Johnson and J Edgar Hoover—from pursuing a full or public investigation of the murder.
Though the Kennedys had tried to bar the Mafia from any knowledge of or participation in the coup plan, the network of Marcello and Trafficante surrounding the CIA—Mafia Castro plots allowed the mob bosses to use Barker, Varona, and others to infiltrate the coup plan and ultimately link it to JFK’s assassination.
TWELVE YEARS AFTER JFK’s murder, Richard Helms tried to explain to Congressional investigators why he continued the ClA—Mafia plots in 1963 without telling President Kennedy, Robert Kennedy, or CIA Director John McCone.
Helms indicated then—and in later testimony—that he saw no difference between that effort and hiring the Mafia to assassinate Fidel.
To Helms, having mobsters shoot Fidel so he could be replaced by a right-wing dictator—perhaps someone like Manuel Artime, best friend of his protégé Hunt—was no different from, and perhaps even preferable to, helping an internal coup that would be followed by a coalition government, free elections, and democracy.
Kennedy aides and officials—including Secretary of State Rusk—told me they totally disagree with Helms’s view.
That arrogant attitude is apparently why Helms continued the CIA—Mafia plots even after the JFK—Almeida coup plan was far along.
Officially, his replacement early in 1963 was Desmond FitzGerald, a patrician figure from a family even wealthier and more blue-blooded than that of Richard Helms.
FitzGerald was brought over from Far Eastern operations and had no previous experience in Cuban affairs.
Perhaps for that reason, William Harvey continued to work with Johnny Rosselli on the CIA—Mafia plots; Harvey had also grown close to Rosselli.
But his role with the Mafia don had to end in June 1963, when the FBI learned that Rosselli was visiting Harvey.
A gruff, powerful, and forceful man of southwestern Native American descent, Morales had headed covert operations for the CIA in Havana before the closing of the United States Embassy, where he had supervised David Atlee Phillips.
Morales also had a role in the Bay of Pigs operation and was extremely bitter at its tragic outcome, which he blamed exclusively on President Kennedy.
Johnny Rosselli, always looking for an advantage to exploit, soon turned the hard-drinking David Morales into a close friend; they even took a trip to Las Vegas together.
For Rosselli, Morales was just another CIA agent he could use for his own ends—in this case, the JFK assassination.
But Morales was a high-ranking CIA officer who could control operations, who could order weapons shipped, and who was also working on the JEK—Almeida coup plan.
Morales made his confession to his attorney and also to a lifelong friend after going on a tirade about JFK’s sole responsibility for the failure of the Bay of Pigs.
Congressional investigator Gaeton Fonzi, who worked for both the Senate Church Committee and the House Select Committee on Assassinations, uncovered Morales’s JFK confession and found it credible.
In the fall of 1963, Morales and Rosselli were observed working closely together.
An Army Ranger assigned to the CIA in the summer and fall of 1963 later wrote an account of his time in South Florida training Cuban exiles.
Apparently, the CIA was preparing to have shooters available to kill Fidel if Almeida had problems finding someone to eliminate the Cuban leader.
CARLOS MARCELLO’S ACCESS to the highly secret CIA—Mafia plots and those working on the JFK—Almeida coup plan gave the godfather, and his allies Trafficante and Rosselli, the connections he needed to create grave concerns at the highest levels of the United States government—if those plans appeared linked to JFK’s murder.
In addition, several exile leaders in the JFK—Almeida coup plan continued to attempt tiny raids into Cuba or against Cuban ships, minor efforts designed to “keep the pot boiling,” in the words of one official, until the day for Almeida’s coup arrived.
Those raids also kept up the morale of Cuban exiles still receiving United States funding, since only a handful of their leaders knew about Commander Almeida and the coup.
In addition to all those efforts, in the remaining months of 1963, Richard Helms actually increased his use of unauthorized operations designed to simply assassinate Fidel Castro.
All his unauthorized assassination plots involved Mafia associates, so Helms may have viewed them as simply different aspects of one operation, the same CIA—Mafia plots that had been running for three years.
Also, based on his later Congressional testimony, Helms apparently saw no real distinction between his CI[A—Mafia plots and the Kennedys’ authorized efforts to stage a coup against Fidel.
If true, that belief doesn’t explain why Helms kept President Kennedy, CIA Director McCone, and Attorney General Robert Kennedy in the dark about his unauthorized operations—or why he used mobsters the Attorney General was trying to prosecute.
The most generous view of the actions of Richard Helms—and a handful of his subordinates—in deceiving his superiors would be that Helms viewed the CIA-—Mafia plots as a kind of backup plan in case something happened to Commander Almeida before he launched the coup.
Helms might have seen the CIA-—Mafia plots as a way of salvaging the operation in the event that Commander Almeida lost his position; was injured, imprisoned, or killed; or decided to flee prior to the coup.
Helms might have thought that even if Almeida could initiate the coup, it would still be helpful to have Mafia or exile sharpshooters on hand to finish the job, just in case anything went wrong.
While the CIA had only a supporting role in the JFK—Almeida coup plan, the CIA— Mafia plots were something that Helms could fully control—or at least he thought he could.
Rolando Cubela, an old element of the ClA—Mafia plots, took on new prominence in the summer of 1963.
Cubela, a physician, had headed the Directo Revolucionario , a student group that had helped win the Revolution.
However, Cubela quickly grew disaffected with Castro rule, and by December 1960 he was working with the CIA on plots to kill Fidel.
In many ways, Cubela was simply another part of the C[A—Mafia plots since he’d met Santo Trafficante in Cuba and knew at least two associates of the godfather who were also involved in the CIA—Mafia plots.
In June 1963 the CIA contacted Cubela again, just as David Morales was taking over the supervision of Johnny Rosselli from William Harvey.
Although Cubela had no real power within the Cuban government, he received a generous travel budget as the former head of the DR, and he frequently flew to Europe and Communist-bloc countries.
According to Cuban reports, David Morales actually met with Cubela in Paris in September 1963, and the CIA acknowledges that a series of meetings between Cubela and CIA personnel followed.
Cubela says the CIA kept pressuring him to assassinate Fidel, while the CIA claims assassination was Cubela’s idea.
As JFK’s Secretary of State Dean Rusk told me—and as CIA files clearly show—he had no following inside Cuba that would have allowed him to stage a coup on his own.
However, Rusk and another committee member told me that Cubela was discussed by name in some of RFK’s Cuba subcommittees of the National Security Council, though not as a possible assassin.
Richard Helms and Desmond FitzGerald mentioned Cubela to some subcommittee members only as someone who might help them find a higher-ranking, more powerful official who could stage a coup.
To an official like Rusk, who didn’t yet know about Almeida, that sounded reasonable.
Twelve years later, when Rusk found out that the CIA was actually using Cubela as a potential assassin, he was livid at Helms’s deceit, with an anger that the usually calm statesman demonstrated in my interview with him.
Only a mid-level official at best, Rolando Cubela played an even smaller role in Cuban affairs as fall 1963 progressed.
Yet Richard Helms and Desmond FitzGerald increased CIA pressure on Cubela to assassinate Fidel, with FitzGerald even flying to Paris to confer with Cubela that same month.
Though FitzGerald claimed to be the personal emissary of Robert Kennedy, Helms later admitted that RFK was never told about the meeting or the assassination aspect of the CIA’s dealings with Cubela.
The CIA admits it tried to persuade Cubela to poison Fidel, but CIA files also show that the Miami CIA station, where David Morales ran operations, was prepared to provide rifles to him.
Cubela owned a house next to Fidel’s home at Varadero Beach, the resort to which Fidel drove on many weekends in an open jeep in a sort of re-creation of his triumphant drive across Cuba after the Revolution.
AMWORLD files indicate that at one point the CIA planned to use snipers to assassinate Fidel as he drove toward his beach house.
The CIA could use his house as the sniper’s nest and/or even blame him for Fidel’s murder.
Cubela was both a disgruntled official and one who—because of his extensive travels—came in contact with Russians overseas more often than most Cuban officials.
Blaming Cubela for Fidel’s murder might also let the CIA implicate Russia in Fidel’s assassination.
Someone in the CIA, most likely David Morales, arranged for Cubela to be in a meeting with his case officer in Paris on November 22, 1963, at the exact time JFK was scheduled to be riding in an open car through Dallas.
If Morales arranged that as part of his work with Johnny Rosselli, it was the perfect way to force Helms to hide a great deal of information from internal CIA investigators and other high United States officials, which is exactly what happened.
Americans would not learn about the Cubela operation until twelve years after JFK’s murder, and it was never revealed to the Warren Commission.
Richard Helms also approved keeping the CIA’s European assassin recruiter, QJWIN, on the payroll throughout 1963, despite his released files showing a complete lack of results.
William Harvey originally supervised QJWIN, but after David Morales took over Harvey’s supervision of Johnny Rosselli in June 1963, it’s likely that Morales had some role with QJWIN as well.
The mysterious QJWIN was part of the CIA’s ZR/RIFLE assassination program.
CIA files indicate that ZR/RIFLE had been applied to the Castro problem and that QJWIN made a 1963 trip to Florida for an operation involving Johnny Rosselli.
As a result, the true identity of QJWIN remains unresolved, with various CIA memos and sources giving different names.
The CIA files of the European criminal assassins that QJWIN tried to recruit —especially those with last names beginning with “M”—are all heavily censored.
Mertz could have been recruited by QJWIN, and/or it would have been easy for Mertz to have assumed QJWIN’s role or clandestine identity.
As detailed in an upcoming chapter, declassified files show that Mertz was deported from Dallas soon after JFK’s murder, and other evidence implicates him in the crime.
Michel Victor Mertz is a little-known but important figure in the JFK plot due to his long ties to Trafficante and Marcello’s heroin network.
It was Mertz who perfected the technique of smuggling heroin hidden in cars on ocean liners, as depicted in the award-winning film The French Connection.
Though Mertz was a deadly assassin, he also had ties to French intelligence and had saved the life of French President Charles de Gaulle in 1961 after infiltrating an anti-de Gaulle group by getting into a fistfight while pretending to be against de Gaulle.
Mertz was considered “untouchable” by French authorities, and he often visited America.
In addition to QJWIN and the Cubela portions of the CI[A—Mafia plots, Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, and Johnny Rosselli continued their connections to the Castro assassination plots, though only Rosselli was supposed to be involved.
Historians have questioned how much of the mob bosses’ efforts were really directed at Fidel—and how much those same efforts were part of their plan to kill JFK remains a question.
For example, historian Richard Mahoney concluded that “under the CIA penumbra, Rosselli could move guns and assassins in relative secrecy.
By putting the Agency’s fingerprints on operations, the mob could anticipate that the CIA would cooperate in the cover-up” of crucial information related to JFK’s assassination.
Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli could meet to discuss their plan to assassinate JFK, safe from law-enforcement surveillance.
While Marcello was under pressure from RFK’s Justice Department, the New Orleans FBI agent in charge of Marcello claimed the godfather was merely a lowly “tomato salesman” who was not involved in organized crime.
In 1963 Johnny Rosselli visited New Orleans and met with Guy Banister, according to one of Banister’s secretaries.
Mafia protocol makes it almost certain that Mafia don Rosselli also met with Marcello.
In addition, Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli sometimes met at a secluded resort outside Tampa, the Safety Harbor Spa, whose exclusive clientele and distinctive staff freed the mob bosses from any possibility of lawenforcement surveillance.
As a corollary to RFK’s pressure on Rosselli’s boss Sam Giancana, the FBI monitored Rosselli’s movements—except when he was on CIA business in Florida.
While FBI surveillance reports for Rosselli exist for other times and places, no surveillance reports for his time in Florida in 1963 have yet been released—if they still exist.
One reason for the missing records might be Johnny Rosselli’s meetings with Jack Ruby in Miami in late September and early October 1963.
Investigative journalist Scott Malone confirmed that “Ruby met secretly with Johnny Rosselli in Miami” on two occasions in that time span.
When Congressional investigator Michael Ewing wrote a meticulously detailed nine-page analysis of Scott Malone’s six-page article after it was released—noting anything even slightly in error—he pointed out no problems with the article’s description of the fall 1963 Ruby—Rosselli meetings in Miami.
Notorious Chicago hit man Charles Nicoletti, another member of Rosselli’s Mafia family, also joined the CIA—Mafia plots in the fall of 1963, according to the Miami Herald and United Press International.
Cuban officials and unconfirmed United States accounts say that Nicoletti also became part of the mob’s plan to kill JFK, as did Herminio Diaz, another mob hit man who worked for Santo Trafficante.
Cuban authorities described him as “a hit man” since the 1940s who had tried to assassinate the President of Costa Rica in 1956.
In 1963 Diaz began working on the CI[A—Mafia plots for Trafficante and was also of great interest to David Morales’s supervisor, Miami CIA Station Chief Ted Shackley.
The CIA was especially interested in Diaz because in his first interview in the United States with David Morales’s Cuban exile agents, Diaz mentioned Juan Almeida and Rolando Cubela as part of a group of disgruntled Cuban officials who wanted to act against Castro.
Diaz had probably acquired the information second-or third-hand from Trafficante (or Bernard Barker), but even though Diaz got some of the details wrong, his mention of Almeida and Cubela was enough to get the CIA’s attention.
It was important for the success of the mob bosses’ plot to kill JFK that the trusted men they brought into the plan—Diaz, Charles Nicoletti, Michel Victor Mertz, and John Martino—all had intelligence ties.
That gave them cover for their work on the plot, plus ways to feed disinformation to the agencies they worked for, before and after JFK’s murder.
The bosses knew that the agencies might also be reluctant to investigate their own assets, especially when there was someone else who could be blamed.
Carlos Marcello was also still involved in the C[A—Mafia plots in the summer and fall of 1963.
David Kaiser wrote that “Marcello had been involved in the CI[A—mafia plot against Castro from the very beginning” and was still working on it into the summer of 1963.
At that time, another detective working for Marcello, Sam Benton, assisted in the CIA—Mafia plots in both Louisiana and Miami.
The main exile group the godfather supported was the New Orleans branch of Tony Varona’s Cuban Revolutionary Council, which also involved David Ferrie.
The Cuban Revolutionary Council had originally been organized by E Howard Hunt with the assistance of Bernard Barker.
Varona, Hunt, and Barker were now working on the JFK—Almeida coup plan with Harry Williams while also continuing to work on the ClA—Mafia plots.
It’s easy to see how the lines become blurred between the covert Cuban operations that JFK and the CIA Director had authorized and the unauthorized operations Richard Helms was hiding from them.
Helms may not have minded the crossover—he might have even welcomed it—since it gave him cover if problems arose with his unauthorized operations.
It was probably also easier for him to manage the operations by using some of the same personnel, such as Morales, FitzGerald, Barker, Artime, and Cubela, on both the authorized and unauthorized activities.
Unfortunately, that also gave the mob bosses access to potentially compromise each exile component of the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
In addition to Harry Williams, the exiles leaders the Kennedys wanted for their operation were Artime, Varona, Manolo Ray, and Eloy Menoyo.
The Mafia’s effort to intimidate, buy off, or kill Harry Williams began in the summer of 1963.
On one occasion in 1963, former death squad leader Rolando Masferrer—accompanied by two thugs described as looking like Mafia “torpedoes”—confronted Williams there.
Masferrer insisted on joining Williams’s operation, but knowing the Kennedys had banned Masferrer from receiving United States backing, Williams refused to be intimidated.
Bernard Barker had apparently arranged for Williams to meet with the CIA security officer for the JFK—Almeida coup plan at a Miami restaurant.
During the meeting, the CIA officer excused himself and Williams was called over to the table of Santo Trafficante, who offered Williams a bribe.
Williams declined, and when the CIA officer returned, the Agency man made no mention of Trafficante or the bribe.
Since Williams resisted intimidation and bribery, Trafficante tried one final approach.
Later in the summer of 1963, Williams traveled to Guatemala City to confer with Manuel Artime, a trip that Barker had also likely helped arrange.
While Williams dined at a restaurant the night before the scheduled meeting, two gunmen attacked him.
The Attorney General told him to leave the country as soon as possible.
It’s important to note that Williams was in touch with the FBI before and after the incident (Bureau agents had warned Williams to be careful, which is why he was carrying a pistol), but Williams’s FBI file— like his CIA file—has never been released.
The few memos about Williams released in other documents prove that his FBI and CIA files in 1963 alone would have been quite extensive given the high-profile people he met with.
As mentioned earlier, a summer 1963 CIA memo says that exile leader Tony Varona was bribed with $200,000 from Rosselli’s boss Giancana.
The CIA learned of the bribe from Mafia member Richard Cain, who had been involved in the CIA—Mafia plots since 1960.
After bugging a Communist embassy in Mexico City the previous year, Cain began working for the CIA as an asset in the summer of 1963, while he was also Chief Investigator for the Chicago/Cook County Sheriff.
CIA memos later withheld from Congressional investigators show that Cain’s information about Tony Varona traveled via an unusually secure channel directly to Desmond FitzGerald, the CIA official working closely with Richard Helms.
That secure channel to FitzGerald and Helms would also soon be used to convey troubling information about Lee Oswald.
However, at the time of Varona’s bribe, perhaps CIA officials like Helms saw nothing wrong with the payment, since Varona, Giancana, and Cain had all been working for the CIA on the CIA—Mafia plots.
But after JFK’s murder, Varona’s Mafia bribe would be yet another explosive piece of information that Helms would have to hide from his own CIA Director.
The Agency also had in its files incriminating remarks Varona made to former death squad leader Rolando Masferrer just weeks after Varona received his $200,000 bribe.
In the late summer of 1963, Varona ominously told Masferrer that he would help remove certain “obstacles” preventing Masferrer from getting United States backing, something possible only if JFK was no longer President.
His part of the JFK—Almeida coup plan was so important that the CIA assigned it a separate code-name, AMWORLD, and its own supersecure communications network at the Miami CIA station.
In the late 1970s, shortly before Artime’s death, Congressional investigator Gaeton Fonzi received information that Artime had “guilty knowledge” of the crime, but that could have come after JFK’s murder.
Artime received so much support from the CIA and the Kennedys—and was slated for such a major role in Cuba if the coup succeeded—that he would seem to have nothing to gain by helping kill JFK before the coup.
However, CIA files withheld from Congress make it clear that not only was Artime working on the CIA-—Mafia plots but the CIA looked at using the Mafia to provide cover for all the weapons it was providing to Artime.
Those Agency memos also show that the CIA was well aware of the talk of Mafia activity that swirled around Artime.
Artime’s operations were further compromised when they were linked to Lee Oswald.
In the summer of 1963, David Ferrie reportedly took Oswald to a small training camp outside of New Orleans that supplied recruits for Artime’s camps in Central America.
The Mafia would also try to compromise liberal exile leader Manolo Ray, whose reputation for integrity seemed to render him incorruptible.
Trafficante and Marcello’s men thus took an indirect approach to tie Lee Oswald to Ray and his exile group.
In the late summer of 1963, Oswald appears to have made an unusual visit to Silvia Odio, a female member of Ray’s group in Dallas.
Odio’s father was in prison in Cuba because of a Castro assassination attempt by Alpha 66’s Antonio Veciana.
With no advance notice, an American and two Cuban exiles appeared at the door of Odio’s Dallas apartment.
More than two months later, after the JFK assassination, both Silvia Odio and her sister recognized Oswald during TV coverage.
Gaeton Fonzi extensively investigated and documented the Oswald—Odio meeting, finding Odio and her sister’s account very credible.
John Martino, who’d met Odio’s sister in Dallas, and Rolando Masferrer, whose brother lived in Odio’s apartment complex.
It was another example of explosive information —information that would cause problems for investigators and intelligence agencies when it surfaced—being planted months before JFK’s murder.
Indeed, Odio’s story would cause major last-minute problems for the Warren Commission, until an associate of Trafficante—Loran Hall—indicated that it was he and his friends who made the visit, not Oswald.
However, after the Warren Report was published, Hall denied making the visit.
One by one, Marcello, Trafficante, and their men attempted to compromise or link to JFK’s upcoming murder the handful of Cuban exile leaders and groups involved in the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
What they did to link exile leader Eloy Menoyo’s group to Oswald is described later in this book.
As for Trafficante and Marcello, their motivation to kill JFK only increased during the summer and early fall of 1963.
New developments in their cases help explain their extensive and careful plans to assassinate the President.
Trafficante was fighting the IRS—the same organization that had sent Al Capone to prison —and three of his brothers were also named in the IRS complaint.
The Justice Department attorney presenting the case against him would be one of RFK’s own Mafia prosecutors, meaning this was one trial that Marcello couldn’t buy his way out of with bribes to local or state authorities.
Any conviction could result in another deportation, and Marcello was still scarred with the memory of that traumatic experience.
Marcello was not alone among mob bosses in his hatred of John and Robert Kennedy.
Though the FBI had not wiretapped Marcello’s phones and had placed only one minor wiretap on Trafficante, RFK’s pressure had resulted in the FBI’s wiretapping other mob leaders, who vented their rage at the Kennedys.
Jimmy Hoffa appears to have been aware of Marcello and Trafficante’s plan to kill JFK, but he couldn’t take an active role because of the intense scrutiny he was under from Robert Kennedy’s Justice Department.
Recipients of Teamster pension fund loans included Marcello and Trafficante, and the latter shared an attormey—Frank Ragano—with Hoffa.
Kaiser points out that Ragano later said that on July 23, “he met Hoffa in Washington” before leaving to see Marcello and Trafficante.
The time has come for your friend and Carlos to get rid of him, kill that son-of-a-bitch John Kennedy.
Of course, by that time Marcello and Trafficante had already been carefully planning JFK’s murder for at least nine months.
But Ragano’s behavior in the fall of 1963— including publicly toasting JFK’s murder with Trafficante on the night of the assassination and, as reported in an FBI file, handling a huge sum of cash for the assassination—indicates that Ragano played a larger role in JFK’s murder than the attorney ever admitted.
In the summer of 1963, Hundley represented the Justice Department at the Chicago hearing on Sam Giancana’s lawsuit to end the devastating “lockstep” surveillance the FBI had him under.
To stall the government’s questioning of him, Giancana apparently helped leak a story to a reporter with the Chicago Sun-Times, which ran an article stating that “Sam Giancana had done work for the CIA,” helping the Agency with intelligence related to Cuba in 1960.
First, Hundley had to back off from questioning Giancana during the court hearing for fear he might reveal the CI[A—Mafia plots, which RFK had been told had ended the previous year.
Giancana won the suit; the ruling forced the FBI to stay farther away from him.
Even so, RFK didn’t let up the pressure and soon began working on a plan to drive the Mafia out of Las Vegas, threatening to eliminate a major source of revenue for Giancana, the Chicago Mafia, and especially Johnny Rosselli.
The second major result of the Chicago Sun-Times article was that it caught the attention of CIA Director John McCone, leading to another fateful decision for Richard Helms.
Instead of giving McCone the full story of the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel, Helms instead told McCone that the plots had lasted only from 1960 to May 1962 and had ended.
Helms didn’t inform the CIA Director that he was continuing the plots into 1963 without authorization.
The ClA—Mafia plots were a deep secret even within the CIA, with only a handful of trusted officials like Desmond FitzGerald, Helms’s protégé E Howard Hunt, David Morales, and William Harvey still working on them.
Helms must have felt confident that his dark secret would never leak, even within the Agency.
Even then, they usually spoke of “eliminating Castro’s regime” as opposed to eliminating an individual.
Other people identified by historians as QJWIN include Moses Maschkivitzan, Jean Voignier, and Michel Mancuso.
They delegated the leading role in the coup plan to Army Secretary Cyrus Vance, named as the “Executive Agent of the Department of Defense for Policy toward Cuba”; Joint Chiefs Chairman Maxwell Taylor; and General Joseph Carroll, head of the Defense Intelligence Agency.
They had far too many aides and staff and met too frequently with the press—so it would have been impossible to maintain the coup plan’s tight secrecy.
Rusk said he understood that and wasn’t angry when he found out soon after JFK’s death that the extensive plans that he, McNamara, and other officials had been making over the summer and fall were not “just in case” contingency plans but were for a real coup that was just days away when JFK died.
Harry Williams told me that E Howard Hunt resented the fact that the CIA had only a supporting role in the JEK—Almeida coup plan.
That was probably also true for Hunt’s mentor Richard Helms and may have been one reason Helms kept pursuing the unauthorized CIA—Mafia plots.
One of the most important of the CIA’s “supporting operations” for the upcoming coup to topple Castro was “the introduction by CIA as soon as practicable of assets into Cuba for the development of intelligence . . . and the development of a suitable cover plan,” according to long-secret declassified files from 1963—never shown to the Warren Commission or the House Select Committee—that I was the first to quote in 2005.
This important CIA attempt to move “assets into Cuba” would accelerate through the summer and into the fall and would include several men linked to JFK’s assassination, including Lee Oswald.
In that regard, Rosselli’s friend David Morales was in a position to influence the actions of CIA officer David Atlee Phillips, while Trafficante’s man Barker could impact the actions of E Howard Hunt—all without Phillips or Hunt being aware that Morales and Barker were really acting on behalf of the mob bosses.
Marcello’s men David Ferrie and Guy Banister had the important task of using the CIA’s plan for getting “assets into Cuba” to make Lee Oswald look guilty after JFK was murdered.
Oswald’s covert activities appear to have been largely controlled by Banister and Ferrie during at least the first nine months of 1963.
On one hand, Ferrie and Banister were acting for United States intelligence, as later described by New Orleans Deputy CIA Chief Hunter Leake and Victor Marchetti, former Special Assistant to Richard Helms, both quoted in earlier chapters.
However, at the same time, Banister and Ferrie were also acting on behalf of their employer, Carlos Marcello, making sure many of Oswald’s activities would later make him look guilty of JFK’s murder.
Banister and Ferrie both hated Fidel, and aside from whatever Marcello was paying them, they no doubt hoped that blaming JFK’s death on a seemingly pro-Castro Communist would trigger the United States invasion of Cuba that both men knew was being planned.
Oswald first tried to join the local chapter of the DRE, an American anti-Castro group that grew out of Cubela’s old DR group in Cuba.
While meeting with the head of the tiny New Orleans DRE chapter, Oswald claimed that he wanted to overthrow Fidel.
Shortly after that, Oswald presented a completely opposite impression by very publicly passing out pro-Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee leaflets on the street in New Orleans, an act that provoked an attack by the same DRE official and two of his associates.
Oswald’s arrest led to newspaper coverage as well as radio and TV appearances, in which he handled himself remarkably well.
Court records indicate that a “Mr Phillips from Washington” met with Banister at his office in New Orleans and that they discussed an anti-Castro TV appeal.
Gerald McKnight later confirmed that it was indeed CIA propaganda specialist David Atlee Phillips who’d met with Banister the previous year.
Thus in 1963 Oswald was dealing with two organizations involving Phillips, the DRE, and the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
CIA files confirm that at the same time Oswald was generating remarkable publicity, David Atlee Phillips was working on Manuel Artime’s AMWORLD portion of the JEK—Almeida coup plan.
The actions of Phillips and Oswald reveal that Oswald’s unusual pro-Castro publicity blitz was part of the CIA’s efforts to place United States intelligence assets in Cuba.
That would include a face-to-face meeting with Oswald within weeks of Oswald’s publicity blitz, followed by Oswald’s trip to Mexico City as he attempted to leverage that publicity into permission to fly to Cuba.
Before looking more closely into those activities, it’s important to focus on aspects of Oswald’s New Orleans street fight incident that the Warren Commission didn’t know about—or chose to ignore.
On May 26, 1963, Oswald had “founded” a New Orleans chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee entirely by mail, and it had exactly one member—Lee Oswald.
Moreover, he never made a serious effort to recruit anyone else; he continued to avoid real American Communists and Socialists who might have been sympathetic to Cuba.
Clearly, Oswald hoped to provoke a reaction from them, preferably in the form of a punch or other physical altercation that he could leverage into an arrest record and publicity.
However, the Wasp’s crew only complained, and “Oswald was peacefully sent on his way,” notes McKnight.
Oswald’s first leafleting incident, on June 15, occurred when he was working for the Reilly Coffee Company, run by William Reilly, a staunch antiCommunist who hated Castro.
Oswald was officially “fired” from his job there on July 19, but four weeks later he debated the director of INCA on live radio in New Orleans.
After leaving the Reilly Coffee Company, Oswald held no job—officially at least—for the next three months.
Unofficially witnesses—including a CIA asset —saw him working for and with Guy Banister and David Ferrie.
Oswald would have earned little money, since he was still under “tight” surveillance by Naval Intelligence, in hopes that the KGB would try to contact either him or Marina, so he couldn’t appear to have significant, unexplained sums of money.
In addition, keeping Oswald low on funds was a way for Banister and CIA officers like David Phillips to ensure that he had little choice but to do what they asked in hopes of a large payday down the road.
As Oswald prepared for his second attempt to get himself arrested for passing out leaflets, one building, with two addresses, became important.
Banister was of course staunchly anti-Castro, and the addresses are simply one more indication that Oswald was working for Banister in the leaflet operation.
As noted earlier, historian Richard Mahoney documented that six witnesses saw Oswald with Ferrie or Banister in the summer of 1963; two of them said that Oswald was working for Banister at that time.
Declassified files and Michael Kurtz later revealed additional witnesses.
One uncovered by Kurtz, Consuela Martin, provides a new explanation of why Banister’s office address appeared on the pro-Castro leaflets.
Oswald sometimes asked her to do translating work for him by typing documents into Spanish.
Though no one would suggest that Oswald was as far right or anti-Communist as Banister, in the Cold War environment of the early 1960s, many liberals— most notably John and Robert Kennedy—were also anti-Communist.
David Kaiser points out that far from being a “sincere” member of the far left, Oswald “only embarrassed the and the Castro cause in the New Orleans area, and his behavior throughout resembled that of an agent provocateur rather than a genuine” Communist, Marxist, or other member of the far left, no matter what Oswald claimed in his media appearances.
Aside from Oswald’s using the address for Banister’s building on some of his pamphlets, there is one other curious fact about them.
Oswald handed out copies of the first printing of The Crime against Cuba, a pro-Castro pamphlet printed in the United States in 1961.
However, Oswald was in Russia in 1961, when the first printing sold out.
Only the fourth printing of the pamphlet was available when Oswald returned to the United States and in the summer of 1963.
Oswald would have needed help in obtaining dozens of copies of the long-sold-out first printing.
It’s possible that Banister ordered one or two copies for his files in 1961, but he had no reason to order dozens of copies.
Those first-printing pamphlets had been ordered when David Atlee Phillips was running operations targeting the Fair Play for Cuba Committee, making Phillips a possible source of pro-Castro literature for Oswald’s PR efforts.
Clearly, Oswald was writing about what he planned to have happen six days later.
The Warren Commission was never able to satisfactorily answer that question because if Oswald had been on the Security Index, he would certainly have been subject to law-enforcement attention on the day of JFK’s motorcade in Dallas.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy and President John F Kennedy waged the largest war against the Mafia that America has ever seen.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS In 1985, Carlos Marcello—for decades the most powerful godfather in America—confessed to an undercover FBI informant that he ordered the assassination of President Kennedy.
A confidential source who has provided reliable information in the past furnished the following: On December 15, 1985, he was in the company of CARLOS MARCELLO and another inmate at the FEDBRAL CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTE , Texarkana, Texas, in the court yard engaged in conversation.
CARLOS MARCELLO discussed his intense dislike of former President JOHN KENNEDY as he often did.
Unlike other such tirades against KENNEDY, however, on this occasion CARLOS MARCELLO said, referring to President KENNEDY, “Yeah, I had the son of a bitch killed.
In addition to his confession, Marcello talked on undercover FBI audio tapes about his meetings with Lee Oswald and Jack Ruby. in 1966.
Shortly before his death, Trafficante confessed his role in JFK’s assassination to his attorney.
NEW YORK DAILY NEWS ARCHIVE Guy Banister, the former FBI Special Agent in charge of Chicago, worked as Marcello’s private detective in 1963.
Numerous witnesses saw Oswald with Banister and Ferrie in the summer of 1963, and this CIA card shows the Agency was aware of their connections.
S A oe aa r 4 In the summer of 1963, Lee Oswald got a significant amount of TV, radio, and newspaper publicity for his phony, one-man chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee in new Orleans.
FILE SALE Be is charged with trying to tell & cenfideniial [De to 2 man Indicied in the alleged cousterfeiting of $500,090 in bosds and checks.
Three weeks before Dallas, JFK had to cancel his Chicago trip and motorcade because of an assassination plot involving four men.
An ex-Marine, not Oswald, who worked at a warehouse overlooking JFK’s motorcade route was arrested.
JFK kept word of the threat out of the press at the time, for national security reasons.
Before Abraham Bolden, the first black presidential secret service agent, could tell warren Commission staff about the Chicago plot, he was arrested and sent to prison on false charges.
Helping Marcello and Trafficante implement their plan to kill JFK was Johnny Rosselli, the Mafia don who represented Sam Giancana and the Chicago mob in Las Vegas and Hollywood. shortly before he was murdered on Trafficante’s orders, Rosselli confessed his role in JFK’s assassination to his attorney.
This plot was kept hidden from the press at the time by JFK, and this small article only slipped out the day after he died.
The warren Commission—and the five government committees that later investigated parts of the JFK assassination—were never told about it.
Tampa godfather Santo Trafficante , and his attorney Frank Ragano —seen here in 1966— toasted JFK’s murder the night he died, at the same Tampa hotel where JFK had spoken just four days earlier.
NEW YORK DAILY NEWS ARCHIVE Three months before JFK was elected President, vice President Richard Nixon had ordered the CIA to work with Trafficante, Rosselli, and other mobsters to assassinate Fidel Castro.
Carlos Marcello also joined those CIA-Mafia plots, which CIA official Richard Helms continued into 1963 without telling JFK or even CIA Director McCone.
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS Robert Kennedy, seen here with the released leaders of the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, and JFK had their own plan to topple Fidel Castro, if they couldn’t reach a negotiated settlement with him.
Q ‘Who is ""3-1"" and what is the name of the anti-Castro group both of which are mentioned on nage 89 of the Report.
Unknown to JFK, Robert Kennedy, or Ruiz-Williams, the CIA was using exile leader Manuel Artime in the CIA-Mafia plots with Trafficante and Rosselli in 1963.
This fact was also hidden from the warren Commission and the House select Committee on Assassinations.
In contrast to the CIA, the Kennedys’ plan in 1963 involved working with Commander Juan Almeida , the head and founder of the Cuban Army, and the third most powerful man in Cuba, to stage a “palace coup” against Fidel that would lead to free elections.
Eetablish a , however rudimentary, with some sort of Public clein to political viebility to provide an adequate political basia {unlese Soviet troops were clesrly fighting Cuban patricts) for orert United States action, Rentrolize the top echeloa of Gubem leadership, The JFK-Almeida coup plan was completely withheld from the warren Commission and the House select Committee on Assassinations.
Above is one of hundreds of pages of files about the JFK-Almeida coup plan declassified in the 1990s.
Fidel’s death would likely be blamed on a Russian or Russian sympathizer.
JFK’s Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, first revealed the existence of the coup plan to the author.
He later confirmed to Vanity Fair that JFK was pursuing the coup plan at the same time he was trying to negotiate a peaceful settlement with Fidel Castro.
He decided to continue the CIA-Mafia plots with Rosselli and the others, without telling President Kennedy, CIA Director John McCone, or Robert Kennedy.
Hunt’s assistant, CIA agent Bernard Barker , was also working for Santo Trafficante at the time, and sold out the JFKAlmeida coup plan to the godfather.
Barker was one of a dozen associates of Trafficante, Marcello, or Rosselli who knew about—or actually worked on—the top secret coup plan.
HSCA CIA officer David Atlee Phillips, a close friend of Hunt’s, was a publicity specialist who had targeted both Fidel Castro and the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
In the summer of 1963, after Oswald’s amazing run of publicity, Phillips reportedly met with Oswald to discuss an operation targeting Castro.
Like Phillips, Morales also worked on the top secret JFK-Almeida coup plan in 1963.
But Morales hated JFK because of the Bay of Pigs, and in the fall of 1963, he worked closely with Johnny Rosselli, supposedly on the CIA-Mafia plots.
Morales later confessed being part of JFK’s assassination to two close associates. site DAYS IN GRAND JURY 4, 088888 8 8} 1960 1961 1962 1963 1964 1965 1966 This chart graphically depicts Attorney General Robert Kennedy’s war against Marcello, Trafficante, and other mob leaders.
He hired ten times the number of Mafia prosecutors as the Eisenhower-Nixon administration, and they spent 13 times more days presenting Mafia cases to grand juries.
Jack Ruby was a low-level mobster in the Dallas arm of Carlos Marcello’s organization.
Marcello told the CAMTEX FBI informant that his group secretly owned Ruby’s Carousel strip club—along with many other clubs in Dallas—and when Ruby was caught stealing from the till, Marcello summoned him for a confrontation.
JACK RUBY TOLL CALLS 1963 oe a6 3 Bese Bz8 Bs Ruby’s long-distance phone calls went up markedly when word was first published about a possible JFK trip to Texas, and they skyrocketed once the trip was officially announced.
Ruby, Marcello’s “payoff man” for the Dallas Police, had to either find a police officer to silence the person accused of killing JFK, or do the job himself.
Thay would Jike to imoy tha soacctey fox hie axpileion from the United States am his destination, Pures files are negntive end they are checking in Taras and with INS, They would Like a chock of our fflea with indlentions cf what may ba pasood to the French, Yr.
In addition, Marcello told the FBI’s CAMTEX informant that he imported two shooters from Europe for the JFK hit.
But witnesses saw more than one man on that floor, and most said neither resembled Oswald, who had recently started working there.
But some witnesses saw shots from the Grassy Knoll, including JFK’s two closest aides in the limo directly behind JFK’s.
For the “single bullet theory” to work, and for Oswald to have fired all the shots that hit JFK and Governor John Connally, this bullet had to hit JFK in the back, supposedly exit his throat, then dive down and shatter four inches of Connally’s rib before smashing into his wrist bones and plowing into his thigh.
In addition to the improbability of the “magic bullet,” this autopsy sheet—and JFK’s shirt and suit coat—all show that JFK was shot in the back almost six inches below the top of his collar, as you can see in the figure on the right. yet, for the “magic bullet” theory of the Warren Commission to work, that same bullet had to emerge from JFK’s throat, just below his Adam’s Apple, which is higher than the back wound—which would have made it impossible for the bullet to then dive down and hit Governor Connally.
One of the six government investigating committees to look into aspects of JFK’s assassination was the Senate Church Committee, in 1975.
Before former Chicago mob boss Sam Giancana could testify about the CIA-Mafia plots, he was murdered on June 19, 1975.
Jimmy Hoffa had been leaking information to the Committee, and he was murdered on July 30, 1975.
Johnny Rosselli kept being forced to testify to the Church Committee, and shortly after his last meeting with Trafficante, Rosselli’s body was found dismembered and floating in an oil drum near Miami.
Chicago hitman Charles Nicoletti was murdered on March 29, 1977, the same day Oswald’s best friend in Dallas, the anti-Communist George DeMohrenschildt, committed suicide.
Both died before they could testify to the House select Committee on Assassinations.
HSCA The local DRE chapter in New Orleans was run by a Cuban exile named Carlos Bringuier.
While the DRE was a real organization managed by the CIA, the New Orleans chapter was tiny.
Bringuier, an acquaintance of David Ferrie, was suspicious of Oswald and declined his offer.
Four days later, on August 9, Oswald returned to the area to promote himself publicly as proudly pro-Castro.
However, Oswald’s arrest and subsequent trial were “prominently reported in the New Orleans papers” and on TV, which seems to have been the goal for both David Atlee Phillips—who was trying to build Oswald’s pro-Castro credentials so he could get into Cuba—and Banister, who wanted to make Oswald look like a pro-Castro Communist.
In addition to Guy Banister, two other Marcello connections are evident upon close inspection of Oswald’s August 1963 incident.
That is around the time that witnesses place Martino with Carlos Marcello and Guy Banister.
Historian Kurtz cites the former Superintendent of the New Orleans Police Department as saying that Martino “met with Marcello himself at the Town and Country Motel,” where Marcello had his office.
A close associate of Carlos Marcello’s lieutenant Nofio Pecora arranged Oswald’s release from jail, as documented by the Director of the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
It’s interesting that Jack Ruby had called Pecora just six days earlier.
Only four days later, evidently unworried about being attacked or arrested again, Oswald once more passed out pro-Castro leaflets on a New Orleans street.
On August 17, 1963, a WDSU radio host contacted Oswald and invited him to be interviewed on a weekly radio show.
Oswald was again articulate and did well in the debate—until he was confronted on the air about his defection to Russia, which he had not mentioned.
Oswald was apparently not prepared for that, which seems odd since his defection was well publicized.
However, the subject had the effect of discrediting the Fair Play for Cuba Committee to the listening public, which is what David Atlee Phillips had been trying to do for more than two years.
That was good for helping Phillips build Oswald’s pro-Castro persona, but that footage would be played endlessly after JFK’s murder, cementing in much of the public’s mind that Oswald was a dangerous Communist.
CIA OFFICER DAVID Atlee Phillips met with Oswald in Dallas in late August or early September 1963, apparently to debrief him after his New Orleans media appearances.
Oswald had built a public and documented record as firmly proCastro and had handled a variety of situations well.
While the United States could use speedboats to sneak assets and agents into Cuba at night, those people couldn’t travel freely or openly talk to lower-level officials and the public and thus could not gauge the level of public support for the coup.
Since the United States had no embassy or diplomatic relations with Cuba, and since travel to the island was severely restricted, the United States needed a number of assets who could travel openly.
As a former defector to Russia, someone like Oswald was especially valuable because if he ever got into trouble, the United States could claim that the Russians were behind his activities.
It occurred openly, in a public place in Dallas, and it involved Cuban exile leader Antonio Veciana of the ClA-backed exile group Alpha 66.
Veciana and his Alpha 66 group were barred from the JFK—Almeida coup plan because of their earlier attack on a Russian ship in Cuban waters.
However, Veciana was also very close partners with Eloy Menoyo, one of the exile leaders the Kennedys and Harry Williams wanted to participate in the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
Veciana’s story of meeting Oswald and Phillips in the lobby of the new Southland Building in Dallas has been controversial, though Congressional investigator Gaeton Fonzi concluded that such a meeting did take place.
Veciana hinted that Phillips used the name Maurice Bishop, and CIA official Ross Crozier later confirmed that to Congressional investigators.
Veciana revealed to my researcher, Thom Hartmann, that he originally named his group Alpha 66 after the Phillips 66 gas stations that were common in the early 1960s.
David Atlee Phillips came from nearby Fort Worth, and by meeting Oswald in public—in the lobby of Dallas’s newest glittering office tower—Phillips must have realized he could have been seen with Oswald by someone who knew him.
Such behavior seems illogical and inconsistent with Phillips’s long intelligence experience, unless Oswald was being used as an intelligence asset for an operation far from Dallas.
In addition, it’s hard to believe a veteran CIA officer like Phillips would be in public with Oswald in Dallas if he knew that Oswald was going to be an assassin or a patsy for JFK’s assassination in that same city.
The Phillips-Oswald—Veciana meeting makes sense if Phillips was using Oswald in the CIA’s anti-Castro operations as one of the United States assets the Agency planned to move into Cuba before the coup.
Apparently, Phillips hoped Oswald’s pro-Castro media blitz would help him get into Cuba via Mexico City.
Phillips was based in Mexico City, where he headed anti-Castro operations.
In addition, Phillips played a major role in the CIA’s Cuban operations based in the United States, ranging from being a part of the JFK—Almeida coup plan to handling Cuban exile groups like the DRE and Alpha 66, as well as generating anti-Castro propaganda and working against the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
Some of Phillips’s most sensitive anti-Castro operations—for Washington CIA officials Richard Helms and Desmond FitzGerald—were kept secret from most others in the CIA, including Winston “Win” Scott, the CIA Chief of Station in Mexico City.
Gaeton Fonzi notes that David Morales also worked closely with Phillips.
That close relationship between Morales and Phillips also meant that Johnny Rosselli could learn from his close friend Morales what Phillips was working on.
In 1963 David Morales—who admitted helping to assassinate JFK—still outranked David Atlee Phillips and could easily have proposed to Phillips that he meet Oswald in public and that Veciana be allowed to see Oswald for some reason.
Years later Phillips wrote a never-published autobiographical manuscript, part fact and part fiction, which has been quoted in Vanity Fair and other publications.
In it Phillips confirmed that Oswald was part of the CIA’s effort to assassinate Fidel Castro.
The CIA planned to have Fidel shot in his open jeep as he drove into Varadero Beach.
On the other hand, Phillips built a long and decorated CIA career as a propagandist using half-truths, distortions, and lies, so what he wrote must be taken with a grain of salt.
However, as with JFK’s murder, Oswald did have the proper background to be an excellent patsy to take the blame for Castro’s death.
The result would have been—and was—that Helms and Phillips would withhold substantial amounts of crucial information from the press, the public, their superiors, and other agencies.
Based on the statements of both Phillips and Veciana, Oswald appears to have been involved in the CIA’s attempts to kill Fidel Castro.
That perhaps casts the meeting between Oswald and Marcello in a different light, since the godfather was also part of the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel.
Essentially, they were on the same side and doing work for the same agency.
AS FOR OSWALD, his recent flurry of activity and upcoming attempt to get to Cuba through Mexico City no doubt made him think his years of undercover toil were about to pay off in a big way.
The FBI found telling notes that Oswald wrote and that the Warren Commission left out of its Report because they clashed with the Commission’s view of Oswald as an ardent Communist.
Instead, they were included only in the Warren Commission’s rarely seen twenty-six volumes of supporting material.
In the notes, Oswald wrote that the United States and Russia “have too much to offer to each other to be tearing at each other’s throats in an endless cold war.
According to the Warren Commission, Oswald wrote these “Notes for a speech by Lee Harvey Oswald” but never delivered the speech.
It was the kind of oration Oswald could have given only after he was no longer undercover and had been revealed as a United States asset, perhaps scoring a lucrative book and television deal like his childhood idol from I Led Three Lives.
After meeting Phillips, but before going to Mexico City, Oswald apparently traveled from New Orleans to Dallas.
There, someone—most likely someone working with the Mafia such as Martino, Banister, or Morales—manipulated Oswald into visiting Silvia Odio, thus linking him to both JFK’s assassination and another of the exile groups in the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
Oswald’s Odio visit and the exile’s follow-up phone call don’t appear to have involved David Atlee Phillips because they seem to undermine what he was trying to do with Oswald.
By connecting Oswald to several parts of the JFK—Almeida coup plan, those working for Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli could ensure that when Oswald surfaced as the main suspect, the CIA and other agencies would have to cover up much information to protect the coup plan—which is exactly what happened.
He named five individuals, but more have since emerged, including John Martino (whom the CIA admits was a CIA asset), David Ferrie, and David Atlee Phillips.
One of those Newman named was William Gaudet, a CIA asset who worked for INCA’s founder.
It’s now clear that Gaudet was part of the “tight” surveillance of Oswald mentioned earlier.
A former Senate investigator wrote that “before his death in 1981, Gaudet admitted witnessing Oswald’s distribution of pro-Castro leaflets in” New Orleans.
William Gaudet later saw Oswald in Mexico City, as he explained to Michael Kurtz.
Gaudet’s testimony is further proof that Oswald was involved in United States intelligence activity in 1963.
It also helps explain why he was never placed on the FBI’s Security Index before Dallas.
WHOLE BOOKS AND a massive Congressional report have been written about the unusual aspects of Oswald’s trip to Mexico City in late September 1963, when he apparently visited both the Cuban and Soviet embassies.
First is that Oswald visited the Cuban Embassy on the same day as two other unusual young men, and all three tried to get Cuban entry visas.
One tured out later to be working for intelligence in Nicaragua, one of the countries where Manuel Artime had an AMWORLD base and worked with the intelligence service.
This young man worked for intelligence in Costa Rica, which was the other country where Artime had an AMWORLD base.
The CIA was clearly attempting to slip multiple assets into Cuba through Mexico City at the same time in the hope that some might get through.
Oswald was under surveillance by United States intelligence in Mexico City, according to Win Scott, the CIA’s Mexico City Station Chief.
Scott said the CIA’s hidden cameras photographed Oswald at the embassy, and he saw photos of Oswald there.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations found additional evidence of the existence of photos of Oswald in Mexico City.
However, only unrelated photos of someone else would be furnished to the Warren Commission and eventually made public.
That’s probably because the CIA’s photo surveillance operation in Mexico City was under the control of David Atlee Phillips, who was no doubt acting on orders from Richard Helms.
One reason for withholding the Oswald—Mexico photos—and denying the CIA had known Oswald was in Mexico—would be that Oswald was involved in a highly sensitive, covert operation run by Phillips and Helms.
It was important for JFK’s murder that someone didn’t want Oswald to actually get to Cuba.
We know that because five phony calls claiming to be from Oswald were made to the Russian and Cuban embassies while the real Oswald was in Mexico City.
A Mexican police agency involved with Trafficante’s heroin network monitored the Cuban and Russian embassy calls for the CIA while mobster (and active CIA asset) Richard Cain had formerly bugged a Communist embassy in Mexico City.
At the time of Oswald’s visit, a flurry of odd cables flowed between the Mexico City CIA station and CIA headquarters in Washington along two different paths.
One path carried accurate information about Oswald to Desmond FitzGerald and Richard Helms, while the other conveyed inaccurate information about him.
The person managing both the accurate and the inaccurate information about Oswald was Richard Helms’s assistant.
After JFK’s murder, and for almost three decades later, Helms maintained that before the assassination the CIA hadn’t even noticed Oswald’s embassy visits.
Declassified files now show that claim to be completely false, as documented by historian and retired Major John Newman.
The actions of Oswald and the CIA are consistent with Oswald’s being one of several United States intelligence assets the CIA was trying to get into Cuba openly.
In fact, a Warren Commission memo, left out of its Final Report, showed exactly how Oswald could have been planning to travel to Mexico City again, and on to Cuba, on November 22, 1963.
As an American with a pro-Castro persona, Oswald could have openly walked the streets of Havana or Varadero Beach talking to Cubans and low-level officials.
Additionally, Oswald’s time in Russia would have made it possible to blame any problem he had in Cuba on the Russians, something CIA notes by William Harvey indicate was always essential for an assassination mission.
I agree with Kaiser that Oswald was trying to get into Cuba as part of an effort to eliminate Castro.
He didn’t have the experience necessary for such a task, and he’d never killed anyone.
But he could have had a supporting role in a Castro elimination plot, and he would have made an excellent fall guy.
Oswald had been part of an operation against Fidel when he was in Mexico City, and after his failure to get into Cuba, Oswald had probably been told—likely by Banister, Ferrie, or Martino—that he still was part of such an operation.
Even as Lee Oswald prepared to return to Dallas from Mexico City in early October 1963, one more important link was being forged between Oswald, JFK’s assassination, and the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
The training camp outside New Orleans where David Ferrie reportedly took Oswald was a sort of minor-league training camp for Manual Artime’s AMWORLD portion of the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
Declassified files show that some arms reported stolen from National Guard armories in the Texas area were actually being supplied to Cuban exile leaders like Manolo Ray’s JURE group, which JFK and RFK wanted for their coup plan.
Other military personnel were taking advantage of that situation by stealing and selling arms and keeping the money.
In October 1963 the Treasury Department tried to stop the trafficking in stolen arms with an undercover sting.
Surprisingly, FBI and Treasury Department memos from that operation quote a Dallas gun dealer as giving a fairly accurate description of the upcoming JFK—Almeida coup plan.
Writers for the Washington Post linked longtime gunrunner Jack Ruby to that same stolen-military-arms ring.
As for the gun dealer who accurately described the upcoming United States action against Cuba, the Washington Post said he was the gun dealer who sold the bullets used in Oswald’s rifle on November 22, 1963.
That means even the bullet found in Oswald’s rifle after JFK’s assassination had been connected to the JEK—Almeida coup plan.
He was scheduled to be tried in New Orleans on federal charges on November 1, 1963, with one of RFK’s own Mafia prosecutors—John Diuguid— handling the trial.
Anxious to avoid the deportation a conviction could bring, Marcello would soon begin efforts to bribe a key juror.
However, that was at best only a temporary solution, since the godfather knew that even if he was not convicted, RFK would launch a new investigation as soon as that trial ended.
RFK was already focusing on serious tax charges against Marcello, and the Mafia chief knew he would have no respite while JFK was alive.
Carlos Marcello knew he had to act before the coup took place and removed his only opportunity to force a cover-up by top United States officials.
Marcello had nothing to gain, and everything to lose, by allowing the JEK—Almeida coup plan to go forward.
Robert Kennedy and aides such as Harry Williams had made it clear that as long as JFK was President, Cuba would never be a safe haven for Marcello, Trafficante, or any other Mafia boss.
The date for the coup was firming up to be sometime in early December 1963, something Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli could have learned from their CIA allies in the JFK plot, like David Morales and Bernard Barker.
If Marcello killed JFK before the coup, it would force Robert Kennedy, CIA Director McCone, military leaders like General Maxwell Taylor, and others to withhold critical information from investigators, the press, and the public to prevent a confrontation with the Soviets that could go nuclear.
Marcello relied on his trusted associates—the Chicago mob’s Rosselli and Trafficante in Tampa—to help him oversee the plot.
First they would try to kill JFK during his long Chicago motorcade on November 2, 1963, the day after Marcello’s trial was set to begin.
The mob bosses’ year of careful planning meant that even their backup plan (Tampa during JFK’s November 18 motorcade) had a backup and that each city’s Mafia family equally shared the risk.
That risk would be minimized by the mob bosses’ using only experienced men they knew they could trust.
The Mafiosi had come up with one basic plan that could be applied in each of the three cities.
Because the opportunities were so close together, the bosses could use most of the same personnel for each attempt.
Each of the three target cities had a key Mafia operative close to law enforcement who would monitor any leaks about—or investigations into—the JFK hit.
In Chicago, the mob’s top “made” man in law enforcement was Richard Cain, who was also chief investigator for the Cook County Sheriff.
The CIA continued to deal with Cain in the fall of 1963, giving him a pipeline not only into law enforcement but into intelligence as well.
In Tampa, Trafficante’s man was Sergeant Jack de la Llana, who had formed and become director of the Tampa Police Department’s first criminal intelligence unit.
This cooperation even extended to other states, as shown when Sergeant de la Llana exchanged information with the New Orleans Police Department about the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
As described to me by Chief Mullins and others (who didn’t realize de la Llana was working for Trafficante in 1963), de la Llana was the perfect man for the Tampa godfather to have on the force.
Though Ruby wasn’t a member of law enforcement, his friendly contacts with Dallas Police were longstanding and ran deep.
According to government files, Ruby knew at least seven hundred of the twelve hundred Dallas policemen; several officers and Ruby associates claimed that Ruby actually knew EVERY Dallas policeman.
The mob bosses knew from earlier motorcades—like JFK’s spring 1963 trip to Chicago—that Secret Service agents rode with the motorcade and were not on the ground except at the beginning and end of the route.
This meant that if JFK was shot en route, no Secret Service would be stationed at the site of the shooting.
Even better for them, shooting JFK in a car—as opposed to blowing it up—would take the Secret Service agents away from the crime scene, since they would have to stay with the motorcade to protect the President on the way to the hospital.
The Mafia’s plan to kill JFK was very similar to the CIA’s plan to kill Castro in the CIA—Mafia plots, and likely to Almeida’s part of the coup plan.
For top United States officials who knew about the coup or the C[A—Mafia plots, hearing how JFK had been shot would be an additional shock that would make maintaining the secrecy surrounding the coup plan a top priority.
That cloak of secrecy would also help obscure the Mafia’s role in JFK’s death.
The sad irony is that the Mafia may have taken the very plan the CIA had intended to use against Castro in his jeep and adapted it to kill JFK in an open limousine.
More confirmation for the CIA’s approach to killing Castro comes from declassified CIA files and from Manuel Artime’s top lieutenant from AMWORLD, Cuban exile Rafael “Chi Chi” Quintero.
Speaking of a later version of an AMWORLD plot to kill Fidel, Quintero said the plan was to shoot Castro at Varadero Beach.
Killing JFK in public, in a car, would ensure that the CIA, Robert Kennedy, and other high officials recognized immediately on hearing the first reports of the tragedy the similarity between JFK’s death and the plans to eliminate Castro.
Chief Brown provided the Senators, and the press, with a remarkable summary of how Tampa’s Trafficante conducted and got away with mob hits; much of it reads almost like a script for what happened in Dallas the following month.
Brown’s Senate testimony makes it clear that Trafficante—as well as Marcello and Rosselli—would do on a larger scale with JFK’s assassination what they had already done successfully in the past.
Brown testified about Trafficante’s ties to Rosselli’s boss, Giancana, and to a French Connection heroin partner Michel Victor Mertz.
Next came his accounts of Trafficante’s direct links to several murders, in addition to many others he had ordered.
Brown pointed out the “relative infrequency with which such professional murders are successfully prosecuted” and explained why.
He said that police had solved only one of twenty-three Mafia murders in Tampa, and the lone exception was not a typical Mafia hit.
Brown said it was very “difficult to obtain evidence sufficient for successful prosecution of Mafia members, because the witnesses who might offer such evidence have always been reluctant to do so fear of Mafia reprisals, since it is common knowledge in Tampa that the Mafia does not hesitate to murder” those who talk to the authorities or testify.
One of the Trafficante hits described by Brown in his testimony is very similar to what happened to JFK and Oswald.
Then the main “suspect in this murder was himself murdered,” as happened with Oswald.
Historians have long known that the Kennedys initiated two separate back-channel attempts to negotiate with Fidel in the fall of 1963, one using pioneering TV journalist Lisa Howard and special UN envoy William Attwood, and the other through French journalist Jean Daniel.
The JFK—Almeida coup plan helps explain the urgency of those efforts at that particular time.
However, neither of the Kennedys’ secret peace efforts had produced any breakthroughs, and that would continue to be the case up until JFK’s assassination on November 22, 1963.
To maintain deniability in case the secret talks were exposed, JFK had to work through William Attwood, who in turn talked to Fidel’s doctor, who dealt with Fidel.
JFK kept his own secrets from Attwood, not telling him that, barring some dramatic breakthrough in the secret talks, JFK and Bobby planned to allow Almeida to overthrow Fidel in December 1963.
Frustrated by the slow pace of the Attwood negotiations yet anxious to avoid a violent coup if possible, in late October 1963 JFK asked French journalist Jean Daniel to talk to Fidel on his behalf.
Daniel would not get to see Fidel until November 21, the day before JFK’s trip to Dallas.
No real progress was made in their talk, but Fidel was intrigued enough by Daniel’s message from JFK that he invited the journalist to a follow-up lunch on November 22 at Castro’s villa at Varadero Beach.
However, Daniel could not securely communicate directly with JFK or Bobby about his talks with Castro, so the Kennedys would have no way to know that Daniel was finally speaking with the Cuban leader.
That could come about with a peacefully negotiated settlement if possible, but if not, they would try to bring it about by supporting Commander Almeida and the Cuban exile leaders with their coup, hopefully leading to eventual free elections and democracy in Cuba.
President Kennedy, RFK, and other key officials in the Kennedy Administration were very concerned about Cuba and the 1964 election.
Talks with other Kennedy aides show that John and Robert Kennedy shared that opinion, and it was one factor in scheduling the JFK— Almeida coup plan for December 1, 1963, a date confirmed in a memo by CIA Director John McCone and by RFK’s top exile aide, Harry Williams.
That way, the Cuba situation would be resolved—one way or the other—before the official start of the campaign in January 1964.
In addition, CIA files and Harry Williams said that after December 1, Cuban officials planned to institute a draft, which would dilute the loyalty of Commander Almeida’s army, allowing Cuban intelligence and other rival factions in the Cuban government to infiltrate his ranks.
As Dean Rusk and a Kennedy aide explained to me, having the coup by December 1 was also necessary so that United States troops wouldn’t be fighting in Cuba during the Christmas holidays and any United States air support for the coup would be over before the Pearl Harbor anniversary on December 7.
That question was obviously on the minds of John and Robert Kennedy, who took steps to deal with just such a situation.
Today, even most historians have no idea that in the days and weeks before JFK’s murder, Robert Kennedy had a secret subcommittee developing plans for what to do if a United States official was assassinated.
The development of “contingency plans” for dealing with the possible “assassination of American officials” grew out of planning for the coup and involved many of the same officials, such as Colonel Alexander Haig, who worked for Army Secretary Cyrus Vance and his aide Joseph Califano.
This planning had begun in September 1963, but since some of the officials working on these Cuba Contingency plans didn’t know about Almeida, they no doubt viewed the issue far differently, and with far less urgency, than the few who did.
Only three of the many files this subcommittee generated have been declassified, though I also spoke with two members of the Kennedy Administration who were familiar with the plans.
One of my sources was John H Crimmins, Coordinator of Cuban Affairs for the United States State Department.
Crimmins worked on developing and writing the Cuba Contingency Plans but, like his boss Dean Rusk, had not been told about Commander Almeida.
The other source was a Kennedy aide, who wishes to remain confidential, who saw the plans after they were drafted and who did know about Almeida and the imminent coup.
Members believed that if Fidel found out about United States plans and decided to retaliate, he would risk assassinating an American official only outside the United States—for example, in a Latin American country.
RFK and the officials working on the plans, especially those who knew about Almeida, were considering how the United States should react if, for example, the United States ambassador to Panama was assassinated and his murder appeared to be linked somehow to Cuba and the upcoming coup.
Robert Kennedy and the other officials didn’t want JFK to be under pressure from the public, the press, or Congress to take hasty action against Cuba if early reports pointed toward Cuban involvement in the death of a United States official in Latin America.
A quick United States military attack against Cuba could provoke devastating retaliation from Russia.
Also, imagine the disaster if the United States started bombing Havana only to have evidence emerge proving the United States official had been killed not by Fidel but in a routine crime.
To avoid those problems, the Kennedy aide cautiously indicated some of the conditions necessary for JFK to make an informed, reasoned response to the apparent assassination of a United States official in Latin America.
First, the United States would need to control and limit initial publicity to keep the news media from generating an outcry for an immediate military response against Cuba.
To protect Almeida, any possible links between the assassination and the coup plan would have to be hidden from the press.
United States investigating agencies would need to take control of the investigation from local authorities as soon as possible, including gaining possession of important evidence.
The autopsy would have to be conducted at a secure United States military facility to ensure that information couldn’t be leaked to the press.
All of this would give JFK the time and information needed to make an appropriate response.
Some aspects of what many call the cover-up regarding JFK’s assassination— from controlling news accounts to his controversial military autopsy—were thus actually planned weeks and months before JFK’s murder but were intended to manage a completely different situation.
The thinking behind the Cuba Contingency plans, and the need to protect the secrecy of Almeida’s coup plan to preserve his life and to prevent a possible nuclear confrontation with the Soviet Union, is responsible for much of the secrecy that surrounds JFK’s murder, even today.
In addition, because officials like Alexander Haig had spent months working on scenarios involving possible retaliation by Fidel against United States officials, they would be extremely receptive to the Mafia’s fake “Castro did it” information after JFK’s murder.
Those inside and outside the CIA who would press the “Castro did it” line often point to remarks Fidel made to Associated Press reporter Daniel Harker in September 1963.
Harker wrote that Castro then said, “We are prepared to fight them and answer in kind.
Soon after Kennedy’s death—and even today—some claim that Castro’s remark was a threat to assassinate JFK, although the comment was not noted as such when the article first appeared.
Given that some men involved in the Castro assassination plots, such as Morales and Rosselli, confessed to killing JFK, the Cuban dictator’s explanation makes sense, especially since those admissions weren’t revealed until years after Castro talked to the Congressional delegation.
As several historians have pointed out, it would have made little sense for Fidel to do something that would risk having his country invaded in retaliation, just to make Lyndon Johnson President.
He said Fidel’s comment had nothing to do with sparking the Cuba Contingency planning and that he felt Castro had no role in JFK’s death.
The Cuban American troops at Fort Benning were trained and ready, and one of the leaders of that group had been told about Commander Almeida.
CIA memos confirm Harry Williams’s accounts of meeting with liberal exile leaders Manolo Ray and Eloy Menoyo to get them to fully commit to his operation.
Until they did, they couldn’t be completely informed about Commander Almeida, though the CIA memo about Williams’s meeting with Ray contains a cryptic reference to Almeida.
Exile leaders Manuel Artime and Tony Varona did know about Commander Almeida, but both men were proving problematic.
Artime increasingly tried to bypass Williams and go directly to Robert Kennedy, causing gradually escalating friction between Artime and Williams.
Unknown to Williams, Artime was working on the CIA—Mafia plots, and key CIA officials were not only aware of Artime’s Mafia involvement, they also looked at using it as “cover” for the CIA supplying him weapons.
At the same time, Tony Varona was leaking information about the coup to another Trafficante associate, former Cuban President Carlos Prio.
CIA memos show that Prio resented the fact that Williams—and not he— was leading the coup plan.
Yet another Trafficante associate, Bernard Barker, had helped CIA officer E Howard Hunt with the initial payment of $50,000 to Almeida (out of a promised $500,000—almost $3 million in today’s dollars), to help get Almeida’s wife and children out of Cuba on a seemingly innocent pretext.
Rosselli had his own pipeline to information about the coup plan, via his increasingly close friend David Morales.
Morales was also involved in the CIA— Mafia plots and the related Castro assassination plotting with disgruntled Cuban official Rolando Cubela.
With all those connections in place, Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli were ready for their first attempt to kill President Kennedy, during his upcoming motorcade through Chicago.
The other elements they would need to put their plan into effect were experienced hit men, someone to be quickly blamed for the hit, and someone to make sure the fall guy was swiftly eliminated.
REVEALED HERE FOR the first time is how Carlos Marcello arranged for two of the hit men he used to kill President Kennedy.
In 1985 Marcello confided to his cellmate, FBI informant Jack Van Laningham, that “two dagos came from Italy” to act as gunmen in JFK’s assassination.
Marcello explained that the gunmen first came to Canada, then into Michigan.
The godfather made that revelation in the cell he shared with Van Laningham while the FBI secretly recorded Marcello’s remarks via a bugged transistor radio that Van Laningham had given Marcello.
Van Laningham’s revelation from Marcello has never been published or revealed anywhere before its appearance in this book.
It’s important to note that six years before Van Laningham told me about Marcello’s claim, author Charles Brandt published a book that helps support what Van Laningham said.
Brandt’s book was about a mob assassin and Teamster associate of Jimmy Hoffa named Frank Sheeran.
Frank “The Irishman” Sheeran and the Inside Story of the Mafia, the Teamsters, and the Last Ride of Jimmy Hoffa.
They would get smuggled in from Canada, like through Windsor, right across the water from Detroit.
The Sicilian war orphans would think they had to take care of a matter and then they could stay in America... . they would and then they would get in the getaway car and be taken somewhere and and nobody back in Sicily would miss them.
Because they were orphans and had no family there would be no vendettas.
Marcello told Van Laningham that the two gunmen came into the United States through “Selfridge” but provided no other information about that locale.
It is an Air National Guard station just north of Detroit and across the bay from Canada.
It’s interesting to note that Selfridge is only a few dozen miles from the restaurant where Jimmy Hoffa would later disappear.
It is also not far from the Windsor border crossing that Sheeran said Marcello used for his hit men from Italy.
Bringing the gunmen into the United States through Canada and then Michigan is significant for two reasons.
First, that was part of a heroin smuggling route through Montreal used by Marcello’s French Connection associates.
The Montreal heroin ring also ran an immigration and illegal-identity racket for “supplying false papers”—what would be called identity theft today.
In addition to smuggling, the ring was also used for new Mafia recruits, immigrants fresh from Italy and Sicily who needed cover identities.
The illegalidentity part of the heroin ring was run by three Mafiosi, including two longtime associates of Michel Victor Mertz, Marcello’s heroin partner.
By bringing the two gunmen in through that route, they could easily be supplied with hard-totrace cover identities.
Second, it’s possible they were brought into the United States via Canada—instead of someplace closer to Marcello’s territory—because they were going to be used in the attempt to assassinate JFK in Chicago.
Years before Van Laningham and Frank Sheeran made their revelations, Marcello biographer John H Davis described a similar scenario based on his extensive research into Marcello’s method of operating.
Carlos Marcello didn’t tell Van Laningham exactly when the hit men came into the United States, so it’s unclear if they made it to Chicago or if they went straight to New Orleans after the Chicago attempt was called off.
It’s also likely they weren’t the only shooters but simply the ones provided by Marcello.
Given the long period of careful planning, and making sure that even backup plans had backups, it’s likely the same was true for the gunmen.
It would have made sense to have at least two teams of two shooters in case something unexpected happened to one or two of the shooters before JFK’s assassination.
Over the years, seriously suggested or rumored shooters have included Trafficante’s enforcer Herminio Diaz, his heroin partner and acknowledged assassin Michel Victor Mertz, Chicago hit man Charles Nicoletti, and one or two of Rosselli’s highly trained Cuban exile sharpshooters.
It’s important to stress that, as with any successful intelligence or criminal operation, the participants would have been informed on a need-to-know basis.
Few aside from Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli would have known the whole plan.
Other participants would have been told only what they needed to know, when they needed to know it, to prevent leaks in case any of them were arrested.
ON OCTOBER 3, 1963, Lee Oswald returned to Dallas from Mexico City, but even that trip was anything but routine, indicating that Oswald’s legitimate work for a United States intelligence agency continued.
In addition, Warren Commission transcripts show Senator Richard Russell saying that Oswald “came back in a car” from Mexico, although Oswald didn’t drive or even own a car and the official story in the Warren Report was that he returned by bus.
All those reports are consistent with Oswald’s being under surveillance by Naval Intelligence while he was also involved in an ongoing CIA operation.
In Dallas, Oswald’s pregnant wife and young daughter lived with a family friend, Ruth Paine.
The Oswalds had been introduced to Paine earlier in the year by Lee’s friend George DeMohrenschildt, the staunch anti-Communist and admitted CIA asset.
When Oswald arrived in Dallas, he moved into the YMCA on October 3, 1963.
The former Marine soon moved to a rooming house and attempted, without success, to get a job at a printing company.
H Lee—Oswald then moved to another rooming house, in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas.
Marina’s friend Ruth Paine had heard about an opening there from a neighbor whose brother worked there.
However, Paine also received a call for Oswald, offering him a position at another firm at a much higher salary.
However, it was tradition for Presidential motorcades to pass through Dealey Plaza, which was true for Franklin Roosevelt and for candidate John F Kennedy in 1960.
Oswald’s activities on weekday evenings and weekends that he did not visit the Paine home are largely undocumented, so it would have been easy for him to talk with individuals related to his intelligence work or his ongoing “tight” Naval Intelligence surveillance.
However, Oswald’s only close friend in Dallas, George DeMohrenschildt, had left the country almost seven months earlier, so outside of Marina, it is not known who else Oswald could have been calling.
Oswald’s intelligence status had to be very closely held to remain secret, meaning that few federal agents in the field could be told about it.
Even though at times the FBI assisted with the Naval Intelligence surveillance of Oswald, field agents would have been told little or nothing about where their routine reports about Oswald were going after they were filed with FBI superiors.
Oswald was apparently worried that a local Dallas FBI agent was going to blow his cover, which he had worked so hard to maintain for so many years, hoping he could make it pay off.
Dallas FBI agent James Hosty had visited Marina Oswald on November 1 and again on November 5.
After Oswald heard about it, he wrote a note to Hosty warning him away; Oswald personally dropped it off at the Dallas FBI office on November 12.
Shortly after Oswald’s death, Hoover ordered the Dallas FBI office to destroy Oswald’s note.
The note and its destruction were kept secret from the Warren Commission and the American public.
The contents of the note and the circumstances of Oswald’s visit were the subject of three conflicting stories when Congress finally investigated the note in the mid-1970s.
The secretary in the Dallas office testified that she recalled a phrase about “blowing up” the FBI office.
However, surely a written threat to blow up the Dallas FBI office, delivered in person by a former defector to Russia, would have provoked a swift response in 1963, as it would today.
Agent Hosty and his supervisor told different stories, with Hosty minimizing any threat or concern about the note.
Based on all the evidence, it’s likely that Oswald was simply trying to keep the local FBI agent from “blowing” the deep cover Oswald had carefully maintained for so long.
Several odd sightings of someone later reported to be Oswald surfaced after JFK’s murder.
These range from Oswald causing a disruption at a firing range to Oswald visiting a car dealership, where he (with no license or money to buy a car) drove a demonstration vehicle at a high rate of speed.
The incidents usually had Oswald doing something that called attention to himself.
Some of those incidents could have involved the real Oswald, either doing something Ferrie or Banister had asked him to do or—in the case of the car—looking ahead to the money he hoped to make after his “big reveal” following his mission to Cuba.
Some of the incidents might have involved someone posing as Oswald; others might have simply involved mistaken identities.
The incidents have been investigated and written about for decades, with few definitive conclusions, so they are not detailed here.
SEVERAL OF OSWALD’S activities during the summer and fall of 1963 bore a remarkable similarity to those of another ex-Marine, Thomas Arthur Vallee—so much so that the Secret Service noted a few of them in a secret memo just three days after JFK’s murder.
In the summer, Oswald had visited a CIA-backed exile training camp and had met with a CIA official about killing Castro.
Before moving to a new city in the fall, Oswald initially stayed at the YMCA before moving to a rooming house and getting a job at a large downtown warehouse that would overlook JFK’s motorcade route.
Over the same time span, ex-Marine Thomas Vallee had done almost all the same things.
Vallee was at a CIA-backed exile training camp and met with a CIA contact about killing Castro.
Vallee then moved to a new city, got a room at the YMCA, and then moved to a rooming house.
Like Oswald, Vallee then found a job at a large downtown warehouse overlooking a motorcade route for JFK—only in Vallee’s case it was JFK’s planned November 2, 1963, motorcade through Chicago.
There were other interesting similarities between Oswald and Vallee that could have made both men subject to the same type of manipulation.
Like Oswald, a teenaged Thomas Vallee wanted so desperately to join the Marines that he lied about his age.
In Vallee’s case, he succeeded and served seven years, winning “the Purple Heart and oak leaf cluster for wounds suffered in the Korean War,” according to the Chicago Daily News.
Like Oswald, Vallee was often depicted by authorities as a troubled loner.
Also like Oswald, that image might have served to hide covert activities that he didn’t want to share with his family.
According to investigative journalist Edwin Black, Vallee later told him that he had spent part of his time in the Marines in Japan at the Camp Otsu U-2 base, one of several U-2 bases used by the CIA operation.
Like Oswald—whose outrageously pro-Russian remarks were never reprimanded by his Marine superiors—Vallee appears to have gotten special treatment in the Marines.
That evokes Oswald’s visit to Manuel Artime’s exile training camp and his meeting with David Atlee Phillips and exile Antonio Veciana, where the assassination of Castro was discussed.
In the fall of 1963, both ex-Marines moved to new cities, with Oswald returning to Dallas and Vallee returning to his hometown of Chicago.
As the Secret Service noted, both men lived at the local YMCA before moving to a rooming house.
Vallee succeeded and began working at IPP Litho-Plate on West Jackson Boulevard in Chicago.
Vallee’s job was at a seven-story building that overlooked what has been described as a “slow turn” for JFK’s upcoming November 2 motorcade through Chicago.
Also like Oswald, Vallee would be arrested on the day of JFK’s motorcade through his city, and he would have a weapon and ammunition with him.
It’s clear that Thomas Vallee would have made an excellent fall guy if the mob bosses had assassinated JFK during the President’s visit to Chicago.
Just as Oswald worked for the far-right racist Guy Banister, Vallee also had a far-right connection.
In the fall of 1963, Trafficante and Marcello associate John Martino was a member of the John Birch Society’s speakers’ bureau.
He was featured in the society’s September 1963 newsletter as he toured the country promoting his book, I Was Castro’s Prisoner.
Martino later confessed his role in JFK’s murder and told associates what Oswald had been instructed to do on November 22.
How Vallee came to be working for the CIA, training Cuban exiles to assassinate Fidel Castro, has never been explained.
However, when confirming that Vallee had lived on Long Island in the summer of 1963, researcher Bill Adams discovered that Vallee had a former housemate who had been arrested for gun dealing.
Given the numerous ties between gunrunning, mobsters, and Cuban exiles, ex-Marine Vallee might have come to the attention of the exiles or their CIA handlers that way.
Vallee himself recognized that he had undertaken activities that would have made him look guilty if JFK had been killed in Chicago.
Vallee didn’t have the seeming pro-Castro connections that distinguished Oswald, but there was an attempt to link Oswald to Chicago via reports of a little-known trip that he—or someone pretending to be Oswald—made prior to the attempt to kill JFK in that city.
The apparent trip to Chicago, in the weeks after Oswald’s well-publicized New Orleans incident, is supported by evidence from several independent sources.
The head of the Ku Klux Klan told veteran newspaper reporter and editor Patsy Sims that he had met with Oswald in Atlanta.
In her definitive history of the Klan, Sims writes that “one of her sources told her that Oswald, in the summer of 1963, had called on Imperial Wizard James Venable in his office in Atlanta seeking the names of right-wing associates.
Klan leader Venable made his statement to Sims in the 1980s, and it’s difficult to see why Venable would make up an Oswald encounter since it tended to link Oswald with Venable’s “right-wing associates,” thus potentially giving the FBI reason to interview or investigate them.
In the 1960s, Klan leader Venable was close to an associate of Guy Banister, white supremacist Joseph Milteer, who lived in Georgia and visited Atlanta frequently.
As detailed later, shortly after the Chicago attempt, almost two weeks BEFORE President Kennedy was murdered in Dallas, Milteer accurately described JFK’s assassination to an informant on a Miami police undercover tape.
Milteer had been seen meeting with Banister in New Orleans in the summer of 1963, when Oswald was reportedly working for Banister and with David Ferrie.
David Ferrie’s long-distance phone records show several collect calls placed to Ferrie from the Atlanta suburb of Marietta from August 16 to August 20; these calls might be related to Oswald’s trips.
The FBI received reports of Oswald’s brief stopover in Atlanta from several individuals, including Hal Suit, the highly respected news director of Atlanta’s largest TV station.
Some reports to the FBI mentioned Oswald leaving behind a pistol at the Holiday Inn in Marietta after he checked out.
Oswald—or the person posing as Oswald—soon retrieved the pistol, but such an incident would tend to incriminate Oswald after JFK’s assassination.
It might also be relevant that President Kennedy had originally planned to visit Atlanta, hold a motorcade, and give a major speech in the late summer of 1963—but local Democrats had urged him to cancel or scale back the appearance because of concerns about JFK’s stance on civil rights.
Apparently, plans had already been made for Oswald to visit Atlanta en route to Chicago before JFK altered his plans.
That helps date the visit after Oswald’s flurry of New Orleans publicity in midAugust.
Oswald seems to have made sure that he would be remembered as being very interested in leftist causes.
Historian Michael L Kurtz, as a student in 1963, witnessed Guy Banister with Oswald there, both at various times debating students about integration.
A report sent to the United States Secret Service a week after JFK’s assassination from the “Senior Customs Representative, United States ‘Treasury Department Bureau of Customs, Montreal, Canada” said that “several persons have contacted this office recently and advised that Lee Oswald, suspected of assassinating the late President Kennedy, was seen distributing pamphlets entitled ‘Fair Play for Cuba,’ on St.
Mr Jean Paul Tremblay, Investigator, Customs and Excise, Montreal stated on November 27, 1963 that he received one of the abovementioned pamphlets from a man on St.
Jacques Street, Montreal, believed to be in August 1963, and he is positive that this person was Oswald.
The point of the trip north by Oswald—or someone pretending to be him— was apparently to tie him to Vallee, thus linking Vallee to a seemingly proCastro, Communist radical.
Of course, that link would need to be made public—with the help of Martino, Milteer, and Banister—only if Vallee were arrested for JFK’s assassination in Chicago.
Government files and sources show nineteen parallels in all, which indicate that Lopez was being manipulated as the perfect fall guy if the JFK assassination was in Tampa or if an additional patsy was needed for Dallas.
Oswald and Gilberto Lopez were both former defectors with a Russian connection in their background.
Each had returned to the United States in 1962 from a Communist country.
Both men had an unusual involvement with the small pro-Castro Fair Play for Cuba Committee in 1963, after it became the subject of Congressional hearings and newspaper accounts.
Both got into fistfights over seemingly pro-Castro statements, though at other times they made anti-Castro statements.
Both men were persons of interest to Naval Intelligence in 1963, and both were alleged by officials to be informants for a United States government agency.
Oswald and Lopez were about the same age, and both had left their wives a few months earlier, when each man had moved to a new city.
Both lived in a city with much anti-Castro activity and a strong mob presence.
Both Oswald and Lopez attempted to get into Cuba in the fall of 1963 by going to Texas, crossing the border at Nuevo Laredo, and proceeding to Mexico City, where they hoped to make an air connection to Cuba.
Officials said that both Oswald and Lopez went at least part of the way by car, though neither man owned a car or had a driver’s license or a known associate who drove him.
CIA files show that each man was under Agency surveillance for at least part of his Mexico trip.
And by November 1963, each would have a job in the vicinity of an upcoming JFK motorcade.
He went to Texas, where an unconfirmed newspaper account places him in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
CIA and FBI files show that Lopez then crossed the border when it was reopened after JFK’s assassination and went to Mexico City.
From there, unlike Oswald, Lopez would be successful in getting into Cuba.
Those parallels show that in the months before JFK’s murder, Oswald and Lopez were probably being manipulated by the same people, for the same purposes.
Each man appeared to have some intelligence role, while neither realized that he was also subject to manipulation by the Mafia.
By having Oswald visit Tampa shortly before the assassination—or at least planting information that he had—the Mafia also managed to link the two potential fall guys.
This meant that much of the activity that seemed to incriminate one of the men could also be used to incriminate the other.
The Warren Commission got only fragments of information about Gilberto Lopez, though it did learn enough to write in one memo that Lopez was on a “mission” of some sort at the time of JFK’s assassination.
However, the Warren Commission was never told about the attempt to assassinate JFK in Tampa, so it apparently considered Lopez of only minor interest.
The CIA, FBI, and military intelligence also withheld important information about Lopez from Congressional investigators in the 1970s.
Memos from the House Select Committee on Assassinations show they knew they were being stonewalled by officials regarding Lopez, and they were unable to get the information they wanted before their terms expired.
In early 1963 Lopez lived south of Miami in the Florida Keys, but by the fall of 1963, he had moved to Tampa.
Whereas most of the setting up of Oswald took place in Marcello’s territory, the unusual actions that appeared to link Lopez to JFK’s assassination were likely the result of manipulation by someone working for Trafficante.
A likely candidate would be David Ferrie’s close associate in Florida named Eladio del Valle.
Del Valle was a businessman and a Cuban exile involved in running narcotics for Santo Trafficante and was partners with Rolando Masferrer.
Trafficante surely knew the hysteria that would be generated if a Cuban exile was paraded in front of TV cameras as the supposed assassin of JFK had the President been killed during his Tampa motorcade.
The same would be true if Lopez was found dead, either as a “suicide” after supposedly killing JFK or if shot by someone like Jack Ruby.
The pressure on United States officials to invade Cuba in retaliation would have been overwhelming—and Trafficante knew that the United States was poised and ready to do just that because so many of his associates had penetrated the JEK—Almeida coup plan.
IT’S IMPORTANT TO point out that while the massive weight of the evidence shows that Oswald was knowingly involved with United States intelligence, the same is not necessarily true for Gilberto Lopez.
A former chief of the Florida Intelligence Unit told me that Lopez was an informant for a United States agency.
But he might have been so unwittingly and not have known that a friend or associate was reporting his information to the agency.
A friend or associate could have manipulated Lopez by playing on his hopes of getting a valid passport or for other reasons.
But he was the right person in the right place at the right time to be the perfect patsy for an attempt to kill JFK during his motorcade in Tampa.
United States officials could give in to a public outcry to retaliate against Cuba, which would serve to limit the murder investigation of JFK at a crucial time as the United States went to war.
If blamed for JFK’s murder, Oswald and Lopez would have been especially good at triggering “the World War III pretext for a national security cover-up,” but Vallee less so.
However, the mob bosses—in particular Rosselli’s good friend and coconspirator David Morales—had one more potential “fall guy” who would at least appear to be in place in Chicago and in Dallas shortly before the attempts to kill JFK in those cities.
CIA documents say that a mysterious man from Cuba was reported in the Chicago area just prior to JFK’s planned motorcade there.
The Cuban was named Miguel Casas Saez, aka Angel Dominguez Martinez, and he always seemed to be one tantalizing step ahead of the authorities.
He was conveniently reported to be in Florida in the weeks before JFK’s Tampa motorcade.
More ominously, CIA reports said that Saez was in Dallas when JFK was shot.
He then fled to Mexico City, where a Cubana Airlines plane was held for him for five hours.
Saez supposedly rode in the cockpit so the passengers wouldn’t see him.
Thirdhand accounts by David Morales’s Cuban exile informants (code-named AMOTs) said the formerly poor Saez suddenly had money and American clothes after he returned to Cuba from Dallas.
He had taken a Russian-language course and “speak Russian quite well,” according to a CIA memo.
That would have made it easy for Saez to talk with any of the thousands of Russian advisors and technicians still in Cuba in 1963.
Later accounts show that the possibility that Saez and Lopez were Castro agents was a huge concern for the CIA’s powerful Chief of Counterintelligence, James Angleton.
It’s unclear now whether Saez was a real person or simply a creation of David Morales’s informants, but in 1963 and 1964, the CIA, the FBI, and other agencies thought he was real.
However, though the Saez allegations concerned United States officials in the crucial early period after JFK’s death, they eventually fell apart.
When the initial report of the Cubana plane being held was finally declassified, it didn’t mention Saez at all.
The most incriminating information in CIA reports was all thirdhand, from sources of questionable reliability whose names are still withheld today.
But those sources worked for David Morales, who—by running covert operations at the huge Miami CIA station—was in the perfect position to feed the alarming reports into the CIA’s massive data collection system.
Morales would have known how high United States officials with access to the secret Saez reports would react after JFK’s murder.
If Saez was a real person, he might have simply been a Cuban on a low-level smuggling mission to the United States who was manipulated by David Morales or his associates so that his travels later looked suspicious.
Having someone like Saez and Lopez in Dallas would have been necessary for the mob bosses if evidence emerged soon after JFK’s murder that the President had been shot by more than one person or if something had happened to Oswald before the assassination.
Still more information falsely implicating Fidel in JFK’s murder—almost all of it linked to associates of Trafficante, David Morales, Johnny Rosselli, or Bernard Barker—would emerge in the days, weeks, and months after the assassination.
The Mafia chiefs knew those allegations were crucial to maintaining “the World War III pretext for a national security cover-up” that would protect Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli from close scrutiny.
Ruby had grown up in Chicago, had moved back for a time in the early 1950s, and had close relatives and many friends in the city.
Journalist Seth Kantor says that just two months before the Chicago attempt, Ruby had “met in Dallas with two Chicago detectives to provide them information,’ thus beginning an informant relationship with Chicago law enforcement that could prove useful.
Ruby had other contacts with people connected to Chicago in the weeks and months prior to the Chicago assassination attempt.
On October 7, 1963—just three weeks before the Chicago attempt—Ruby had met in Dallas with Chicago businessman Lawrence Meyers, whom David Ferrie had called on September 24.
Meyers would be in Dallas meeting with Ruby the night before JFK’s assassination, at the restaurant of Joe Campisi, Marcello’s Dallas lieutenant.
In preparation for the attempt to kill JFK in Chicago, Ruby received an envelope with approximately $7,000 from an associate of Jimmy Hoffa in October 1963.
The payoff occurred in Chicago just weeks after Ruby met with Johnny Rosselli in Miami.
I interviewed Jim Allison, who witnessed the payoff, along with his wife.
Jim Allison was a respected businessman who in 1963 was in the public relations field.
One of those was A Gordon Hardy, who introduced Allison to Jimmy Hoffa in Chicago, in Hoffa’s large suite at the Bismarck Hotel.
Allison came to realize that Hardy also had Mafia ties, but Hardy came to view Allison as someone he could trust.
Jim Allison was in Chicago on business on the weekend of October 27, 1963, and Hardy told Allison he could get him tickets to see the Chicago Bears play the Philadelphia Eagles.
He told Allison to meet him on Sunday morning at the coffee shop at the Bismarck Hotel.
Allison was having a late breakfast at the coffee shop when Hardy showed up with the football tickets.
While Allison was talking with Hardy, “a little guy came in” to the coffee shop and caught Hardy’s eye.
Hardy asked Allison to excuse him, saying he had to give the guy money to pay for his breakfast.
Hardy smiled as he pulled out a number-10 business envelope and—feeling Allison was a friend he could trust—gave Allison a look at the inch-thick stack of $100 bills inside.
Allison soon left the coffee shop, went to the football game, and didn’t think anything more about the payoff in the coffee shop until three weeks later.
When he saw Ruby shoot Oswald live on TV and the ensuing coverage, Allison realized “it was the man at the coffee shop” he had seen receiving the envelope stuffed with money from the Hoffa associate.
However, Allison was reluctant to tell the authorities, because he’d just seen someone murdered on live TV in a police station—by someone his friend Hardy apparently knew.
It is unlikely that Hardy had any idea what the money he had given Ruby was for or that Ruby would soon become so notorious; otherwise, he wouldn’t have met Ruby in front of witnesses.
Hardy had probably simply been asked by Hoffa or one of Hoffa’s men to give this man Ruby from Dallas an envelope stuffed with money.
Neither the Warren Commission nor the House Select Committee on Assassinations could find any record of Ruby’s being in Dallas on October 27, 1963, one of the few days in the months before JFK’s assassination they could not account for.
Ruby had called a number in Chicago the previous day, after he had called Los Angeles—Johnny Rosselli’s home base.
The Chicago number belonged to an associate of Allen Dorfman, a corrupt Teamster official and mobster.
Ruby kept late hours, and it would have been easy for him to take a commercial flight under an assumed name to Chicago early in the morning after his club had closed.
The FBI and Justice Department would get reports about a rumored payoff to Jack Ruby prior to JFK’s death, and those reports linked Teamster official Allen Dorfman to the money.
When Ruby returned to Dallas, he bought a safe for his office, perhaps to keep the money, because he didn’t put it in his bank account.
A simple test of putting an inch-thick stack of bills into a number-10 business envelope shows it would have held about $7,000 in $100 bills.
According to Seth Kantor, on the afternoon of JFK’s assassination, Ruby was seen by “the loan officer at” his Dallas bank.
Ruby didn’t put the money in the bank, however; bank records show that Ruby’s only bank transaction that day was a withdrawal for $31.87.
CARLOS MARCELLO’S FEDERAL trial in New Orleans could result in his deportation again, a nightmare that Marcello would do almost anything to avoid.
Marcello was clearly guilty of the charges Robert Kennedy had brought against him, so, according to biographer John Davis, “Marcello’s principal strategy was to terrorize and possibly eliminate” the key witness against him and to “bribe as many jurors as” possible.
But Marcello knew that even if he was successful in using that strategy for the trial, Robert would keep bringing new charges against him as long as JFK remained president.
By Friday, November 1, David Ferrie and Carlos Marcello were no doubt ready to see JFK killed the following day, cutting off the major source of Bobby Kennedy’s power.
Carlos Marcello was joined in the courtroom by David Ferrie, who had just returned from Guatemala.
Marcello had been plotting JFK’s death for just over a year at that point, and now his goal was just one day away.
For John F Kennedy to die the day after Marcello’s trial started would no doubt be sweet revenge for all the prosecutions—which he viewed as persecutions—and the harrowing ordeal of his humiliating deportation.
The Secret Service had learned of an assassination threat in the city; his visit to Chicago was cancelled on such short notice that agents were already at the airport to meet the President.
According to Chicago Secret Service agent Abraham Bolden, whose account was confirmed by other law-enforcement sources uncovered by journalist Edwin Black, the plot involved four men, two of whom were briefly detained and released and two who were never apprehended.
Because two of the men had never been caught, there was still an active threat involving potential Presidential assassins on the loose.
Two of the suspects had Hispanic names—“Rodriguez” and “Gonzales”— indicating a possible Cuban connection.
Five years later, former Senate investigator Bud Fensterwald found several newsmen at the Chicago Daily News who knew about the four-man threat in Chicago, even though they did not write about it at the time.
One of the newsmen said, “At the time of JFK’s scheduled visit to Chicago [on November 2, 1963] there were four men in town who planned an assassination attempt from one of the overpasses from O’Hare into town.
A fifth man, ex-Marine Thomas Vallee, whose job overlooked JFK’s motorcade route, was arrested at 9m., two hours before JFK was scheduled to arrive in the city.
In his car he had an M-1 rifle and three thousand rounds of ammunition.
Knowing of at least two potential assassins still at large, JFK and Bobby apparently decided to cancel JFK’s entire trip.
They also decided to keep any mention of the assassination threat out of the press—and the press complied, even though several newsmen had heard about the four-man threat.
If the threat was made public, and the four men turned out to be Cuban agents retaliating for the JEFK—Almeida coup plan, then the plan—and Almeida—could be exposed.
Remarkably, there is no evidence that those making the Cuba Contingency Plans, like my State Department source John Crimmins, were told about the Chicago threat.
Information about the Chicago threat appears to have been limited to higher officials, especially those in the Secret Service and FBI—two agencies not directly involved in the Cuban Contingency planning.
As JFK’S Press Secretary Pierre Salinger explained to me, just after he assured the press that JFK would NOT cancel the motorcade because of a crisis in Vietnam, he had to quickly issue two different phony excuses for the cancellation.
The initial reason given for JFK’s sudden cancellation was a cold, although that was quickly changed to the need for JFK to stay in Washington to deal with the aftermath of the assassination of Vietnamese President Diem.
While Diem’s death probably was a factor in JFK’s decision, news services had already run a story from Salinger saying that special equipment had been installed in Chicago so that JFK could monitor the tragic events in Vietnam during his visit.
The Kennedys had done this kind of news management on a smaller scale in the past, involving incidents as diverse as leaks about the Bay of Pigs and reports of JFK’s sexual indiscretions.
The CIA had suppressed news stories related to Cuban operations, such as a Florida incident in September 1963, when the Agency made sure “two local newspapers suppressed” and turned over photos of several covert Cuban exile operatives after their boat had problems.
Suppressing a news story on the scale of the Chicago threat against JFK took a new level of coordination among Robert Kennedy and several agencies, but the Cuban aspects of the threat seemed to justify it.
Not until years later would the public learn that Vallee had recent ties to a Cuban exile group training to assassinate Fidel Castro.
Vallee also had ties to the John Birch Society, widely known at the time for its extreme stance against civil rights, Martin Luther King Jr., and JFK, especially his seemingly soft stance on Cuba.
As mentioned earlier, the CIA and INS had also received reports of a possible Cuban agent named Miguel Casas Saez in Chicago, but they were unable to track him down.
In addition, two of the men sought in the Chicago incident had Hispanic names, and a later CIA memo says the plot allegedly involved “Cuban dissidents,” which meant exiles.
Those Cuban connections are why Bobby and JFK kept any mention of the four-man Chicago plot, and the real reason for JFK’s sudden cancellation, out of the press.
Former Chicago Secret Service Agent Abraham Bolden confirmed the fourman Chicago threat and told Congressional investigators and Fensterwald that it was handled differently from any other threat against the President.
Bolden said that “shortly after the assassination,” the Chicago Secret Service Chief “called all agents into his office and showed them a memo from Washington to the effect that the Secret Service was to discuss no aspect of the assassination and investigation with anyone from any other federal agency now or any time in the future.
Bolden thought this memo was directed at the FBI, who “wanted to get the role of Presidential protection away from” the Secret Service.
Decades later, former Chicago FBI agent Thomas B Coll recalled, “Some people were picked up.
The investigation of the Chicago assassination threat went along two paths that began more than forty-eight hours before JFK was set to arrive.
One investigative path, sparked in part by a tip the FBI passed along to the Chicago Secret Service, was about a four-man assassin team in the city.
Several Chicago Secret Service agents kept watch on two of the four-man assassin team.
According to investigative journalist Edwin Black, the agents had been able to pick up the trail of only two of the four men and had been watching the rooming house where they were staying.
When the two men left, one Secret Service agent followed them in an unmarked car.
However, the car with the two men suddenly reversed direction on a narrow street and began doubling back, so the two men wound up going past the Secret Service agent’s car.
They overheard the agent’s radio and realized they were under surveillance.
With its surreptitious surveillance blown, the Secret Service felt it had no choice but to go ahead and detain the men, so “the two subjects were apprehended and brought to the Chicago Secret Service office,’ Bolden told investigators.
Black writes that “the two men were taken into custody in the very early Friday hours and brought to the Secret Service headquarters.
The lack of any weapons—and the premature ending of the surveillance before the two men had committed any crime—presented a problem for the Chicago agents.
The only information about the two men being a threat came from the FBI, which was loath to share informants with other federal agencies.
Once the two men were detained by the Secret Service, no doubt various checks on them—or at least on the aliases they were using—were run in an attempt to find an outstanding warrant or other reason to hold them.
Richard Cain—Chief Investigator for the Chicago/Cook County Sheriff’s Department—was in a perfect position to monitor or even influence law enforcement’s reaction to the Chicago plot.
A “made” member of the Mafia, Cain had also worked on the ClA—Mafia plots for Rosselli, Trafficante, and Marcello.
Cain would have known about the two suspects detained and lookouts for the two still at large, showing that the secrecy of the assassination plot had been blown.
Cain’s position also would have allowed him to follow a second important part of the Chicago plot.
The second path of the Chicago investigation focused on ex-Marine Thomas Vallee.
That same day, according to an FBI report, two Secret Service agents conducted a “pretext interview of Vallee . . . and noted that he had two M-1 rifles in his possession, along with .22 caliber revolver and an estimated 1,000 rounds” of ammunition.
Unlike the other ex-Marine fall guy, Oswald, Vallee was serious about guns.
The Secret Service agents returned to the office and reported their concerns to Martineau.
On or about Thursday, October 31, 1963—one day after the Chicago agents’ pretext interview of Vallee—“Vallee’s landlady called the Service office and said that Vallee was not going to work on Saturday,” according to the testimony of Agent Edward Tucker to Congressional investigators.
On the morning of November 2, before JFK’s motorcade was canceled, Thomas Vallee was heading into the city.
According to Congressional investigators, he had put one of his M-1 rifles and his pistol in the trunk of his car, where he also had three thousand rounds of ammunition.
Vallee wore a shirt with an open collar and a jacket—similar to what at least one member of the four-man assassin team was wearing.
According to Edwin Black, police records show that Vallee was arrested around 9m., about two hours before JFK’s scheduled touchdown at O’ Hare.
That was all the pretext the Chicago police needed to search his car, where they found the M-1 rifle and three thousand rounds of ammunition.
By Saturday night, November 2, 1963, all the suspects who were in custody— Vallee and the two who were part of the four-man team—had been released.
According to Edwin Black, who had several Chicago police sources, when no evidence had been found to justify holding the men, they were released.
Vallee was apparently never even brought to the Secret Service office for an interview, then or in the coming weeks.
The Secret Service didn’t even talk to ex-Marine Vallee in the days and weeks after the Dallas assassination was blamed on fellow ex-Marine Oswald, even though Secret Service records—some of which are still classified —show that the agency maintained an interest in Vallee for at least the next seven years.
Clearly there was more to Vallee and the Chicago attempt than the records released so far reveal.
AFTER THE CANCELLATION of the Chicago portion of the plot, Marcello’s two shooters from Europe headed south.
As Marcello explained to his cellmate Jack Van Laningham, in a conversation secretly recorded on FBI undercover audiotape, the two hit men left Michigan and came to his huge, sixty-fourhundred-acre Churchill Farms estate.
The estate had its own airfield, so they could have been flown directly there, perhaps by pilot David Ferrie.
It’s long been documented that Marcello and Ferrie spent the weekend of November 9 and 10 working on strategy at the secluded farmhouse in the middle of the vast Churchill Farms property.
Marcello’s federal trial continued in New Orleans, so the two later claimed to government investigators that they were working on trial strategy.
However, Marcello had top attorneys to handle that, and Marcello’s main strategy involved bribing a key juror to ensure his acquittal, or at the very least a hung jury, and Ferrie was not involved with that.
Their meetings at Churchill Farms were also unusual because Ferrie usually met with Marcello in the godfather’s office at the Town and Country Motel, as he had done several times in October.
Marcello admitted to Van Laningham that two rifles were obtained from a New Orleans gunsmith so the two European hit men could conduct target practice, safe from the view of law enforcement.
Because of the ongoing trial, the government had to be careful not to intrude on Marcello’s privacy or talks with his attorneys or their representatives.
That created the perfect situation for Marcello and Ferrie to help prepare the two hit men for the upcoming hit against JFK, ironically at the same secluded house where one year earlier Marcello had revealed his intention to kill JFK to FBI informant Ed Becker.
Also, shortly before his weekend planning session with Marcello, David Ferrie admitted that he’d purchased a .38 pistol and that he’d deposited the $7,000 mentioned earlier into his bank account.
On November 7 and 8, 1963, Jack Ruby talked to two of Hoffa’s associates in lengthy telephone conversations.
Earlier, on November 1, Ruby had called Chicago, and on November 9 Ruby’s recent visitor from Chicago—Lawrence Meyers—was in New Orleans; Ferrie had called Meyers just over a month earlier.
It seems unlikely that Meyers was anything more than a low-level message courier who knew nothing about the overall operation.
Jack Ruby’s volume of long-distance phone calls continued to explode in November.
Ruby’s cover story—at the time and later accepted by the Warren Commission—was that the calls were simply about a union problem involving his performers.
However, many of his calls were to an incredible number of Mafia and Hoffa associates.
They served as intermediaries and cutouts, as no doubt coded phrases were passed from Ruby to eventually reach others involved in the plot, with those in the middle knowing nothing of the assassination plans.
Ruby could be helpful to Marcello not just if the President was killed in Dallas but also if the hit was in Tampa.
Ruby had been stationed in Tampa during World War II and in recent years had reportedly made trips there to recruit strippers for his club.
ON NOVEMBER 9, 1963, undercover Miami Police tapes recorded white supremacist Joseph Milteer talking about JFK’s murder less than two weeks before the assassination in Dallas.
Milteer said “there was a lot of money” involved in the plot, not only from far-right extremists “but from men who could afford to contribute,” though the only one he mentioned by name was a Louisiana political boss who was tied to both Carlos Marcello and Guy Banister.
The Miami Police told the Secret Service and FBI about the tapes and plot.
The FBI assigned Atlanta agent Don Adams to the case on November 13, and he went to the southern Georgia town of Quitman, where Milteer lived, to quietly investigate him.
However, Adams told me that his FBI superiors never told him about the Miami police tapes of Milteer; he later learned they withheld other relevant information from him as well.
Milteer was not arrested before JFK’s Tampa motorcade, before Dallas, or even after JEK’s murder.
While parts of the Milteer story and the audiotapes have been known to investigators for decades, it was only in 2006 that Michael L Kurtz published accounts of reliable witnesses who could tie Milteer directly to Guy Banister and other associates of Carlos Marcello.
Aside from sharing racist views and hatred of the Kennedys, Banister, Milteer, and Marcello also shared a connection to the illegal arms trade, since in 1963 the major buyers of illegal weapons from organized crime included Cuban exile groups and white supremacists.
Milteer traveled extensively and was in touch with the most violent racist groups active in 1963, as well as those trafficking in arms.
Milteer would continue to make accurate remarks to Somersett about JFK’s murder in the coming days, showing he was aware of—and possibly involved in—the plot.
Milteer had inherited $200,000 from his father , and his determination to kill JFK appears to have been motivated by his racist ideology more than money.
John and Robert Kennedy were told about Milteer’s threat before JFK made his trip to Florida.
However, by mid-November 1963, JFK and RFK were dealing with pressing Cuban issues on several important fronts, in addition to an array of foreign crises and domestic problems.
A November 8, 1963, Los Angeles Times article—headlined “Kennedy Ducking Cuba Problem, GOP Says” and picked up by other newspapers—slammed JFK for doing nothing about Cuba.
President Kennedy was doing a great deal regarding Cuba, but none of it was in the public eye.
Even while JFK was making his final attempts to reach a peaceful solution with Castro, he continued his efforts to overthrow the Cuban leader.
As the December 1, 1963, date for the coup approached, Commander Almeida indicated to Harry Williams that he wanted JFK’s personal assurance that the President would fully support the coup once it began.
The plan was that on November 18, 1963, following JFK’s long motorcade in Tampa, the President would go to Miami to deliver a speech, several lines of which would specifically reassure Commander Almeida that he had JFK’s personal backing.
Years later, Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Sy Hersh wrote that CIA officer Seymour Bolten—an aide to Cuban Operations Chief Desmond FitzGerald—told a Congressional investigator that he had personally delivered the key paragraph written for JFK’s speech.
Declassified files withheld from Congress and not seen by Hersh confirm that Bolten’s supervisor, FitzGerald, was a key participant of AMWORLD and the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
However, apparently John and Robert Kennedy—still digesting the political and security fallout from the canceled Chicago motorcade—decided against sharing information about the Chicago threat with the entire subcommittee.
Telling all the subcommittee members would have meant their supervisors, aides, and secretaries could also find out, which could compromise the security of the impending coup plan.
So most of those working on the Cuba Contingency planning, and other key personnel, hadn’t been told crucial information about the assassination threat in Chicago.
Declassified files show that Robert Kennedy was set to meet with coup plan exile leaders Harry Williams and Manuel Artime in Washington on November 17, 1963, the day before JFK’s important speech for Almeida.
That made it all the more crucial that no hint of the coup plan could emerge from any investigation of the Chicago threat, or any threats that might emerge during JFK’s upcoming trips to Tampa and Miami on November 18, 1963.
On November 17, in Florida, President Kennedy and his aides were putting the finishing touches on the image that JFK wanted to project to assure Commander Almeida of his support.
That weekend, JFK had been at the Kennedy Palm Beach estate with Richard Goodwin and other aides, creating the final draft of his important Miami speech.
JFK already had the passage the CIA had carefully crafted for Commander Almeida.
The aides working on the speech didn’t know about Almeida or that the CIA had written a small portion of JFK’s remarks, as Goodwin confirmed to me.
JFK’s recent activities had been orchestrated to send a show of strength to Almeida and his allies in Cuba.
That day, Florida newspapers featured major front-page coverage of JFK viewing the launch of a Polaris missile from a submarine.
In Tampa JFK was scheduled to have a private—though widely publicized—meeting with the head of Strike Force Command and other military brass, including some brought in from Washington.
Coupled with the special lines in JFK’s speech, all this was designed to reassure Almeida that JFK would back him and the coup all the way, even with United States military force.
According to the Senate Church Committee, Lopez “was at a get-together at the home of a member of the Tampa Chapter of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee [where he was] for some time waiting for a telephone call from Cuba which was very important.
The released records give so many different reasons why Lopez claimed he wanted to return to Cuba that it’s hard to pin down the real reason.
Lopez’s trip would be unusual because he didn’t own a car or drive—yet after JFK’s Tampa motorcade, Lopez would embark on a long journey by car to Texas.
Lopez would then be driven by a still-unidentified person to Mexico City, where he would catch a flight to Havana.
In addition to not being able to drive, Lopez also had no passport and little money, so someone who could help him get to Cuba could have used that as a way to manipulate him.
That could have been a United States intelligence agency, the Mafia, or—as in the case of Oswald—both.
A 2003 newspaper report pointed out how Lopez might have come to the attention of the Mafia, concluding that “Gilberto Policarpo Lopez movements and activities suggest that he was a possible participant in Trafficante’s activities,” though on a very low level.
The small Ybor City enclave in Tampa was frequented by Santo Trafficante, since it was home to his favorite restaurant.
The man’s last name was Rodriguez, one of the names that had surfaced in the Chicago threat investigation.
However, neither that official nor Tampa Police Chief Mullins— who had recently taken over from Chief Brown—was ever told about the Chicago threat.
My high Florida law-enforcement source stated that an “informant said that he’d met Oswald at an FPCC meeting in Tampa with several other people present, just before JFK’s motorcade.
The informant remembered Oswald’s appearance, but not his name, so if it was Oswald, he may have been using an alias.
For the Tampa assassination attempt, the point is not whether the real Oswald was in Tampa or not on November 17, 1963; what is important is that someone wanted authorities to think he was, or might have been.
Before JFK’s Tampa motorcade, officials there would issue a lookout describing a potential assassin that actually matched Oswald much more closely than the first description issued after JFK’s murder in Dallas.
THREE WEEKS AFTER Chicago, the Kennedys faced a shocking development at a critical time when officials discovered another plot to assassinate JFK, this time during his long Tampa motorcade on November 18.
Officials uncovered the plot less than twenty-four hours before JFK’s arrival and advised him to cancel his visit, since at least two potential assassins were on the loose.
Tampa Police Chief Mullins told me that he also advised the President and his staff to cancel JFK’s visit.
However, another sudden cancellation was not a viable option for President Kennedy.
While he and RFK had been able to keep the real reason for the Chicago cancellation out of the press, another major motorcade cancelled at the last minute would surely raise questions they couldn’t answer.
In addition, JFK was set to give his important speech that night in Miami, with the important lines of assurance for Commander Almeida.
The Tampa threat was verified not only by Chief Mullins and a former head of the Florida Intelligence Unit (who wishes to remain confidential because of his efforts against Santo Trafficante and his crime family) but also from newspaper accounts—which appeared the day after JFK’s murder—and several official files.
That was the same basic scenario as Chicago and Dallas; however, those Congressional investigators weren’t told the threat was active in Tampa.
Chief Mullins confirmed that the police were told about the threat by the Secret Service prior to JFK’s motorcade through Tampa, and they had their own source as well.
Secret Service agent Sam Kinney said he learned later that “organized crime” was behind the threat.
The former head of the Florida Intelligence Unit—who worked closely with the Tampa Police at the time—said that he was certain there was going to be a hit on JFK in Tampa.
The official accompanied the Presidential party and said that the strain of dealing with the threat was why Kennedy appeared “handsome, tan, and smiling” in front of the crowds but appeared “tired and ill” backstage.
Nevertheless, JFK went out of his way to present a fearless image in Tampa in spite of the threat.
After finishing one of his speeches, JFK “surged out into the crowd, which immediately engulfed him.
The Secret Service men with him went crazy,” according to a report in a local newspaper.
We’ ll never know whether he did so because of his ongoing back problems or, in case word of the threat leaked to the public, to show he wasn’t afraid.
Chief Mullins and other officials were especially concerned about Tampa’s tallest building, the Floridan Hotel, which overlooked a hard left turn for JFK’s motorcade.
In 1963 one could easily register under a false name—at that time, many travelers paid with cash—and every guest room window in the Floridan could be opened.
The hotel was just one short block away from the intersection where JFK’s limo would have to come to almost a full stop to make its turn.
For a sniper perched in one of the hotel windows, sitting back in the shadows, assassinating the President would have been all too easy.
Chief Mullins and the Secret Service didn’t know if the two suspects at large were southern white supremacists, disgruntled anti-Castro exiles, pro-Castro exiles, or Cuban agents.
Even without knowing about Marcello’s two hit men from Europe, officials in Tampa had plenty of reasons to urge JFK to cancel his entire motorcade.
It wasn’t bulletproof anyway, and using it would send the wrong message to Commander Almeida.
The Lincoln in which JFK rode in Tampa was the same one he would later use in Dallas.
Just as in Chicago, a complete press blackout about the threat was informally ordered.
A tight lid of secrecy was clamped down on all information about the threat.
Two small articles appeared right after JFK’s death, but even then the story was quickly suppressed, and they received no follow-up.
Chief Mullins was quoted in those articles—at first openly talking about the threat but by the following day saying nothing—and he didn’t speak for publication about the threat again until I interviewed him in the mid-1990s.
According to the Review Board’s Final Report, just two months later, “January 1995, the Secret Service destroyed Presidential protection survey reports for some of President Kennedy’s trips in the fall of 1963,” including Tampa.
That destruction apparently broke the law, since the 1992 JFK Act that created the Review Board had required agencies to preserve all relevant records.
However, when the Secret Service destroyed records for JFK’s Tampa trip in 1995, Commander Almeida was still alive in Cuba—and his secret work for JFK not been publicly exposed—giving the Secret Service a possible national security reason for its actions.
After JFK’s death, the Tampa threat still could not be exposed to the general public since there was still the chance that Oswald or other suspects might prove to have connections to Castro or the coup plan.
The public’s faith in the Secret Service, already at a low ebb after Dallas, would have been shaken to the core if weeks or months after JFK’s death it was revealed that the agency had covered up an assassination attempt in Tampa that had so many parallels with Dallas.
JFK GAVE SEVERAL speeches in Tampa, including one at the International Inn, where—four days later—Santo Trafficante would publicly toast JFK’s death.
After JFK concluded his Tampa trip, a member of the Tampa Police motorcycle detail told the St.
Mullins introduced each of us to the President,” who was no doubt grateful that he had survived the motorcade unharmed.
The ex-chief of the Florida Intelligence Unit told me that Santo Trafficante had called off the attempt to kill JFK shortly before the President’s arrival.
Chief Mullins said his department provided much information to the FBI at the time of the Tampa threat.
However, those documents have never surfaced in declassified FBI files.
Chief Mullins didn’t know at the time that Gilberto Lopez had indeed headed to Texas, reportedly Dallas, or that two more men investigated for JFK’s murder—involved with Trafficante’s drug network and described shortly—were also headed from Florida to Dallas in the coming days.
ON THE EVENING of November 18, the President flew to Miami and gave his most important speech, with lines directed at Commander Almeida and his allies in Cuba.
Those carefully crafted sentences were also designed so they would not upset JFK’s back-channel negotiations with Fidel.
What now divides Cuba from my country . . . is the fact that a small band of conspirators has stripped the Cuban people of their freedom and handed over the independence and sovereignty of the Cuban nation to forces beyond the hemisphere.
Once this barrier is removed, we will be ready and anxious to work with the Cuban people.
The following day several newspapers trumpeted those lines almost too clearly.
Commander Almeida was satisfied with JFK’s remarks in Miami and communicated that to Harry Williams.
Declassified files show that in the days following Almeida’s response to JFK’s speech, Robert Kennedy had his final meetings in Washington with Manuel Artime and Harry Williams before the coup.
Robert Kennedy arranged for Harry Williams to have a crucial meeting with CIA officials on the morning of November 22, 1963, as later confirmed by the Washington Post.
After JFK returned to Washington, he expressed his relief at surviving the trip to his close aide David Powers.
After JFK’s Tampa motorcade and Miami speech, John and Robert Kennedy could breathe a sigh of relief as they looked ahead to JFK’s upcoming trip to Texas.
They knew of no active threat in Texas as there had been in Chicago and Tampa.
Moreover, Dallas didn’t have a large Cuban exile population to worry about, as did Tampa and Chicago.
CHIEF MULLINS WONDERED if “two may have followed the Presidential caravan to Dallas,” and there is a well-documented account of two men and a woman doing just that.
The woman was Rose Cheramie , a member of the lowest rung of the Mertz—Marcello—Trafficante heroin network.
Cheramie was a sometime B-girl, prostitute, and heroin courier for Ruby.
On November 21, 1963, Rose Cheramie had been dumped on the side of the road by two men she was riding with from Florida.
She was eventually taken into custody by Louisiana State Police Lieutenant Francis Fruge, who drove her to East Louisiana State Hospital to be treated for heroin withdrawal.
Weiss, Cheramie said that “word was out in the New Orleans underworld that the contract on Kennedy had been let,” and Dr.
Cheramie would later be proven an accurate informant regarding Marcello’s part in the French Connection ring, but at this time no one was taking her seriously.
It’s ironic that a woman who was one of the lowest members of Marcello’s crime empire came so close to exposing part of the godfather’s plot, which could have saved JFK’s life.
The man at the highest levels of that heroin network, Michel Victor Mertz, had been traveling in America in 1963, sometimes under his own name—most recently in October—and sometimes under the name of “Jean Souetre,” an old associate from a mission that Mertz had undertaken for French Intelligence several years earlier.
Mertz, who won the French Legion of Honor for killing twenty Nazis for the French Resistance in World War II, sometimes did work for French Intelligence to avoid prosecution for his crimes.
Jean Souetre, the alias Mertz used in Dallas on November 22, 1963, and in the days before, was the name of a fugitive French officer who in 1962 had participated in the attempted assassination of French President Charles de Gaulle.
This attempt was more serious than the one Mertz had foiled a year earlier, since Souetre’s group was able to hit de Gaulle’s car with numerous bullets.
The French President survived, and the incident inspired Frederick Forsyth’s novel The Day of the Jackal.
Souetre was one of several men imprisoned for the attempt, though he later escaped.
Jean Souetre himself did not travel to America in the 1960s, and on November 22, 1963, the real Souetre was in Barcelona, Spain, and has witnesses to prove it.
On the other hand, INS records provided to the French government show that Mertz traveled frequently to America in 1963 and before as part of his heroinsmuggling activities.
Souetre had even been the subject of a memo by Richard Helms in the summer of 1963.
The fact that Mertz was using the identity of a wanted French Presidential assassin, recently tied to the CIA, was sure to generate fireworks when his alias surfaced as being in Dallas when JFK was shot.
Richard Helms had shown RFK and JFK a Cuban rifle from a “three-ton Cuban arms cache left by terrorists on a Venezuelan beach, as well as blueprints for a coup against” the president of Venezuela, according to historian Michael Beschloss.
Helms was no fan of JFK and RFK’s secret peace feelers with Castro, so this was probably his attempt to short-circuit any peace negotiations and to cover himself if his unauthorized CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel were uncovered.
Even veteran CIA officer Joseph B Smith would write in his memoirs that he “was not too impressed with this evidence of the Venezuelan guerrillas’ intended use of the arms.
Smith’s memoirs—written decades before the JFK—Almeida coup plan was first exposed—also contained an interesting remark he heard in 1964 from CIA official Desmond FitzGerald.
Even within the CIA, littke more than a handful of people knew about Commander Almeida, but FitzGerald was one of them.
Robert Kennedy celebrated his thirty-eighth birthday on November 20, 1963, and shortly after that had his last meeting with Harry Williams.
RFK had arranged for Williams to meet on Friday, November 22, with a group of CIA officials for a final planning meeting for the Almeida coup.
After a session that would stretch from morning to afternoon, Williams would leave for Miami that night.
From there, he would be flown to the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo on November 23, and from there slip into Castro’s Cuba, to meet personally with Almeida and await the coup on December 1.
The ten days from November 22 to December 1 would essentially be the countdown for the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
Once Harry Williams was inside Cuba around November 26, there might be no turning back for JFK and RFK, since secure communication with Williams at that point might be impossible.
RFK appears to have been close to finally telling some Cabinet officials— including Dean Rusk—about Commander Almeida, letting them know that the coup plans they’d been working on for months were about to be put into effect.
JFK was getting ready to leave for Texas the next day, while Rusk and several other cabinet members would be flying to the Far East on the same day.
Early the following week, around November 25, would be the soonest all the administration’s top officials could be gathered.
That may well have been the meeting at which officials like Rusk and McNamara would finally be told about Almeida, since at that point the coup would have been less than a week away.
JFK and RFK had been hoping for a breakthrough with their peace feelers, but progress was slow.
Even this was just to have “preliminary talks . . . for the discussion of an agenda” for actual negotiations.
The ball was left “in Castro’s court,” but the slow pace must have frustrated JFK and RFK, especially with the December 1 coup date looming.
The Kennedy brothers had no way of knowing that their other secret peace initiative was finally starting to produce results.
In Cuba, French journalist Jean Daniel finally had the meeting with Castro he’d been waiting for since late October.
According to Arthur Schlesinger, after “spending three fruitless weeks in Havana,” Daniel was surprised by a visit from Fidel Castro at 10:00m., the night before the journalist was scheduled to leave Cuba.
Daniel and Castro talked until 4:00m., and Daniel conveyed Kennedy’s wishes from late October about his desire for dialogue.
The two men arranged to have lunch again, to continue their discussion—on November 22, 1963.
Not only is the date ironic, but the location of their lunch was to be Castro’s “villa at the beach,” at Varadero —the very place one later AMWORLD document identifies as a good place to assassinate Castro, since it was near the home of CIA asset Rolando Cubela.
ROBERT KENNEDY WAS continuing his unrelenting attack on organized crime, not just in the courts but also in the press.
RFK had supported the Times investigation by providing crucial information and quotes.
The articles revealed that RFK was getting ready to run the Mafia out of Las Vegas, the mob’s relatively secure stronghold.
A separate Times story that week would have also pleased RFK, as it spotlighted the Mafia ties of one of JFK’s potential rivals, when it reported that “Sen.
RFK’s Times series capped an autumn full of anti-Mafia publicity, which had begun with the nation being riveted by a new series of televised crime hearings that for the first time truly exposed the inner workings of the Mafia.
Mobster Joe Valachi, the star of those hearings, had cooperated with authorities only because he was facing a death sentence.
RFK’s goal was to galvanize the public against the Mafia using the Valachi Hearings, held by the Kennedys’ old friend Senator John McClellan.
The focus of the hearings was “Organized Crime and Illicit Traffic in Narcotics,” striking at the heart of Trafficante and Marcello’s lucrative French Connection.
On November 20, RFK had been briefed “on the progress of the Marcello trial” in New Orleans, according to John H Davis, who says RFK was told “a favorable verdict was expected in a couple of days.
For Friday 22, Kennedy had scheduled a top-level meeting on organized crime to be attended by his personal staff and United States attorneys from all over the nation.
He was looking forward to giving them the good news from New Orleans as soon as it came in.
However, as Davis and a later court case extensively documented, Carlos Marcello had bribed a key juror and already knew he would be acquitted on Friday.
Being in court that day would not only give Marcello an ironclad alibi for JFK’s murder; it would also allow him to plan a celebration for that evening, ostensibly to celebrate his acquittal.
RICHARD HELMS WAS busy with the CIA’s portion of the JEK—Almeida coup plan, which included the Agency’s efforts to get United States “assets into Cuba” prior to the coup.
But on that same date, a CIA memo says “ FitzGerald approved telling Cubela he would be given a cache inside Cuba.
So, on November 20, 1963, a CIA officer telephoned Cubela and asked him to postpone his return to Cuba in order to attend a meeting on November 22 in Paris.
Cubela would be meeting with his CIA case officer at the very time JFK was assassinated, while the CIA man was trying to give the reluctant Cubela a CIA-devised poison pen to use to kill Fidel.
David Morales could have orchestrated that fateful timing, knowing the cover-ups it would generate within the Agency after JFK’s murder.
IT’S IMPORTANT TO point out that JFK’s motorcade route was first announced and published in the Dallas newspapers only on November 19, 1963.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations looked into that story and found it to be false.
It was necessary to keep the entire motorcade from having to drive across a concrete median to reach the Stemmons Freeway.
Yet another myth about JFK’s murder in Dallas is that somehow, the Secret Service was negligent or complicit, because they didn’t search all the buildings along the motorcade route.
As we now know, Sorrells would have been worried about that because of the recent threats in Chicago and Tampa.
When the motorcade route has been known for years,” and not just a few days.
After JFK’s November 22, 1963, motorcade in Dallas, there would not be another opportunity to apply their plan before JFK’s upcoming coup in Cuba on December 1, 1963.
Without the intense secrecy surrounding the impending coup, whose exposure could trigger “World War III,” they might not be able to trigger a national security cover-up by high United States officials.
The fact that the press secrecy surrounding the Tampa and Chicago attempts had held meant that local officials in Dallas would likely have little idea about the close calls JFK had experienced in recent weeks, making the job of the mob bosses easier.
The two European shooters—who had been training at Marcello’s huge, secluded Churchill Farms estate outside New Orleans—had likely never been sent to Tampa.
The gunmen were taken to Dallas by Joe Campisi, Sr., Marcello’s number-two underboss in that city.
Twenty-two years later, Marcello explained to his cellmate Jack Van Laningham the key role Campisi played in his plot.
Campisi hid the two hitmen at his restaurant until it was time for them to go to Dealey Plaza, before JFK’s motorcade was scheduled to pass through that parklike part of downtown Dallas.
The shooters’ presence in Dallas prior to JFK’s arrival in the city might help explain an unusual police incident that the FBI withheld from the Warren Commission.
Marcello’s biographer, John H Davis, wrote that on the morning of Wednesday, November 20, 1963, two police officers on routine patrol entered Dealey Plaza... and noticed several men standing behind a wooden fence on the grassy knoll overlooking the plaza.
The men were engaged in what appeared to be mock target practice, aiming rifles over the fence in the direction of the Plaza.
The two police officers immediately made for the fence, but by the time they got there the riflemen had disappeared, having departed in a car that had been parked nearby.
The two patrol officers did not give much thought to the incident at the time, but after the assassination . . . they reported the incident to the FBI, which issued a report of it on November 26.
For reasons that have never been satisfactorily explained, the substance of the report was never mentioned in the FBI’s investigation of the assassination, and the report itself disappeared until 1978.
It was not that unusual in Dallas at that time for men to bring rifles to work in such areas, to show, trade, or sell.
One reason Bureau officials like J Edgar Hoover withheld that report from the Warren Commission was probably that the FBI had lost track of French assassin and heroin trafficker Michel Victor Mertz—using the name of another French assassin, Jean Souetre—in Dallas shortly before JFK’s murder.
Even worse, the FBI hadn’t informed the Secret Service about the matter prior to JFK’s arrival.
Mertz was apparently stalking JFK, who was in Fort Worth the morning of November 22, before heading to Dallas for his afternoon visit.
Oswald was living in a rooming house in the Oak Cliff section of Dallas, while his wife, Marina, and their children still lived with Ruth Paine.
Oswald usually went home to Marina only on weekends (though he hadn’t on the previous weekend), but he told Frazier that he wanted a ride to visit Marina that evening.
According to Frazier, Oswald told him he wanted to get some curtain rods.
Oswald planned to spend the night at Ruth Paine’s and then ride to work with Frazier on Friday.
Based on all the evidence, it appears that Oswald was planning to leave work the following day, in order—he thought—to go meet his contact at the Texas Theatre, just as confessed conspirator John Martino said.
Warren Commission counsel David Belin outlined in a memo how Oswald could have traveled to Mexico on November 22, using bus connections and the amount of money he had.
While that makes sense from the perspective of Oswald’s maintaining his lowly, far-left cover for a mission, it would be ludicrous for someone to try to escape on public transportation after having shot the President of the United States.
The following morning, Oswald would leave his wedding ring in a cup on the dresser and $170 in a wallet in a dresser drawer.
Clearly, Oswald knew he was leaving Dallas and wouldn’t be back any time soon.
Oswald would bring a package with him that morning, wrapped in brown paper, but it probably wasn’t curtain rods.
However, it was physically impossible for the package to have contained the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle later identified as the murder weapon, that Oswald is said to have kept wrapped in a blanket in Ruth Paine’s garage.
When Oswald went to work the following morning, Wesley Frazier’s sister saw Oswald walking across the lawn toward Wesley’s car, carrying something in a long paper bag.
She later testified that Oswald was holding the top of the package, which didn’t touch the ground.
However, even a disassembled Mannlicher-Carcano was too long at 34. inches to hold in that fashion without actually dragging the ground.
It’s impossible for a normal human to hold a package like that, which is as long as a disassembled Mannlicher.
That is easy to demonstrate with an ordinary yardstick, which is only 1. inches longer than a disassembled Mannlicher.
You simply can’t cup it in your hand, and tuck it under your shoulder, as Oswald did with the package.
For Oswald’s body, the maximum length the package could have been was about 23 inches, not the 34. inches of the disassembled Mannlicher.
The sworn accounts of Frazier and his sister are important, since that means Oswald didn’t take the Mannlicher-Carcano to the Depository that day.
After they arrived, Oswald walked ahead of Frazier, who didn’t see Oswald enter the building.
No one saw Oswald enter the building except for Jack Dougherty, who remembered Oswald but said he wasn’t holding a package.
There is an unconfirmed report from a mob associate that some type of demonstration or incident relating to Cuba was planned for Dealey Plaza that day.
Oswald may have been told that a pro-Cuba banner would be unfurled from a Depository window, or otherwise displayed, that would embarrass JFK with a pro-Castro message.
It would have been easy for Banister or Ferrie to tell Oswald such an incident would create news stories like he’d had in New Orleans that would supposedly cause the Cuban Embassy in Mexico City to welcome him when he tried to get into Cuba.
Whatever Oswald brought in his package that morning, he could have thought it was to help with such a banner or demonstration.
However, the most important thing to remember is that whatever was in the package, it wasn’t the Mannlicher-Carcano rifle.
This was true in Oswald’s interrogations, his media appearances, and his private talks.
THE FBI RECEIVED numerous credible reports from witnesses that Jack Ruby was in Houston on the afternoon of November 21, a couple of hours before JFK was scheduled to arrive there.
Ruby was sighted one block from the Rice Hotel, where President Kennedy would deliver a speech, before flying to Fort Worth, where JFK and Jackie Kennedy would spend the night.
According to one account, Ruby didn’t leave Houston until after JFK’s arrival.
If Ruby was in Houston, he might have been there to observe security preparations for JFK, or to meet someone else involved in the plot, or both.
On that same day, Seth Kantor notes that “Ruby’s Carousel checking account” had $246.65 in it, about the usual amount.
Back in Dallas on Thursday evening, November 21, Ruby had dinner at Campisi’s Egyptian Restaurant with one of his friends and business associates, Ralph Paul.
It was Paul who apparently fronted the money from Marcello’s organization to Ruby and who theoretically owned 50% of the Carousel Club.
Congressional investigators determined that the married Tippit had been carrying on a long-term affair with a waitress at Austin’s.
Author Henry Hurt talked to the woman, who confirmed that, at the time, she thought she was pregnant by Tippit.
This would have made Tippit subject to pressure or blackmail by one of Paul’s associates—like Ruby.
Joe Campisi Sr. verified Ruby’s presence at his restaurant that night, though he later claimed to Congressional investigators he had not been there that day.
Given the fact that Marcello has stated that Campisi was hiding the shooters at his restaurant that night, it’s clear why Campisi would deny having been there.
It also puts Ruby’s visit to Campisi’s in a whole new light, since it would have given Ruby an opportunity to make plans with Campisi for the following day, in one of the restaurant’s secure back offices.
Ruby would later call Campisi one of his “three best friends,” but theirs was much more of a business relationship, with Campisi calling the shots.
After leaving Campisi’s, Ruby spent time at the Carousel Club and the Bon Vivant Room restaurant in the Teamster-financed Cabana Hotel with Lawrence Meyers, from Chicago.
As noted earlier, Meyers—who also had contact with David Ferrie—appears to have been a low-level mob messenger or courier.
AFTER JFK AND Jackie arrived at their Fort Worth hotel, many in their Secret Service detail took time to relax.
After the recent stress of the Chicago and Tampa threats, it’s not surprising that the agents would be ready for some relaxation, especially since no threat or warning had emerged for the next day’s Dallas visit.
According to CBS anchor Bob Schieffer—then a reporter for a Fort Worth newspaper—a major attraction for the club was that its waitresses wore only “underwear” while serving drinks, though another report says they wore bikinis.
The owner of the Cellar club, Pat Kirkwood, knew both Jack Ruby and mob associate Lewis McWillie.
Kirkwood claimed in a filmed interview for Jack Anderson in 1988 that several strippers who worked for Jack Ruby had come to the club late that night, and he indicated that Jack Ruby might have sent them over on purpose.
Warren Commission documents confirm that some of Ruby’s strippers knew Kirkwood.
Whether or not the women were sent by Ruby on purpose, the fact that Secret Service agents were out so late the night before Kennedy’s visit was important information for someone like Ruby.
Their presence indicated that the Mafia’s plan for Dallas hadn’t leaked, as it had in Chicago and Tampa.
None of the Secret Service limo drivers were involved, though several high-profile agents from the next day’s events were.
The agents’ recent accounts of their exploits in Dallas usually leave out or gloss over this well-documented incident.
Though the agents’ names are all listed in the Warren Commission volumes, along with their time spent at the club and the drinks they say they consumed, I’ve decided not to name them here.
The agents left at various times, but the last agent didn’t leave until 5m., even though they had to report for duty at 8m.
NOVEMBER 22, MORNING, WASHINGTON, DC Harry Williams began his RFK-arranged meeting with CIA officials in Washington, DC, at an Agency safe house.
Haynes confirmed in his article that Williams was the Cuban exile leader closest to JFK’s administration.
Helms and Desmond FitzGerald have also been reported as having attended at least a brief part of the long meeting.
Harry Williams said that Lyman Kirkpatrick asked many probing questions about the coup plan with Almeida.
Apparently, Kirkpatrick was anxious to make sure the operation didn’t become another Bay of Pigs disaster for the United States.
They would break for lunch around noon, Eastern time, with Williams eating separately from the CIA men.
McCone’s memo was withheld from the Warren Commission and from all of the government investigating committees of the 1970s.
It wasn’t declassified until 1993, when it slipped through in a mass release of files, and wasn’t published until 2005.
AT THE JUSTICE Department, Robert Kennedy was in a meeting about organized crime with forty of his attorneys from the Racketeering division.
RFK was told that the verdict in the Marcello case in New Orleans could come as early as that day.
The last subject before they broke for lunch was Sam Giancana and corruption in Chicago.
TO COVER AS many important facts as possible on this critical day, I will describe brief passages in approximate chronological order.
Where times are given, they should be considered approximate, as are dates when events happened very late at night or very early in the morning.
Since most of the key events occurred in Texas, Central time is used unless otherwise indicated.
Some meetings or incidents that we’ve covered extensively in earlier chapters are mentioned only briefly here, to place them in the context of other important events.
Most witness accounts in Dealey Plaza are from early, official Dallas Police, FBI, and Secret Service reports, supplemented by interviews conducted by noted journalists.
I’ve chosen to focus on reliable accounts that the Warren Commission largely overlooked or ignored, because they ran counter to the Commission’s conclusions.
There are far more such accounts that can be noted here, but the Annotated Bibliography provides numerous sources to find them.
JFK added, “Last night would have been a hell of a night to assassinate a president.
I mean it—the rain and the night and we were all getting jostled,” as JFK acted out the shooting scenario for Jackie.
It’s now clear that JFK was talking about assassination because of the recent threats he dealt with in Tampa and that made him cancel his Chicago trip.
On the presidential wavelength of the Secret Service radio net, JFK and Jackie were referred to by their code names, Lancer and Lace.
JFK’s motorcade left Love Field. 12:00m.: Four witnesses say that Oswald was downstairs, around the lunch room, at this time.
Dealey Plaza is a funnel-shaped area composed of Houston Street at the top (the wide part of the funnel), with Elm Street as the left of the funnel, and Commerce Street as the right side.
Just in front of the Depository is the Elm Street extension, which runs straight into a parking lot and railroad tracks that flow into a railroad yard.
At 11:55, an important witness named Lee Bowers was in the tower in the railroad yard behind the grassy knoll.
He saw a dirty 1959 Oldsmobile station wagon enter the parking lot behind the picket fence.
The driver, a middle-aged white male with partially gray hair, drove around slowly, then left.
The car had out-of-state plates and a sticker touting Republican Senator Barry Goldwater in the rear window.
According to his statement to police, completed on November 22 and in Warren Commission Volume 24, “at about 12:15 another car came into the area with a white man about 25 to 35 years old driving.
Just a few minutes after this car left at 12:20m., another car pulled in.
This car was a 1961 Chevrolet Impala . . . color white, and dirty up to the windows.
One of the men was described as wearing a very light-colored shirt, white or a light blue, open at the collar, unbuttoned about halfway, with a regular T-shirt beneath it.
Oswald claims he ate his lunch in the first-floor lunch room, alone, except for a black man named Junior who walked through with a short black man.
Both of the men were later identified, and were in the lunch room at times between noon and 12:25.
The short man, Harold Norman, later said “there was someone else in there,” but he couldn’t remember who.
Oswald made a point of eating his lunch in the first floor lunch room, which was used by minority and disabled employees in that time of segregation.
Such an act helped to burnish his reputation as having far-left sympathies in a very conservative city.
Also, by witness statements and his own admission, Oswald remained in close proximity to the first-floor pay telephone around lunch time, as JFK’s motorcade drew closer to Dealey Plaza.
But according to the Warren Report, Oswald had no one to call but Marina, which raises the question of who else Oswald was calling.
Oswald might well have been waiting to make or receive one or more phone calls that day, regarding what he thought was his “mission” to Mexico City and on to Cuba, in the same way that Gilberto Lopez had been waiting for a phone call about going to Cuba on November 17.
Oswald himself later said that when he finished his lunch, he went up to the second floor, to get a Coke.
Jack Ruby was at the Dallas Morning News building, where he had been since approximately 11:45m.
Ruby was seen sitting on the second floor, in the only chair from which he could see the site where Kennedy would be killed.
However, both shortly before and after the shooting, Ruby was not seen in the offices, meaning that he could have slipped away for a time.
That was the time when JFK’s motorcade was passing by the Dallas Morning News offices— grabbing the attention of most of the workers there—and going through Dealey Plaza.
Only two people said they saw Ruby during the time he was missing from the newspaper offices.
Two men who worked for the city and county saw a man in the sixth-floor window, but he was staring and “transfixed” at the area of the grassy knoll, not at the motorcade.
Later, “there was a nun, a sister, with a bunch of schoolchildren . . . right by the car.
Arnold then went on the other side of the fence, on the grassy side of the knoll.
Warren Commission files confirm that no Secret Service agents were on the knoll, or in Dealey Plaza at all.
Lee Bowers, in the railroad tower overlooking the parking lot behind the grassy knoll’s fence, told attorney Mark Lane that he noticed two men behind the stockade fence, looking up toward Main and Houston.
One of the men was “middle-aged” and “fairly heavyset,” wearing a white shirt and dark trousers.
JFK’s driver, Secret Service agent William Greer, testified that “when they got to Houston from Main Street, he felt relieved.
For almost a minute, anyone in that perch would have a totally unobstructed shot at a slow-moving car, with the target getting larger with each passing second.
Carrico, would later describe the small wound in JFK’s throat as an entrance wound.
Kennedy aide David Powers, in the same limo as Kinney, was sure that the shot came from the right front— the grassy knoll—as was another Kennedy aide, Kenneth O’Donnell, who was in the limo with Powers.
Soldier Gordon Arnold, on the grassy knoll, said “the shot came from behind me, only inches over my left shoulder.
JEK’S LIMO, WHICH accelerated to a speed of around 11 miles an hour after making the turn onto Elm, slowed down.
Powers told my researcher that he felt they were riding into an ambush, which explains why JFK’s limo initially slowed so much.
John Connally turned to the right, because he thought the sound came from over his right shoulder.
Not seeing JFK out of the corner of his eye, Connally started to tum back toward his left.
Connally can be seen in the Zapruder film holding his Stetson hat well after JFK has already been hit in the throat; Connally’s wrist would have been shattered at that point if both men had been hit by the same bullet.
JFK’s limo continued to slow as the driver looked toward the back seat.
David Powers is adamant that “the same bullet that hit JFK did not hit John Connally,” meaning one of these shots probably hit Connally.
Secret Service agent Glenn Bennett, in the limo with Powers and O’ Donnell, “saw what appeared to be a nick in the back of President Kennedy’s coat below the shoulder.
At some point, a shot was fired that missed JFK’s limo entirely and struck a curb on Main Street near the bridge that forms the triple underpass with Elm, Main, and Commerce.
The shot knocked up a chip of concrete that struck an onlooker, James Teague.
Lee Bowers, in the railroad tower behind the grassy-knoll parking lot, noticed a flash of “light or smoke” from the two men behind the fence overlooking the grassy knoll.
Bowers said that he thought one of the men might have been standing on the bumper of a car backed up to the fence.
This shot blew away a large portion of the President’s skull, rendering him braindead, though his heart continued to beat.
Officer Hargis, riding on a motorcycle behind and slightly to the left of Kennedy, was splattered with blood and brain matter.
Powers and O’Donnell are certain that shot came from the front, from the fence on the grassy knoll.
It’s possible that a shot was fired from above and behind at almost exactly the same time, hitting Kennedy in the back.
Price saw a man (about twenty-five, with long dark hair) running full-speed away from the fence and toward the railroad yard.
He was wearing a white dress shirt, no tie, and khaki-colored trousers.
Sheriff Bill Decker, riding with Curry and Sorrells, radioed for all available men to head for the railroad yard behind the fence on the grassy knoll.
Photos clearly show that most of the crowd surged toward the grassy-knoll area, including many Dallas deputies.
He’d seen a flock of pigeons fly from the roof, and he wanted to check it out for a sniper.
The elevators were not working when Baker and Truly got to them, so they took the stairs to the second floor.
Baker asked Truly if he knew the man; Truly said that Oswald worked for him.
Officer Baker’s initial report stated that Oswald had been “drinking a Coke,” though for some reason, those words were later scratched out.
It’s unlikely Oswald raced down all seventy-two steps of the eight flights of stairs from the far corner of the sixth floor’s “sniper’s nest,” and bought a Coke, in the seventy-five to ninety seconds since the last shot.
The “sniper’s nest” was on the opposite comer of the building from the stairs, making Oswald’s alleged feat even more difficult.
Dallas Deputy Seymour Weitzman ran to the knoll after hearing the shots.
He was one of several law enforcement personnel who encountered someone behind the picket fence claiming to be a Secret Service agent, even though no real Secret Service agents were stationed there, or anywhere on the ground in Dealey Plaza.
Once Officer Smith was behind the fence, he noticed “the lingering smell of gunpowder,” as did many of the witnesses on or near the knoll.
Smith noticed a man near one of the cars, and, as he later testified to the Warren Commission, Smith pulled his pistol on him.
Smith later explained that the credentials “satisfied me and the deputy sheriff” who had joined him.
The Deputy, Seymour Weitzman, confirmed in his Warren Commission testimony that he had also met the fake Secret Service agent.
Officer Smith later explained his regret at allowing the phony agent to leave, because—instead of looking like a typically clean-cut, suit-and-tie Secret Service agent—this man “had on a sports shirt and sports pants.
But he had dirty fingernails and hands that looked like an auto mechanic’s hands,” indicating they were greasy.
Officer Smith searched the interior of a four-door, off-white 1960 or 1961 Chevrolet sedan parked by the fence, but not the trunk.
Deputy Seymour Weitzman also told the Warren Commission he saw “Secret Service, as well” behind the fence.
Weitzman later said the man who he thought was Secret Service showed him ID and said that he had everything under control.
Three other witnesses—Jean Hill, soldier Gordon Armold, and Malcolm Summers—also saw what they thought were Secret Service agents on the knoll.
Secret Service Chief James Rowley later confirmed that all Secret Service agents in the area of Dealey Plaza were riding in the motorcade and went to the hospital with the President—none were stationed on the ground.
As for those on the grassy knoll, twelve years later, journalist Michael Canfield talked to retired Deputy Seymour Weitzman, who’d “had a nervous breakdown” soon after the arrest of the Watergate burglars.
Canfield then “showed him a photo of Sturgis and Barker” because the government had investigated reports—later proved false—that Fiorini and E Howard Hunt had been photographed in Dealey Plaza after JFK’s murder.
Weitzman even said he’d be willing “to make a tape recorded statement for official investigators,” and he recorded a statement for Canfield, in which he reaffirmed the Barker identification.
Michael Canfield was party to a lawsuit involving E Howard Hunt in which he and his coauthor obtained a sworn deposition from Barker.
When their attorney asked Barker where he was on November 22, 1963, Barker initially remarked, “This is a question that came up during the Watergate Hearing,” but review of Barker’s Watergate testimony reveals no such questioning.
Barker claimed to be at home watching television at the time of the assassination, though he said no one but his family and friends could vouch for him that day.
If Barker “saw .. . how the whole thing happened,” he didn’t see it on live TV, or even on the news later that night, because the motorcade wasn’t broadcast live, even in Dallas.
The Zapruder film, so well known today, wasn’t shown on TV at all until almost twelve years after JFK’s murder, and at the time of Barker’s deposition, the film had appeared on TV only a handful of times.
Behind the picket fence on the grassy knoll, Deputy Weitzman and Officer Smith were soon joined by three railroad employees who had watched the motorcade from an overpass approximately fifty feet in front of the Presidential limousine.
The railroad men also saw all the footprints on the ground and two muddy footprints on the bumper of a station wagon parked there.
Around this time, a car was reported speeding through downtown Dallas, bearing a stolen Georgia license plate.
He described the man as in his early thirties, 5' 8"" to 5' 10"", dark hair and average weight, in a dark sports jacket open in front with lighter-colored pants, no hat or anything in his hands.
Deputy Roger Craig also saw the incident and said “T heard a shrill whistle and I turned around and saw a white male running down the hill from the direction of the” Depository, while “a light colored Rambler Station wagon” pulled over and the man “who had been running got into this car.
Deputy Craig “reported this incident at once to a Secret Service officer, whose name I do not know”—though again, no real Secret Service agents were in the area.
Craig saw Oswald at police headquarters later and thought that he had been the running man.
Some of the witnesses in Dealey Plaza soon started talking to authorities, and many of those on or near the grassy knoll said the shots came from there.
Jean Hill was one of the closest witnesses to JFK when the shooting started.
Six witnesses, including three in the motorcade, said they smelled gunpowder around the knoll.
Those in the motorcade were Senator Ralph Yarborough, Congressman Ray Roberts, and the Dallas mayor’s wife, plus there were two police officers and a civilian who were on the ground near the knoll.
But even the number of shots witnesses reported—two, three, four, even five or more shots—varied widely.
Several witnesses near the knoll said they heard only two shots, perhaps indicating the number fired from there.
In an interesting parallel, investigator Josiah Thompson found that, “with no exceptions, all those witnesses who were deep inside the Depository (either at work or in hallways) report hearing fewer than three shots”—either just one shot or two.
However, the Depository had not attracted as much notice as the area behind the grassy knoll and was not sealed off until twenty-eight minutes after the shooting.
A witness named Howard Brennan, whose statements to authorities would be very inconsistent, later became the star witness in making the case against Oswald.
Though he initially appeared to have gone toward the knoll after the shots, he later claimed to have seen Oswald fire a shot from the Depository.
As Anthony Summers notes, Brennan couldn’t identify Oswald in a lineup on the night of November 22, even though a month later he said he could, and then, three weeks after that, said he wasn’t sure.
Finally, Brennan told the Warren Commission he was sure he had seen Oswald in the Depository window, even though Brennan’s vision was questionable.
The initial lookout for a suspect, apparently based on Brennan’s description of the man in the window, was for a man older and heavier than Oswald.
One was Dallas Times Herald photographer Bob Jackson, who would later win a Pulitzer Prize for his famous photo of Ruby shooting Oswald.
Couch said he saw about a foot of rifle being pulled back into the window.
Neither Couch nor Jackson immediately contacted police about what he had seen, which even a Warren Commission counsel considered unusual, especially for a newsman.
Within minutes of the shooting, Oswald had walked out of the building without being noticed—and if Oswald could leave the building without being noticed, anyone else could, too.
According to most accounts, Oswald walked north one block, then turned right and went east on Pacific.
He swung back to Elm Street and paused in front of the Blue Front Inn, seven blocks east of the assassination site.
When the bus became stalled in traffic, Oswald asked for a transfer and got off the bus at the same time as another passenger.
He paused in front of the Greyhound bus terminal, three blocks from where he had left the bus.
One of the men arrested at the Dal-Tex was a young man wearing a black leather jacket and black gloves.
The other man arrested at the Dal-Tex was Eugene Hale Brading (aka Jim Braden), from Los Angeles.
Brading was on parole at the time, and some authors have alleged that he was a courier for the Mafia.
Brading sometimes did business from the seventeenth floor of the Pierre Marquette Building in New Orleans, and “in his work for Marcello, Ferrie worked out of” a different office on the same floor.
Some of Braden’s activities the day before the assassination parallel those of Jack Ruby.
After giving police only his “Jim Braden” alias, Brading would be released within hours.
In all, at least twelve men—possibly more—were detained by police, then released.
Tippit, who had been parked at” a Texaco service “station watching traffic . . . suddenly sped off towards Oak Cliff,” according to “three attendants” at the station interviewed by former FBI agent William Turner.
At Parkland Hospital, JFK was rushed into the trauma room, where faint signs of life were detected.
The first doctor to see Kennedy, and the only one to see him before his clothes were removed, Dr.
Charles J Carrico, noticed a small, round bullet-entry wound in his throat, above his shirt and tie.
At the small, round bullet-entry wound in his throat, a neat tracheotomy incision was made.
Emergency room doctors had no immediate need to turn Kennedy’s body over, so they didn’t notice the wound in his back.
JFK’s limo was left unattended in the parking lot and was soon surrounded by people.
J Edgar Hoover called Robert Kennedy, who was having lunch at his home in Virginia, to tell him that “the President has been shot.
Two men working at a record shop in Oak Cliff said Tippit hurried into the shop, made a call, apparently got no answer, and hung up after about a minute and rushed from the store.
Dallas reporter Earl Golz interviewed the two men, whose shop was one block from the Texas Theatre (where Oswald would be apprehended) and seven blocks from where Tippit would be killed.
Despite the extreme severity of the President’s head wound, which left him no chance of meaningful survival, the Dallas doctors had done everything humanly possible to save him, but to no avail.
John F Kennedy received the last rites of the Catholic Church and was pronounced dead at Parkland Hospital.
But the House Select Committee looked into that as well and found there was not a motorcade planned for Miami.
After retiring from the CIA, he would later be convicted as one of the Watergate burglars.
In contrast to Hunt, Kennedy aides like Harry Williams had only positive things to say about McCord.
The identities of the actual tramps were later released by the Dallas Police and confirmed by photos of the men.
While they had a perfect alibi for JFK’s murder, it’s ironic that they also had no way to know for sure what had happened in Dallas.
It would be up to Guy Banister, who was not in court, to monitor the news and field any reports from Dallas.
JFK’s death would not be announced for another thirty minutes, but by 1:00 m.
We may never know how much of that mission was real, and how much had been simply made up or exaggerated by men like Ferrie and Banister.
It most likely involved leaving work after lunch and going to a prearranged meeting at the Texas Theatre, as part of getting to Mexico and on to Cuba.
As someone who had accepted the risks involved in defecting to Russia at the height of the Cold War, Oswald would have known the value of following orders and the danger of his Current situation.
At 1:00m. in the Oak Cliff neighborhood of Dallas, Earlene Roberts, the housekeeper at Oswald’s rooming house, saw Oswald run inside.
At 1:02, Roberts saw a Dallas Police car pull slowly up to the rooming house, park directly in front of it, sound its horn twice, and then slowly pull away.
However, ex-FBI agent William Turner points out that Tippit’s uniform jacket “was on a hanger in the car’s window,” and she could have mistaken that for a second officer.
Oswald had probably changed shirts, to a long-sleeved rust-brown shirt with a white T-shirt beneath it.
The housekeeper last saw him waiting at a stop for a bus that would take him back downtown.
Two witnesses at the Texas Theatre, Butch Burroughs and Jack Davis, said they observed Oswald inside the theater as early as 1:15, according to researcher Larry Harris.
Oswald, the ex-serviceman tured killer, then pulled out his pistol, shot the officer, and fled.
Another witness saw a man with a long coat, ending just about at his hands, looking at Tippit’s body, then running to his car and driving off.
Also, most witnesses say that the man who talked with Tippit had been walking west—toward Oswald’s rooming house, not away from it.
Numerous problems with the evidence in the Tippit slaying have been noted for decades.
For example, instead of immediately fleeing, the shooter took the time to empty four spent shells from his revolver at the crime scene.
Two of the shells were made by Remington-Peters and two by Winchester-Western.
However, of the four bullets taken from Tippit’s body, just one was RemingtonPeters and three were made by Winchester-Western.
There were also problems with the chain of custody of the shells, as well as with the initial descriptions of the gun itself and a discarded jacket.
Witnesses sometimes changed their stories, possibly because they were intimidated or threatened.
For example, two days after the Tippit slaying, a policeman told witness Acquilla Clemons that she might get hurt if she told anyone else what she saw, and she never spoke to the Warren Commission about it.
The chief suspect in the Reynolds shooting was a heroin addict named Darrell Wayne Gamer.
Though Garner drunkenly boasted of the shooting and confessed to being at the scene, he was released when provided with an alibi by Nancy Mooney, a former employee of Jack Ruby.
Another Tippit slaying witness, Domingo Benavides, “was anonymously threatened after the Tippit killing,” and “his brother Edward was murdered by an unknown assailant” soon afterward.
Carlos Marcello’s men in Dallas were very capable of having key witnesses intimidated or attacked.
Aside from Clemons, the Warren Commission did not hear from two other important witnesses.
According to researcher Larry Harris, “Frank Wright, who lived on the next block . . . heard gunshots, went out to see what was happening and saw a man Standing near a police car.
He insisted the man ran and jumped in a gray car parked beyond” Tippit’s car “and sped away west on Tenth Street.
The House Select Committee on Assassinations said, “This action, which is commonly described as a coup de grace, is more indicative of an execution,” something one might expect of an experienced hit man.
The key witness for the Warren Commission regarding Oswald and the Tippit slaying was Helen Markham.
Even the Dallas Assistant District Attorney at the time, William Alexander, later told Anthony Summers that when it came to the Tippit slaying, “Oswald’s movements did not add up then and they do not add up now.
Jack Anderson, one of America’s top investigative journalists in the 1970s, later obtained information from Johnny Rosselli on several occasions.
Before Ruby had to do the job himself, he apparently tried to persuade one of his many police contacts to kill Oswald.
In fact, the night of Tippit’s death, Ruby met with one of Tippit’s police-officer friends for more than an hour.
Thousands of pages have been written just about the Tippit slaying, so we cannot cover here all of the evidence and the many problems with the theory of Oswald as a “lone assassin” of Tippit.
While Tippit was talking to Oswald, the officer might have been shot by someone nearby who was unconnected with Oswald.
Oswald might have already been inside the Texas Theatre at the time of Tippit’s death, meaning the officer had been shot by someone else.
At 1:22, officers on the scene of the Tippit shooting broadcast a description of the assailant, describing him as a white male about thirty years old, 5' 8"", “black wavy hair,” slender build, wearing a white jacket, white shirt, and dark slacks.
However, another call came in, erroneously reporting that the suspect was at a library, where police converged.
Suddenly, police were called to the Texas Theatre, and the Abundant Life Temple was never searched.
Reportedly, the Temple had recently been the site of activity by Cuban exiles.
According to the Warren Commission version, Johnny Calvin Brewer, the owner of a shoe store six blocks away from the slaying site, heard a report on the radio about the shooting.
He looked up to see a man hide from a passing police car by stepping into his doorway.
As noted earlier, witness Jack Davis said that once in the theater, Oswald sat next to him for a few minutes; then Oswald moved to sit next to another person for a few minutes; then Oswald got up and went to the lobby, as though looking for someone.
An alternate version proposed by some historians says that Oswald got worried when he couldn’t find his contact, so he walked out to the lobby and looked around.
Oswald saw a police car go by and ducked into the doorway of the shoe store, then went back into the theater to await his contact’s arrival.
In any event, police broadcast an alarm at 1:45 to converge on the Texas Theatre.
At approximately 1:48, police arrived at the theater, and once inside, the shoe store owner pointed out Oswald to the officers.
First, an officer frisked two men sitting in the center of the theater before proceeding to Oswald.
Other evidence calls into question what ID Oswald had on him at the time, and whether an additional wallet was found at the Tippit slaying scene.
Later, dollar bills torn in half would be found in Oswald’s room, indicating he had used the “matching half” technique before.
Antonio Veciana told my research associate how one of his CIA contacts (the CIA officer who originally recruited David Atlee Phillips for the CIA) used the technique of a torn-in-half dollar bill to identify his contact.
CIA memos show they were using that technique in 1963, as part of the AMWORLD portion of the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
The “matching half” technique was also used by the heroin ring Michel Victor Mertz shared with Marcello and Trafficante, most recently in a major bust that occurred in Laredo at the time of Oswald’s return from Mexico.
Recall that John Martino said that Oswald was supposed to meet his “contact” at the Texas Theatre, and then later be eliminated.
Martino himself was emblematic of how the mob manipulated Oswald, since he was both a CIA asset and a mob functionary for Santo Trafficante; Martino also knew Carlos Marcello.
The use of movie theaters as clandestine meeting places for CIA missions was confirmed years later by David Atlee Phillips, the CIA officer Oswald had allegedly met with less than three months before the assassination.
In his 1977 autobiography, Phillips described his own use of just such a technique, where he would meet a contact at a movie theater, whom he’d know because he carried with him a previously arranged item and recognized a prearranged coded phrase.
He had $13.87 on him and may also have had David Ferrie’s library card, as explained shortly.
At 2:30, a police call went out to look for a 1957 Chevy sedan, last seen in the vicinity of the Tippit slaying.
The alert said that the car’s occupants should be checked for illegal weapons.
In a sea bag they found a tiny Minox spy camera, three other cameras, a 15-power telescope, two pairs of field glasses, a compass, and a pedometer.
At approximately 3:00, police arrived at the home of Ruth Hyde Paine, where Oswald’s wife, Marina, lived and Oswald had spent the previous night.
Two weeks earlier, Marina had noticed what appeared to be Oswald’s rifle wrapped in a blanket in the garage.
The case against the ex-serviceman who kept his rifle wrapped in a blanket and shot a patrolman on the street seemed cinched, except for one more important piece of evidence.
The “magic bullet,” the cornerstone of the “single bullet theory” required for one lone presidential assassin, was found at Parkland Hospital around 1:45, just before Oswald was arrested at the Texas Theatre.
This was the almost pristine bullet that supposedly caused JFK’s back and throat wounds and all of Connally’s bone-shattering injuries.
According to Henry Hurt, citing medical reports, it “‘literally shattered’ his fifth rib, leaving five inches of it ‘pulverized,’” and then “struck Connally’s right wrist” and “shattered the radius bone at the largest point”—all while, according to the Warren Commission’s “single bullet theory,” Connally continued to grip “his white Stetson hat” with that hand.
The “magic bullet” then buried itself in Connally’s thigh, from which it supposedly later fell out, emerging in almost perfect condition.
Chapter Two noted numerous problems that showed why the single bullet theory was physically impossible, and the bullet mostly likely planted for a Parkland employee to find.
Around seventeen minutes before that “magic bullet” was found, Jack Ruby was at Parkland Hospital, where he spoke with noted journalist Seth Kantor.
Another witness saw also Ruby at Parkland around that time, though for some reason Ruby later denied being there.
The police and the Warren Commission seemed determine to pin Tippit’s murder on the obvious suspect they had in custody, Oswald.
According to author Larry Harris, the police lineups regarding Oswald and the Tippit slaying have been described as “a travesty.
AT 1:33 P.M., White House press aide Malcolm Kilduff in Dallas officially announced that JFK was dead.
Five minutes later, at 1:38m., CBS anchor Walter Cronkite told a national television audience the tragic news.
Cronkite abruptly stopped describing the young suspect when he was handed a memo that confirmed JFK’s death.
Cronkite’s emotional words reporting that the President was dead is an oft-repeated clip, but overlooked by most is that Cronkite’s remark about the young man in custody didn’t refer to the twentyfour-year-old Oswald’s capture at the Texas Theatre.
It couldn’t have, since the newsman made his fateful pronouncement about JFK at 1:37m.—but police weren’t even called to the theater until 1:45, and the first officers didn’t arrive until 1:48m.
After reading it, the shocked judge announced that JFK had been shot and might be dead.
For Marcello and David Ferrie, that hour would be their first chance to find out more about what had happened in Dallas.
Guy Banister was not in his office that day during regular business hours, so he was probably available to tell them whatever he’d learned.
While all three would have been happy at JFK’s death, the fact that Oswald was still alive and in police custody presented a huge potential problem.
However, Robert Kennedy’s lead Justice Department prosecutor on the case, John Diuguid, told me that while David Ferrie had been in the courtroom with Marcello’s team before the break, Ferrie wasn’t in court when everyone else returned.
Just to be sure he avoided conviction, Marcello had also made sure the key witness against him was threatened during the trial.
Consequently, the jury found Marcello “not guilty” on both counts of perjury and conspiracy.
If Marcello didn’t want to face far more serious charges than those he had just escaped, he had important loose ends left to deal with.
In Washington, DC, Harry Williams had returned from lunch to resume his meeting with the CIA officials.
According to CIA Director John McCone’s desk calendar, now at the National Archives, McCone had lunch that day, starting at 1:00m. , with Richard Helms, Lyman Kirkpatrick, and two other officials.
By the time Williams’s meeting resumed, everyone had heard that JFK had been shot.
Williams told me that the highest official at the meeting at this time, apparently Lyman Kirkpatrick, began eyeing him with suspicion, as if some aspect of JFK’s death made the CIA official think a Cuban exile was involved.
Williams said he was trying to play it cool, but he felt that perhaps Kirkpatrick took his demeanor the wrong way.
Within minutes, the meeting broke up with all plans on hold, and Williams retumed to his room at Washington’s Ebbitt Hotel.
SOMEONE IN THE Presidential party in Dallas called Robert Kennedy at his Hickory Hill estate in Virginia, to tell him his brother was dead.
That was followed by a flood of calls—from Lyndon Johnson, Hoover, and others—over the four phones in RFK’s large house.
While CIA Director John McCone was en route to the estate, RFK made an intriguing call to CIA headquarters, according to journalists George Bailey and Seymour Freidin.
After John McCone arrived at RFK’s estate, probably between 2:45 and 3:00 , Mahoney writes that Robert “went out on the lawn with him.
Of course, neither McCone or RFK knew about the ongoing ClA—Mafia plots, or the assassination side of the Cubela and QJWIN operations.
RFK’s question likely referred to some aspect of the JFK—Almeida coup plan that both men knew about, particularly the AMWORLD portion with exile leader Manuel Artime.
By 5:00 , McCone was back at CIA Headquarters, meeting with officials who knew about the JFK—Almeida coup plan, including Richard Helms and Lyman Kirkpatrick.
Helms told neither man that he had continued the CIA— Mafia plots to kill Fidel, or that a CIA officer had been meeting with Roland Cubela about Fidel’s assassination at the very moment that JFK was shot.
According to the Church Committee, the case officer “tells AMLASH the explosives and rifles with telescopic sights will be provided.
The case officer also offers AMLASH the poison pen device but AMLASH is dissatisfied with it.
IN HAVANA, FRENCH journalist Jean Daniel was having lunch with Fidel Castro, discussing JFK’s proposal for talks between the two countries.
However, Hoffa’s mood changed after he got a call from a Teamster official in Washington.
Hoffa was furious that two Teamster leaders at the union’s Washington headquarters had closed the office, lowered its flag to half-mast, and sent condolences to the President’s widow.
Hoffa yelled at his secretary for crying, hung up on the people in Washington, and left the building.
The Teamster organizer was an associate of Frank Chavez, a deadly henchman for Jimmy Hoffa.
FBI reports also linked Chavez to Jack Ruby, and Chavez would later make a documented attempt to kill Robert Kennedy.
SHORTLY BEFORE 4:00m. in Washington, DC, reporter Haynes Johnson had joined Harry Williams in his room at the Ebbitt Hotel.
Williams had been helping Johnson with his forthcoming book on the Bay of Pigs.
Haynes was also working closely with Manuel Artime on the book, even though at the time there was friction between Artime and Williams.
Though Haynes was friends with both RFK and Williams, the journalist hadn’t been told about the JFK— Almeida coup plan.
In the hotel room, Williams was on the phone with Robert Kennedy, who told him that the JEK—Almeida coup plan was now on hold, so Williams wouldn’t be leaving for Guantanamo the next day.
Hearing that Haynes was also in the room, RFK then asked to speak to him, since he was also a friend of RFK’s.
Haynes didn’t mention RFK’s comment to Harry, and RFK never said anything about it—or said anything similar—to Williams.
It’s important to stress that both Haynes Johnson and Williams agree that RFK said, “One of your guys did it’—killed JFK—to Haynes, not to Williams.
Haynes confirmed that to me in 1992, and again in May 2007, and it’s in his detailed 1983 Washington Post article.
Williams said RFK never voiced any suspicion like that to him on that day or any other.
A close Kennedy associate— who knew RFK, Haynes, and Williams—backed up Williams’s statement.
The evidence indicates that RFK’s comment related to Manuel Artime’s operations, which we now know had ties to associates of Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, and Johnny Rosselli.
That would also explain why RFK would make the “your guys” comment to Haynes and not Williams, due to the friction that had developed between Williams and Artime.
Haynes Johnson would later write that within a year or so after JFK’s death, he heard that Artime was involved in the drug trade, something that was later confirmed by United States officials.
In addition, Haynes also wrote about one of Artime’s protégés during Watergate, who became a major Miami drug lord when Trafficante was still powerful there.
Hoover probably knew the latter because the FBI had assisted Naval Intelligence with its tight surveillance on Oswald.
This information almost slipped out right after the assassination, when James Hosty, the Dallas FBI agent assigned to Oswald, allegedly told Dallas Police “officer Jack Revill on November 22 . . . that Oswald . . . had been under observation.
AT 7:00 P.M. , NBC news anchor Chet Huntley introduced the audio portion of Oswald’s August 21, 1963, interview with WDSU-TV in New Orleans.
By 7:43, NBC was running the video portion of the interview as well, allowing millions of viewers to see and hear Oswald state, “I would definitely say that I am a Marxist” and then outlining the aims of the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
LIKE CARLOS MARCELLO, Santo Trafficante had a documented celebration the day that JFK was assassinated.
Trafficante had earlier arranged to meet his lawyer, Frank Ragano, and Ragano’s girlfriend—Nancy Young — for dinner at Tampa’s International Inn.
JFK had delivered a speech there just four days earlier, and the irony was not lost on Trafficante or Ragano, who realized that in “the same hotel lobby I was crossing to meet Santo, Kennedy had shaken hands and waved at admirers” earlier that week.
Ragano found the normally crowded restaurant almost empty that Friday night.
As Trafficante drank Chivas Regal, he proclaimed, “This is like lifting a load of stones off my shoulders . . . now they’ ll get off my back, off Carlos’s back, and off back.
I’m glad for sake because Johnson is sure as hell going to remove Bobby.
Ragano didn’t realize that Trafficante knew about the JFK—Almeida coup plan and that the United States government had been making plans to invade Cuba for months.
According to FBI reports, “in December 1963” an FBI source “witnessed a meeting between Santo Trafficante, Frank Ragano,” and another Tampa mobster.
The mobster he named was a business partner of one of Trafficante’s closest relatives.
Also, the club in Tampa where the source said the meeting occurred was well known for being linked to the Mafia.
Confirmation for the meeting comes from the FBI file, which says that independent of the inmate, the FBI “had already received information regarding an incident similar to that reported by” the inmate.
Hoover soon began to exert pressure on senior FBI officials to complete their investigation and issue a factual report supporting the conclusion that Oswald was the lone assassin.
Thus, proclaiming Oswald the “lone assassin” kept it a local and not a federal prosecution—and kept it out of the hands of Robert Kennedy’s Justice Department.
Hoover’s early decision to pronounce Oswald a lone assassin—even before JFK’s autopsy—no doubt signaled to many agents in the field how their investigation should proceed.
There was a shift from agents pursuing every lead vigorously, to focusing on Oswald’s guilt and claiming he had acted alone.
In addition, because of the quick decision that there wasn’t a conspiracy, there was no large manhunt in Dallas for other conspirators.
Roads and airports weren’t closed, making escaping the city far less difficult for those involved in the assassination.
There are unconfirmed reports of various private planes taking off from small airports around Dallas, particularly Redbird, but nothing conclusive.
The mood at Guy Banister’s office had been joyous earlier on November 22.
Though his temporary secretary said Banister wasn’t there “at all that day,” she said that Banister’s mistress, Delphine Roberts, was in the office.
After the secretary left, that evening Banister finally made it in to the office after visiting a neighborhood bar.
He was preceded by Jack Martin, a privatedetective associate and drinking buddy of Banister’s.
According to Delphine Roberts, Martin arrived first and went to a filing cabinet.
Banister then pulled out a pistol and struck Martin on the head several times, causing him to bleed.
Martin later called an assistant District Attorney to say that Ferrie was a longtime colleague and tutor of Lee Oswald.
Since Martin had fallen out with Ferrie over a fraudulent ecclesiastical order (the Holy Apostolic Catholic Church of North America) and was an alcoholic, there was some doubt at the time about his reliability.
But Martin’s actions would set off a chain of events that led to Ferrie’s arrest by Monday, November 25.
David Ferrie’s library card was apparently found on Oswald at the time of his arrest.
On Sunday, November 24, Gill would stop by Ferrie’s residence and leave word that “Ferrie should contact him, Gill, and he would represent him as his attorney.
That was on Sunday, but according to the House Select Committee on Assassinations, “Oswald’s former landlady in New Orleans, Mrs.
Within days, the Secret Service would ask Ferrie whether he had ever loaned Oswald his library card.
But on Friday, November 22, Ferrie didn’t want the authorities to connect him to Oswald in any way, so he took two young men with him on a sudden trip to Texas.
David Ferrie’s travels and actions on the two-day trip were considered so bizarre and unusual by investigators that it’s possible that his goal was to retrieve his library card.
Ferrie needed the card, so that he could produce it if he were ever asked for it by investigators in New Orleans.
Shortly before his death, Ferrie told the staff of New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison that “he had some business for Gill to take care of” when he suddenly went to Texas.
Ferrie told the FBI that “he had been in New Orleans until at least 9:00m. on November 22, celebrating Marcello’s trial victory at the Royal Orleans” hotel.
Ferrie suddenly decided to drive to Houston through a heavy rainstorm, accompanied by two young men.
They visited a Houston ice-skating rink, where Ferrie “spent a great deal of time at a pay telephone, making and receiving calls,” according to Anthony Summers.
In the early morning hours of November 23, Ferrie checked in to the Alamotel in Houston, which was owned by Carlos Marcello.
While still registered at the Houston Alamotel, Ferrie drove to Galveston and checked into another motel there.
Jack Ruby made several calls to Galveston around the time of Ferrie’s arrival there.
Congressional investigators couldn’t understand why hotels in Houston and Galveston both listed Ferrie as staying there during the same twelve-hour period.
One explanation is that someone in Galveston or Houston may have been bringing David Ferrie his library card.
For example, there were men in each city who had just come from Dallas, shortly before Ferrie’s arrival.
One was an associate of Jack Ruby, and the other was alleged mob associate Eugene Hale Brading, who had been arrested in Dealey Plaza just after JFK’s assassination.
I’m not asserting that either of those two men delivered Ferrie’s card but simply explaining how it could have been done.
GUY BANISTER MIGHT have been able to use his law-enforcement or intelligence contacts to get someone on the Dallas Police force to pull the card.
Banister could have evoked Ferrie’s work for the CIA and with Varona’s CIAbacked anti-Castro Cuban group, giving rise to the “for the good of the country” excuse offered to Dallas reporters to stop their reporting on Ferrie.
Alternately, Marcello’s associates might have been able to use their Dallas Police contacts to get the card.
Mobster Joe Civello ran Dallas for Marcello, and Dallas Police Sergeant Patrick Dean boasted to Peter Dale Scott about his “longtime relationship” with Civello.
In fact, according to Scott, “Dean would be in charge of security in the Dallas basement when Oswald was murdered” and later fail “a lie detector test about Ruby’s access to” it.
ACCORDING TO DALLAS FBI agent James Hosty, after JFK’s murder in Dallas, “the Pentagon ordered us to Defense Condition 3, more commonly known as Def Con 3—the equivalent of loading and locking your weapon, and then placing your finger on the trigger.
Peter Dale Scott points out that Hosty wrote “that at the time of Oswald’s arrest, fully armed warplanes were sent screaming toward Cuba.
Just before they entered Cuban airspace, they were hastily called back.
That was the very base that JFK had visited just four days earlier, for a secret session with the Strike Force Commander and other leaders.
On Friday afternoon and evening, national security concerns about JFK’s assassination reverberated throughout the United States government, as information, misinformation, and possible disinformation about Oswald started to be uncovered.
It appeared that someone had fed disinformation about Oswald to the FBI and military intelligence, which served to incriminate him and focus attention on Cuba.
JACK RUBY CONSTANTLY stalked Oswald at the police station, while continuing to try to find a policeman willing to silence Oswald for him.
Ruby’s association with hundreds of policemen made him well suited to the task.
Ruby admitted later that he was packing a pistol when he went to police headquarters that night.
At 6:00m., Ruby was seen on the third floor of police headquarters by John Rutledge, a reporter for the Dallas Morning News.
At 7:00m., Ruby spoke to Detective August Eberhardt at Dallas Police headquarters, on the thirdfloor hallway.
Finally, at some time after that and before 8:00m., Ruby tried to open the door to Captain Fritz’s office, where Oswald was being interrogated.
If Ruby had managed to get into Fritz’s office while Oswald was there, it’s likely he would have done what he did finally do on Sunday—shoot Oswald.
He called the home of his friend Gordon McLendon, owner of KLIF radio, who was close to David Atlee Phillips and had a connection to Marcello.
Ruby then called a radio DJ, offering to help him set up a telephone interview with District Attorney Henry Wade.
Around 9:50m., Ruby even dropped by Temple Searith Israel, where Ruby seemed depressed when he talked with Rabbi Hillel Silverman.
During Oswald’s interrogation, around 10:30m., one of the officers got a phone call from Ruby, who offered to bring them some sandwiches.
By 11:30, Ruby was back at the police station, and a policeman spotted him among the throngs of reporters.
Finally, after midnight, Ruby would get a chance to see Oswald—but he would be too far away to have a clear shot.
Ruby was packing his pistol, and carrying some sandwiches, when he attended a thirdfloor briefing at Dallas Police headquarters.
There, Chief Curry and District Attorney Henry Wade announced that Oswald would be shown to newsmen at a press conference in the basement.
Ruby attended the chaotic press conference in a basement assembly room, where Oswald was shown to reporters to counter stories that he had been beaten.
DURING THE ROWDY press conference, Oswald said in response to a question that he “didn’t shoot anybody, no sir” and correctly stated that he had not been charged with shooting the President.
Oswald also asked for someone to “come forward to give me legal assistance,” possibly an appeal to one of his contacts, like Banister or Phillips, to clear him with the authorities.
Two lawyers connected to Marcello received calls about representing Oswald, but Oswald never saw a lawyer while he was in custody.
Interestingly, Chief Curry later said that “one would think Oswald had been trained in interrogation techniques and resisting interrogation techniques,” and that Curry believed Oswald could have been some type of agent.
Curry’s remark was based on the way Oswald handled himself during the twelve hours of interrogation that weekend, none of which were recorded or stenographically transcribed.
Assistant DA Alexander said that he “was amazed that a person so young would have had the self-control he had.
For someone like Oswald, who had withstood KGB pressure and scrutiny in Russia for years, dealing with the Dallas Police for a couple of days—until someone came forward to help him—would have presented few problems.
RICHARD D MAHONEY wrote that “ubsequent to the Kennedy assassination, Ruby, a man described by Rosselli himself as ‘one of our boys,’ stalked, murdered, and thereby silenced Oswald.
Ruby continued trying to fulfill his obligation to Carlos Marcello throughout the weekend.
After the press conference, Ruby went to the radio station, and left around 2:00m., to meet a Dallas Police officer and his girlfriend, a dancer for Ruby, at Simpson’s Garage.
There are numerous discrepancies about the duration of the meeting and the participants, but the police officer said the meeting with Ruby lasted two to three hours.
THE TWO SHOOTERS supplied by Carlos Marcello returned to Joe Campisi’s restaurant shortly after the shooting, where they remained until he helped them leave Dallas.
However, those three—and likely Bernard Barker—were probably not the only men in Dallas who had been working in Dealey Plaza for Marcello and Trafficante.
Just as they’d carefully planned JFK’s murder so it could take place in any of three cities, they probably had additional personnel assisting with JFK’s murder in Dallas.
There is an unconfirmed report of Rosselli being in Tampa on November 20, before flying to New Orleans the next day.
Plumlee told former FBI agent William Turner that Rosselli stayed in Tampa the night of November 20, before being flown in a private plane to New Orleans on November 21.
He says the group then traveled to Houston, before going on to Dallas on the moming of November 22.
Plumlee says the flight was authorized by “military intelligence” with “the CIA” in a supporting role, and it was apparently related to the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Castro.
Although Plumlee did talk to government investigators in the mid-1970s, some have criticized his credibility.
However, three additional mob associates independently placed Johnny Rosselli in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
Most of the accounts also include Chicago hit man Charles Nicoletti, whom the Associated Press said had joined the ClA—Mafia plots in the fall of 1963.
Unfortunately, none of the accounts meet my usual standards for reliability and independent corroboration, so I consider those accounts only suggestive.
It is worth noting that no solid alibi for either Rosselli or Nicoletti has emerged for November 22, despite the fact that these allegations have been public for many years.
Cuban officials have claimed that Trafficante bodyguard and henchman Herminio Diaz was in Dallas on November 22 and took part in JFK’s murder.
Diaz had recently become a CIA asset and as noted in Chapter Seventeen, would be linked to a ClA—Mafia plot to kill Fidel just over two weeks after JFK’s murder.
Diaz had a dark complexion, which could explain some of the witness statements from Dealey Plaza.
Again, there is no independent corroboration or evidence for Diaz’s involvement in JFK’s murder, aside from the statement of a captured Cuban exile named Tony Cuesta.
The Cuban exile also named Eladio del Valle—a drug trafficking associate of Trafficante and Roland Masferrer—as being part of the JFK plot.
As noted earlier, in 1967 del Valle would be brutally murdered the same night that David Ferrie died.
If Oswald had truly been a Communist, doing it for some ideological reason, he avoided claiming credit or making his ideological points when he had the chance at his Friday-night press conference.
If Oswald hoped to get away, killing Kennedy and then trying to escape by bus and cab—to get to a rooming house where he had no car or driver’s license—also makes no sense.
Oswald would have known that once he left work, he would quickly be fingered for the crime, and he had no way to get out of Dallas without taking public transportation.
The thought of the Mafia having an inexperienced hit man flee a major assassination using public transportation is ludicrous.
If Oswald had suddenly turned against the US, he blew his chance to expose the United States to the world by keeping quiet about United States anti-Castro efforts at his Friday-night press conference.
Instead, after reviewing all the evidence for almost twenty-five years, my view is that Oswald was a low-level part of some United States effort against Castro, and he had been told his cover must be maintained at all costs to avoid blowing an important operation, one that could cost lives if exposed.
Oswald was finally charged with killing JFK at 1:30m. ; he had been charged with killing Tippit earlier, at 7:30m.
The murderous ex-serviceman in Rosselli’s film even kept one of his long-barreled weapons hidden away, wrapped in a blanket, just like Oswald is said to have done.
It was also possible to enter the Depository shortly before the motorcade, through the back door in the loading dock area.
CCHAPIER 16 Another Mafia Murder in Dallas As NIGHT FELL in Washington, DC, on November 22, 1963, Robert Kennedy went to Bethesda Naval Medical Center along with Jackie and a caravan that included the hearse with JFK’s body.
During the twenty-minute ride, RFK heard Jackie’s account of the shooting.
At Bethesda, the man really calling the shots was Robert Kennedy, from the family suite on the hospital’s seventeenth floor.
Robert was part of a group that included Jackie as well as JFK aides Dave Powers and Kenneth O’Donnell.
RFK was no doubt shocked when he heard what Powers and O’Donnell had seen from their vantage point in the motorcade, in the limo directly behind JFK’s.
As Powers told my research associate—and as Powers and O’Donnell both confirmed to former House Speaker Tip O’Neill—they clearly saw shots from the front, from the grassy knoll.
Powers and O’Donnell had known and worked with RFK for years; the Attorney General would have trusted their observations.
In addition, White House physician Admiral George Burkley—the only doctor at Bethesda who had also seen JFK at Parkland—later stated that he believed JFK had been killed by more than one gunman.
Entire books have been written about JFK’s autopsy, which several government commissions studied over the course of thirty-five years, yet substantial controversies remain.
The location and size of wounds on some autopsy X-rays and photos don’t match what others show, or what some at Parkland or Bethesda observed.
Even worse, crucial evidence is missing, ranging from photos and tissue samples to JFK’s brain.
At the root of these controversies is the fact that Robert Kennedy controlled the autopsy.
All agree that the Bethesda doctors didn’t realize JFK had been shot in the throat, since a tracheotomy incision obscured that wound.
The Bethesda doctors did find JFK’s small back wound, so they initially assumed he had been shot once in the back and once in the head, and that Connally had been hit by a separate shot.
James Humes learn about the throat wound, and he burmed his first draft of the autopsy report on Sunday, November 24.
Beyond those key points, much has been disputed over the years and remains controversial, ranging from what the autopsy doctors did or didn’t do—and why —to what type of casket JFK arrived in.
Accounting for much of the controversy were the national security implications of the autopsy.
The President’s assassination was a nightmare scenario beyond anything contemplated for the Cuba Contingency Plans that Alexander Haig and others had been working on.
Oswald was still alive, so the results of JFK’s official autopsy would have to be part of a public trial—and there are many indications a hasty “national security” autopsy was performed before the “official” autopsy.
Robert Kennedy’s concerns about the exposure of the Almeida coup plan would have been shared by other officials in the know, like Joint Chiefs Chairman General Maxwell Taylor, who had ultimate authority over a military facility like Bethesda.
One of the main points of RFK’s subcommittee’s making the Cuba Contingency Plans—the one about the possible “assassination of American officials’*—had been to avoid a situation in which the premature release of information could back the President into a corner and cause a crisis that could go nuclear.
The thinking behind that planning appears to have been implemented to deal with JFK’s death.
Some have tried to claim that shadowy generals, the CIA, or J Edgar Hoover ran the autopsy without Robert Kennedy’s knowledge, but much evidence shows that’s simply not true.
Several of the people at the autopsy made it clear that JFK’s personal physician, Admiral Burkley, wielded a heavy hand at the autopsy on RFK’s behalf.
Jerrol F Custer, the radiology technician who took X-rays in the autopsy room with a portable X-ray machine, stated that Admiral Burkley said, “I am JFK’s personal physician.
Since the Commandant of the Bethesda facility, Admiral Calvin Galloway, was present in the autopsy room, Burkley sometimes conveyed RFK’s wishes through him.
Burkley himself stated in his oral history at the JFK Library that “during the autopsy I supervised everything that was done .. . and kept in constant contact with Mrs.
However, RFK also had someone—an individual I interviewed in 1992—assisting him in dealing with Burkley and the autopsy room.
The presence of this very sensitive, confidential source at the autopsy has been confirmed by a Kennedy-authorized account, and his credibility is not only clear based on the public record but has been vouched for by numerous associates of John and Robert Kennedy.
These include Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Harry Williams, and RFK’s trusted FBI liaison Courtney Evans.
It’s significant that my source who assisted RFK at the autopsy was fully knowledgeable not only of the JFK—Almeida coup plan, but also about the Cuba Contingency Plans designed to protect it.
The bottom line is that whatever went on at the autopsy most likely happened with the full knowledge, and probably at the ultimate direction, of Robert Kennedy.
Further proof of this concept is the fact that some of the most important missing evidence, such as JFK’s brain, wound up under RFK’s control.
Even such a basic fact as the time when the autopsy started has caused much debate and uncertainty over the past four decades.
There was a delay of at least forty minutes, and possibly as much as an hour, between the arrival of JFK’s body at the facility and the start of the autopsy.
There were two ambulances—one was a decoy supposedly meant to throw off reporters and sightseers who might have made it onto the base.
However, author David Lifton found that the men who were to guard the ambulance with JFK’s body had lost sight of the ambulance as it sped away.
Much confusion on their part followed, before they finally arrived at the rear of the facility and found the ambulance at last.
Oddly, Secret Service Agent Kellerman says the autopsy started at 7:30, while the casket team’s report says JFK’s casket was not carried in until 8:00m.
In addition to the unusual timing discrepancies, there were also easy-todocument differences between how JFK’s body looked at Parkland and how it looked at the start of his autopsy in Bethesda.
The most obvious example is JFK’s throat wound, where the tracheotomy incision had been made.
However, photos of JFK’s body at the start of the autopsy show a very ragged incision, spread open in the middle, that was at least two or three times larger.
JFK’s official autopsy report said the incision was 6. centimeters when the autopsy began, while the lead autopsy physician, Dr.
The throat incision was not enlarged during the official autopsy, because, as assisting autopsy physician Dr.
While the official autopsy was jammed with officers and other personnel, an earlier unofficial national security autopsy would have been conducted with only a few people present.
As the official account would evolve, JFK’s back wound was supposedly caused by the complete “magic bullet” found at Parkland on a stretcher—no bullet was found at the autopsy.
Osborne—then a Captain and later an Admiral and the Deputy Surgeon General—told Congressional investigators he saw “an intact bullet roll . . . onto the autopsy table” when JFK was removed from his casket.
Osborne’s account is confirmed to a degree by the account of X-ray technician Custer, who said that “a pretty good-sized bullet” fell out of JFK’s “upper back,” where his back wound was located.
To Lifton, “Stover confirmed there was a bullet in the Bethesda morgue” from JFK’s body.
However, Stover thought it was the bullet found on the stretcher at Parkland.
But it wasn’t, since that bullet was at the FBI laboratory, many miles away.
A brief national security autopsy before the official one, as well as national security concerns following the official autopsy, could also account for the many problems surrounding the autopsy photographs and X-rays.
The images showing the damage to the President’s head do not show the pattern of damage observed by either the medical professionals at Parkland Hospital in Dallas, or by numerous witnesses at the military autopsy at Bethesda Naval Hospital.
Along with his colleague at the autopsy, Agent James Sibert, he doesn’t believe in the “magic bullet” theory that was later proposed.
Measurements of the bullet holes in JFK’s jacket and shirt show they were almost six inches below the tops of the collars, well below the neck.
This statement was just one more indication of JFK’s mindset following the Chicago and Tampa assassination attempts.
When the events of the autopsy are considered in terms of the cloak of secrecy those attempts generated for national security reasons, it starts to provide a rationale for many, if not all, of the autopsy discrepancies.
JFK’s body and funeral arrangements were put in the hands of Cyrus Vance’s two trusted aides, Alexander Haig and Joseph Califano.
Califano wrote that after JFK’s murder, he went to the Pentagon and met Vance, who put him in charge of arranging JFK’s burial at Arlington National Cemetery and told him to meet RFK there the next day.
Califano and Haig have always been careful to distance themselves from the most sensitive parts of Vance’s work on RFK’s plans to eliminate Castro, and neither ever admitted to knowing about the JFK—Almeida coup plan.
Harry Williams confirmed that Al Haig did know about Commander Almeida.
Vance’s use of Califano and Haig is logical even if Califano had not yet been told about the JEFK—Almeida coup plan, because Vance knew he could count on both men to follow orders, if any national security problems arose.
ON THE EVENING of November 22, my confidential Naval Intelligence source was Called back to his office.
While national security was no doubt the overriding concern in the document destruction ordered by my source’s superiors, it would also help to avoid embarrassment to those higher in the chain of command who had been aware of Oswald’s special status.
CHICAGO BRIEFLY BECAME a focus of the assassination investigation very early on the morning of Saturday, November 23.
The staff at Klein’s, a major retailer of mail-order rifles, began searching their records and “on November 23 at 4:00m., CST, executives at Klein’s Sporting Goods in Chicago discovered the American Rifleman coupon with which Oswald had allegedly ordered the MannlicherCarcano,” using the “Hidell” alias.
A CIA memo stated that Richard Cain, an Agency asset, was “deeply involved in the President Kennedy assassination case,” but other details of his involvement—aside from his timely tip about the rifle—are lacking.
Cain was also in a position to see if word of the recent fourman Chicago threat might surface in the news media, and to plant false information to deceive authorities and the media, such as claiming that Oswald had received support from the small Fair Play for Cuba Committee chapter in Chicago.
AT 9:00 A.M. on November 23, 1963, CIA Director John McCone talked to Robert Kennedy.
McCone was set to meet with new President Lyndon Johnson at 12:30 to start briefing him on the most pressing intelligence matters, so it’s not hard to imagine that McCone and RFK must have discussed what McCone was going to tell LBJ about the coup plan with Almeida.
At that point, LBJ had had no involvement in the plan and probably didn’t even know it existed.
Now, as President and Commander-in-Chief, he would have to be brought up to speed, and quickly.
McCone was about to find out a bit more about the AMLASH operation with Cuban official Rolando Cubela.
According to Evan Thomas, on November 23 Desmond FitzGerald finally told “Walt Elder, the executive assistant to McCone, that he had met with Cubela in October and that one of his agents had been meeting with the Cuban turncoat the very moment Kennedy had been shot.
Even without knowing about the scoped rifles, “Elder was struck by FitzGerald’s clear discomfort.
The normally smooth operator was ‘shaking his head and wringing his hands.
Just two days later, FitzGerald would tell Cubela’s case officer to delete a reference to the poison pen in a memo, so McCone would continue to be in the dark about the assassination side of the Cubela operation.
After his talk with RFK on the morming of November 23, John McCone met with President Lyndon B Johnson.
It’s very important to look at what McCone could have told LBJ in those early hours, since it would shape LBJ’s opinions— and United States policy—about JFK’s murder and Cuba in the coming days, months, and years.
Of course, even though McCone was CIA Director, he was limited in what he could reveal to LBJ because Richard Helms hadn’t told McCone some crucial operations.
McCone probably told LBJ the broad outlines of JFK’s coup plan with Commander Almeida.
McCone also could have informed LBJ about AMTRUNK, the so-far ineffective plan to try to find other Cuban military leaders willing to stage a revolt against Castro.
McCone might have known what his aide had just learned about FitzGerald and Cubela ; but, if not, McCone probably told LBJ the following day.
However, anything McCone told LBJ about Cubela would have been incomplete, since McCone didn’t know about the assassination side of the Cubela operation.
Neither LBJ nor McCone would have known that the CIA—Mafia plots were continuing, or that CIA officer David Morales had been working with a mobster like Johnny Rosselli.
They also didn’t know that major Cuban exile leader Manuel Artime was part of the CI[A—Mafia plots.
All that information would shape much of LBJ’s outlook about the assassination, along with another bit of news that McCone reportedly conveyed to LBJ on either November 23 or at their meeting on November 24.
Peter Dale Scott adds that “a CIA memo written that day reported that Oswald had visited Mexico City in September and talked to a Soviet vice consul whom the CIA knew as a KGB expert in assassination and sabotage.
However, it later emerged from CIA and FBI files that almost all of those reports had connections to associates of Santo Trafficante, Carlos Marcello, Johnny Rosselli, or David Morales.
And those are just the reports we know about, the ones that were eventually declassified.
There are indications that other versions of the same stories—from the same or similar mob-linked sources—are among the JFK assassination files still being withheld.
In circumstantial detail, it stated that Oswald had been seen in Havana in the company of Cuban intelligence officers several days before the events in Dallas . . . the detailed locale, precise notations of time, and more—was very persuasive.
As long as he lived, Haig—later Reagan’s Secretary of State—expressed the belief that Castro was behind JFK’s assassination, as does Califano today.
However, neither man realized that stories like the one they saw were not only later discredited, but also linked to the Mafia.
One CIA cable that weekend tried to urge caution in dealing with such reports, but it went unheeded, at least initially.
That mistaken impression has helped to essentially freeze US—Cuba relations since the time of JFK’s murder.
However, at the time, it also served to divert attention and suspicion away from the Mafia.
As the following chapter shows, Marcello and Trafficante would have their associates like John Martino continue to spread false “Castro killed JFK” stories that hinted at the JFK—Almeida coup plan, as a way to keep the pressure on United States officials to stifle any truly full investigation of Oswald, his associates, and of any other suspects in JFK’s murder.
LATER REPORTS ABOUT the movements of Gilberto Lopez and Miguel Casas Saez also fed the “Castro killed JFK” beliefs shared by LBJ, McCone, and CIA Counter-Intelligence Chief James Angleton.
Both were later reported to have been in Dallas during JFK’s assassination.
However, he wouldn’t check into his Mexico City hotel until Monday, November 25, and his whereabouts on November 23 and 24 are unknown.
It’s almost as if someone was keeping him on ice, just in case some type of evidence emerged proving that more than one gunman was involved in Dallas, or in case Oswald needed an accomplice to make the scenario of his guilt believable.
Lopez may well have been an unwitting asset for some United States agency, while he was focused only on getting back to his native Cuba.
But just as Oswald was manipulated by those with intelligence connections who were also working for the Mafia, the same could have been true for Lopez.
The actions of Miguel Casas Saez also appear to have been manipulated by someone wanting him to look suspicious.
Some reports say that Saez flew out of Dallas on a private plane and made a mysterious airport rendezvous in Mexico City, where he transferred directly to a Cubana Airlines plane without going through Customs or Immigration.
The plane had supposedly been waiting for him for five hours, and he then rode in the cockpit, thus avoiding identification by the passengers.
The reports made Saez sound like a Cuban assassin, being given special treatment after fleeing Dallas.
However, the House Select Committee looked into that account and found that it wasn’t true.
Other reports say that Saez left Dallas with two friends after JFK was shot and crossed the border Nuevo Laredo.
Since many of the reports about Saez originated with David Morales’s AMOT informants, the whole scenario is suspect, which is what the CIA and FBI eventually concluded.
Still, either or both men would have made excellent patsies for JFK’s death if anything had happened to Oswald or if someone else was needed to shoulder some of the blame.
At the same time, each may also have been serving some legitimate role for United States intelligence.
TO RICHARD HELMS and his aides, it would have been clear that whatever CIA operation Oswald was involved with had been subject to a massive intelligence failure.
John Whitten was Helms’s Covert Operations Chief for all of Mexico and Central America.
As the CIA’s Deputy Director for Plans, essentially its highest operational official, Richard Helms was responsible.
On November 23, 1963, Helms therefore had to take control of all the CIA’s material on Oswald, both for national security reasons and probably to protect his own career.
Kurtz wrote that “ other employees of the New Orleans office, Leake gathered all of the Oswald files.
They proved so voluminous that Leake had to rent a trailer to transport them to Langley.
Stopping only to eat, use the restroom, and fill up with gas, Leake drove the truck pulling the rental trailer filled with the New Orleans office’s files on Oswald to CIA headquarters.
Leake explained that ... the CIA dreaded the release of any information that would connect Oswald with it.
Leake’s description of the Oswald files as “voluminous” makes sense, given the information from our independent source about the “tight surveillance” of Oswald, something not known to Kurtz at the time of his interview with Leake.
Buttressing Leake’s credibility is the fact that no routine reports from the CIA’s New Orleans office have ever surfaced about former defector Oswald’s several well-publicized pro-Castro activities in New Orleans during August 1963, despite the CIA’s interest in both former defectors and the Fair Play for Cuba Committee.
A SOMBER ROBERT Kennedy took time out from his family and official duties for a private meeting with Harry Williams, who told us the meeting occurred within two days of JFK’s death.
Almeida was still in Cuba, and his family was still outside of Cuba under United States surveillance, but any plans for a coup were now on hold.
Williams said that RFK “didn’t say much,” but told Williams that “things are going to change,” now that RFK no longer essentially ran Cuban operations and policy for the United States.
Williams said he already knew that RFK and “Johnson . . . hate each other’s guts,” so RFK’s role and the plans would no doubt be very different, if they continued at all.
Yet the Saturday-morming newspapers were conveying just the opposite impression by establishing the basic “lone assassin” scenario that some people still believe today.
In hindsight, it seems absurd to think that all the relevant information about the shooting, and an unusual former defector like Oswald, could be uncovered less than twelve hours after the shooting—and that clearly wasn’t the case.
However, investigations that touched on covert matters would have to be conducted in secret, so as not to alarm the public or back President Johnson into a corner regarding possible retaliation against Cuba or the Soviet Union.
Journalists asked to withhold information from the public didn’t have to be made aware of the JFK—Almeida coup plan, or the Cuba Contingency Plans to protect it.
That same phrase, “for the good of the country,” would be used to stop Dave Powers and Kenneth O’Donnell from revealing they had seen shots from the grassy knoll, and it was probably used to silence others as well.
It’s unclear if Ferrie’s name was surfacing because Oswald apparently had his library card, or because of the Jack Martin allegations, or for some other reason.
But the “for the good of the country” comment helps to confirm CIA officer Leake’s statements that Ferrie was working for the CIA in 1963.
With Ferrie on the run, and Oswald still alive, Carlos Marcello would have known that his carefully orchestrated plan could still unravel.
Not all of the pressure on journalists in Dallas came from Washington; it also came from conditions on the scene.
The intense competition among journalists and networks in Dallas for “scoops” also contributed to coverage that was often shallow or wrong, and stories that avoided the lengthy in-depth investigations that might have uncovered what had really happened in Dallas.
However, just being involved in reporting on the assassination gave a huge boost to the careers of broadcasters.
Texan Dan Rather’s career-making scoop was his role as the first journalist to view and report on the Zapruder film, though so firmly entrenched by the weekend was the “official” story of the lone-assassinshooting-from-behind that Rather claimed the home movie showed JFK’s “head went forward with considerable violence” after he was shot.
The public wouldn’t get to see the film for themselves—and learn that JFK was pitched backward, not forward—for another twelve years.
While covering the assassination helped their careers, it sometimes impeded any questioning of the “official” version of the lone assassin, both at the time and for years to come.
IN DALLAS, JOE Campisi Sr. continued to hide the two European gunmen in his restaurant.
That presumably involved their going to Michigan to cross the border into Canada.
In 1985, after hearing Marcello’s remarks about the two on the FBI’s undercover audio tapes, the FBI apparently took action.
Those two shooters were not the only Europeans involved in JFK’s assassination.
As noted earlier, a CIA memo said that French Connection heroin kingpin and assassin Michel Victor Mertz was in Dallas on November 22, the day of the shooting.
The CIA memo also indicated that Mertz had been using the alias of “Jean Souetre,” a wanted French assassin.
It also stated that “Souetre” had exchanged mail with a dentist in Houston, who had met the real Souetre on a trip to Europe.
The dentist later told investigators that he was interviewed by FBI agents who “told me that Souetre was in Dallas that day and was flown out... as far as they were concerned, in a government plane.
The FBI couldn’t find any record of Souetre’s being “flown out” on a government plane, because the person in question was actually Mertz, who’d been posing as Souetre.
When Mertz was picked up by United States authorities in Dallas, he had apparently switched to yet another cover identity, one guaranteed to get him deported back to familiar territory.
The man’s description was very close to Mertz’s, and he looked just a few years older than a cover identity Mertz often used.
Based on age and description, the man Investigator Bailey remembered could not have been the real Souetre.
Mertz could have picked up that alias from either of two of his heroin associates, Joseph Orsini and Antoine D’Agostino, who had both earned “a death sentence in absentia” for Nazi collaboration.
Bailey’s supervisor at INS at the time, Hal Norwood, recalled other aspects of the story.
Norwood described the arrest of an “individual who might have been French which occurred shortly after the killing of the President.
Norwood thought Bailey “was one of the men he sent” to pick up the foreigner.
The Washington INS office was VERY interested in the man and called twice regarding him,” according to INS supervisor Norwood.
Mertz could have used his intelligence connections to make sure the official paperwork was later suppressed.
Something similar had been done in the recent Senate narcotics hearings, where Mertz’s heroin associates had all been identified, but Mertz’s name was completely missing from the hearings.
The fact that the CIA discovered later that someone had been using the name of Souetre would also allow an official like Helms to ask INS officials to remove the information about the deportation from their files, on national security grounds.
Mertz likely used the name of one of his wanted associates to get picked up by the INS, but once in custody he could have used his intelligence connections to ensure he was deported to Canada, instead of to France, where his associate was wanted.
It must have been deliciously ironic for Carlos Marcello to see the same INS that had once deported him, on the orders of Robert Kennedy, now fly his heroin partner and assassin Mertz out of Dallas shortly after JFK’s assassination.
EVEN AS EVIDENCE tying Oswald to Cuba and Russia caused concern among officials in Washington, and would soon break in the press, Marcello continued the pressure to have Oswald killed.
With the authorities still seeking David Ferrie, the whole plot could unravel and point to people working for Marcello.
The godfather could make only limited efforts to contain Oswald’s public statements and cooperation with police, which is why two attomeys linked to Marcello had been asked to represent the still lawyerless Oswald.
We noted earlier Ruby’s friendship with Dallas Police Sergeant Patrick Dean, Homicide Captain Will Fritz, and Police Chief Jesse Curry.
At noon, Chief Curry called Captain Fritz to see if Oswald could be transferred to the county jail—and the jurisdiction of the sheriff—at 4:00m.
At 1:30, Ruby placed a call from the Nichols Garage, next door to his Carousel Club, and told someone the whereabouts of Chief Curry, which must mean that Ruby was talking to or keeping tabs on Curry.
Harkness, expecting Oswald to be moved at 4:00m., started clearing a crowd that was blocking a driveway entrance to the county jail.
An announcer for Dallas radio station KLIF said Ruby called him to offer to cover the transfer of Oswald for the station.
Finally, at 4:00, Ruby was at the police station, expecting Oswald to be moved—but for some reason the transfer was called off and rescheduled.
However, at 7:30m., Chief Curry inadvertently told two reporters wanting dinner—but not wanting to miss Oswald’s transfer—that if they were back by 10:00m.
Finally, at 10:20m., Chief Curry announced at a press conference that Oswald would be moved the next morming, in an armored truck, which meant Ruby would have to wait until Sunday to complete his assignment.
However, Ruby began laying important groundwork on Saturday for the rationale he would use to be near police headquarters at the time of Oswald’s transfer.
Ruby’s story would be that he had to wire $25 to one of his dancers, Karen Carlin.
To begin preparing this cover story, Ruby had Carlin and several others go to the Nichols Garage.
All those involved in this meeting later gave authorities different accounts of what happened there.
Karen Carlin arrived at the Nichols Garage before Ruby did; then Ruby called the parking attendant and told him to lend Carlin $5—and be sure to time-stamp the receipt—for which Ruby would reimburse him.
When Ruby arrived at the garage, his cover story was that he was supposed to loan Carlin another $25.
Ruby claimed he didn’t have the cash to lend and couldn’t get it, ignoring the fact that his club and its safe were next door.
The plan was for Ruby to wire Carlin the money the next day, from a Western Union office only one block from the police station where Oswald would be moved.
The following day, Ruby’s time-stamped Western Union receipt would be designed to “prove” that Ruby just happened to be near the police station when Oswald was being moved.
It’s clear this was only a cover story, since there were two Western Union offices much closer to Ruby’s Oak Cliff apartment.
There was no need for Ruby to go all the way downtown to use the Western Union office near the police station— except for the fact that Ruby had to silence Oswald.
ON NOVEMBER 24, 1963, at 10:00m. , CIA Director McCone met with President Johnson to tell him about “the Cuban situation,” including “our operational plans against Cuba,” according to McCone’s notes.
LBJ and McCone no doubt also discussed the latest information from Mexico City that seemed to implicate Fidel Castro in JFK’s murder.
IN SOUTH CAROLINA on November 24, white supremacist and Banister associate Joseph Milteer was having breakfast with his friend William Somersett, unaware that Somersett was an informant for the Miami police.
However, as if he needed to make sure, Milteer excused himself so that he could telephone someone.
ON THE MORNING of November 24 in Dallas, Jack Ruby was spruced up, dressed in his finest, ready for the spotlight he was sure to occupy after he completed his assignment for Carlos Marcello.
Ruby was undoubtedly nervous, but not about the length of time he might have to spend in jail after shooting Oswald.
Under Texas law, for murders involving a “sudden passion,” the sentence could be as brief as two years, with time off for good behavior, or sometimes even just probation, with no prison time.
Instead, Ruby was probably worried only that after he pulled out his gun and started shooting at Oswald, he might hit a policeman or a policeman might start shooting at him.
The Committee also found that Ruby’s shooting Oswald wasn’t “spontaneous,” and that Ruby probably had help entering the basement of the police station for the transfer.
Sergeant Dean refused to testify to Blakey’s Committee and even told author Peter Dale Scott “of his longtime relationship with Civello,” the mobster who ran Dallas for Carlos Marcello.
Dean also worked in narcotics, which Ruby was also involved in with Civello and Marcello.
As had apparently been planned the night before, at 10:19m. , dancer Karen Carlin in Fort Worth called Ruby’s home, supposedly to ask him to send her money.
It’s doubtful that Ruby was there, since an earlier call to Ruby’s home by his regular housekeeper was answered by someone who didn’t seem to recognize her voice.
At 10:45m., Ruby was talking to a TV crew in front of the police station, before heading to the Western Union office.
At 11:00m., Sergeant Dean apparently removed police who had been guarding an interior door to the basement.
Upstairs, in Detective Fritz’s office, a small group of officials were questioning Oswald, but at 11:15m. they were told their time was up.
However, the transfer car wasn’t in position, so the group with Oswald had to slow its passage toward the basement.
The basement was packed with at least seventy policemen and forty newsmen.
At Western Union, Ruby wired Carlin the money at 11:17m. and then headed back to the police station, only a block away.
The timing was tight for Ruby to have any hope of claiming a “sudden passion” defense, but he had plenty of associates who could signal when he should arrive.
For example, only one minute after Ruby left the Western Union office, his attorney entered the police station and saw Oswald coming out of the jail elevator.
Even with the crowds of press and police, no one ever claimed to have seen Ruby actually enter the police basement, one more indication that he must have had help in doing so.
Ruby most likely entered the basement from the alley that runs between the Western Union office and the police station.
One officer claimed to have seen “an unidentified white male” walk down the ramp into the basement, past Officer Roy Vaughn, who was guarding the ramp.
But that officer failed a polygraph test, while Officer Vaughn, who consistently said he had not let Ruby down the ramp, passed his polygraph test.
AROUND 11:20 A.M., Oswald walked through the door, flanked by two Dallas Police detectives.
As soon as he was visible, a car horn blew and is audible on the news broadcast of the transfer.
At 11:21, Ruby surged out of the crowd and fired one shot into Oswald’s abdomen.
It was only after Ruby was told that his victim was dead that “Ruby calmed down,” according to Marcello’s biographer, John H Davis.
Later that day, a Secret Service agent interviewed a “highly agitated” Karen Carlin.
As Officer Archer had suspected, Ruby had apparently been threatened with death as well, and not just for himself.
Ruby would soon be visited in jail by Marcello underboss Joe Campisi Sr.
Ruby had last seen Campisi at his restaurant on the night before JFK’s murder.
Campisi was also close to Sheriff Bill Decker, in whose custody Ruby would spend most of the rest of his life, reportedly in a cell overlooking Dealey Plaza.
At the time, a Chicago mobster associate of Richard Cain was well known in the underworld for that type of Mafia retribution; years later, Johnny Rosselli’s legs were cut off after Santo Trafficante had him murdered.
IN SOUTH CAROLINA, Joseph Milteer had completed his phone call and rejoined his friend William Somersett.
NOW THAT LEE Oswald was dead, Carlos Marcello would soon be free from worry.
After Oswald’s murder, David Ferrie returned to New Orleans and turned himself in to authorities.
The FBI and Secret Service were investigating Jack Martin’s allegations, and the news media had started to get wind not just of Ferrie, but even Marcello, as possibly being involved in JFK’s death.
However, Martin was an unstable individual and quickly backed away from his charges, and within forty-eight hours the entire incident had blown over.
Ferrie was also able to produce his library card when the agents asked, so he was released and the investigation dropped.
Former FBI supervisor Guy Banister was briefly interviewed by authorities, but not investigated.
Statements by the local FBI to the press seemed to place responsibility for the whole incident on District Attorney Jim Garrison.
The matter had been staunched before it could become national news, and the press and the authorities would soon forget the whole thing—at least for a few years.
Carlos Marcello had managed to emerge unscathed from the weekend crisis that could have exposed the roles of David Ferrie and Guy Banister in JFK’s murder, and even led to the godfather himself.
Marcello knew that Ruby was a longtime mob associate who could be trusted not to talk.
But the godfather realized there were still avenues investigators could pursue that could lead to his associates.
So, even as the government continued to scramble to deal with the aftermath of two assassinations—including the national security implications of JFK’s murder and the coup plan that was on hold—Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli implemented plans to keep attention focused away from themselves, and toward Fidel Castro.
CCHAPIER 17 Secret Investigations and Getting Away With Murder In THE COMING months and years, Carlos Marcello would have other close calls that could have exposed his role in the assassination; those would continue through the time of his 1985 confession to Jack Van Laningham and its almost deadly aftermath.
MARCELLO AND SANTO Trafficante used two basic strategies to conceal their roles in JFK’s murder, at the time and for years to come.
First, along with Johnny Rosselli, the two godfathers continued to exploit their work on the unauthorized CIA—Mafia plots to kill Fidel, to gain a measure of protection from close scrutiny.
Those few CIA officials who knew about the plots would be loathe to look seriously at the possibility that their own operation was somehow involved in JFK’s murder.
To do so would cost their own careers, and perhaps even bring themselves and the Agency under suspicion.
In addition, parts of the ClA—Mafia plots involving the mob bosses would continue in December 1963 and beyond.
Second, Marcello and Trafficante used the legitimate national security concerns surrounding the coup plan with Almeida to keep the pressure on United States officials to withhold key information from investigators, the press, and the public, to protect the United States government’s ally high in the Cuban government.
That pressure included continuing to have their men float “Castro killed JFK” stories that would find their way to occasionally receptive officials in Washington.
Those stories would sometimes travel through government channels and other times through the press.
Commander Almeida would remain high in the Cuban government and unexposed for decades, so protecting his life and his family would be a legitimate national security concern for a series of Presidents and CIA Directors, from 1963 until Almeida’s death in 2009.
One unexpected benefit of the first two approaches for the mob bosses was that various United States officials and agencies would use legitimate national concerns to hide a variety of intelligence failures and unauthorized operations—not just the CIA-—Mafia plots—that could have been exposed in a truly wide-ranging investigation of JFK’s assassination.
National security concerns were also used to hide not just the “tight” surveillance of Oswald but the structure that allowed a massive program of domestic surveillance by a raft of agencies—including the CIA, FBI, and military intelligence—to be conducted on thousands of Americans in the 1960s, including some in the JFK investigation.
Finally, if their two main strategies failed, the two godfathers would not hesitate to resort to murder to keep their roles in JFK’s murder hidden.
That wasn’t just a threat to help silence a long-time mobster like Jack Ruby—several murders would be carried out, including their gruesome slaying of Johnny Rosselli.
IN ADDITION TO Ferrie and Banister, in the weeks after JFK’s murder more associates of Carlos Marcello were interviewed by authorities about JFK’s murder.
Even though at least a dozen of Marcello’s associates and family members were interviewed or interrogated, the godfather would not be mentioned at all in the Report of the Warren Commission.
One of the consequences of Oswald’s death was the creation of the Warren Commission.
Sometimes misperceived as something solely created by LBJ so he could control the investigation, the Warren Commission was actually created due to the efforts of several Robert Kennedy associates.
Neither President Johnson nor J Edgar Hoover wanted the Warren Commission, whereas RFK’s associates apparently saw a commission as preferable to having the whole investigation in the hands of LBJ and Hoover.
Within hours of Oswald’s death, Hoover was talking to Nicholas Katzenbach, Robert’s trusted Deputy Attorney General.
While a devastated RFK was consumed with funeral preparations and family matters, Katzenbach was essentially running the Justice Department.
However, Katzenbach focused on areas like civil rights and wasn’t a specialist in the areas of organized crime or Hoffa, areas that were now especially relevant in light of Ruby’s recent actions.
Also, there is no evidence that Katzenbach was ever told about the JFK—Almeida coup plan, which had been withheld from all of RFK’s associates who weren’t actively involved in the Cuba operation.
However, it’s important to note that Katzenbach’s concerns where shared by other high officials, all of whom were very concerned that rampant speculation about Oswald’s ties to Russia or Cuba could trigger an dangerous confrontation with the Soviets, at a time when an untested President had just assumed office, and much of the nation was still in shock.
Even as RFK loyalists pushed for a Commission to investigate JFK’s murder, Hoover and the FBI continued their investigation, which would later form the basis for much of the Commission’s work.
However, as mentioned in Chapter Two, author Henry Hurt found that an analysis of FBI documents eventually provided to the Warren Commission “showed that at least 60 witnesses claimed that the FBI in some way altered what the witnesses had reported,” and more witnesses have reported discrepancies since that time.
In addition, in at least two instances, the FBI simply rewrote memos to completely change their meaning—something an FBI agent would do only on orders from the highest authority.
We know this only because the National Archives eventually released the original, unaltered memos.
But in the version the Warren Commission published, the final three paragraphs of the memo, which cover Civello—and his ties to narcotics—are completely missing.
Once President Johnson had been persuaded to appoint a Presidential Commission to investigate JFK’s murder, LBJ pulled out all the stops in telling men like Senator Richard Russell why they should join the Warren Commission.
President Johnson did the same with Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren, whom he wanted to chair the Commission.
The Warren Commission’s real purpose was to end speculation about foreign involvement in JFK’s murder, which it eventually did.
The creation of the Warren Commission was announced on November 29, 1963.
The other members were Georgia Senator Richard Russell, Kentucky Senator John Cooper, Louisiana Congressman Hale Boggs, Michigan Congressman Gerald Ford, and disarmament official John J McCloy.
However, before the Commission could begin gathering evidence, their final conclusion was preordained when J Edgar Hoover leaked the FBI’s own report and conclusions to the press on December 8, 1963.
Hoover used his extensive media connections to make sure the FBI’s conclusions—that Oswald acted alone, Ruby acted alone, the two had no connection, and there was no conspiracy in JFK’s death—became front-page news.
At that point, the Commission couldn’t really come to any other conclusion, since it would have to depend on Hoover’s FBI for most of their investigative work.
In addition, one of the seven men appointed to the Commission, Michigan Congressman Gerald Ford, went to one of Hoover’s top aides, who wrote that Ford told him “he would keep me thoroughly advised as to the activities of the Commission.
Allen Dulles knew a great deal about United States efforts to assassinate Fidel using Trafficante, Rosselli, and Marcello, but he didn’t tell the rest of the Commission.
However, Earl Warren’s son indicated that the Chief Justice learned something about the plots, and Gerald Ford indicated years later that he’d become aware of them as well, though there is no way to know how much they knew or if it was accurate.
Later, Chief Justice Warren and Congressman Ford were the only members of the Warren Commission who went to Dallas to interview Jack Ruby.
They even denied the request of the Commission’s expert on Ruby to accompany them.
When Ruby begged Warren and Ford to take him to Washington for questioning away from Dallas, they refused.
CARLOS MARCELLO AND Santo Trafficante didn’t want more situations like the Ferrie investigation, so even as the headlines were full of the FBI investigation and talk of the Commission, the godfathers’ men quietly supplied a steady stream of stories implying that Castro had ordered JFK’s death.
This kept national security concerns alive in Washington, and the “Castro did it” stories of some—like John Martino—even contained hints of the JEK—Almeida coup plan.
Other mob associates linked to such stories include Rolando Masferrer, Frank Fiorini, and Manuel Artime.
The eager audience for these stories included officials such as CIA Director John McCone, J Edgar Hoover, and Lyndon Johnson.
The stories spread by John Martino were especially provocative—and accurate, about matters the public wouldn’t officially learn about for decades.
Appearing in small-market newspapers and radio broadcasts, Martino’s stories blamed Castro for JFK’s murder while hinting at the JEFK—Almeida coup plan.
They were just detailed enough to draw the attention of United States officials but not enough to become major news stories.
The stories helped to force top officials into a continuing cover-up about JFK’s assassination, in order to prevent a public outcry to invade Cuba and to avoid exposing Commander Almeida.
Martino’s stories began just two days after Oswald’s murder, when David Ferrie was essentially cleared of involvement in JFK’s death.
Martino was touring the country as a prominent member of the far-right John Birch Society Speakers Bureau, ostensibly to promote his book I Was Castro’s Prisoner.
It’s unlikely that David Atlee Phillips or others in the CIA were behind Martino’s publicity efforts, because Martino’s book actually mentioned the name of Phillips’s associate, David Morales, a fact that the CIA wanted to keep secret.
Martino’s phony stories started out mildly, claiming that Oswald had gone to Cuba in the fall of 1963 and had passed out pro-Castro literature in Miami and New Orleans.
Those tales brought Martino a visit from the FBI on November 29, but he refused to identify his sources.
An article under Martino’s name appeared in the December 21, 1963, issue of the right-wing journal Human Events, in which Martino took credit for revealing that “the Kennedy Administration planned to eliminate Fidel Castro . . . through a putsch, the plan involved a more or less token invasion from Central America to be synchronized with the coup.
At the time, that was more than many high-ranking United States officials in the Johnson administration knew about the coup plan.
As previously noted, three months earlier Martino and Masferrer had been linked to the attempt to smear Ray’s group by tying it to Oswald via Dallas JURE member Silvia Odio.
When Martino’s article was published, only the FBI and a handful of Odio’s closest family and friends knew about Oswald’s visit to her in Dallas, and nothing about it had appeared in the press.
It’s not hard to imagine the consternation Martino’s increasingly provocative articles caused among high-ranking officials in Washington.
They attracted the attention of J Edgar Hoover, since FBI agents interviewed Martino yet again on February 15, 1964.
Frank Fiorini, the future Watergate burglar under the name Frank Sturgis, was another Trafficante associate leaking information to the press implicating Fidel Castro in JFK’s murder.
However, none of these other leaks hinted at the JFK— Almeida coup plan, and Martino’s stories were unique in that regard, probably because Martino had actually been part of the assassination plot.
In addition, Martino knew Marcello, Rosselli, and Trafficante, while Fiorini was simply a bagman for Trafficante.
Fiorini’s information implicating Fidel and the Cubans appeared in a Florida newspaper on November 26, 1963.
The FBI immediately interviewed Fiorini, who maintained he’d been misquoted.
Later, Fiorini admitted he’d received his information from John Martino.
Other efforts to link Oswald and Ruby to Fidel were less sophisticated, though they sometimes echoed the information in the memo that so alarmed Alexander Haig.
These additional efforts range from the fake “Pedro Charles” letter mailed to Oswald from Havana on November 28, 1963, to stories linking Ruby to Cuban plots.
It’s amazing how many dozens, sometimes hundreds, of pages of follow-up FBI and CIA memos were generated because of one or two obviously fake letters or stories.
It’s likely that even more phony information implicating Fidel, with hundreds of pages of official follow-up memos, remains unreleased.
NATIONAL SECURITY CONCERNS—that Castro might have been behind JFK’s death in response to United States actions against him—played a key role in the actions of LBJ, Hoover, and others.
As former FBI agent Harry Whidbee told Vanity Fair, “We were effectively told, “They’re only going to prove was the guy who did it.
Government officials conducted many secret investigations into JFK’s murder, and not just because of all the phony mob-linked stories implicating Fidel Castro.
Many leads and individuals couldn’t be investigated publicly or revealed to the Warren Commission, both for national security reasons and to avoid exposing the unauthorized operations and intelligence failures of various agencies and officials.
The CIA, Naval Intelligence, LBJ (he asked Richard Helms to conduct one for him), and the FBI all had their own internal, secret investigations of the JFK assassination.
However, their results weren’t shared between, or often even within, agencies.
As detailed in Chapter Two, my Naval Intelligence source said that after Oswald died, they quit shredding and sanitizing his surveillance files and began a lengthy investigation into the assassination.
But that investigation was not shared with most officials inside Naval Intelligence, and there is no indication it was ever shared with other branches of the military, the Joint Chiefs, or President Johnson.
Richard Helms had more suspicions about the possible involvement of CIA personnel in JFK’s death than he ever acknowledged to the Warren Commission or to any of the later Congressional investigations.
Those investigations have never been released, so there’s no way to know if Helms suspected Barker or other agents.
Helms had the CIA conduct its own internal investigation into Oswald and JFK’s assassination, a little-known fact first uncovered years later by Congressional investigators.
Helms initially appointed an AMWORLD veteran, CIA officer John Whitten, to head the Agency’s secret investigation, but as soon as Whitten asked Helms for “files on Oswald’s Cuba-related activities,” he was taken off the JFK investigation and reassigned.
In Congressional testimony long after the fact, Whitten said that Helms hadn’t told him anything about the CIA— Mafia plots to kill Fidel, and he was “appalled” when he heard about them twelve years later.
Whitten also wasn’t allowed to see the files on Oswald that CIA agent Hunter Leake had delivered from the CIA’s New Orleans office to Helms, or told about the assassination aspect of the Rolando Cubela operation.
After Whitten was removed from the investigation, Helms replaced him with CIA Counterintelligence Chief James Angleton, under whom the internal CIA investigation seems to have been designed more to hide information than to uncover it.
Angleton heard all of the claims from Mexico City that Oswald had killed JFK on Fidel Castro’s orders and had access to other incendiary reports, like those concerning shadowy Cuban agent Miguel Cases Saez and young Cuban exile Gilberto Policarpo Lopez, both of whom went from Texas to Mexico City and then to Cuba.
Not surprisingly, the paranoid Angleton concluded that Fidel had killed JFK and that both Saez and Lopez were involved, according to intelligence journalist Joseph Trento.
Fifteen years later, when Congressional investigators got to see many of the files about Saez and Lopez, they exposed the numerous flaws in Angleton’s conclusion.
In December 1963, one CIA memo says that President Johnson received a secret Agency report about Oswald and JFK’s assassination.
Angleton’s conclusions probably fed Johnson’s belief that Fidel had orchestrated JFK’s assassination.
In addition, Helms made Angleton his key contact with the Warren Commission, both for providing it information and for withholding material Helms didn’t want the Commission to see.
Hence, the Warren Commission saw nothing about the JFK—Almeida coup plan, AMWORLD, the surveillance of Oswald, any of his intelligence activities, or anything else that might have triggered a real investigation or cost Helms his job.
Richard Helms mysteriously dumped exile leader Tony Varona in January 1964 for unknown reasons.
Varona’s quick fall from grace raises suspicions that someone in the CIA such as Helms, or perhaps even RFK, suspected that Varona was involved somehow in JFK’s death.
Helms had access to the Varona—Chicago Mafia payoff memos and would have known about Varona’s long ties to Rosselli and Trafficante through the ClA—Mafia plots.
If Helms knew or suspected that Varona—or other CIA assets—had any involvement in JFK’s death, he might simply have dealt with it himself.
Robert Kennedy would also have close associates conduct secret investigations of his brother’s murder for much of the rest of his life.
For months after his brother’s murder, associates described him as being “shattered,” with some indicating he might have in some way blamed himself for his brother’s death.
RFK’s secret investigations started the day JFK died, when the Attorney General called “Julius Draznin in Chicago, an expert on union corruption for the National Labor Relations Board,” according to author David Talbot.
Sheridan’s widow later confirmed that her husband and RFK worked together on the secret inquiry.
Those investigations are probably why, by 1966, RFK would tell his friend Richard Goodwin that he thought “that mob guy in New Orleans”—Marcello— was behind his brother’s death, as Goodwin told me.
The following year, after David Ferrie’s name finally surfaced as a suspect in JFK’s murder, RFK had his press aide, Frank Mankiewicz, conduct yet another secret investigation.
But when he tried to tell RFK, “it was like he just couldn’t focus on it.
In late 1963, that numbing pain was still constant for RFK, but he seemed determined to do something about Cuba and the coup plan.
He seems to have become confident that the coup plan with Almeida was still secure enough to continue.
My source, John H Crimmins—Coordinator of Cuban Affairs for the United States State Department—told me that “nothing ever surfaced” to make him think Castro was involved in JFK’s murder, even after it “was looked at over the course of the days and weeks” after JFK’s death.
Also, a formerly “top secret, eyes only” memo “from Gordon Chase of the National Security Council Staff” implies that McGeorge Bundy, the “President’s Special Assistant for National Security Affairs,” was able to provide some type of “assurances re Oswald” on December 3, 1963 which indicated that Oswald was not a Castro agent.
Commander Almeida was still safe and undetected, but the same wasn’t true for one of his associates.
A couple of rumors about the Almeida coup plan were reported to the CIA in the days after JFK’s death, and it’s possible that Fidel’s agents in Miami might have heard the same or similar rumors.
Perhaps out of caution, Commander Almeida left Cuba, in a way that would not arouse suspicion.
The timing of Che’s arrest, just one day before the originally scheduled coup date, raises the possibility that Fidel had learned something about the coup and had arrested one of those he thought was responsible.
Che’s house arrest probably lasted for only a short time, perhaps just a day or two.
December 2 is one of Cuba’s biggest holidays, the anniversary of the founding of the Cuban Army, whose first battle saw Almeida save his friend Che’s life.
As Commander of Cuba’s Army, Almeida was also considered its founder, so the Cuban public would definitely notice if he didn’t appear for the celebration.
Apparently things had calmed down enough for Almeida to return from Algeria to be part of the celebration, something Almeida would not have done if he feared that he was returning home to the same fate as Che.
The day after the big December 2, 1963, celebration, a CIA report says Almeida “expressed despair” to a subordinate.
But at some point after that, Almeida communicated to Harry Williams that he was still willing to stage a coup against Fidel, if RFK and new President Lyndon Johnson would back him.
RFK believed that a free and democratic Cuba would be the best memorial to his slain brother.
Apparently, LBJ had heard enough about the coup plan from McCone to worry that JFK’s death was retaliation from Castro.
In the early weeks of January 1964, RFK decided to swallow his pride, put his own feelings aside, and plead his case personally to President Johnson.
Their relationship had been terrible since 1960 and had worsened since JFK’s death, because Robert Kennedy felt that Johnson had moved into the White House and asserted control too quickly.
But Robert Kennedy’s meeting with LBJ about the coup plan did not go well.
Only the two of them were present, and RFK later told Williams that President Johnson listened sympathetically but made it clear that he would not continue with the plan.
LBJ’s decision also included ending the Cuban exile troop training program at Fort Benning, since those exiles’ real purpose had been to be among the first United States troops into Cuba after the coup.
However, LBJ did agree to continue funding RFK’s favored Cuban exile groups in case they proved useful in the future.
Formerly, Cuban operations had essentially been run by Robert Kennedy through Army Secretary Cyrus Vance and Richard Helms.
Now the CIA would take primary responsibility, with McCone reporting to LBJ, and RFK no longer had any role in Cuban operations.
RFK offered to back Williams with his personal fortune, but Williams felt they had both done—and sacrificed—enough, so he went back to being a mining engineer, far away from the intrigue of exile politics.
Williams communicated the news to Almeida, who apparently ended any planning for a coup.
According to Williams, RFK made sure Almeida’s family—still outside of Cuba on a seemingly innocent pretext—was covertly sent “$3,000 that the family used.
Almeida’s first wife and two daughters reportedly never returned to Cuba to live, and those payments continued for decades.
As for who in the Agency continued making those covert payments and monitoring the CIA’s surveillance of Almeida’s family, those files have not been released.
However, at least initially, it was probably E Howard Hunt and his aide Bernard Barker, since they had already been working on the top-secret operation.
A month after his meeting with President Johnson, RFK himself was expressing a different, more enlightened attitude about Castro.
In an exchange with CIA official Desmond FitzGerald, RFK proposed seeking an accommodation with Fidel instead of trying to overthrow him.
That was emblematic of RFK’s development over the next four years, as he grew from being a tough bulldog of a prosecutor and protector of JFK to being one of the most progressive members of the Senate.
CIA OFFICIAL RICHARD Helms had not changed his feelings about Fidel, however.
Hunt’s friend Artime continued to get the lion’s share of the money, which CIA accounts say totaled $7 million, while some former officials say it was several times that amount.
With planes and ships going to his Central American bases full of CIA arms and supplies— and returning empty of cargo—Artime was also soon involved in drug trafficking with Santo Trafficante’s organization.
A December 6, 1963, attempt to assassinate Fidel Castro involving Herminio Diaz—Trafficante’s bodyguard and narcotics trafficker—was first documented in 2006 by author Larry Hancock.
The material, especially appropriate for an assassination attempt, was slated to be delivered in January 1964 under David Morales’s supervision.
Morales remained good friends with Johnny Rosselli, and in 1964 Morales made at least one trip to visit the Mafia don in Las Vegas.
Rosselli continued to split his time between Las Vegas and Los Angeles, where he moved into a large, lavish apartment on Beverly Glen, near Beverly Hills.
Friars Club and was soon bilking stars of the era, including Milton Berle and Phil Silvers, in an elaborate poker scam.
Helms kept other aspects of the ClA—Mafia plots going as well, retaining European assassin recruiter QJWIN on the CIA payroll in December and for several months thereafter—until reports about Trafficante’s associate Michel Victor Mertz surfaced in Europe and to the CIA, at which point QJWIN was fired.
As for Mertz, the Warren Commission never learned about him, though the FBI gave them—with no explanation—a few memos showing the Bureau had checked for airline passengers in Dallas named Mertz on November 22, 1963.
Aside from having $1 million in heroin stolen from in France near the one-year anniversary of JFK’s death, Mertz prospered and lived extremely well after the assassination.
In Paris, Mertz had a swank townhouse on Boulevard Suchet, an area also home to the Duke and Duchess of Windsor.
Even after his heroin network was busted at Fort Benning, Georgia, in 1965, and Mertz was profiled in a Pulitzer—Prize-winning heroin exposé by Newsday, Mertz served only a brief, comfortable detention in France a few years later.
While the man whose alias Mertz used in 1963—Jean Souetre—eventually talked to journalists and allowed himself to be photographed, Mertz remained reclusive and threatening to investigators until his death on January 15, 1995.
Even his death was kept relatively secret for such a notorious figure, hindering efforts to get United States government files about him released.
A far more lowly member of the heroin network Mertz shared with Trafficante and Marcello did not live nearly as long.
Rose Cheramie’s statements about a plot to kill JFK were finally taken seriously by authorities after JFK’s assassination.
On Monday, November 25, she revealed new information about her sometime boss, Jack Ruby, to Louisiana State Police Lieutenant Francis Fruge.
Fruge investigated and confirmed her claims about a heroin ring operating in Texas and that she had worked for Ruby as a B-girl.
But authorities in Houston lost track of the heroin courier Cheramie had identified and closed the case.
Congressional investigators found that in 1965, Cheramie had tried to tell the FBI “about a heroin deal operating from a New Orleans ship,” and even though “the Coast Guard verified an ongoing narcotics investigation of the ship,” the FBI had decided not to pursue the case.
One month after she contacted the FBI, Cheramie was found mortally wounded under unusual circumstances on a desolate road in Texas, and she died on September 4, 1965.
CARLOS MARCELLO, SANTO Trafficante, and most of their associates prospered after JFK’s murder.
According to historian Richard Mahoney, “s Bill Hundley, head of the Organized Crime Section, put it, ‘The minute that bullet hit Jack Kennedy’s head, it was all over.
That wasn’t completely true, and the FBI did step up its efforts against organized crime after JFK’s murder.
Also, while Robert Kennedy remained Attorney General, there were still prosecutions to continue against Marcello, for jury tampering, and multiple counts against Jimmy Hoffa.
Shortly after that, the United States Attorney in New Orleans learned that Marcello “had threatened to kill” the government’s main witness during the same trial.
Marcello would not be tried until the following year, and he would be found “not guilty” on August 17, 1965.
Jimmy Hoffa was not so lucky, and by the spring of 1964, Robert Kennedy’s Justice Department and the head of his “Get Hoffa Squad,” Walter Sheridan, had finally succeeded in convicting Jimmy Hoffa for the first time.
Hoffa would also be convicted on separate charges, in Chicago, and only a flurry of appeals delayed the start of his long prison sentences.
In the press at that time, Ruby was not connected to the Mafia or considered any type of mobster, which would remain true for more than ten years.
Melvin Belli eventually took over Ruby’s defense; his law partner had first been called on November 24, 1963, by someone from Las Vegas connected with mobsters who’d had casinos in Havana.
The call didn’t come from Johnny Rosselli, but it did come from his Las Vegas headquarters hotel, the Desert Inn.
Belli was close to Los Angeles gangster Mickey Cohen, who was a good friend of Carlos Marcello.
Belli took Ruby’s case and kept any mention of Ruby’s Mafia contacts out of the trial.
Instead of using the “sudden passion” defense available in Texas—which can result in a sentence as short as two years served, or even just probation—Belli use a bizarre “psycho-motor” defense that had never been attempted before, and they lost.
EVEN WHILE RUBY’S trial was going on, and after it ended, several Warren Commission staff members tried to do a thorough investigation of Jack Ruby’s Mafia ties and Cuban gunrunning, but they were stymied.
The FBI intimidated several witnesses who tried to talk about Ruby’s gunrunning, while FBI agents relied on Ruby’s mob associates to say that Ruby had no mob associates.
After the two staffers investigating Ruby wrote a long memo to the the Commission’s General Counsel outlining numerous problems and stonewalling by the FBI and by Richard Helms, they were barred from interviewing Ruby in Dallas.
Given Sheriff Decker’s mob ties and Marcello’s control of Dallas, Ruby’s concerns were all too real.
THE WARREN COMMISSION staff lost another important source of information when mob associates of Trafficante’s and Rosselli’s framed Chicago Secret Service agent Abraham Bolden.
Using information provided by two criminals he’d put in jail, Bolden was arrested on the day he went to Washington to tell Commission staff about the Secret Service’s laxity, as well as the Chicago and Tampa attempts.
One of Bolden’s accusers worked for Sam DeStefano, a notorious associate of Richard Cain, the Chief Investigator for in the Cook County/Chicago sheriff’s office.
Richard Cain’s brother, Michael, told me that Richard Cain had the “motive, means, and opportunity” to frame Bolden.
Cain was part of the Chicago Mafia and had worked with Rosselli and Trafficante on the ClA—Mafia plots.
Bolden was sentenced to six years in prison, even though his main accuser later admitted to committing perjury against him.
Bolden’s judge told the jury before their deliberations that Bolden was guilty, but even after that misconduct resulted in a mistrial, the same judge was allowed to conduct Bolden’s second trial.
The result was another conviction, and Bolden has been fighting to clear his name ever since his release from prison.
SOME OF THE many shortcomings of the Warren Commission were covered in Chapters 1 and 2.
They are too numerous to cover here, though Professor Gerald McKnight’s Breach of Trust details the most definitive account of their many problems.
Basically, the Commission was not given much crucial information and had to rely on the FBI for most of their investigative work.
Like the CIA, the Bureau withheld much crucial information from the Commission— including the Tampa attempt, and much about Cuban exiles tied to Trafficante and Rosselli.
Instead, the FBI flooded the Commission staff with reports of wild allegations and irrelevant paperwork.
That’s why you’ll find Jack Ruby’s mother’s dental records in the twenty-six volumes of supporting evidence for the one-volume Warren Report but nothing about the JFK—Almeida coup plan, the ClA—Mafia plots, or the threat against JFK by Marcello and Trafficante that informants reported to the FBI in 1962.
Like Marcello, neither David Ferrie nor Guy Banister—who died of natural causes on June 6, 1964—is mentioned even once in the Warren Report.
I noted in early chapters the Commission’s internal struggles over their conclusion, but another problem surfaced just as the Commission had hoped to be wrapping up.
Commission staffers and the FBI were under pressure to resolve the matter of Silvia Odio’s visit from Oswald and two exiles a couple of months prior to JFK’s murder.
The soldier of fortune knew Santo Trafficante and had been under house arrest with the mob boss in Cuba in 1959, before being asked to join the CIA—Mafia plots to kill Castro in the spring of 1963.
Hall’s convenient claim came just in time for the Warren Commission’s last meeting, two days later.
At that final meeting, three of the Commission members, led by Georgia Senator Richard Russell, tried to include a dissenting opinion about the “magic bullet” theory.
Over the next two days, Hall changed his story and denied having visited Odio, as did his two friends, but it was too late to change the Commission’s Final Report.
THE REPORT WAS submitted to President Johnson on September 24, given to Hoover the following day, and released to the public on September 28, 1964.
The press widely proclaimed the Warren Report, as it came to be known, to be the definitive account of Oswald’s guilt as a lone assassin.
IN ADDITION TO his anti-Castro duties, E Howard Hunt later admitted that during the 1960s, one of his duties for the CIA had been press and publisher relations.
Both Richard Helms and his protégé Hunt played behind-the-scenes roles with the press and publishers during 1964 and afterward, and that likely applied to the reporting of matters relating to the CIA, Cuban exiles, and JFK’s assassination.
The authors of two early books about JFK’s assassination, Thomas Buchanan and Joachim Joesten, a left-wing European journalist and concentration-camp survivor, were the targets of CIA attempts to discredit them.
The CIA even dug up Nazi files to use against Joesten, foreshadowing the more extensive efforts Helms and the CIA would launch against Warren Report critics just two years later.
After the first wave of well-researched, bestselling books critical of the Warren Commission emerged in 1966, early the following year, the CIA issued a fifty-three-page memo detailing how CIA officials could attack critics and bolster the “lone nut” theory in the press.
In the 1970s, the Senate Church Committee was able to document that “the CIA maintained covert relationships with about 50 American journalists or employees of United States media organizations” from the 1960s to the mid-1970s.
Bernstein wrote that even that figure “refers only to those who were ‘tasked’ in their undercover assignments or had a mutual understanding that they would help the Agency or were subject to some form of CIA contractual control.
In E Howard Hunt’s final autobiography, he confirmed Bernstein’s much higher figures and the other information in his article.
In the mid-1960s, Hunt, and his assistant Bernard Barker, was still involved with the Manuel Artime side of the ClA—Mafia plots, which had now been officially merged with the Rolando Cubela assassination operation.
RFK’s liberal exile leader Manolo Ray was no longer working with the CIA, and Eloy Menoyo had been captured while on a mission into Cuba and had been given a life sentence.
However, the CIA started getting reports from Trafficante associates showing that the Cubela operation was insecure.
In addition to the mob-linked security breaches surrounding the Cubela operation, Fidel Castro’s intelligence agents had actually penetrated Artime’s group a year earlier.
Richard Helms was no doubt livid when he saw a January 25, 1965, article in The Nation that gave an all-too-accurate description of the expensive scope of Artime’s operation.
That publicity, various problems with Artime, and the insecurity of Cubela’s operation due to Trafficante’s associates proved too much for Helms, and he began the gradual process of shutting down Artime’s operation.
Harry Williams had one last encounter with his former colleague Manuel Artime, after Artime’s CIA-backed operations had been ended, in part because of financial irregularities.
In Miami, Williams happened to drop by a friend’s house—and was surprised to find Artime, Hunt, and Barker there, along with a Trafficante associate.
Williams told me “they were planning the selling of the equipment” for Artime.
He advised them not to, and after declining their offer to join their venture, he quickly left.
Instead, Artime, Hunt, and Barker sold the supplies and apparently kept the money.
On February 28, 1966, Rolando Cubela was arrested in Cuba, due in part to information from Fidel’s agent in Artime’s camp.
Richard Helms officially became CIA Director on June 30, 1966, putting him in an even stronger position to ensure that his unauthorized activities under JFK and LBJ were not exposed.
In addition to firing Bernard Barker, Helms made sure that six CIA veterans of AMWORLD and his sensitive anti-Castro operations were reassigned to Laos in 1966, where the United States had been waging a secret war for years.
In May 1966, Sam Giancana left the country, after using his work on the CIA—Mafia plots to avoid spending another year in jail for refusing to testify about the Mafia to a grand jury after being granted immunity.
His old pal Johnny Rosselli was not so lucky, when the FBI got a tip that his real name was Filippo Sacco and he wasn’t a United States citizen.
William Harvey tried to get the CIA to aid Rosselli, but to no avail, and Harvey was forced to resign from the CIA the following year.
Apparently, the younger FBI agents in New Orleans had grown tired of seeing Marcello literally get away with murder.
Apparently hoping to force Hoover to take action against Marcello, an FBI agent staged a public confrontation with the godfather at the airport.
The resulting arrest and charges would dog Marcello for years, eventually sending him to a short stay in federal prison.
Marcello—and ‘Trafficante—was dealt another blow on October 5, 1966, when the Texas Court of Appeals ordered a new trial for Jack Ruby.
Two months later, the same court would order a change of venue to Wichita Falls, Texas, away from Dallas and its mob-affiliated sheriff.
Three days after winning that appeal, Ruby was diagnosed with cancer and died on January 3, 1967, before his trial could begin.
The Times wrote to a New Orleans Police Lieutenant, listing thirty-two questions about the assassination, primarily focused on David Ferrie but also including Carlos Marcello.
The police chief gave a copy of the letter to New Orleans District Attorney Jim Garrison, who then had Ferrie brought in for questioning in December 1966.
Garrison tried to conduct his investigation in secret at first, but it was leaked to the media, resulting in a firestorm of publicity that centered on Ferrie.
At the height of the controversy on February 22, 1967, David Ferrie died, an apparent suicide.
That same night, Ferrie’s friend Eladio del Valle—an associate of Trafficante and Masferrer—was murdered in Florida.
In the weeks and months that followed, Garrison’s investigation was targeted by a variety of people offering to help, some of whom should have been investigated themselves, such as a bitter Cuban exile named Alberto Fowler and Trafficante associates Rolando Masferrer and Loran Hall.
After Ferrie’s death, Garrison focused on Clay Shaw, a coworker of Fowler.
RFK asked his close associate Walter Sheridan to go to New Orleans and look into Garrison’s charges.
However, Sheridan felt that Garrison was a fraud, and he soon began to undermine Garrison’s investigation in various ways, which included producing an NBC News special critical of Garrison.
Recently released FBI files show that in the late spring of 1967, Garrison twice privately considered indicting Marcello for the assassination of JFK but decided not to.
Instead, Garrison’s investigation wound up becoming a media circus, and Clay Shaw was eventually acquitted.
In 1967, amid the Garrison firestorm, to pressure the CIA to help him, Johnny Rosselli began leaking information to columnist Jack Anderson, who was not yet the journalist superstar he would become before the Watergate scandal, five years later.
Rosselli’s leaks to Anderson hinted at the CIA—Mafia plots, though the Mafia don attempted to tie them to Robert Kennedy.
No other reporters followed up on Anderson’s stories, but President Johnson asked CIA Director Richard Helms for a report on the plots and any links they might have had to JFK’s assassination.
Helms met with RFK around this time, and the resulting Inspector General’s report delivered by Helms contained no information about the JFK—Almeida coup plan or AMWORLD, Rosselli’s work for the CIA in the summer and fall of 1963, or the 1959 CIA—Mafia plots involving Jimmy Hoffa.
In July 1967, CIA official Desmond FitzGerald, who had overseen the CIA— Mafia plots in 1963, died of natural causes.
Carlos Marcello would increasingly become the focus of unwanted attention in 1967 and the first half of 1968.
On May 6, 1967, author Ed Reid showed a copy of the manuscript for his new book to the Los Angeles FBI Bureau.
It mentioned for the first time Marcello’s fall 1962 assassination threat against JFK, heard by Ed Becker.
Someone high in the Los Angeles mob learned about Reid’s manuscript, because the very next day the Mafia’s most powerful attorney —Sidney Korshak—provided the FBI with derogatory information about Becker.
Early in 1968, Senator Robert Kennedy began offering behind-the-scenes help to journalist Michael Dorman for an article about Carlos Marcello.
Dorman told author Gus Russo that “Robert Kennedy was enthusiastic about the article” and even offered to have one of his aides assist Dorman.
In March 1968, Robert Kennedy officially entered the race for the presidency.
Just as his late-starting campaign was building impressive momentum, by winning the all-important California primary, he was tragically assassinated on June 4, 1968.
Marcello still ordered contract killings, even while appealing his assault conviction and two-year sentence for slugging an FBI agent.
Marcello was under pressure because he’d been convicted of assaulting the FBI agent, and his appeals were running out.
However, Marcello had backed Nixon for years, and one of Marcello’s “fixers” was close to President Nixon’s own fixer, former mob attorney Murray Chotiner.
That was in stark contrast to his old friend Jimmy Hoffa, who was doing hard time at the Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary.
Since it was one of the least secure and most comfortable federal prisons, allowing more phone calls and visitors than others, Marcello had no trouble running his empire from prison.
When he was released on March 12, 1971—after serving just five months—Marcello emerged much healthier and more fit, ready for what would be his most prosperous decade.
Even before Marcello entered prison in 1970, reporters whispered among themselves that the New Orleans godfather was tied to JFK’s murder.
In fall 1971, Noyes learned from the Los Angeles Chief Deputy District Attorney that the Senate Judiciary Committee was holding secret hearings into the assassinations of John and Robert Kennedy.
An aide to Murphy confirmed the secret hearings to Noyes, who began writing a book about the assassinations, Legacy of Doubt.
At sixty-five, Johnny Rosselli was facing five years in prison after being caught and convicted for his Friars Club cheating scheme and immigration violations.
However, the CIA admits “meeting with INS regarding the status of the deportation proceedings March 1971,” and the INS deportation efforts were halted at that time, after Rosselli entered prison on February 25, 1971.
Rosselli had forced Helms to intervene by resuming his leaks to muckraking columnist Jack Anderson.
The new articles discussed “six attempts against Cuba’s Fidel Castro,” including those involving rifles.
Anderson’s linking the Bay of Pigs and the CIA— Mafia plots to JFK’s assassination would hit President Nixon especially hard, since it referred to events during his tenure as Vice President.
Nixon’s alarm at the time was confirmed by long-secret Senate Watergate Committee files that I published for the first time in 2012.
However, Anderson’s column didn’t mention Trafficante, Giancana, Marcello, or David Morales—meaning that someone as knowledgeable as Helms would realize Rosselli had more bombshells to drop, if he chose.
Soon after the Rosselli-Anderson articles, E Howard Hunt began working as a White House consultant.
Clearly, as a veteran of the ClA—Mafia plots that Nixon had begun back in 1960, Hunt’s first priority was to make sure that Nixon’s role in those plots didn’t surface.
Testimony shows that Hunt was even ordered by the White House to look into assassinating Jack Anderson.
Later in 1971, CIA official David Atlee Phillips was apparently overseeing a new assassination attempt against Fidel Castro, once more involving Cuban exile Antonio Veciana.
The attempt failed, but Fidel was apparently so angry that he ordered the compilation of a huge Dossier of the CIA’s attempts to kill him.
The Dossier—with extensive details, including photos of captured weapons and assassins—began when Nixon was Vice President in 1960 and continued under Nixon’s Presidency.
As the new Senate Watergate files indicate, and Watergate burglar Frank Fiorini confirmed in a long-overlooked published interview, the Watergate break-ins were all about trying to see if that Dossier had fallen into the hands of Nixon’s enemies.
The first break-in involving Hunt, Barker, Fiorini (using the name Frank Sturgis), and the other “Plumbers” occurred at the Chilean Embassy in Washington.
That burglary, which Nixon talked about on a White House tape, occurred two weeks before the first Watergate break-in.
As Trafficante later revealed to the Chief Investigator for his attorney, that’s also why almost all of the Watergate burglars were veterans of the C[A—Mafia plots.
Remarkably, six months before the first Watergate break-in, President Nixon had received a new Mafia bribe of $1 million involving Jimmy Hoffa.
Just as in 1960, this new Mafia—Hoffa bribe again involved Carlos Marcello, Santo Trafficante, and New Jersey mobster Tony Provenzano.
As documented by the FBI and Time magazine, the bribe was for Hoffa’s release from prison, only with the condition that he couldn’t return to the Teamsters for eight years.
The mob bosses preferred to deal with Hoffa’s easygoing replacement, Frank Fitzsimons, instead of the volatile Hoffa, hence the special stipulation barring Hoffa from the Teamsters.
In late 1973, Hoffa—angry that Nixon had kept him from the Teamsters— tipped Senate Watergate Committee investigators about Nixon, Johnny Rosselli, and the CIA—Mafia plots.
Committee investigators interviewed Johnny Rosselli in a secret session about those plots.
However, for reasons that are still unclear, that part of the investigation was shut down in early 1974 and was withheld from the press.
However, following Nixon’s resignation in August 1974, leaks about assassinations coming from new President Gerald Ford resulted in news articles that caused Ford to create the Rockefeller Commission on January 4, 1975, to investigate CIA activities, including assassination plots and JFK’s assassination.
Their goal was to investigate CIA operations, domestic surveillance, and assassination plots.
In the case of each of those Committees, all the files about JFK—Almeida coup plan—and its infiltration by the Mafia—were withheld from Congress.
That was ostensibly to protect Almeida, still a very high official in Cuba, from being exposed as a United States asset.
It also prevented the exposure of intelligence failures by agencies like the CIA and potentially embarrassing revelations about officials of both parties.
All four men had been part of the Nixon Administration during the Watergate scandal, which had involved numerous veterans of the anti-Castro plots, including those linked to the Mafia.
Of course, Marcello, Trafficante, and Rosselli had the most to fear if their roles in JFK’s assassination were exposed by the Congressional investigations.
The godfathers would try to prevent that at any cost, even if it meant murdering some of their own.
Even as the Rockefeller Commission issued its final report on June 11, 1975, the Senate Church Committee intensified its efforts.
On June 13, the Church Committee again grilled Helms, this time exclusively about CIA assassination plots, including those with the Mafia.
He testified in closed session, so the public had no way to know what he said—or didn’t say.
Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficante would have been extremely concerned, since Helms’s revelations about the ClA—Mafia plots could lead to the exposure of their roles in JFK’s murder.
In the short term, Trafficante had the most to lose, since he’d played a much bigger role in the C[A—Mafia plots.
Trafficante would have been especially worried when Sam Giancana was subpoenaed and slated to testify on June 26.
On June 19, 1975, Sam Giancana became the first of several Congressional witnesses to be murdered.
The former mob boss was cooking a late-night meal for a trusted friend visiting his home in Chicago’s Oak Park neighborhood.
His friend shot Giancana seven times with a silenced .22-caliber pistol, an unusually small gun for a mob hit.
Five of the shots were around Giancana’s chin and mouth, a sign that Mafiosi shouldn’t talk.
The gun was eventually traced to Florida, and some pointed the finger at Trafficante.
One government informant, Charles Crimaldi, said that Giancana was killed by someone who worked for the CIA, though the hit man was acting on his own and not at the request of officials.
Since several CIA assets and officials also worked with the Mafia, the hit man could have been someone with ties to both the mob and the Agency.
Giancana’s murder made headlines across the country, adding urgency to the Committees’ investigations.
The day after Giancana’s death, CIA Director William Colby testified about CIA assassination plots, followed four days later by Johnny Rosselli.
The transcripts—kept secret until the 1990s—show that Rosselli had mastered the art of saying a lot while revealing little, sticking to an incomplete version of the CIA—Mafia plots that mirrored the whitewashed version Helms had promulgated in his own testimony and in the 1967 Inspector General’s Report.
On June 25, William Harvey testified to the Church Committee about the CIA—Mafia plots, followed by more testimony from Helms on July 17 and 18, both in closed sessions.
Jack Anderson wrote once more about Rosselli on July 7, and Time magazine ran an article touching on the original 1959 ClA—Mafia plots that Jimmy Hoffa had brokered—a story Hoffa himself had just leaked to someone with the Church Committee.
Hoffa was now in the crosshairs of the Committee, because of Time’s article about the 1959 CIA—Mafia plots.
Carlos Marcello and Santo Trafficane couldn’t afford to let Hoffa testify, continue his leaks to Committee staff, or continue his efforts to rejoin the Teamsters.
According to the CAMTEX FBI file, Marcello summoned Hoffa to Churchill Farms for a conference shortly before his disappearance, but Hoffa refused to back down.
On July 30, 1975, Jimmy Hoffa was spotted leaving a restaurant near Detroit, headed for what he thought was a meeting with New Jersey mobster Tony Provenzano, an associate of Carlos Marcello’s.
Hoffa was killed the same day Senator George McGovern released to the United States news media an updated copy of the Cuban Dossier of CIA assassination attempts against Castro, which McGovern had recently received in Cuba.
Johnny Rosselli used Jack Anderson to ensure he didn’t meet the same fate as Giancana and Hoffa.
Anderson’s September 1, 1975, column claimed that Rosselli had avoided deportation because of his war record, helping Rosselli show Trafficante and Marcello that he wasn’t getting preferential INS treatment because he was testifying.
Rosselli was back in front of the Church Committee on September 22, ten days after Helms had faced the Committee yet again.
Trafficante’s old associate Rolando Masferrer—who was on the fringe of the JFK plot—was killed in a spectacular car bombing on October 31, 1975.
His death could have been related to the Church Committee hearings or to the general upsurge of violence in Miami’s exile community, fueled by politics and the expanding drug trade.
A current article about JFK’s assassination was on Masferrer’s desk when he died.
John Martino, Masferrer’s mutual associate with Trafficante, had died of natural causes on August 3, 1975, three days after Hoffa disappeared.
In declining health, Martino had finally confessed his role in JFK’s murder to two friends, his business partner and reporter John Cummings.
The Church Committee apparently never learned about Martino or his published Statements about the Kennedys’ 1963 coup and invasion plan.
William Harvey, who had already testified to the Church Committee but had not revealed all he knew about the CIA—Mafia plots, died on June 9, 1976.
In addition to the main Senate Church Committee, there was a subcommittee with Senators Gary Hart and Richard Schweiker that was devoted exclusively to exploring JFK’s assassination.
Their report was issued on June 23, 1976, but Schweiker was determined to forge ahead with the investigation, which included the possibility of more interrogation of Johnny Rosselli by increasingly knowledgeable Senate staffers.
During intense questioning, he had reportedly given Congressional investigators Santo Trafficante’s name in relation to JFK’s assassination.
Rosselli had to explain to Wadden why that, or further testimony, was so dangerous.
According to historian Richard Mahoney, Rosselli confessed to Wadden his “role in plotting to kill the President”—-something Wadden revealed only much later, to RFK’s former Mafia prosecutor William Hundley.
On July 16, 1976, Rosselli had dinner with Trafficante and told the godfather he’d had to mention his name during his most recent testimony.
Twelve days later, on July 28, 1976, Rosselli was seen alive in public for the last time.
Once it was Clear Rosselli was missing, Senator Schweiker asked the FBI to look into the matter.
Rosselli’s body finally turned up on August 7, 1976, in a fifty-five-gallon oil drum, found in a canal near Miami.
Rosselli had been shot and stabbed, his legs cut off, and his body stuffed in the oil drum.
It was shot with holes, so it wouldn’t float, then weighted with chains, but somehow it was still discovered.
The police were officially baffled, and E Howard Hunt suggested that Fidel had killed Rosselli.
However, three of Rosselli’s associates said that Trafficante had ordered the gruesome slaying.
Rosselli’s murder was the kind of headline news that even the most jaded or intimidated reporter couldn’t ignore, especially after Jack Anderson revealed information he had to keep secret while Rosselli was alive.
In his September 7, 1976, column, Anderson wrote that Rosselli had said those involved in the CIA—Mafia plots had killed JFK and even hinted that shots from the grassy knoll were part of that plan.
The Senate Church Committee hearings had overshadowed those in the House by the Pike Committee, but on September 17, 1976—amid the furor created by Rosselli’s murder—the House created the Select Committee on Assassinations.
Unfortunately, the investigation’s first nine months were hampered by problems in settling on a chief counsel to direct the probe and determining which member of Congress would chair the Committee.
Not until the summer of 1977 did the House Select Committee finally have its permanent general counsel, G Robert Blakey, creator of the RICO racketeering law and a former Mafia prosecutor for Robert Kennedy.
Santo Trafficante had been interviewed once by the Church Committee, with no record kept at Trafficante’s request, but he couldn’t count on such consideration from the new House Select Committee.
Hit man Charles Nicoletti, an associate of Johnny Rosselli’s and a veteran of the CIA—Mafia plots with Trafficante, was slated to talk to Congressional investigators.
But on March 29, 1977, Nicoletti was “the victim of a mob assassination” in Chicago, according to the Miami Herald.
The article mentioned that Nicoletti had once “been responsible for drawing up CIA-ordered plans for the assassination of Castro .. . in October, 1963,” though at that time, Nicoletti’s mob superiors were far more focused on assassinating JFK than Castro.
Gaeton Fonzi, an investigator for the Church Committee, had gone to work for the new House Select Committee on Assassinations.
On the same day that Nicoletti died, Fonzi was in south Florida to interview George DeMohrenschildt, the sophisticated White Russian who had been Oswald’s best friend for a time.
Even as Fonzi spoke to DeMohrenschildt’s daughter about arranging the interview, DeMohrenschildt was meeting with a writer for the Wall Street Journal, Edward Epstein, telling Epstein he’d informed Dallas CIA official J Walton Moore about Oswald’s activities.
That evening, before Fonzi could meet him, DeMohrenschildt committed suicide by putting the barrel of a .20-gauge shotgun in his mouth and pulling the trigger.
About a week later, Fonzi had also planned to set up an interview in Miami with former Cuban president Carlos Prio, also an associate of Trafficante’s.
On April 5, 1977, before Fonzi could interview him, Prio committed suicide by shooting himself in the heart with a .38 pistol.
That fall, Fonzi tried to arrange an interview with Cuban exile Manuel Artime after being tipped that Artime had “guilty knowledge” of JFK’s assassination.
Artime, one of E Howard Hunt’s best friends and a supplier of “hush money” to Hunt and the other Watergate burglars, had become a player in Miami’s exploding drug market.
Fonzi’s partner talked to Artime in early November about scheduling an interview, but Artime entered the hospital the following week, was diagnosed with cancer, and died two weeks later, on November 18, 1977, at only forty-five.
The following spring, Fonzi tried to track down David Morales, though the CIA made it difficult for the House Select Committee to determine even Morales’s CIA position in 1963.
Two weeks after David Atlee Phillips and Antonio Veciana testified to the Select Committee in executive session—and after Morales was added to the list of CIA personnel the Committee wanted to interview—Morales died, apparently of natural causes, on May 8, 1978.
In less than three years, Congressional investigations had been thwarted by the deaths of at least nine actual or potential witnesses, from the sensational murders of Rosselli, Giancana, and Hoffa to the unexpected deaths of Morales, Artime, and DeMohrenschildt.
Those important witnesses died before they could testify fully or, in most cases, testify at all.
Surprisingly, even after Harry Williams had seen those headlines, he still volunteered to talk to the House Select Committee, but he never heard back from them.
Richard Helms faced charges about lying to Congress that needed to be resolved before he could testify.
After a major White House meeting about the issue in July 1977, Helms agreed to plead guilty to making a false statement to Congress and was fined $2,000 on November 4, 1977.
Later that day, he went to a CIA reception where his current and former CIA colleagues donated an even larger amount.
Santo Trafficante had primarily pleaded the Fifth in his first House Select Committee appearance on March 16, 1977, but Blakey arranged to grant him and Marcello limited immunity, in an effort to get them to talk.
The situation was complicated because Trafficante was under indictment for charges relating to the FBI’s BRILAB investigation, which had grown out of the Watergate-era prosecution of Nixon’s former attorney general, Richard Kleindienst.
Carlos Marcello didn’t realize his new business partner, Joe Hauser, would soon be a wired FBI informant for that operation.
Nonetheless, Trafficante testified on November 14, 1977, and September 28, 1978, and Marcello testified in January 1978.
Both gave cautious statements and denied having anything to do with JFK’s murder.
The same month that Trafficante testified for the last time, author Dan Moldea had a revealing exchange with Frank Ragano, Trafficante’s former attorney who had gone through a very acrimonious split with the Tampa godfather.
Possibly as part of a Teamster effort to suppress Moldea’s book, Ragano had offered Moldea a large sum for the rights to it.
As part of their back and forth, in September 1978 Moldea had his attorney ask Ragano about his book’s theory that Hoffa, Marcello, and Trafficante were behind JFK’s murder.
Bernard Barker had been released from prison for his Watergate crimes in June 1974, but by 1978 he was being investigated by the House Select Committee on Assassinations.
That is highly unusual, since even the testimony of far more senior CIA figures like Richard Helms, E Howard Hunt, and David Atlee Phillips has been released in full.
For CIA figures, testimony can be released with any sensitive terms or identities censored, so it’s remarkable that all of Barker’s Committee testimony remains secret.
Even though the Committee conducted an investigation of Barker, it’s not mentioned in the Committee’s Final Report or in any of their supporting volumes.
However, the memorandum’s biography of Barker does not mention the FBI report of Barker’s gangster activity in Cuba, which may not have been provided to the Committee.
There is no indication in the memo that the Committee investigated Barker’s Mafia ties.
The CIA withheld much material from the Committee about the roles of Barker in the JEK—Almeida coup plan and the CIA—Mafia plots.
A short time later, CIA officer George Joannides was assigned to be the Agency’s new liasion with the House Select Committee.
Joannides had worked with David Atlee Phillips in 1963, running the DRE exile group involved in the altercation with Oswald.
The Committee wanted to interview the CIA agent running the DRE in 1963, but Joannides claimed he couldn’t be found.
It appears that some high CIA official, probably Ted Shackley, was using Joannides—and the excuse of protecting Almeida—to withhold important information from the Committee.
As the House Select Committee on Assassinations rushed to finish its work on the JFK assassination, acoustic tests indicated there had been at least one shot from the grassy knoll.
Those highly technical findings have been the source of much debate ever since, so I have not factored them into my conclusions.
When the House Committee submitted its Final Report on March 29, 1979, its ultimate conclusion about JFK’s murder was that it was likely a conspiracy, involving at least one shot from the grassy knoll.
The Committee found that Trafficante, like Marcello, had the motive, means, and opportunity to assassinate President Kennedy.
Investigator Gaeton Fonzi later wrote a book-length account of all the Agency stonewalling the Committee had faced, called The Last Investigation.
The Committee also recommended the Justice Department investigate the possible involvement of Marcello and Trafficante in JFK’s murder.
BY 1981, CARLOS Marcello was feeling the full force of the FBI’s BRILAB undercover operation.
Facing the biggest legal battle of his life, Marcello was under indictment in Louisiana for trying to bribe state officials in a multimilliondollar insurance scam.
In Los Angeles, he’d been indicted for trying to bribe a federal judge.
Even worse, much of the evidence was in the godfather’s own words, recorded by a bug and phone taps the FBI had finally placed in Marcello’s office at the Town and Country Motel.
He was aided by two undercover FBI agents, who pretended to be crooked businessmen.
In Miami, Santo Trafficante was under indictment for a $1 million labor union fraud scheme.
Both Trafficante and Marcello were also hit with RICO racketeering charges, using the statute that G Robert Blakey had helped create.
Trafficante would avoid conviction, but Marcello’s luck had finally run out.
They weren’t mentioned in the press and were barred from the trial, at Marcello’s lawyers’ request, so they wouldn’t prejudice the jury.
Still, the jury was able to hear hours of Marcello discussing the blatant corruption and crimes he had been committing for years.
Marcello was convicted in Louisiana on August 4, 1981, and in Los Angeles on December 11, 1981.
The following year, he was sentenced to seven years for the Louisiana counts and ten years for the Los Angeles counts.
His powerful attorneys did everything they could, but on April 15, 1983, Marcello’s BRILAB appeal was denied and he was ordered to begin serving his sentence immediately.
The prison and its park-like grounds were designated as level one, meaning it was one of the least secure and most comfortable federal prisons.
But after a year, Marcello was transferred to the far more secure federal prison in Texarkana, Texas, an imposing level-three facility where most prisoners had few comforts.
However, Marcello was not like most other prisoners, and he soon found ways to receive extraordinary privileges.
AS DETAILED IN Chapter Three, by December 1985, Jack Van Laningham was Carlos Marcello’s cellmate at Texarkana, as part of the FBI’s highly secret CAMTEX undercover operation.
Van Laningham had placed a court-authorized, bugged transistor radio in their cell, and the Bureau was recording everything the two said there.
Agent Tom Kirk worked undercover, pretending to be a sleazy businessman with a friend in the Bureau of Prisons who—for the right price—could get Marcello transferred to a nicer prison and, eventually, even released.
While Carlos was in prison, his younger brother, Joe*, ran the parts of Carlos’s empire that the godfather couldn’t run from prison.
Van Laningham tried to mollify the godfather and reassured him his secret was safe, all while knowing the FBI was recording their coversation through the bugged transitor radio.
Van Laningham was even more nervous about his undercover role after Marcello’s admission.
Marcello’s family had paid the first bribe, and the godfather wanted Jack to be the first to go to the nicer level-two Seagoville Prison near Dallas, where Marcello would join him a few days later.
The next time Marcello brought up the Kennedys and his deportation while they were in their cell, Jack encouraged him to talk about his hatred of the Kennedys.
That resulted in Marcello’s making a few more revelations about the assassination, including the two hitmen he imported from Europe, which were all recorded by the FBI’s bugged radio.
He said we have become good friends and I want to tell you a story; he was dead serious and I was scared.
He was telling me that if I crossed him, the grass would grow over me, as I would be dead.
After the godfather was moved to Fort Worth, a final bribe—$1 million—was to be paid to Kirk, for Marcello’s early release from prison.
Marcello complained to Van Laningham about the “running of his organization,” by his brother, Joe Marcello, who lacked the ability to run such a huge criminal empire.
Marcello’s family member paid the bribe, and Marcello was moved to the Fort Worth facility.
However, when it came for Joe Marcello to pay the final bribe, to get his older brother released from prison, it wasn’t paid.
WHILE MARCELLO SAT in prison, his old partner Santo Trafficante made a startling confession to his old attorney.
On March 13, 1987, the seventy-twoyear-old Trafficante called Frank Ragano to arrange a meeting for the following day.
Trafficante had brought Ragano back into the fold, after smoothing over their acrimonious split in the 1970s, and in 1986 Ragano had helped Trafficante beat a federal RICO prosecution.
But the Tampa godfather had fallen seriously ill, was facing risky surgery, and wanted to talk to his old confidant one last time.
During an hour-long drive in Ragano’s car, away from family and any possibility of government bugs, Trafficante mused about his criminal career and their long association.
According to Ragano, when the subject of John and Robert Kennedy came up, Trafficante said , “Goddam Bobby.
Ragano later claimed he was stunned that Trafficante was admitting a role in JFK’s murder.
Ragano held a news conference in front of the Trafficante family home in Tampa’s posh Parkland Estates.
In discussing Trafficante’s illness, Ragano mentioned his meeting with Trafficante four days earlier, as documented in a Tampa Tribune article published the following day.
Ragano wouldn’t reveal Trafficante’s confession to the public until 1992, and it wouldn’t be detailed fully until his 1994 autobiography was published.
Trafficante’s family remained silent when Ragano’s allegation first surfaced, but in 1994 they denied Ragano’s account to Anthony Summers and other journalists.
They claimed Trafficante had been receiving medical treatment in Miami on March 13 and therefore couldn’t have been in Tampa, where Ragano says his meeting took place.
However, while medical records prove that Trafficante was in Miami receiving dialysis on March 12 and March 14, no medical records place him there on March 13.
By May 21, 1987, it was clear that Marcello’s family was never going to pay the final bribe for Marcello’s release.
That night, federal marshals removed Marcello from his comfortable room at the Fort Worth prison.
To Marcello, his family, and his attorneys, the sudden move from level-one Fort Worth to the remote level-three Texarkana must have seemed like a nightmare.
They no doubt tried to contact Kirk for an explanation, but his undercover role for CAMTEX had ended.
For Carlos Marcello, the move would have been a crushing, devastating blow.
Joe Marcello’s friend was not a criminal, just a salesman who dealt with one of the legitimate businesses Joe Marcello managed for his brother’s empire in the mid-1980s.
The salesman and his family were with Joe Marcello at his restaurant one afternoon, for a holiday meal.
The salesman thought it odd that Joe would have such a meal with him, instead of with his family.
Early in the meal, someone came out from the back of the restaurant and whispered to Joe Marcello.
Joe excused himself, and an unusually long amount of time passed, more than an hour, with no sign of Joe.
Joe said nothing more, but the salesman thought it so unusual that he told another family member about it.
JACK VAN LANINGHAM knew nothing about that, when he called Carlos Marcello’s office in April 1988, shortly after Easter.
Van Laningham, still in prison in California, was simply curious about what had happened to Marcello and assumed his secret was still safe.
Van Laningham was frantic and remembered Marcello’s threat to him, after the godfather’s outburst about ordering JFK’s assassination.
He knew enough about Marcello’s associates and connections to realize he was in danger, especially while he remained in prison.
Fearing for his life, Van Laningham wrote the first of a series of increasingly frantic letters to the Justice Department in Washington.
He listed the important information he had obtained for the FBI, including Marcello’s JFK confession.
Van Laningham said that “ Kirk told me during the investigation that the Attorney General knew what was going on.
Van Laningham also told the Justice Department, “Marcello knows all about what we did to him.
Van Laningham also volunteered to take a lie-detector test about Marcello’s JFK confession.
Finally, Van Laningham also threatened to tell the news media about his FBI work and about the Justice Department’s reluctance to prosecute Carlos Marcello or his brother.
Unknown to Van Laningham, in mid-1988 John H Davis had been in contact with the FBI regarding his upcoming biography of Carlos Marcello, scheduled for release in January 1989, since he was seeking the release of FBI files and the BRILAB surveillance tapes of Marcello.
PBS and journalist Jack Anderson were also working on major television specials for the twenty-fifth anniversary of JFK’s assassination in November 1988, which would include information linking Marcello to JFK’s murder.
A high official in the Reagan—Bush Justice Department apparently decided it was better not to add Van Laningham’s explosive Marcello confession to the mix.
By September 1988, Van Laningham had been given a firm release date in January 1989, ending any talk of his going to the press—and any chance his explosive information could be added to Davis’s book.
HALF A DOZEN television specials aired around November 22, 1988, several featuring information about the Mafia, with two specifically highlighting Marcello.
However, none of the journalists knew the FBI was sitting on a trove of secret reports and tapes that included Marcello’s confession.
It focused extensively on Marcello, Trafficante, and especially Rosselli, though it sometimes appeared to endorse Rosselli’s false claim that Castro was involved in JFK’s murder.
Anderson’s documentary revealed that much information—especially from the CI[A—remained unreleased.
His special, and the other programs and articles that appeared by November 22, 1988, started to generate a movement calling for the release of all the JFK assassination files.
Unlike most other books and articles published at the time, it presented Marcello not as one of many suspects in JFK’s murder but as THE suspect.
Even with so much material still withheld, Davis came remarkably close to outlining how Marcello had murdered JFK, something that would have seriously alarmed Marcello and his men.
Essentially, the attention generated by the twenty-fifth anniversary coverage reignited public interest in JFK’s murder, eventually leading to action by Congress.
In January 1989, Jack Van Laningham was paroled from federal prison and sent to a halfway house in Tampa, Florida, where Trafficante’s mob family was still active.
Regarding the situation with Carlos Marcello, he made a call to Marcello’s office, in hopes of reaching some type of accommodation.
Since Marcello remained in prison, his organization was still being run by Joe Marcello and underbosses like Frank Caracci, who’d met with Jack Ruby six weeks before JFK’s murder.
A few days after his call to Marcello’s office, Van Laningham had left work and was walking back to the halfway house.
The two looked like mob “torpedoes” but initially seemed as if they were going to give him something—until they began savagely beating him.
While one of the men held the stunned Van Laningham on the ground, the other looked around and—seeing no one in the area—went back to the car to get his gun.
Suddenly, a car pulled onto the street, and the driver—spying Van Laningham on the ground—stopped and called out.
The two hitmen jumped in their car and sped off while the driver helped him to his feet.
Van Laningham was helping the Tampa FBI at the time, and he reported the attack to them.
Finally, the FBI gave Van Laningham a lie-detector test, not only about the attack but also about Carlos Marcello’s JFK confession, and he passed.
He was eventually released from parole and kept a very low profile for twenty years, until he was finally located by NBC News, to appear in my 2009 special that NBC produced for the Discovery Channel.
IN JANUARY 1989, Carlos Marcello also had the first of several small strokes.
The godfather was transferred to Rochester, Minnesota’s, Medical Center for federal prisoners.
Apparently, the Bureau didn’t question Marcello at that time about his earlier remarks to Van Laningham.
By that time, the debilitating effects of Marcello’s strokes, compounded by Alzheimer’s, were clear.
One of the CAMTEX FBI officials told us he had not noticed any signs of the latter four years earlier, while listening to all of the Bureau’s undercover Marcello tapes in 1985 and 1986.
Agent Kimmel said he thought a few of Marcello’s remarks showed such indications; however, they weren’t enough to stop the dangerous CAMTEX undercover operation, which continued until May 1987.
It’s important to note that both Van Laningham and Agent Kirk were risking their lives for the FBI at that time, something the Bureau would not have allowed if Marcello had shown serious signs of being senile.
Marcello’s statements, noted by Van Laningham in the FBI files, are usually accurate and consistent with facts not well known at the time.
Van Laningham said Marcello was mentally “sharp” with no signs of Alzheimer’s while he knew him, and the aging godfather demonstrated a firm grasp of complex criminal matters in the 1985 and 1986 accounts.
The earliest documented sign of Alzheimer’s was noted by John H Davis, who indicated that by January 1, 1988, those visiting Marcello had begun to notice signs of the disease.
Carlos Marcello was released from prison on October 6, 1989, after his BRILAB conviction was reversed unexpectedly.
The government decided not to retry him, so Marcello, increasingly incapacitated from the strokes and his Alzheimer’s, returned to Louisiana.
By the time of his strokes, Marcello’s empire had begun to break apart.
After spending his final years at home, his mind ravaged increasingly by disease and strokes, Carlos Marcello died on March 2, 1993, at age eighty-three.
He reportedly died peacefully at his home, a far cry from the bloody executions he had ordered for so many victims.
IN 1989, COMMANDER Juan Almeida was still a revered figure in the Cuban government, and his secret work for JFK had not been exposed.
However, some of his protégés were caught up in a major drug scandal in 1989.
One may have bartered for his life by revealing Almeida’s work for JFK, because soon after the trials, Almeida largely disappeared from view in Cuba.
There was no official explanation, though Almeida’s absence was noted by exiles and journalists.
It was after Almeida’s disappearance that JFK’s Secretary of State Dean Rusk first revealed JFK’s fall 1963 coup plan to me.
With Almeida assumed dead, and with the 1992 passing of former exile Tony Varona, Harry Williams began telling Thom Hartman and me details about the coup plan.
Williams revealed Bernard Barker’s work for Trafficante, and that he eventually learned both were involved in JFK’s assassination.
Williams for the first time also named Almeida, whose identity as the coup leader was soon confirmed by a former JFK and RFK associate who later became a prominent Washington official.
In November 1994, I informed the Review Board very generally about JFK’s 1963 “plans for a coup in Cuba,” without revealing Almeida’s identity.
By 1995, Commander Almeida had resurfaced in Cuba, perhaps because his presence was needed to help stabilize the country, which was in dire financial Straits after the fall of the Soviet empire.
No official explanation for Almeida’s return, or his several-year fall from grace, was ever given.
Harry Williams passed away on March 10, 1996, after Thom and I had extensively interviewed him as a confidential source more than half a dozen times.
Though his own extensive CIA and FBI files remain unreleased, he lived to see a few declassified AMWORLD memos about himself, which detailed and confirmed information he had first revealed to us four years earlier.
In 1997, the Review Board declassified hundreds of pages of military files about JFK’s 1963 “Plans for a Coup in Cuba” from the files of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Joseph Califano, but none named Almeida—they referred only generally to the high-ranking Cuban military officials who would lead the coup.
However, after being contacted by a JFK Review Board official in late 1997 and 1998, I confidentially provided the official with the first information naming Almeida and AMWORLD, which the official tried to get released.
The Board’s mandate expired in September 1998, and though it had declassified more than 4. million files, NBC News reported on September 29, 1998, that “millions” of pages remain unreleased.
Also, Phillips grew up in Fort Worth and had friends and former classmates in the area, so it’s hard to believe Phillips would have met Lee Oswald in public, in Dallas, less than three months before JFK’s murder, if he knew Oswald was going to be blamed for the assassination.
As with William Harvey, and E Howard Hunt, only the release of the remaining JFK assassination files might clarify the matter.
Richard Helms died on October 23, 2002, having successfully maintained his decades-long cover-up in the public eye and largely rebuilt his reputation in the process.
Hunt limited his JFK assassination comments in his book to speculation, some of which was inconsistent with remarks he made to his son in a so-called “confession” tape.
Hunt tried to make millions selling his story to actor Kevin Costner before his death, and some of Hunt’s account appears to have been cribbed from existing JFK conspiracy books, as he speculated about a large conspiracy that could have included LBJ, Cord Meyer, William Harvey, David Phillips, David Morales, Frank Fiorini, and French hit man Lucien Sarti.
Most tellingly, Hunt never mentioned—in his autobiography or in his son’s tape—the documented Mafia ties of his best friend Manuel Artime and former assistant Barker, or their work on the CIA—Mafia plots.
Whether Hunt was involved in the assassination, or was used by Barker on behalf of Trafficante, might only be known when the remaining JFK assassination files are released.
On September 11, 2009, Commander Almeida passed away in Cuba, with his work for John and Robert Kennedy never having been publicly exposed to the Cuban people.
In the last years of Almeida’s life, after Fidel Castro’s illness forced him to step down, Almeida had very high profile in Cuba.
After serving twenty-one years in a Cuban prison, former exile leader Eloy Menoyo was released in 1986, the same year Senator Edward Kennedy engineered the release of the last Bay of Pigs prisoner.
Former exile leaders Manolo Ray and Antonio Veciana are still alive, in Miami and Puerto Rico, respectively.
Several Cuban-exile military veterans of AMWORLD and JFK’s Cuban-American training at Fort Benning have formed CAMCO, an outreach to military leaders inside Cuba.
Standing in the way of any true normalization between the United States and Cuba is the continued withholding of so many JFK assassination files.
The respected Washington think tank OMB Watch found that “well over one million CIA records” pertaining to JFK’s assassination remain unreleased.
But despite the 1992 law requiring their release, the CIA intends to keep those records secret until at least 2017 and has reserved the right in court filings to keep them secret even longer.
With Almeida’s death, there is no longer any legitimate national security reason for so many files to be withheld.
As of September 16, 2013, the National Archives has refused to tell the public or journalists exactly how many JFK assassination files are still secret.
Until all the files are released, former officials and CIA personnel will continue to say or imply that Fidel killed JFK, thus perpetuating the fifty-plusyear Cold War with Cuba.
Only public pressure on Congress and the White House can get the remaining JFK files released.
And for framed ex—Secret Service Agent Abraham Bolden, still fighting for a pardon after almost fifty years, they represent his last chance for justice.
SELECTED GOVERNMENT DOCUMENTS This memo refers to the FBI’s CAMTEX undercover operation that targeted godfather Carlos Marcello in prison, and obtained his confession to JFK's murder.
The secret coup plan, and the code-name for part of it—AMWORLD—was withheld from the Warren Commission and the five later United States government committees that investigated JFK’s murder.
Qn February 15, 1964, John V Martino, born August 3, 1911, at Atianeie City, New Jarsey, and resident, with his family, at 2326 Aiton Road, Miami Beach, Florida, gtated he was sware of the article which had appeared in the Memphis, Tennessee, ""Press-Scimitar,"" on January 30, 1964.
Mr Martino said he had been interviewed by Kay Pittwan of the ""Press-Seimitar"" on the day before he gave a lecture in Memphis om the situation fm Cuba.
With regard to the content of the newspaper erticle, Mr Martino gatd Lt bad been completely twisted by the raporcer, and he had reprimanded her for it while in Memphis.
He said, specificslly, that he had never stated that Osweld had been paid to assassinate Prysicent Kennedy.
He said he does not work with the Cuban underground, es quoted in the ercicle, although he has sources of information concerning activities in Cuba.
He seid he was quoted correctly in the statement that his sources informed him that President Kennedy _ was engeged in @ plot to overthrow the Castro regime by preparing ¢nother invasion attempt against Cuba.
Martine refused to cGivuige the sources of his information or how they might know what plans President Kennedy might Rave had, He ssid it was che opinion of his sources, ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY This is a selected Annotated Bibliography of the source material used in The Hidden History of the JFK Assasssination.
Far more books, documents, and articles were consulted than can be listed here, but the exact source for most quotes can be found using Google.
My previous books dealing with JFK’s assassination, each had approximately 2,000 endnotes, with almost every paragraph, sometimes every line end noted.
This book highlights just the most important references, in an easier-to-read format.
More references will be available after November 10, 2013 at thehiddenhistoryofthejfkassassination.com.
More detailed information about any of the topics covered in this book can be found in my earlier books.
Ultimate Sacrifice covers JFK’s plan for a fall, 1963 coup in Cuba in great detail, as well as all of the events leading up to JFK’s assassination.
Legacy of Secrecy has new material about JFK’s murder especially its aftermath and the cover-ups that followed.
The trade paperback of each contains important material not in the hardback editions.
I’ve listed the most important, well-documented books related to JFK’s assassination that have stood the test of time.
A Google search for documents using some or all of that information will often locate the document.
Alleged Assassination Plots Involving Foreign Leaders. and Church Committee Report, Vol.
This book draws on interviews with more than fifty individuals, conducted over the past 23 years, starting with JFK’s Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, in 1990 and continuing through 2013.
A dozen interviews were conducted with CAMTEX FBI informant Jack Van Laningham, from August 2009 through 2012.
In addition, Van Laningham was the subject of a professionally-filmed Oral History, in which he discussed every aspect of CAMTEX and his time with Carlos Marcello over two days.
Additional CAMTEX< interviews include those with FBI supervisor Thomas Kimmel; with another FBI official who heard all of the CAMTEX tapes of Marcello; and the source with Joe Marcello when Carlos found out Van Laningham was an FBI informant.
In addition to several talks with Ronald Goldfarb and G Robert Blakey, others interviewed include Marvin Loewy, Thomas Kennelly, and John Diuguid, Marcello’s Justice Department Prosecutor in November, 1963.
Interview with ex-Secret Service Agent Abraham Bolden 4-15-98; Interviews with JFK’s Press Secretary, Pierre Salinger 4-3-98 and 4-10-98; Phone interviews with Jim Allison, who witnessed Jack Ruby receiving a payoff of approximately $7,000 in Chicago, several weeks before JFK was almost killed in that city: 4-14-98, 4-15-98 and 4-16-98.
Miguel Casas Saez document 1-27-64, F82-0272/1, declassified 8-16-83; CLA memo about Saez released 8-16-93, still partially censored.
Malone, William Scott, “The Secret Life of Jack Ruby,” New Times 1-23-78.
Summers, Anthony and Robbyn, “The Ghosts of November,” Vanity Fair, December 1994.
JFK Lancer Productions and Publications, 2010) Hinckle, Warren, and William W Turner.
JFK Lancer Productions, 2005) Lifton, David S Best Evidence: Disguise and Deception in the Assassination of John F Kennedy.
The Secret History of America’s War on Drugs ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS This book builds on 25 years of research, and the work that led to my three earlier books about President Kennedy’s life and death.
When I’d said something as concisely and accurately as possible in a previous book, I sometimes adapted that wording for this book.
So, before I thank the many people who made this book a reality, I want to thank those who helped my previous books come to fruition.
There isn’t room to name them all, but their efforts are both appreciated and remembered.
Someone who has been there to shape and mold all of my books is Charlie Winton, Counterpoint’s founder and CEO, and this one is no exception.
A literary editor in the truest sense of the word, he helps to bring my often diffused work into sharp focus, and it’s always the better for it.
Kelly Winton is following in her father’s footsteps at Counterpoint and guided an ever-expanding book —that grew by more than 50%—seamlessly through a tight production schedule.
She coordinated an effective team that included Peg Goldstein’s excellent copyediting, Megan Jones’ attractive interior layout, Charles Brock’s sharp cover design, and Sara Walker’s accurate proofreading.
Publicity expert Lorna Garano is already laying plans to spread the word out about the book, and Judy Klein is always working to bring the book to other countries.
Brad Strickland, an excellent writer himself, always helps my prose to read more smoothly.
Thanks also go to Jack’s son, Craig, for allowing me to provide the proof that backs up his father’s amazing story.
The best research partner anyone could ever have is Thom Hartmann, who helped with the first six years of research and has remained a staunch supporter and friend ever since.
Wife Louise Hartmann and producer Shawn Taylor make Thom’s radio and TV shows a pleasure to be part of, and check out their many great projects at thomhartmann.com.
My father, Clyde Waldron, is my partner in the book writing business, and I couldn’t do it without him.
George and Leonardo DiCaprio, and Earl Katz, have also been great supporters, and—along with Robert De Niro—will soon bring Jack Van Laningham’s story to the screen.
Ron Goldfarb, a long-time friend and supporter, was a great help in getting this book off the ground.
It is truly an international effort, and research help came from Stephane Risset in France, Paul Byrne and John Simkin in England, and Kate Willard in Australia.
Henry Rosenbloom and his crew at Scribe always do a great job in presenting my work in Australia.
Special thanks is due to several key sources for this book, including Daniel Sheehan (whose own autobiography has just been released), Travis Kiger, Casey Quinlan, Thomas Kimmel, and others who wish to remain anonymous.
Dan Moldea, Peter Dale Scott, Anthony Summers and Robbyn Swan, the late John H Davis, John Newman, Dick Russell, and William Turner—I encourage our readers to Seek out their work.
Mike Cain was a source of valuable information about the Chicago Mafia, while Gordon Winslow is a fountain of information about Cuban exiles.
Vince Palamara contributed valuable work about the Secret Service, and Larry Hancock and Stuart Wexler are always sharing new discoveries.
Because historian Gerald McKnight demolished the Warren Commission with his book Breach of Trust, I didn’t have to.
Liz Smith remains an icon of American journalism, who isn’t afraid to report the truth.
Rex Bradford and the Mary Ferrell Foundation do a remarkable job a making one million assassination files available online.
Also great online resources are the National Security Archive; JFK Lancer, run by Debra Conway and Sherry Fiester; and Bill Kelly’s jfkcountercoup.blogspot.com.
Susan Barrows and Chris Barrows are always unfailingly helpful, while Jim Steranko’s interest and encouragement have been part of this project since the start.
To all of these great people—and anyone I might have forgotten—I give my warmest thanks for your help in making this book possible.
