He also defends the use of “peasant” in contrast to awkward terms such as “post-peasant” and “polybian” and goes to great lengths in chapter 2 to argue that, in spite of rising income and living standards, low agricultural productivity is another important hallmark of peasant persistence.
Still, even with these arguments, one might ask if Walker missed an opportunity to move us beyond the concept.
Some may be satisﬁed that “middle-class peasant” sufﬁciently qualiﬁes the term, but others could legitimately argue it recasts the deﬁnition of “peasant” into an unrecognizable meaning.
It is also possible that Walker’s arguments for the “persistence of the peasantry” may be too theoretically subtle or lengthy for utility with respect to the day-to-day consequences of Thailand’s rural transformation.
With rural concern dominated by debt ﬁnancing, contract farming, off-farm opportunity, acquiring pickup trucks, accessing college education, and rising expectations for state welfare, the exploitative connotations embedded in the term “peasant” remain seriously problematic.
Walker’s lengthy defense of the term, if nothing else, may fuel debate rather than resolve it.
Quibbles over terminology aside, the book is an intellectual tour de force that is sure to frame subsequent research on rural Thailand.
The adhesive binding of the ﬁrst copy I read failed with pages separating upon ﬁrst reading.
In the aftermath of Kennedy’s assassination, those “thirteen days” became the centerpiece of the “Camelot” legend.
Remarkably, over ﬁfty years after the fact, this mythological version of the crisis dominates most popular and academic accounts of the missiles of October.
Stern is uniquely qualiﬁed to do what should have been done years ago—challenge the contrived accounts of this seminal event of the young president’s thousand days in ofﬁce.
The American public, members of Congress, former American presidents, the secretary of state, and even President Kennedy’s successor, were misled regarding Kennedy’s decision to remove United States missiles from Turkey.
The key ﬁgures of President Kennedy’s ExComm were Robert Kennedy, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy.
Nonetheless, the President publicly adopted a hawkish stance on the missiles in a nationally televised address to the nation on October 22, 1962.
Kennedy demanded the unconditional removal of Soviet missiles from “that imprisoned island” and announced that a “strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba” was underway.
At the same time Robert Kennedy was meeting with a KGB agent, and through the use of this back channel and others the President brokered a deal with the Russians committing the United States to the removal of American missiles in Turkey and a pledge not to invade Cuba.
The ﬁrst movement occurred at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, where a CIA-trained force of 1400 exiles were all captured or killed.
Kennedy refused to commit American air power to provide cover for the invasion force while they were pinned down on the beach, despite pleas from some of his advisors.
Kennedy’s wavering stance at the Bay of Pigs was followed by his disastrous summit with Khrushchev in Vienna in June 1961, where, as Kennedy himself admitted, the Soviet leader bullied the American president.
This in turn was followed by Kennedy’s tacit approval of the Berlin Wall in August 1961.
In Moscow, Khrushchev had taken the measure of the new American president and was unimpressed.
The Kremlin was emboldened to believe that Kennedy could be intimidated, and this contributed to Khrushchev’s decision to deploy the missiles in Cuba, thus bringing the world to the brink of nuclear war.
In the days after the missile crisis, after securing a “no invasion” pledge, it was no wonder that Khrushchev would proclaim the event a victory for the Soviet bloc.
Sheldon M Stern’s book is history as it should be—challenging the conventional wisdom and dissecting the myths propagated by both sycophants and scholars with an agenda.
Sadly, some ﬁfty years after the missile crisis, the manipulation of history for political purposes continues unabated.
