Towards the Deployment of Nuclear Missiles in Cuba During the 1961 May Day celebrations in Havana, Fidel Castro reiterates that the Cuban Republic is a Socialist Republic.
May Day Celebrations Also in May, the Cuban government sends several requests for peace between Cuba and United States, only weeks after the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Despite Cuba's outstanding victory of self-defense, Cuba still makes efforts to bring peace between the two nations and to re-establish trade agreements.
On the second day of the summit, Khrushchev delivers an ultimatum threatening to ""normalize"" the situation in Berlin if the United States does not withdrawal within six months.
However, the construction of the Berlin Wall brings stability, and Khrushchev allows his deadlines on resolving the Berlin question to pass without further incident.
Back in the Western Hemisphere, on June 6, Prime Minister Castro proposes that Cuba will release all prisoners captured at the Bay of Pigs in exchange for an equal number of political prisioners to be released from Guatemalan, Nicaraguan, Spanish, and United States jails.
On June 13, 1961, United States General Maxwell Taylor submits a report on further United States ""limited war"" programs against Cuba, which Kennedy had ordered following the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
Explaining that there is ""no long term living with Castro as a neighbor"" and that international workers solidarity ""constitutes a real menace"" to Latin American nations, Taylor calls for the creation of a new subversive method for destroying the Cuban Republic.
The options for terrorism against Cuba are among the full range of political, military, economic, and psychological tactics.
On July 26, the CIA fails in another attempt to assasinate Fidel Castro, Raul Castro, and Che Guevara during celebrations commemerating the July 26th movement.
Had the assasinations been successful, Humberto Torres would later explain, the plan called for a covert United States attack against the Guantanamo Naval Base, in order to make it appear as though the Cuban's were attacking the United States in retaliation; thus giving the United States ample political reason for a full military invasion of Cuba.
In August, a rumor planted by the CIA spreads through Cuba, explaining that the government plans to take all Cuban children away from their Mothers and Fathers and raise them in state institutions.
In what is known as ""Operation Peter Pan"", 15,000 Cuban families send their children abroad.
On September 21, 1961, a CIA report on Soviet nuclear capabilities , is disseminated within the United States government.
Only some ten to twenty-five Soviet ICBMs are known to exist in the world, and all within the Soviet Union, with no major increase in Soviet ICBM strength expected in the near future.
By this time the United States has a total of 22,229 nuclear weapons, while the Soviet Union has 2,450.
In October, the terrorist organisation Alpha 66 is founded in Miami, partly out of frustration of continual failed attempts to assasinate Castro after an October 4th attempt had just failed — headed by CIA assasins Antonio Veciana Blank and Bernardo Paradela Ibarreche, their infiltration of Cuba had been discovered, though they killed Delfin Sen Cedre, another teacher in the Literacy Campaign.
On October 15, Rubén López Sabariego, a Cuban worker at the United States held Guant´namo Naval base, is killed.
Two years later, a diligent United States journalist uncovers that the United States Navy secretly dismissed Marine Captain Arthur J Jackson, who explained he was acting in self-defense.
In November 26, Manuel Ascunce Domenech, a volunteer teacher in the Literacy Campaign, and his peasant student Pedro Lantigua, are shot dead by terrorists in Escambray.
On November 30, 1961, after replacing the CIA Director Allen Dulles with John Alex McCone, President Kennedy authorizes another aggressive covert assault on the Cuban Republic codenamed Operation Mongoose.
The operation is directed by the CIA Brigadire General Edward G Lansdale, under the guidance of Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
The CIA creates an organization under its control, the Special Group Augmented , to carry out Operation Mongoose.
Further, William K Harvey is put in charge of Task Force W, under guidance from the SGA, a task force that will subsequently involve approximately four hundred Americans agents at the CIA headquarters in Miami.
Task Force W assimilates about two thousand Cuban exiles, possesses a private naval fleet of speedboats, and has an annual budget of some $50 million.
The chief aim of Task Force W is to attack Cuban ships and aircraft, in addition to any non-Cuban ships engaged in trading with Cuba with tactics being the contamination of shipments of sugar and oil freighters , destroying industrial products, sinking freighters, etc.
During the New Year's Day parade in 1962, Cuba provides United States intelligence with the first reliable information on the extent of Soviet defense arms deliveries to Cuba.
United States intelligence estimates by the planes on display that the aircraft in the possession of the Cuban Revolutionary Air Force includes around sixty Soviet jet fighters, primarily MiG-15 and MiG-17 aircraft with a small number of MiG-19 planes.
The MiG-15 had been first deployed over a decade ago in the Korean War and had shown its effectiveness in combat; while the MiG-19 was relatively new, having first been deployed in early 1955.
Though the most recent development in Soviet aircraft was the MiG-21, put into service in early 1958, Cuba received a modest shipment of the older, more ""experienced"" planes, for the role of self-defense.
On January 19, 1962, a meeting of the SGA is held in Robert Kennedy's office.
Notes taken by CIA representative George McManus contain the following passages, ""Conclusion Overthrow of Castro is Possible...a solution to the Cuban problem today carried top priority in United States Gov.
From January 22 to 31, 1962, a conference of the OAS is held in Punta del Este, Uruguay.
Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Ecuador, and Mexico — all who explain the vote is illegal, and refuse to participate.
Another resolution is also adopted prohibiting OAS members from selling arms to Cuba and setting measures for collective ""defense"" against the island of Cuba.
It was directly against the charter of this organization to take such steps, which stated that no country could use economic pressure or aggression to gain its objectives or influence affairs inside another country.
On January 28, a group of terrorists are arrested in Cuba in their attempt to paralyze urban transportation by destroying motors with chemicals and magnetic mines.
Edward Lansdale a list of bizarre and ruthless plans to ""provoke, harass, or disrupt"" the Cuban government.
Operation Mongoose: Possible Actions to Provoke, Harrass, or Disrupt Cuba On February 7, the United States institutes a ""total"" embargo of trade with Cuba, a decision intending to be forced on all nations in the world.
The United States Congress resolves that should any nation not hede the United States dictate of not trading with Cuba, all United States aid to that country would be cut off, while covertly actions are taken to sink ships that trade with Cuba, posion their cargo, etc.
On the 15th, the United Nations General Assembly rejects a resolution demanding the United States cease it's operations in Cuba, by a vote of 50 vs., with 39 abstentions.
On the 19th, Cuba explains to the United Nations Security Council that it is certain the United States is planing another invasion, the United States again denies the charges, and the United Nations Security Council refuses to hear out Cuba.
Lansdale notes that a ""vital decision"" has not yet been made regarding a direct United States military invasion of the Cuban Republic, but that it must be done quickly before the Cuban government becomes too strong among its people.
Operation Mongoose: The Cuba Project On the 26th, Cuba's Ministry of Public Health, assisted by workers organisations throughout Cuba, carry out a nationwide campaign of vaccination against polio.
These workers completely eradicate the disease from Cuba by the end of the year.
Forty three years later, the United Nations World Health Organisation would finally recognise that Cuba was the first nation to accomplish this in the Americas.
Kennedy is unwilling to committ to a full scale invasion, but keeps the option open, and agrees to allow the terrorist activities to continue in the meantime.
Elsewhere in the world, in April of 1962, 15 United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey become operational, on the border of the Soviet Union.
All positions are reported ""ready and manned"" by United States personnel — ready to launch against the Soviet Union at any moment.
The missiles are armed with 1.45 megaton warheads, 97 times the power of the atomic bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
Late in April, 1962, while vacationing in the Crimea, across the Black sea from Turkey, Khrushchev realizes the nuclear tipped knife that is at the throat of the Soviet Union.
To ensure a deterrent, Khrushchev considers deploying nuclear weapons to Cuba to prevent a full United States invasion.
While the United States had nuclear missiles all around the world and on the very borders of the Soviet Union, the Soviet Union had only 10 25 nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States.
Upon returning to Moscow, Khrushchev discusses the idea with First Deputy Prime Minister Anastas Mikoyan.
Although Mikoyan is skittish and opposed, Khrushchev asks a group of his closest advisers, including Frol Kozlov, Commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces Sergei Biryuzov, Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko , and Marshal Malinovsky to evaluate the idea.
The group proposes that a mission be sent to Cuba to see if Fidel Castro would agree to the proposed deployment.
On May 8-18, 1962, a full-scale United States military exercise designed to intimidate and practice a full military invasion of Cuba begins.
On May 12, the Alpha 66 terrorists attack a Cuban patrol boat, killing three and wounding five Cubans.
Throughout the following month deliberations regarding the possible installation of missiles in Cuba continue in Moscow.
Although Alekseyev expresses concern over the idea , it is resolved that Alekseyev and Marshal Biryuzov should travel to Cuba to explore the question with Castro.
In the event of deployment, the Soviet military proposes a force of 24 medium-range ballistic missile launchers and 16 intermediate-range launchers; each of the launchers would be equipped with two missiles and a single nuclear warhead.
Soviet officials also decide to send a defensive contingent of four elite regiments, twenty-four advanced SA-2 surface-to-air missile batteries, forty-two MiG-21 interceptors, forty-two IL-28 bombers, twelve Komar-class missile boats, and coastal defense cruise missiles.
On May 29, 1962, Sharif Rashidov, an alternate member of the Soviet Presidium, arrives in Cuba with a delegation on a ten-day mission to study irrigation problems and to discuss the possibility of introducing nuclear missiles.
The presence of the ambassador-designate in Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseyev , Marshal Biryuzov, and two or three military experts is not known to the United States military.
Castro responds telling the group that he will need to consult with his government before providing an answer.
On the following day, after conferring with the chief ministers of government , Fidel Castro informs the visiting Soviet officials that Cuba will accept the deployment of nuclear weapons as a deterrent to United States invasion.
Marshal Biryuzov later informs Khrushchev that the deployment of the missiles could be done secretly.
On July 2, 1962, Raul Castro and a high-level Cuban military delegation arrive in Moscow, where they are met at the airport by Marshal Rodion Malinovsky and Anastas Mikoyan.
According to the formal agreement, which is renewable every five years, the missiles and maintenence of them will be entirely under the jurisdiction of the Soviet military.
In mid-July, Soviet cargo ships begin moving out of the Black Sea for Cuba.
United States Aerial reconnaissance of the ships in the following months show them ""riding high in the water"", which is indicitive of the vessels carring unusually light cargo, typically a sign that military equipment is being transported.
Meanwhile, United States terrorism against the Cuban republic continues.
By July 25, Edward Lansdale provides the SGA an assessment of the accomplishments of Phase One of Operation Mongoose.
Some successes are reported, aside from several victories of sabotage, propaganda and murder, is the infiltration of eleven CIA terrorist teams into Cuba.
By August 10, 1962, after examining CIA reports on the movement of cargo ships from the Black and Baltic seas to Cuba, CIA Director John McCone dictates a memorandum for the President expressing the belief that Soviet MRBMs are destined for Cuba.
McCone's memorandum is sent over the objections of subordinates concerned that McCone has no hard evidence to back up his speculations.
In August 20, 1962, by now a frustrated General Maxwell Taylor , informs President Kennedy that the SGA sees no possibility for overthrowing the Cuban republic through internal dissent, no matter how the situation is manipulated.
He bluntly explains that the only method that can defeat the Cuban Republic is through direct United States military intervention.
In the meantime, the SGA recommends a much more aggressive Operation Mongoose.
Kennedy authorizes the development of more aggressive plans, but specifies that no open United States military involvement could take place.
Streathen Hill, a British freighter heading to the Soviet Union with Cuban sugar, is forced to dock in Puerto Rico because of a damaged propeller.
With repairs to the ship underway, 14,000 bags of sugar are offloaded to speed up the process.
CIA agents enter the warehouse where the sugar is stored, and lace the bags in an unknown chemical.
When President Kennedy learns of the action, horrified, he orders the sugar to be destroyed.
On August 26, 1962, Che Guevara, Cuba's Minister of Industries, and Emilio Aragonés Navarro, a close associate of Fidel Castro, arrive in the Soviet Union.
Guevara urges Khrushchev to announce the missile deployment publicly — Khrushchev refuses.
In August 29, 1962, a high-altitude U-2 surveillance flight shows air defense missiles at eight different locations in Cuba.
Additional reconnaissance shortly thereafter identifies new coastal defense cruise missile installations.
However, U-2 photographs of the area around San Crist—bal, Cuba, where the first nuclear missile sites are later deployed, reveal no evidence of construction at this time.
In the first week of September 1962, unknown to United States intelligence, Soviet troops began arriving in Cuba.
On the fourth, Attorney General Robert Kennedy meets with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, who informs the United States that the Soviet Union does not have any intention of installing surface to surface missiles in Cuba.
By the end of the week the United States Tactical Air Command establishes a military group to begin developing plans for a coordinated United States air attack against Cuba, with plans to launch it well before a ground invasion of Cuba.
On September 15, 1962, The Poltava, a Soviet large-hatch cargo ship, docks at the port of Mariel, Cuba, carrying the first SS-4 MRBMs to be deployed.
By the 28th, United States spy agencies become aware of shipments of the Soviet IL-28 light bomber aircraft.
Over fourteen years old, the first Soviet jet bomber ever made had been completely phased out of the Soviet Air Force by 1960.
In the House of Representatives, a bill is approved to cut off aid to any country permitting the use of its merchant ships to transport goods of any kind to Cuba.
On the following day, in a speech to the United Nations General Assembly, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko charges the United States with creating ""war hysteria"" and aggressive military preparations to engage Cuba.
Gromyko states that ""any sober-minded"" person realizes that Cuba could not possibly invade the United States, and has never done anything aggressive against the United States, nor ever will it.
Gromyko explains however that should the United States attempt to invade Cuba once again, or to destroy any ships traveling to Cuba, the Soviet Union would stand solidly in defense of Cuba.
