I t was one minute before high noon on Oct.,1962, the air-defense tracking network.
The ability to ""read the mail"" than 100,000 American troops were preparing to invade of Russian air defenses was a closely guarded Cold War Cuba to topple Fidel Castro's communist regime and secret.
The United States Strategic Air Command's missiles and four minutes later. manned bombers bad been ordered to DEECON-2, one step ""There's always some sonofabitch who doesn't get the word,"" short of nuclear war.
In the Caribbean, United States Navy destroyers was Kennedy's frustrated response. were playing a cat-and-mouse game with Russian submarines At 2:03m. came news that another U-2, piloted by Major armed with nuclear-tipped torpedoes.
Rudolf Anderson Jr., was missing while on an intelligenceAnd then, at 11:59m., a U-2 spy plane piloted by Captain gathering mission over eastern Cuba.
Evidence soon emerged Charles W Maultsby unwittingly penetrated Soviet airspace it had been shot down by a Russian surface-to-air missile in a desolate region of the Chukot Peninsula opposite Alaska. near the town of Banes.
Flying at an altitude of 70,000 feet, the 11-year Air Force Historian Arthur Schlesinger Jr. called the Cuban Missile veteran was oblivious to the drama below.
Scholon a routine mission to the North Pole, gathering radioars and politicians agree that for several days the world was active air samples from a Soviet nuclear test.
Dazzled by tbe the closest it has ever come to nuclear Armageddon. aurora boreahs, he'd wandered off course, ending up over But the nature of the risks confronting Kennedy and the Soviet Union on the most perilous day of the Cold War.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev have been widely misTHE END WAS NEAR NEW INFORMATION ABOUT THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS SHOWS JUST HOW CLOSE WE CAME TO NUCLEAR ARMAGEDDON BY MICHAEL DOBBS He was completely unaware the Soviets had scrambled understood.
A young American president went he was. ""eyeball to eyeball"" with a Russian chairman and forced A former member of tbe Air Force's Tbunderbirds fligbthim to back down through a skillful blend of diplomacy demonstration team, Maultsby bad enough fuel in his and force.
Accorditig to Scblesinger, Kennedy ""dazzled the tank for nine hours and 40 minutes of flight.
That was world"" through ""a combination of toughness and restraint, sufficient for a 4,000-mile round trip between Fairbanks' of will, nerve and wisdom, so brilliantly controlled, so Eielson Air Force Base and tbe Nortb Pole, but not enough matchlessly calibrated."" for a 1,000-mile detour over Siberia.
WashingTbanks to newly opened archives and interviews with ton time, Maultsby shut down his single Pratt & Whitney key participants in the United States, Russia and Cuha, it is J57 engine and entrusted his fate to his U-2's extraordinary now possible to separate the mytb from the reality.
The Air Force's Alaskan Air Command risks of war in October 1962 arose not from the ""eyeball-tosent up two F-102 figbters to guide bim back across tbe eyeball"" confrontation between Kennedy and Khrushchev, Bering Strait and prevent any penetration of American but from ""sonofabitcb"" moments exemphfied by Maultsby airspace by the Russian MiGs.
Because of the heightened and his wandering U-2. alert, the F-102s were armed with nuclear-tipped air-to-air The pampered son of the Boston millionaire and the o missiles, sufficient firepower to destroy an entire fleet of scion of Russian peasants had more in cominon than they incoming Soviet bombers. imagined.
Having experienced World War II, both were On the ground, SAC commanders were frantically trying horrified hy the prospect of a nuclear apocalypse.
Maultsby's location, as they had tapped into the Soviet As the crisis lurched to a climax on Black Saturday, events \ MILITARY HISTORY Photographed from a low-flying United States Navy patrol aircraft in November 1962, the Soviet freighter Anosov carries tarpaulin-shrouded ballistic missiles on her fore and aft decks. threatened to spin out of control.
Unable to effectively A full-scale invasion of the island would follow within communicate with each other, the two leaders struggled seven days.
Marine units and the Army's 1st Annored Divito rein in the chaotic forces of history they themselves sion would hit the beaches east and west of Havana, along a had unleashed.-mile front, in an operation modeled after the ]uno 1Q44 D-Day landings in France.
T he countdown to Armageddon began on October 16, when Kennedy learned that Khrushchev had broken his promise not to deploy ""offensive weapons"" in Cuba—a U-2, piloted by Major Richard Heyser, had flown over the island two days earlier and taken photographs It is impossible to tell what would have happened had Kennedy accepted the advice of Air Force General Curtis LeMay and the other joint chiefs.
And the full scope of the danger was not of intermediate-range Soviet missiles near the town of understood in Washington, Moscow or Havana.
Kennedy branded the mercurial Russian the main protagonists—Kennedy, Khrushchev or Castro— leader ""an immoral gangster,"" but the Americati presihad tnore than a very limited knowledge of events unfolding on a global battlefield that stretched from the Florida Straits to the Bering Sea.
World War III had already begun—aircraft were taking fire, missiles were being readied for launch and warships were forcing potentially hostile subtnarines to surface.
As Black Sattirday dawned, Castro wrote Moscow of his conviction that an American attack on the island was ""almost inevitable"" and would take place in the next 24 to 72 hours.
Unbeknownst to Kennedy, the Cuban leader had visited the Soviet embassy in Havana at 3m. and petined an anguished telegram to Kbrushchev.
If the ""itnperialists"" invaded Cuba, Castro declared, the Soviet Union should undertake a pre-emptive nuclear strike on the United States.
In the meantime, he ordered his anti-aircraft defenses to begin firing on low-flying American reconnaissance planes.
Castro declared that he and his comrades were ""ready to die in the defense of our country"" rather than submit to a Yanqui occupation.
The Soviet cotnmander in Cuba, General Issa Pliyev, was also preparing for war.
On his orders, a convoy of trucks carrying nuclear warheads moved out of the central storage depot at Bejucal, south of Havana, around midnight.
By early afternoon, the convoy had reached the Sagua la Grande missile site in central Cuba, tnaking it possible for the Soviets to lob eight 1-megaton missiles Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev and American President John F Kennedy at the United States.
Pliyev also ordered the arming of share a light moment after a meeting at the United States Embassy in Vienna, shorter-range tactical nuclear missiles to counter a United States inAustria, in June 1961.
His bellicose, but ultimately ineffective, attempts to get Kennedy was blissfully unaware of the nature of the rid of Castro had provoked Khrushchev into taking drasthreat facing United States forces poised to invade Cuba.
Kennedy imposed 23, the CIA estimated that the Soviets had between 8,000 a military quarantine on the island and demanded the and 10,000 military ""advisers"" in Cuba, up from an earlier Soviets withdraw their missiles. estimate of 4,000 to 5,000.
We now know that the actual By October 27—tbe 12th day of the crisis—the two superSoviet troop strength on Black Saturday was 42,822, a figure powers were on the brink of war.
All that remained was for the warheads intended to hurl an invading force back into the sea.
Namara was stunned to learn, three decades later, that the The U.S.Joint Chiefs of Staff presented the president with Soviets had 98 tactical nukes in Cuba that Atnerican intellia formal recommendation to bomb tbe Soviet missile sites. gence knew nothing about.
HOUR BY HOUR No one can know for sure whether the Soviets would SATURDAY OCT. 271962 • 12:44m.
In a cahle to Pliyev, Khrumissile sites on Cuba activated, to intercept Maultsby. shchev had asserted his sole decision-making authority according to transmissions • 1:28m.
Maultsby intercepted by USS Oxford. runs out of fuel. over the firing of nuclear weapons, both strategic and tacti• 3m.
But communications between Moscow and Havana Soviet embassy in Havana, Defense Secretary Robert were sporadic at best, and the missiles lacked electronic wires Moscow urging McNamara that U-2 is locks or codes to prevent their unauthorized use.
The Khrushchev to use missing off Alaska. nuclear missiles against weapons were typically under the control of a captain or a • 1:45m.
It is quite conceivable that a mid-level Soviet officer informs Kennedy of missing U-2. • 4m.
U-2 piloted by might have fired a nuclear weapon in self-defense had tlic • 2:03m.
McNamara Captain Charles W Maultsby informed that U-2 is Americans landed. takes off from Eielson AFB missing over Cuba. en route to North Pole to ""You have to understand the psychology of the military • 2:25m.
Maultsby monitor Soviet nuclear tests. person,"" said Colonel-General Viktor Yesin, a former chief lands at Kotzebue.
Soviet nuclear of staff of the Soviet Strategic Rocket Forces, when concruise missiles arrive at • 3:02m.
United States Navy tenant in October 1962, Yesin was responsible for preparing tracks Soviet freighter • 4:28m.
Grozny en route to Cuba. aircraft guns fire on Navy reconnaissance planes There is at least one documented case of a Soviet offi• 9:09m.
U-2 piloted by Major Rudolf Anderson takes off near San Cristobal. cer contemplating the unauthorized use of tactical nuclear for mission over eastern Cuba. • 5:59m.
Navy drops practice weapons on Black Saturday Valentin Savitsky, captain of depth charges on nuclear-armed • 10:12m.
Anderson enters Soviet submarine B-59. the Soviet submarine B-59, considered firing his 10-kiloton Cuban air space. • 8:05m.
Robert Kennedy nuclear torpedo at the destroyer USS Beale as the latter • 10:18m.
Radio Moscow meets with Soviet ambassador attempted to force B-59 to the surface by dropping practice announces Khrushchev offer to withdraw missiles from Dobrynin. offers to withdraw depth charges.
Savitsky could not communicate with United States missiles from Turkey Cuba in return for withdrawal ""within four to five months"" Moscow and had no idea if war had broken out while he of United States missiles in Turkey. was submerged.
Fortunately for posshot down, shortly after overflying Soviet missile without a fight. terity, his fellow officers calmed him down.
Maultsby's Ü-2 armies, missiles and nuclear-armed bombers to hair-trigger enters Soviet air space as a Soviet missiles from Cuba. states of readiness created its own risks, which increased result of navigational error.
A United States F-106 carrying a nuclear warhead crash-landed in III CIISIIIIl •II« SltBs.
A guard at an Air Force base in Duluili, situ 11 Him ifiia SIIIS Minn., mistook a fence-climbing bear for a Soviet saboteur, ma sill triggering an alarm to scramble an interceptor squadron in Wisconsin.
A truck in the Soviet cruise missile convoy moving toward Guantanamo fell into a ravine in the middle of the night, convincing others in the convoy they were under attack.
Mistakes and miscalculations go hand in hand with war. t e a ptiiot ciiri iKSis (21 | « i i i siiis 1 Some have far-reaching consequences, leading to the pointo o «IC.II « l l f l l i t i Ui less squandering of blood and treasure, but they are unlikely CM to cause the end of civilization.
Kennedy understood that 00 Based on reconnaissance photographs, communications intercepts a nuclear war is different from a conventional war.
There is and other sources, United States intelligence analysts produced the above map no room for error.
A ""limited nuclear war"" is a contradiction of Soviet installations in Cuba, including the contested missile sites. in terms.
MILrTARY HISTORY As the missile crisis deepened, U.S. forces at Guantanamo Bay on Cuba's southeast coast went on high alert.
As Maultsby glided across the skies of eastern Russia, Bypassing his executive committee, or FxComm, the presia debate raged in the White House over how to respond dent sent his brother.
Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, to a new message from Khrushchev, delivered over Radio to meet Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly DoMoscow.
If the Soviet government dismanmissiles from Turkey Advisers urged the president to reject tled its missile bases in Cuba, the United States would end Khrushchev's offer, arguing that acceptance would destroy the Cuba quarantine and promise not to invade the island.
United States government would not make any public commitment to do so—that part of the deal would have to remain secret.
Another was that ""the people deciding the liinits of crisis management.
At 9m. on October 28— the whys and wherefores"" had better be able to explain why the 13th day of the crisis—the Soviet premier broadcast they were sending young men into battle in clear and simanother message over Radio Moscow, announcing the disple terms.
Otherwise, Kennedy noted in a private letter, mantling of the Cuban missile sites.
MILITARY HISTORY r-T':""sc*Tr:*-""' ••'-• C iting national-security considerations, the United States Air Khrushchev's concession triggered the removal of most Soviet military Force has yet to release a single document on hardware from Cuba.
After switching off his engine, The ""sonofabitch wbo never got the word"" was fortunate Maultsby glided for 45 minutes across the Bering Sea and to survive that day the White House called Black Saturday. was eventually picked up by the American F-102s.
Maultsby So was the rest of humanity. (^ performed a dead-stick landing on an ice airstrip near Kotzebue, on the westernmost tip of Alaska.
