He helped me to achieve the passage of the Symms `Cuba Resolution' by Congress twice, in 1982, and again in 1984.
I will never forget Claudio's help in my successful efforts to reaffirm the Monroe Doctrine and to support the rights and liberties of the oppressed Cuban People.
Claudio Benedi is the author of the `Benedi Doctrine,' which condemns the institutionalized violations of human rights by totalitarian Communist regimes around the world, especially in Castro's Cuba.
Moreover, Claudio has for a long time been in the forefront of those who denounce the Soviet military base in Cuba, in violation of the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement.
Claudio is an expert on inter-American affairs, and for the last three decades he has been fighting for the security of America and for the freedom of Cuba.
Benedi concerning the Soviet-Cuban geostrategic relationship, printed in the Diario Las Americas of Miami on May 2, 1990.
Manuel Antonio de Varona, president of the Junta Patriotica Cubana, and Dr.
Claudio Benedi, Secretary for the Foreign Relations and Washington Representative of the Junta Patriotica Cubana, to the 20th Session of the General Assembly of the Organization of American States, at Asuncion, Paraguay, on June 4, 1990.
From the Diario Las Americas, May 2, 1990 Soviet Union's Relations With Cuba are Geostrategic, Not Economic, Dr.
Claudio Benedi Asserts From Washington `Relations between the USSR and Cuba are not merely economic, but mainly and fundamentally geostrategic, for the maintenance--in fact--of the base that the Soviets have attained in Cuba for their penetration into the Western Hemisphere, 90 miles from the U.S.', asserted Dr.
Claudio Benedi, representative of the Cuban Patriotic Board in Washington.
The interviewee recalled that, as columnist Patrick Buchanan recently affirmed in a recent article on Diario Las Americas, if the USSR needs investment capital, it should get ahold of the $5,000 annual millions that is given to Castro for the use of the island as a strategic base.
He likewise refers to the opinion of Senator Sam Nunn, chairman of the Armed Forces Committee in the United States Senate, who stated in Miami that `the Cuban economy is increasingly weakening, as a result of the reductions in the aid that it receives from the USSR, but the possibility could exist that, as a compensation, Moscow will increase military aid' to Cuba.
He later detailed how the USSR uses the Cuban territory as a base for its warplanes and warships, as well as its main facilities, such as the Cienfuegos base, the espionage plant at Lourdes, where it has 6,000 troops and technicians, and 27,000 military personnel, a brigade organized as such and some airports intended for war activities.
That is, the Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs of the USSR, Victor Komplektov, upon his return from Managua, said to Pravda that the USSR will continue economic cooperation with Nicaragua, even with the new government, and Washington analysts say that it could be a precedent for other communist totalitarian regimes.
Benedi ends, do not seem to know the Stalinist nature nor Castro's megalomaniac paranoia, nor the sufferings and struggles of the Cuban people for 31 years, inside & outside of Cuba, for their freedom'. - - JUNTA PATRIOTICA CUBANA, Area Metropolitana de Washington, Washington, DC, June 4, 1990.
Honorable Ministers of Foreign Relations: Honorable Ambassadors and Representatives of the American States: Distinguished Representatives of the Americas: This General Assembly meets in historical moments for the Americas and for the world.
For the Americas, because we are celebrating the Centennial of the Inter-American System, and for the world because of the unavoidable crisis of the totalitarian system of Marxist-Leninist socialism, that we expect to reach, in its full extension, the Stalinist redoubt in Cuba.
We, who have been born in the Cuban State, a member of this Honorable General Assembly, of the Inter-American System and of the Organization of American States and directly concerned in our own right and affected by that which may be discussed or agreed upon in same, have the moral and legal duty of submitting to your learned consideration our position and denouncements to the effect that, as we suppose, linked by the same cause, they shall be taken into account by you.
What is excluded, now with a greater reason than yesterday, is the present government of Cuba, because of its being a Marxist-Leninist regime, totally incompatible with the Inter-American System.
Said part is integrated in the whole, historically, geographically, politically, economically & ideologically, despite the fact that an extra-continental power has tried to take it out of its geopolitics and geostrategy, through the use of a satellite government subjected to ideological servitude and to economic, political and military submission.
This Soviet Union's intervention in the internal affairs of the Americas, through its base in Cuba, has posed a challenge to the Continent of the Americas and produced a crisis in its institutions, values and principles, because of the overt and sneaky infiltration of the Marxists fifth column into the Inter-American power structures.
As we have already proven, we are not dealing with a super-structure of values, with an addition of principles nor with a mere reform; we are dealing with a subversive supplantation, with a displacement, with the destruction of the spiritual and material structures, in order to replace them with others that are alien to its history, its traditions and its culture.
Marxists have understood it thus and, because of it, they have declared war on the Inter-American System, on the OAS and on those nations which represent those values and principles, and that is the reason why they attempt, by all means at their disposal, to introduce their Trojan Horse into the OAS, through the reinstatement of Castro's satellite Marxist-Leninist-Stalinist regime.
The historical sequence cannot be broken by grafting onto the heart of the Americas alien ideologies, such as Communism, whose impracticality and evil nature have been proven, one that destroys man, woman and peoples.
That `tragic Utopia has made peoples to retrocede to unprecedented levels in the history of humankind', as Pope John Paul II has stated.
This Twentieth General Assembly of the OAS has no jurisdiction or powers to allow the entry of Castro's Marxist-Leninist regime to the OAS, because it was not the OAS who separated the present government of Cuba from it, but the application of the Treaty of Rio, and besides this meeting not having been assembled in accordance with the Treaty of Rio, not all the countries who are members of the OAS are signatories to the Treaty of Rio.
It must be likewise pointed out that at the Eighth Consultation Meeting of the Foreign Relations Ministers, assembled in accordance with the Treaty of Rio, a Resolution was passed which declared Marxism-Leninism incompatible with the Inter-American System, and that said Resolution is still in force.
Despite efforts to repeal it, it is still in force and it is still binding, since the modification of said Treaty, that was made in Costa Rica, has not taken effect because the necessary number of required states have not ratified it.
In the hundred years that the Inter-American System has lasted, a constant preoccupation, besides a basic and substantially fundamental principle has been, and continues to be, to protect the countries of this Hemisphere, as it was wished by Simon Bolivar, the Liberator; Jose Marti, United States President James Monroe and all exalted men & women of the Americas, from the intervention of an extra-continental power in their internal affairs.
This principle and foundation of our regional organization and our political philosophy about the defense of sovereignty and freedom, self-determination and the dignity of the human person, has been violated by the Soviet Union through its satellite Castro.
That is why to let satellite Castro enter into the OAS is tantamount to become an accomplice of the Soviet Union and of the evil Marxism-Leninism.
Those who attempt such a thing can be defined as suffering from political underdevelopment, political daltonism; they cannot see the red and black colors.
It remains undoubtedly proven that Castro's Marxist-Leninist regime is a satellite of the Soviet Union, a lackey of Soviet imperialism.
The answer is obvious; therefore, if we are honest, let us apply it to the satellite regime of Castro in Cuba.
We must be consistent and follow the historical sequence and the traditions of the Americas, instead of defrauding the founders of our nations; that is why we believe that it is fundamental that we make reference to the indispensable background that irrefutably supports our petitions and denouncements.
We have proven that a regressive transculturation has taken place in Cuba.
The values and principles upon which a civilized coexistence of the free nations of this Hemisphere is supported have been destroyed, and other, falsely called values, which run counter to the Cuban people's tradition, culture and history, have been imposed.
Besides the human violation, there has been in Cuba an institutional violation of human rights.
The human violation is committed both in the totalitarian and authoritarian regimes, albeit in the former it is committed in a totalitarian manner, but the institutional violation is only committed in the Marxist-Leninist regimes, because that kind of violation is intrinsic to such a system, which could not exist without it, because of its being a state totalitarian regime, in which the so-called State has all rights and individuals have none, vis-a-vis the State.
None of the freedoms recognized for citizens may be practiced against that which is established by the Constitution and the laws, nor against the existence and purposes of the Socialist State, nor against the Cuban people's decision to build Socialism and Communism.
Only a naive or deluded person, or an accomplice of communism, would believe that in Cuba, under the Marxist-Leninist system, there could be any vestige of democracy.
To this it must be added, mainly and fundamentally, that a military and strategic Soviet base is in Cuba.
We have proven that the relationship between the Soviet Union and Cuba is geostrategic and not merely economic.
That is why some people wonder that the Soviet Union would continue to subsidize Castro and his economic and social disaster with over $5 billion annually.
It is cheap for the Soviet Union to maintain its base within the heart of the Americas.
The Soviet Union entered the Americas through Cuba, and it has established there, in fact, a military, political, ideological and subversive base.
Besides, it has a nuclear submarine base at Cienfuegos; an electronic base--the largest and most up-to-date outside of the Soviet Union--operated by 6,000 military and technicians, and it utilizes the whole of the Cuban territory for its warplanes and warships.
All of the above entrails, besides an affront, a threat to the security and peace in the Americas.
In the Nuclear missile crisis, in 1962, satellite Castro imperiled the Cuban people to extermination in a nuclear conflict, only to serve the interests of the Soviet imperialism.
The Cuban people continues to be imperiled through the same or similar reasons, and a holocaust could take place.
There, where a state of law does not exist, cannot be any protection for human rights.
There does not exist in Cuba the division of powers that is basic in the juridical and political structure of modern states, as Montesquieu declared.
On Articles 9 through 29, the division of powers is banished, private property rights are abolished, such as we understand them in the Western world, as well as the inviolability of the human person, freedom of education and all other rights recognized in the Americas about family, religion, etc.
In the so-called `Socialist Legality', the principle of `analogy' is enshrined.
It is not a case of more or less freedom, nor of a partial improvement or alleviation of the treatment given to the Cuban political prisoners of both genders, but of the system proper, which must generate those violations in order to stay in power through terror and force.
Terror against the civilian population has been recrudesced and the dissidents have been threatened with a modification of the Penal Code to include dissidence as a form of fellonious treason punishable by the death penalty.
Since the end of World War II, the Inter-American System has been getting ready to face the challenge of international communism, to prevent the intervention of an extra-continental power in the internal affairs of the Americas.
But we must underline that, while NATO was a deterrent in Europe to prevent communist expansion, the Treaty of Rio, debilitated by the ominous Kennedy-Khrushchev `understanding', could not prevent the Soviet Union from expanding its neo-colonialism and its imperialism to the Americas, through locating its base in Cuba.
And it was not by coincidence that Fidel Castro and the communist agents infiltrated in the Americas tried to prevent the OAS from being created, by murdering Jorge Eliecer Gaytan and bringing about over 5,000 deaths and a great deal of destruction.
But, despite that tragedy, the OAS was created to respond to the challenge.
However, some leaders of the Americas, turning their backs to this tragic reality, have been weakening the OAS, creating parallel organizations that have diminished its efficiency and dynamism, upon usurping some of its functions.
The OAS is what its states want it to be at a given time in its history.
The United Nations Organization was created in 1945 and the OAS in 1948.
There are exemplified the case of satellite Castro and the intervention of an extra-continental power in the internal affairs of the Americas, with a military, subversive, political, ideological, terrorist and economical base.
And, since the present government of Cuba has declared itself Marxist-Leninist, it is thus separated from the Inter-American System, from the OAS and from all of its organisms.
A Joint Resolution of the United States Congress was approved--now known as the `Cuba-Symms Resolution, because of Senator Steve Symms having been its advocate--whereby the United States obligated itself to fight together with the Organization of American States and with freedom-loving Cubans to attain self-determination and freedom for the Cuban people.
On October 22, 1962, the so-called `Missile Crisis' took place in Cuba, because the Soviet Union learned that its base on the island was in danger and it placed its nuclear missiles there, not to protect the Castro's satellite regime, but its base.
By virtue of the `Missile Crisis', the so-called `Kennedy-Khrushchev Understanding' was signed, a disastrous political mistake on the part of the United States, which violates the Monroe Doctrine, the Treaty of Rio, the OAS's Charter and the Cuban people's rights of sovereignty and freedom.
The force of the Monroe Doctrine, that had been so efficient to deter the European States from intervening in the internal affairs of the Americas, and through which the United States protected our Latin-American countries from the ambitions for conquest of the Europeans, including then-Russia, has now been debilitated and rendered useless to prevent Soviet penetration in Cuba and Nicaragua; in the latter, the Soviet Union maintains its power, although it may have surrendered government half-way.
One of the most outstanding leaders for democracy in Latin-America, our fraternal friend Dr.
Romulo Betancourt, an illustrious Venezuelan descended from the Liberator, Simon Bolivar, charged the Stalinist tyrant Fidel Castro with attacking and violating the Venezuelan sovereignty.
The Ninth Consultation Meeting of the Foreign Relations Ministers, on July 26, 1964, condemned the Castro regime as an aggressor and violator of the Venezuelan sovereignty.
The next step ought to have been the application of the Treaty of Rio to the agressor and violator.
It was not done then, and that regime has continued, until this time, attacking and violating the sovereignty of the peoples of the Americas, as the President-elect of Costa Rica, Dr.
Rafael Calderon, has stated, accusing Castro of intervening in the internal affairs of El Salvador by helping the Marxist-Leninist guerrillas.
Those aggressions are consubstantial with the communist system implemented in Cuba.
The Cuban state has freely agreed with you the treaties, covenants, agreements and resolutions which are in force within the Inter-American System; that is why we now ask you to fulfill what you obligated yourselves to comply with.
Two nuclear plants are being built in Cuba, one of them precisely close to the Soviet submarine base in Cienfuegos.
These plants are being built with the same Soviet technology that so noisily failed at Chernobyl, in the Soviet Union.
They not only imperil the lives of Cubans, but are also a threat for the rest of the American States.
The satellite Castro, following orders from the Soviet Union, has refused to sign and ratify the Treaty of Tlatelolco on the Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in Latin-America.
We have learned from reliable sources that 15% of the Cuban population, that is, one and a half million people, both men and women, in the regular military and the militias, are upon arms.
Since the Cuban economy has been destroyed by the communist system, Castro could not pay for the mobilization of those forces.
It has been verified that the Soviet Union had done likewise in Nicaragua.
What we have nowdays in the Americas is a crisis of identity, that is fostered when there are governments that fail to support the principles and values that have given them life and, turning their backs to their traditions, culture and history, embrace ideologies that deny their transcendental values and their juridical and political principles.
There is identity among the nations of the Americas, and through that identity they make up an organic and regionally structured whole in a System that given itself the juridical and political institutions capable of representing and defending it.
In order to attack and destroy the Americas, it is indispensable to attack and destroy the System based upon that identity and upon those principles, and that is exactly what is happening today.
Understanding this, the extra-continental foreign forces that have infiltrated the Americas to subvert and destroy them, have begun by securing a base in Cuba and attempting to have another one in Nicaragua, and by devising a strategy to destroy the Inter-American System because of its absolute incompatibility, as well as tactics to fragment the OAS through separating the North from the South, or else trying to create parallel organisms.
The economic, political and social development--giving way to military interventions--in the last three decades, has been at times hampered, other times interrupted and in every case adversely influenced--the exodus of capital and skilled persons and the deactivation of national and foreign investments--by communist subversion, both urban and rural, sponsored by the Soviet Union through its satellite Castro and the Sandinista-Marxist movement of sub-satellite Daniel Ortega in Nicaragua.
The Inter-American System is theocentric and its values and principles comprise the belief in God, the full dignity of man and woman, their freedom, justice, peace and the idea that the resources existing in the Americas are at the service of the common good, administered by human beings for the benefit of men and women.
The Inter-American System proclaims the unlimited respect to human rights, fraternity and brotherhood among men and women, vis-a-vis the class struggle, and love vis-a-vis hate; because of the above, it is incompatible with Marxism-Leninism, since the latter proclaims the barbarous practice of hate, instead of the Gospel of Love; the class struggle, state totalitarianism, militant atheism, the destruction of the sense of transcendence and the destruction of the human person; it is esentially anthropocentric.
Ideological pluralism--any euphemism used to cover the permissiveness that is an accomplice of Marxism-Leninism in the Americas--is a negation of democratic coexistence in the bosom of the Inter-American System.
There cannot be any possible coexistence where all the attributes and conditions for coexistence are not given.
We say `yes' to democratic pluralism, whereby representative democracy will be implemented--so many times mentioned in the OAS' Charter--whereby the people shall vote periodically, with full liberty, to elect its leaders in the plurality of democratic parties, which is the antithesis of Marxist-Leninist totalitarianism.
What they want is not coexisting, but destroying our democratic system.
There is no ideologic pluralism in the Soviet Union or Cuba, nor was there any in the former communist-subjugated countries.
In the former, those who advocate ideological pluralism are deemed as `deviationists' and severely punished.
There is the categorical answer for the deluded, the naive and the accomplices, who say or believe that there could be democracy and freedom in Cuba under the Communist system, while the totalitarian Stalinist tyrant and the Soviet base are there.
The Treaty of Tlatelolco on the proliferation of nuclear weapons in Latin-America, which is so important for the present and future of the Americas, has not been signed by satellite Castro.
It is known that the Soviet Union has built a base for nuclear submarines at Cienfuegos, Cuba, which has been `visited' by warships capable of transporting and firing nuclear weapons.
We believe that the Soviet Union, which signed the II Protocol of the Treaty of Tlatelolco, has violated it.
The government of satellite Castro has been charged with being involved in the illegal narcotics traffic, lending its air space and territorial waters to facilitate said traffic between Latin-America and the United States.
There are courts which have accused high-ranking officials of the communist regime of Cuba of being involved in the illegal narcotics traffic.
A few days ago, Castro met at La Habana the lawyers of his partner in crime, former General Manuel Noriega, in trying `to contribute evidence' to defend his disgraced partner.
The return to the Soviet Union of the 27,000 Soviet military personnel who are presently in Cuba, the organized brigade with a force of 2,800 members, and the Soviet military technicians who are 6,000 strong, stationed at the electronic base of Villa Lourdes, La Habana.
The return to the Soviet Union of the military personnel and `advisors' who are still in Nicaragua and with other subversive movements in the Americas.
The return to the Soviet Union of the nuclear and/or conventional weapons located in Cuba.
The breakup of the military and ideological and geostrategic submission links between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
The elimination of the communist system implemented by deceit, terror and force in Cuba.
The cessation of the subversive movement sponsored by the Soviet Union in several countries of Latin-America, such as El Salvador, Guatemala, Colombia, Peru, Chile, Brazil, Guyana, Suriname, Nicaragua and Honduras.
This quotation should be present in the reformist deliberations of this Assembly, because Castro is an imitator of Stalin.
That there cannot be any freedom in the Americas, as a whole, if it does not exist in each of its components.
That there cannot be any democracy in the whole, which is made up by the Americas, if it does not exist in each of its components.
Cuba, which is a part of the Americas, is presently subjugated by a totalitarian, tyrannical, Marxist-Leninist regime of a Stalinist nature, convicted and self-avowed.
That there cannot be any peace in the whole, if it does not exist in each of its components.
There could happen a holocaust in Cuba worse than that of Romania, if the American States would not help the Cuban people and act in solidarity with same to prevent that.
A crime is being committed in Cuba upon the Cuban people for the last 31 years, by a tyrant dressed in military garb who threatens, in his psychopathic megalomany, to stain with blood that country before surrendering the power to the legitimate representatives of the people.
We respectfully request that these denouncements be considered as made, that this document be circulated among the member States, and that action be consequently adopted.
We are in the vanguard of that struggle and we still expect and trust that you shall act in solidarity with us and join us, as the patriots and statesmen of the last century did, to help several countries of the Americas to become independent.
Cuba is fighting for its second independence and the whole of the Americas has committed its history and dignity of free nations with the Cuban people.
Manuel Antonio de Varona, Chariman, Cuban Patriotic Board, Former Prime Minister and Chairman of the Cuban Senate; Dr.
