P President John F Kennedy, 22 October 19621 Introduction On 1 January 1959, left-wing rebels under the leadership of Fidel Castro seized control of Cuba.
Embargo, invasion and edge of the abyss could the USA assassination attempts followed. and USSR see that their rivalry Castro was forced to seek had taken humanity to the brink economic and military security of extinction.
Soviet Premier communication between the two Khrushchev decided to install superpowers, and a tentative nuclear missiles on Cuba to step towards placing limits on the intimidate the United States.
This most dangerous weapon mankind was the catalyst for the Cuban has ever devised.
U-2 reconnaissance spy plane photograph of Soviet ships unloading equipment for a nuclear missile base in Cuba.
The strategic revolution • Released two years later, he organised a small army to take • Why did the Soviet Union deploy arms race control of Cuba.
DEFCON 1 means the nation 1961) A missiles almost lead to World Removal of is at war.
Crisis, the United States Air Force was placed forced him to step down from office in 2008.
S forcing them to back down in order to gain an advantage. nikita KHRUSHCHEV • Premier of the Soviet Union during the Crisis Deterence 1963 • Pursued a policy of brinkmanship with the The idea that a nation possesses United States over the Cold War hotspots of enough weapons, and the 1945 1961 5 August West Berlin and Cuba willingness to use them, to convince The Limited other nations not to attack them.
Keep your inquiry questions in mind as you read the Acronym for ‘mutual assured dropped on in Cuba orders the Crisis information and work through the activities in this chapter.
Batista’s golden telephone Batista gave American companies a great deal of Trouble in the Tropics freedom over the way they operated in Cuba.
IT&T, an American telecommunications company that Cuba had been a Spanish colony until the Spanish–American War of 1898.
The Spanish– controlled all the phone lines in Cuba, was allowed While Cuba technically then became an independent nation, it quickly came S American War to charge extremely high rates for phone calls.
Under the Platt sign of their gratitude, IT&T gave Batista a working, Amendment, the United States reserved the right to intervene in Cuban affairs, E gold-plated telephone.
It now sits in the Museum of with troops if necessary, and supported several corrupt regimes.
The United States the Revolution in Havana as a symbol of American also maintained a military base at Guantánamo Bay.
In 1933, Colonel Fulgencio G The Platt Amendment complicity in Batista’s opulence and corruption.
Batista overthrew the existing government and, as head of the army, effectively A controlled the five-man presidential committee.
Batista was President of Cuba Activity 1940–44 and, after a long stay in the United States, seized control of Cuba in Creative writing P 1952 through a military coup.
This occurred three months before an election The year is 1961 and you have just been Fulgencio Batista Batista feared he would lose.
He suspended individual liberties and favoured appointed curator of the Museum of the wealthy landowners over the poor.
In a speech in October 1960, Senator John F Kennedy to accompany the phone explaining America’s S o u rc e 4. 02 exploitation of Cuba since 1898.
P He also encouraged the Mafia to establish casinos in the capital city, Havana.
While Batista had the support of a small group of wealthy businessmen and the united states and Source 4.03 the island of cuba M plantation owners, most Cuban people detested the corruption of his regime map showing and by the mid-1950s resistance groups had emerged.
One was led by a middleCuba’s proximity A class law student named Fidel Castro.
On 26 July 1953, Castro and a group of to the united his followers attacked an army barracks.
He founded a revolutionary group named after the date of the attack on the barracks—the 26th of July Movement—and started planning another attempt to overthrow the Batista regime.
Unable to defeat Batista’s forces, however, Castro fled to the Sierra Maestra mountains in the south-east of the island.
Explain why events in Cuba would be carefully watched by the US Government.
Support for Batista’s regime collapsed and the dictator fled to Portugal.
Initially Castro’s ideology was vague, as he had never made a clear statement on E whether or not he supported Marxism.
United States interests owned about 80 per cent of Cuba’s utilities (water, electricity and telephone services), 40 per cent of its sugar production and 90 P per cent of its mining industry.
Profits from these industries made United States businesses very wealthy while the majority of the Cubans lived in poverty.
L E Activity Ernesto ‘Che’ Guevara P Source analysis Born in Argentina in 1928, Guevara 1.
Identify two elements of the image that suggest Castro is a revolutionary leader.
By referring directly to the image and using your own knowledge, explain why there was widespread known as a Latin American revolutionary opposition to Batista’s regime.
Evaluate how useful this document is in explaining why Castro’s revolution was ultimately successful.
S helped Castro train his guerilla army in the Sierra Maestra mountains and was In spite of fears that he would nationalise all privately owned property and Castro’s Minister of Industry . businesses, at first Castro only took over the US-owned and -operated telephone Guevara left Cuba to foment revolution system.
He also arrested and executed ex-officials of the Batista regime, many of in Bolivia, but was captured and killed by whom had United States supporters.
Other ex-Batista officials fled to the United States, the Bolivian army in 1967.
He is now an where they formed groups that resolved to return to Cuba and overthrow Castro. icon as a revolutionary and as someone United States President Eisenhower halted shipments of arms to Cuba and also threatened who challenged the status quo.
This would have been a disaster for the Cuban earned his nickname ‘Che’ when he and economy, as it relied heavily on its sugar exports to the United States. a friend rode motorcycles around South America.
Argentinians were known by The breakdown in the US–Cuba relationship came in July 1960, when Castro other Latin Americans to frequently demanded that Soviet oil be refined in Cuban-based, American-owned refineries. use the word che, colloquially meaning When Shell, Texaco and Esso refused, the Cuban government seized their Dwight Eisenhower, US ‘friend’ or ‘mate’, when they talk. facilities.
The Soviet Union agreed to purchase the sugar and also, in the wake of a United States trade embargo, supply all of Cuba’s fuel needs.
On 12 April, Activity was an unpleasant experience for the United States.
In his first man in space. seem weak and indecisive in the eyes of the Russians.
P When President Kennedy was inaugurated in January 1961, he inherited a variety of schemes designed to depose Castro.
Perhaps the most ambitious was a CIA The name ‘Bay of Pigs’ E plan to support an invasion of Cuba by 1400 anti–Castro Cuban exiles.
Kennedy might be the result of a mistranslation. supported the idea but did not want any evidence of United States involvement.
On 17 L In Spanish, this area is called Bahía de April, an invasion was launched from Guatemala, which landed at the Bay of Pigs Operation Mongoose on the southern coast of Cuba.
Castro’s tanks and artillery pounded the exiles on the landing beach but it is also the name Before the Bay of Pigs invasion and Kennedy’s M of a variety of fish found and easily defeated them.
Over presidency, the CIA hatched an array of schemes in waters of the bay. designed to either oust the Castro regime or A 1100 prisoners were released and returned to the United States in exchange for basic necessities including food and medical supplies. assassinate Castro.
In September 1960, the CIA met with members of the Mafia to organise a S If the invasion was a catastrophe for the exiles, it was a political disaster for ‘hit’ on the Cuban leader.
He felt personally responsible for the failure of the landing and admitted Castro as he had shut down their lucrative night United States involvement at a media conference on 20 April.
When this came to invasion was not ‘the final episode in the eternal struggle of liberty against tyranny, nothing, the CIA concocted other schemes.
One S o u r c e 4. 06 involved coating a cigar in poison (as Castro was a prolific smoker), while another suggested placing Members of the Cuban exploding seashells in locations where Castro militia celebrate after defeating the CIA backed was known to swim.
In invasion force of antiJanuary 1962, Attorney-General Robert Kennedy Castro exiles at the Bay of initiated Operation Mongoose.
CIA-run scheme was to clandestinely send US agents and anti-Castro Cubans to Cuba to engage in acts of sabotage against targets like docks, crops, shipping and oil refineries.
President Kennedy hoped that Operation Mongoose would S o u rc e 4. 07 eventually led to an uprising by the Cuban people that would topple the Castro regime.
Draw up and complete a table like the one below and put each event from Source 4.08 in the most 2.
Space Race Military Political Discussion Discuss your decisions with a partner, then share your thoughts with the rest of the class.
By referring to the key events in the timeline, explain how advances in military technology contributed to S 2.
Evaluate the usefulness of this table in understanding the balance of power between the USA and USSR up to and including 1961.
Make a flow chart explaining the key events from the Spanish-American War to the Bay of Pigs invasion.
A By 1960, the United States believed that the Soviet Union was far ahead of them P in a number of important fields—and Soviet leader Premier Khrushchev was A Golden Opportunity keen to perpetuate this notion.
In 1957, the CIA released the Gaither Report, which expressed deep concerns over a ‘missile gap’ with the Soviets possessing The Tsar Bomba had a E By 1962, Cold War tensions had reached their height.
In yield of 50 megatons, competing in several fields to demonstrate their dominance to the rest of the making it roughly 1500 L world.
They appeared to be in front of the United States in a number of important areas. of the United States.
United States Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara announced and Nagasaki Cold War events this at a press conference in February 1961.
The Americans led the Soviet Date Event Union in terms of deliverable nuclear warheads by a factor of seventeen to one.
S 29 August 1949 The USSR detonates their first atomic bomb Source 4.09 1 November 1952 The United States detonates the first hydrogen bomb Deputy Secretary Gilpatric on the arms race Cited in Kagan, On the Origins 12 August 1953 The USSR detonates its first hydrogen bomb The total number of our delivery vehicles … of War, 491.
The delivery rocket is an R-7 bear even after a Soviet surprise attack upon our forces would be as great as, 3 November 1957 The USSR sends Sputnik 2 into orbit; it carries the first animal launched into space, a dog named Laika perhaps even greater than, the total undamaged force which the enemy can threaten to launch against the United States in a first strike.
This was an enormous blow to Khrushchev’s personal prestige as the leader of the socialist world.
He knew that the Soviet Union did not have the resources to Operation Anadyr keep up with the United States in an arms race and it would take too long for the Source 4.04 USSR to develop and deploy enough ICBMs to catch up.
A Russian • four motorised regiments, with 2500 men each E balance of power with the United States.
Castro’s revolution in Cuba provided bomber base was Khrushchev with the perfect opportunity. • two tank battalions equipped with new T-55 tanks located nearby.
The G • a MiG-21 fighter squadron Soviets used this Fearing a repeat of the Bay of Pigs invasion with more direct involvement from • forty-two Il-28 bombers (each of which could carry six codename in an Nikita Khrushchev the United States, in September 1961 Castro requested that Khrushchev send attempt to mislead A military equipment and soldiers to help defend Cuba.
Khrushchev initially agreed nuclear bombs with eight to twelve kiloton warheads) any Western spies to the request but soon decided to give Castro more than he had requested.
An R-12 missile on M The Il-28 bomber, called ‘Beagle’ by display in Moscow in the Khrushchev’s motives early 1960s.
A NATO, flew at over 900km/h and had a It wasn’t just the presence of United States nuclear missiles in Turkey that convinced range of over 2000km.
Thus it could easily S Khrushchev to consider placing Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The Luna rockets (codenamed weak and could be easily pushed around ‘Frogs’ by the United States military) would be used against a United States invasion force on the Nuclear missiles would guarantee that the United beaches.
Discuss It was a bold move designed to show China that chips for Khrushchev’s other goals, such as your reasoning for each decision.
Russia was the leader of the socialist world getting the United States out of West Berlin 2.
Share your thoughts with the rest of the class and compare your responses with other groups.
Developed and analysed by the CIA the next day, the photos evidence revealed the presence of two Soviet nuclear missiles.
On the morning of Tuesday Khrushchev was well aware that placing missiles in 16 October, the presidential advisor on national security matters, McGeorge Cuba was a provocative act.
President Kennedy immediately alerted his kennedy’s ‘off the record’ meeting optimism—that the United States would not notice the brother, Attorney-General Robert Kennedy, at 9.30 am.
Once the missiles were brief, so that the public would not be alerted to a problem, but an ‘off the record’ in place and fully operational, Khrushchev’s plan was to meeting was held later that evening.
Kennedy had an advantage, as Khrushchev S announce their existence during a speech at the United didn’t know that the Americans knew about the missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy would find it extremely difficult to Kennedy was what to do about them.
E dislodge the missiles once they were in place—he would just have to learn to live with them, as Khrushchev was G forced to live with United States missiles in Turkey.
Thirteen days A Unfortunately, from Khrushchev’s perspective, the United States was keeping a close eye on Cuba.
The CIA suspected that One of the U-2 aerial the Soviets were also sending nuclear missiles to Cuba One of Kennedy’s options was to do nothing about the missiles.
President Kennedy ordered Defense McNamara noted, the missiles did not meaningfully reduce America’s shown to President Kennedy by the CIA on 16 L U-2 flights over Cuba to get more information.
The Soviet A Khrushchev and Castro Union could now initiate a devastating first strike met for the first time, 1960.
While S personnel have moved steadily onto the island in increasing numbers at the S o u r c e 4. 13 invitation of the Cuban Government.
Now that movement has been increased. the United States possessed enough nuclear weapons ‘The President’s News It is under our most careful surveillance.
In the wake of the Bay of Pigs fiasco, the our security in any way … or the lives of American citizens in this country, or if Cuba should … become an offensive military base of significant capacity for meeting with Khrushchev in Vienna (which Kennedy the Soviet Union, then this country will do whatever must be done to protect its admitted was the ‘roughest thing in my life.’30) and own security and that of its allies. the erection of the Berlin Wall, Kennedy felt the One Soviet freighter, need to appear tough in front of the Russians.
As the Indigirka, was Activity Attorney-General Robert Kennedy noted, ‘The US tasked with carrying could not accept what the Russians had done.’31 the warheads for the Source analysis There were also mid-term Congressional elections nuclear missiles to be 1.
What do you think Kennedy means by the phrase ‘an offensive military base of coming up in November, and Kennedy knew that based on Cuba.
By referring to the document, and using your own knowledge, explain why than all the bombs Almost immediately President Kennedy set up a Khrushchev decided to send nuclear missiles to Cuba. special group called ExComm (short for ‘Executive dropped by Allied aircraft on Germany 4.
Evaluate the usefulness of this source in accounting for the extent of military Committee of the National Security Council’). during World War II. support sent to Cuba by the Soviet Union.
The members of ExComm the CIA told McGeorge represented very different personalities and ideas on how to deal with the Soviet Bundy about their Union.
President Kennedy rarely sat in ExComm’s meetings, as it was felt that his discovery of Soviet presence might make its participants reluctant to speak their minds.
Bundy opted well-considered move by JFK, as ExComm needed to come up with a plan that not to tell President would resolve the looming showdown with the USSR without destroying the Kennedy until the next day, reasoning that world.
It was the The president’s choices last sleep anybody in G By mid-afternoon on 16 October, ExComm presented Kennedy with a number of the White House would options, ranging from aggressive to diplomatic.
A president to decide on the course of action that he hoped would get the missiles removed without resorting to a nuclear war.
Throughout the Cold With a partner, discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each option.
The range of the War, those in the US Activity Soviet nuclear Write down your ideas in a table like that below and share them with the Government who called rest of the class. missiles on Cuba Source analysis for an aggressive The two types of missiles attitude when dealing Option Advantages Disadvantages 1.
Identify two cities in the United States that the Soviet missiles in Cuba could stationed on Cuba ensured with the Soviet Union reach.
Nothing that almost every part of were called ‘hawks’, Blockade Cuba with United States warships 2.
Identify two other important targets, not in the US, that the Soviet missiles the continental United while those who could reach.
States could come under advocated diplomacy to prevent more missiles arriving nuclear attack. and discussion to avoid Limited air strike 3.
Evaluate the extent to which this map helps you understand why Khrushchev Negotiate through the UN decided to place nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Refer to other ideas and Trade ‘missiles for missiles’ information in your response.
Kennedy meets the leaders of Congress to inform falsely informed the them of the crisis and his decision to initiate a quarantine of press that he had a Early morning: President Kennedy is informed cold, so that his return Day 7 Cuba; Congress demands a tougher military response. to Washington on that the Soviet Union is constructing nuclear Monday 22 7.00 pm: Kennedy announces to the American people the presence Saturday would not missile bases on the island of Cuba.
October of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, and his intention to quarantine seem too suspicious.
The Organisation is the most favoured option at this stage; Robert P Examining a reconnaissance photo at a United States of American States McNamara presents the idea of a blockade.
State Department discussion about Cuba. votes unanimously to Day 2 condemn the placement E ExComm meets throughout the day to consider the best response; of missiles in Cuba and Wednesday 17 the air strike option still has the most support.
Robert Kennedy A Thursday 18 October Government’s statement that no missiles are, or will be, installed on Cuba. meets with Soviet Ambassador to the S 9.15 pm: ExComm gives its recommendations to President Kennedy.
United States, Anatoly Dissatisfied with the lack of consensus within the group, Kennedy tells Dobrynin, to express the S o u rc e 4. 17 them to reconvene and present a response they all agree with.
Kennedy meets with top military officers and they exert over the placement of Kennedy at his desk in the Oval Office upon signing the Cuba considerable pressure on him to launch air strikes in preparation for Quarantine order, 23 October 1962. the missiles in Cuba.
Reconnaissance photographs reveal that the missiles will be operational within a few days.
Kennedy leaves Washington for a scheduled 10.00 am: The United States quarantine of Cuba comes into effect; two Russian ships, October congressional election campaign trip to Chicago.
Day 9 the Gagarin and the Komiles, are very close to the quarantine line.
ExComm learns that twenty Russian ships have either stopped short of the pushes hard for the blockade option but the group remains divided.
October quarantine line or are turning around; Dean Rusk makes his ‘eyeball to eyeball’ remark.
Strategic Air Command is placed at DEFCON 2; United States bombers ExComm meetings continue throughout the morning. are ready to launch a full nuclear attack on the Soviet Union.
Reconnaissance photographs reveal that the Il-28s are being rapidly assembled in Cuba.
Day 5 Day 10 The CIA informs Kennedy that the missiles are probably now operational and can United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson confronts Saturday 20 Thursday 25 October be launched at a few minutes’ notice; this makes an air strike extremely risky.
After a meeting in the Oval Office, Kennedy decides in favour of a Cuba during a televised session of the General Assembly. blockade of Cuba to prevent more missiles arriving; the word ‘quarantine’ is used to reduce the military connotations of the action.
ExComm discusses a possible military response if the quarantine Closer than anyone knew Friday 26 fails; air strikes and invasion are offered as likely options.
While ExComm was aware of the ballistic return for an American promise not to invade Cuba . missiles and Il-28 bombers, they knew nothing of the R-11m cruise missiles and the Lunas.
ExComm meets to discuss their response to Khrushchev’s tactical nuclear weapons would have been fired. in the event of a United States invasion.
One of the cruise Kennedy would have felt compelled to respond A second letter; they learn during the meeting that a U-2 has been missiles could take out a United States aircraft carrier and shot down over Cuba and that the pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, with a full nuclear attack on the Soviet Union. its support vessels.
The Lunas were so powerful The MRBMs and IRBMs on Cuba would have been P has been killed.
The question now is whether the United that, hypothetically, only ten of them would have States should retaliate by bombing anti-aircraft sites in Cuba; fired at their targets in the US, along with the been needed to completely destroy all the Allied Day 12 Kennedy delays his decision until the following morning.
Tens of millions of people forces landing on the Normandy beaches on E would have died within a few hours.
L October Khrushchev’s second Foxtrot submarines guarding the freighter ships the Jupiter missiles from Turkey and responds to letter.
Khrushchev’s first letter, agreeing not to invade Cuba en route to Cuba each carried one nuclear-tipped P torpedo.
Like the cruise missiles, each torpedo The man who saved in return for the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles. the world was capable of destroying an aircraft carrier.
Robert Kennedy meets Dobrynin and reiterates the US M Government’s acceptance of the terms of Khrushchev’s first letter; The Jupiter missiles in Turkey were obsolete by As the Crisis intensified and a nuclear war, starting with a United States invasion of Cuba, he also indicates that the missiles in Turkey would be removed seemed increasingly likely, Khrushchev began to wonder if he had pushed Kennedy A October 1962 and had in four to five months, but that this must be kept absolutely already been scheduled too far.
The quarantine around Cuba, Kennedy’s address to the nation on 22 secret; Robert Kennedy hints at the possibility of military action for removal.
They would S October and reports of a huge United States troop deployment to Florida to take out the missiles if Khrushchev does not respond quickly. be replaced by United States suggested to Khrushchev that the United States was prepared to spark a third submarines armed with Preparations for a United States invasion of Cuba continue; ExComm world war.
Khrushchev nuclear missiles, which expects that it will take place on either Monday or Tuesday would patrol the eastern sent two letters to President Kennedy, one on 26 October and if Khrushchev does not agree to withdraw the missiles.
Khrushchev insisted that the United States must also withdraw its Jupiters be kept secret October public United States guarantee not to invade and the eventual, albeit to avoid giving the nuclear missiles from Turkey.
The reasoning behind Khrushchev’s harsher stance secret, withdrawal of the Jupiter missiles from Turkey. impression that they in the second letter can only be guessed at.
It may have been the result of an CIA reconnaissance traded missiles under article by journalist Walter Lippmann, which suggested that a missile trade-off was photo analysts A potential third world war has been averted duress.
Khrushchev was known to think that Lippmann’s became expert at by less than twenty-four hours. missiles were finally deciphering the type views reflected the views of the White House.
That Kennedy failed to publically removed in March 1963. of Soviet military reject Lippmann’s proposal might have suggested to Khrushchev that the United States equipment being Thirteen days in Government was prepared to trade.
Pespectives Soviet Ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, on the night of 26 the dimensions of the October and suggested that the United States was prepared to trade missiles crates the equipment With a partner, script and present a conversation between two ordinary Thirteen days: in Turkey for those in Cuba.
This technique film task Americans at the height of the crisis, one supporting an invasion of Cuba was dubbed ‘cratology.’ and the other opposed.
Make reference to some of the key events of the considerably and the Kennedys were now in an extremely awkward position.
We agree to do this and to state this commitment in the United S o u r c e 4.
This government, as promised, has maintained the United States will respect the integrity of the frontiers of Cuba, its Kennedy’s address the closest surveillance of the Soviet military build-up on the island of Cuba. sovereignty, undertake not to invade… to the nation Within the past week unmistakable evidence has established the fact that a S series of offensive missile sites is now in preparation on that imprisoned island.
The purposes of these bases can be none other than to provide a nuclear strike Activity E Activity capacity against the Western hemisphere … Our unswerving objective, therefore, must be to prevent the use of these missiles against this or any other country Source analysis G and to secure their withdrawal or elimination from the Western hemisphere Speech writing … To halt this offensive build-up, a strict quarantine on all offensive military 1.
A secondary school of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any 2.
Using your own knowledge, explain why it would be so difficult for the United States to meet the new P States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union. of this crisis.
You are demands. aware of student fear about the Crisis and Activity E decide to address the L matter in your weekly Source analysis assembly address.
On Saturday 27 October, a U-2 spy plane on a photographic reconnaissance word speech in which 2.
As the Crisis escalated, Kennedy found it harder phone line, as is often to withstand ExComm’s demands for decisive military action.
Initially the S Extract from Khrushchev’s first letter spark World War III, that night Kennedy called a small group of his advisors link was between two ‘Letter from Chairman to Kennedy, friday 26 October 1962 into the Oval Office to discuss their options.
In addition machine was used. oct26/doc4.html show statesmanlike wisdom.
We, for our part, will declare that our to this, Robert Kennedy indicated that the United States would withdraw their As of 2008, a secure ships, bound for Cuba, will not carry any kind of armaments.
You would declare missiles from Turkey after the Crisis was over—but that this had to remain strictly email connection is Full text of the that the United States will not invade Cuba with its forces … Then the necessity used when the leaders first letter confidential.
Dobrynin passed this message onto Khrushchev, and the Soviet for the presence of our military specialists in Cuba would disappear … e and of Russia and the you ought not now pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knots of leader accepted the United States offer the following morning.
A possible nuclear war had United States need to war, because the more the two of us pull, the tighter the knot will be tied. possibly been averted by less than twenty-four hours. communicate quickly.
President Kennedy’s offer to remove the missiles from Turkey was kept from the Activity public for over twenty-five years.
Even though the Jupiter missiles in Turkey were obsolete Source analysis and scheduled for removal anyway, the Kennedys could not risk giving the 1.
Outline the details of Khrushchev’s proposal to Kennedy. impression that they had been removed under pressure from the Soviets.
It forced the leaders of the United States and the USSR to abandon A hotline was established between the Pentagon and socialism to other Latin American countries their game of brinkmanship.
They realised the importance of communicating clearly the Kremlin and establishing a shared agreement on peaceful coexistence.
The years after the Kennedy promised not to invade Cuba A nuclear test ban treaty was signed, which prohibited Crisis saw a significant relaxation in the tension between the two superpowers. testing nuclear weapons above the ground or under In a secret deal, Kennedy agreed that the Jupiter The French word ‘détente’ is used to describe this period that lasted, largely water missiles will be withdrawn from Turkey S uninterrupted, until the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979.
Kennedy, and his speechwriters, had a gift for producing memorable lines, which is evident in this extract.
Robert Kennedy Americana enforced on the world by American weapons of war.
On 22 November 1963 Kennedy was in Dallas, Texas, on a was also killed by jfklibrary.org/Asset-Viewer/ of the grave or the security of the slave.
On 6 E BWC7I4C9QUmLG9J6I8oy8w. political trip to shore up support in the southern states (where his civil rights bill aspx kind that enables men and nations to grow and to hope and to build a better life June 1968, while for their children … Let us not be blind to our differences—but let us also direct was deeply unpopular) for his re-election campaign in 1964.
He was killed by an L campaigning for his attention to our common interests and the means by which those differences assassin while riding in a limousine in the presidential motorcade.
We all cherish were involved, ever since. was shot and killed as our children’s future.
M KHRUSHCHEV Khrushchev remained leader of the Soviet Union until he was ousted by the A Presidium in October S o u r c e 4.
His political opponents criticised the state of the economy, agriculture S ‘Over the garden wall’ and education under Khrushchev’s rule.
They also accused him of increasingly by Norman Mansbridge, directing policy without input from the Presidium.
Khrushchev asked a colleague, ‘Not even a wet spot would have remained where 2.
By referring directly to the cartoon, and using your own knowledge, explain the CASTRO role played by Attorney-General Robert Castro had not been part of the negotiations to remove the missiles and he felt Kennedy in defusing the stand-off over the deeply betrayed by Khrushchev’s decision.
The Cuban leader also thought that they Cuban missiles. had missed the perfect opportunity to force the United States out of their military 4.
Without a nuclear deterrent, Castro believed tension between the United States and USSR in 1962.
Refer to other views and ideas in your that his country was vulnerable.
No attack materialised but the United States trade embargo of response.
Castro remained President of Cuba until poor health forced him to step down in 2008.
Test L Essay Quiz – Chapter 4 P Write an essay on one of the topics below, using evidence.
Only one, however, of the United States. who, as United States Secretary of Defense, was at never-before-seen Soviet and Cuban about these events than Robert Kennedy almost resulted in the end of human civilisation.
This is exactly what a U-2 spy plane discovered the heart the Cold War for seven years. documents.
This makes their book one presents in his book, this is an invaluable Castro’s revolution in Cuba, his subsequent on 14 October 1962.
Two days later President His comments and revelations carry of the most original and insightful on resource written by one of the key the weight of someone who was a key the topic, particularly when covering participants.
For thirteen days the world held took place within the broader context of the Cold its breath as the leaders of the two superpowers Thirteen Days.
Directed by Roger Donald Kagan, On the Origins of Ernest May and Philip Zelikow, The War.
The United States was unwilling to accept tested the limits of their courage.
Inside the White that a foreign power had such influence over a the crisis took two forms: the courage to stand Cinema, 2000 One long chapter in this fascinating House during the Cuban Missile nation in what America considered it to be its firm and the courage to concede.
Kagan argues that wars break out We know so much about what happened in Latin America and the United States feared perspective of the White House.
While when powerful nations are unwilling to during the Crisis because President fear and aggression.
They came to an agreement stand up to aggression and provocation. it goes to great lengths to get the ‘look Kennedy ordered the installation of that Cuba would be used as a base to foment at the last minute that prevented the outbreak and feel’ of the early 1960s right, it does recording devices in the White House revolution in other nations in the Western of a third world war and ushered in a period of early in his presidency.
Even worse, Cuba could be used détente between the two superpowers. purposes of drama and entertainment. of many discussions and meetings have as base for the installation of Soviet nuclear been edited and presented in this highly useful resource.
