Soviet General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev’s decision to put nuclear missiles in Cuba was precipitated by two major developments.
The first was the rise of the Cuban communist movement, which in 1959 overthrew President Fulgencio Batista and brought Fidel Castro to power.
The Cuban Revolution was an affront to the United States, which took control of the island following the Spanish-American War of 1898.
After granting Cuba its independence several years later, the United States remained a close ally.
Under the directive of President Dwight D Eisenhower, the CIA prepared to overthrow the Castro government.
The resulting Bay of Pigs Invasion, ordered by President John F Kennedy in April 1961, saw the defeat of approximately 1,500 American-trained Cuban exiles at the hands of the Cuban Revolutionary Armed Forces.
Fidel Castro and Che Guevara, 1961 The Soviet Union, meanwhile, was motivated to assist the fledgling communist government that had somewhat surprisingly come to power without any support or influence from Moscow.
Despite the Americans’ humiliating defeat at the Bay of Pigs, the Soviets feared that the United States would continue to oppose and delegitimize the Castro regime.
As Khrushchev explained, “The fate of Cuba and the maintenance of Soviet prestige in that part of the world preoccupied me.
The other factor which led Khrushchev to his decision was the disparity between American and Soviet nuclear capabilities.
From the Soviet perspective, nuclearizing Cuba would also serve as an effective response to the American Jupiter missiles deployed in Turkey.
A United States reconnaissance photo of missile sites in Cuba, 1962 In May 1962, a special Soviet delegation made a secret trip to Cuba to work out the details of the operation—codenamed “Anadyr”—with Castro.
From July to October 1962, the Soviets secretly transported troops and equipment to Cuba.
If all went according to plan, the Americans would find out about the operation only after it was too late to stop it.,902 soldiers were deployed—most wearing civilian clothes and introduced to an unconvinced Cuban population as “agricultural specialists”—before the crisis started.
The CIA was unaware of the operation until October, as it had little presence in Cuba following the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
Furthermore, a series of international incidents involving U-2 spy planes had caused the United States to put a five-week moratorium on aerial reconnaissance over Cuba.
The missions resumed on October 14, when Air Force Major Richard Heyser flew over the island and recorded video evidence of the R-12 sites.
President Kennedy meets in the Oval Office with the pilots who flew reconnaissance missions over Cuba, October 1962 With Soviet missiles on their way to Cuba, President Kennedy faced a pressing decision.
Kennedy wisely ruled out a military strike, noting that it was likely to miss at least some of the missiles and would prompt Soviet retaliation, probably against a vulnerable West Berlin.
He ultimately chose the second option proposed by the CIA, but with one crucial difference.
His military advisers nevertheless continued to push for an attack, to which Kennedy sardonically quipped, “These brass hats have one great advantage in their favor.
Kennedy also ordered the Strategic Air Command into Defense Condition 3 and two days later upped it to DEFCON 2, only one step short of nuclear war.
Among other preparations, 66 B-52s carrying hydrogen bombs were constantly airborne, replaced with a fresh crew every 24 hours.
United States officials made sure that the Soviets would pick up the communications ordering the American nuclear forces on high alert.
At the United Nations, American Ambassador Adlai Stevenson famously sparred with Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin over the crisis.
It was one of four submarines sent from the Soviet Union to Cuba, all of which were detected and three of which were eventually forced to surface.
The diesel-powered B-59 had lost contact with Moscow for several days, and thus was not informed of the escalating crisis.
Crew members fainted from heat exhaustion and rising carbon dioxide levels.
The Soviet B-59 submarine surfaces, October 28, 1962 American warships tracking the submarine dropped depth charges on either side of the B-59 as a warning.
The crew, unaware of the blockade, thought that perhaps war had been declared.
Vadim Orlov, an intelligence officer aboard the submarine, recalled how the American ships “surrounded us and started to tighten the circle, practicing attacks and dropping depth charges.
Unbeknownst to the Americans, the B-59 was equipped with a T-5 nuclear-tipped torpedo.
It was capable of a blast equivalent to 10 kilotons of TNT, roughly two-thirds the strength of the bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
Firing without a direct order from Moscow, however, required the consent of all three senior officers on board.
Political officer Ivan Semonovich Maslennikov agreed that they should launch the torpedo.
The last remaining officer, Second Captain Vasili Alexandrovich Arkhipov, dissented.
The B-59 surfaced near the American warships and the submarine set off north to return to the Soviet Union without incident.
Armageddon Averted Although the Americans and the Soviets ultimately reached an agreement, it took almost a week of tense negotiations following the institution of the blockade.
A deal was on the table—the Soviet Union would remove the missiles if the United States was willing to accept Castro’s communist regime in Cuba.
A United States Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missile On October 27, however, Khrushchev upped his demands in an address broadcast publicly via Radio Moscow.
The Soviet Union would stand down in Cuba only if the United States agreed to remove the Jupiter missiles deployed in Turkey.
Later that day, an American U-2 reconnaissance plane was shot down over Cuba.
The pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, would end up being the only military fatality during the crisis.
American officials—mistakenly believing that the Kremlin had directly ordered the attack—were demoralized by the turn of events.
Unbeknownst to many of his advisors, the President instructed his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, to meet secretly with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
The United States was willing remove the missiles from Turkey within five months, but under the condition that it not be part of any public resolution to the conflict.
Given that Turkey was a member of NATO, an admission that the United States was trading missiles in Turkey to resolve the situation in Cuba would have undermined the alliance.
Six Soviet missile transporters are loaded onto a ship at the Port of Casilda in Cuba, November 6, 1962 The Soviet Union began to dismantle the nuclear sites in Cuba within a day of the agreement.
Fidel Castro—furious with Khrushchev’s decision to give in to American demands—refused to let in any United Nations inspectors to verify the removal of the missiles.
The Soviets had to resort to loading missiles on ship decks and uncovering them at sea, where they could be photographed by American planes.
The United States lifted the blockade on November 20 and removed the Jupiter missiles from Turkey by April 1963.
In the end, however, the removal of the missiles was a fairly meaningless gesture as the new Minuteman ICBMs had rendered the Jupiters obsolete.
As Khrushchev affirmed only days after the end of the crisis, “We fully agree with regard to three types of tests or, so to say, tests in three environments.
Less than a year later, the two superpowers signed the Limited Test Ban Treaty , which included the principles outlined by Khrushchev.
Nevertheless, the years after the crisis also saw a massive increase in the construction of nuclear weapons in the Soviet Union.
The Soviet stockpile tripled by the end of the decade and peaked at over 40,000 warheads during the 1980s.
This phenomenon can be explained in part by the fact that Soviet leaders felt they had little choice but to capitulate during the crisis given the comparative weakness of their nuclear arsenal.
The crisis also prompted the creation of the Moscow-Washington hotline, a direct telephone link between the Kremlin and the White House designed to prevent future escalations.
Kennedy also ordered the creation of the nuclear “football” which would give him and future presidents the means to order a nuclear strike within minutes.
