Marrs INTRODUCTION PART ONE -THE HIDDEN HISTORY OF THE THIRD REICH PARTTWO -THE REICH CONSOLIDATES PARTTHREE -THE REICH ASCENDANT Epilogue INTRODUCTION ADOLF HITLER'S THIRD REICH ENDED IN BERLIN ON APRIL 30, 1945 Thunder reverberated from a storm of R ussian artillery that was bombarding the ruined capital.
The day before, along with the incoming shells, came particularly bad news for the fuehrer, who by this late date in World War II was confined to his underground bunker beneath the Reich chancellery.
Hitler had learned thattwo days earlier his Axis partner, Italy's Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini, had been captured by paramilitary Italian resistance fighters.
Mussolini and his mistress, Clara Petacci, were executed and their bodies were left hanging from lampposts in a Milan piazza.
This news was especially worrisome to Hitler because only hours earlier he had married Eva Braun in a small civil ceremony inside the Fuehrerbunker.
He handed out poison capsules to his remaining female secretaries and had Blondi, his favorite Alsatian dog, poisoned.
But Hitler, decorated World War I soldier and hardened political fighter, made it clear that he and his philosophies would not leave the world stage quietly.
Hitler then passed along a line of his entourage, mostly women, and shook their hands while mumbling inaudibly.
At about three P.M. on April 30, members of H itier's entourage heard a single shot from their leader's quarters.
Hitler's valet, SS Sturmbannfuehrer Heinz Linge, and an orderly emerged with a blanket-covered body.
The corpses were carried up to a garden area, placed in a shell crater, and burned with gasoline.
H owever, these remains were never found, reportedly due to the constant shelling.
THE ESCAPE OF ADOLF HITLER It was well known and publicly reported that H itier often made use of doubles, men who closely resembled him, for use at certain public presentations.
Pauline Koehler, a maid at H itier's B erghof in Berchtesgaden, insisted that she knew of at least three men who doubled for Hitler.
After all, the few persons who testified that he was dead were ardent N azis who were eager to please their captors— whether Russian, British, or American— with accounts of the leader's death.
F egelein had left the bunker but protested when captured by an S S search party that he planned to return.
He was later shot by a firing squad in the chancellery garden for desertion.
Evidence that Fegelein was privy to secret knowledge comes from Kristina Reiman, an actress who met with Fegelein in Berlin on April 27.
J ust before he left me, however, he said that if the fuehrer ever discovered that he, Fegelein, knew his secret.
A H itIer double could have been secreted into the bunker any time prior to his reported suicide.
After Hitler got Eva to take poison— or a dead duplicate Eva brought in— the double, dressed in the fuehrer's clothing, could have been shot, a poison capsule placed in his mouth, and left to be covered by Bormann and retrieved by the unsuspecting valet Linge.
Hitler could have then passed from the study through his living quarters to a small conference room containing a stairway to the garden above.
While Linge and others from the entourage waited in the hallway outside Hitler's study, the fuehrer's party and an armed SS escort could have made their way to a secluded spot to await darkness.
Hitler could have moved along Hermann Goering Strasse, then cut across the Tiergarten to the Zoo Station near Adolf H itier P latz.
F rom there, they could have followed the rail lines to the Reichssportfeld and crossed the Scharndorfestrasse to the Piechelsdorf Bridge, a short walk to the Havel River, where a J u-52 floatplane would have been waiting to fly the fuehrer out.
Indeed a J u-52 pontoon plane had landed on the Havel the previous night, at the radioed request of someone in the Fuehrerbunker.
Author Infield has suspected this was a practice run for the following night.
Once away from Berlin, an airplane could have taken Hitler almost anywhere in territory not under direct control of the Allies— Switzerland, Spain, or any number of other friendly locations.
Conventional history says that Hitler and Eva Braun committed suicide in the bunker— end of story, despite tantalizing tidbits of information that have surfaced since the war.
On J uly 17, 1945, during the Potsdam Conference, Soviet leader] oseph Stalin reportedly told United States president Harry S Truman that Hitler did not commit suicide but probably escaped.
Years later, the Russians produced photos purporting to be of Hitler's dead body, which contradicted their earlier accounts that the bodies of H itIer and his mistress had been immediately burned.
Today, while H itier's fate may be intriguing and undoubtedly will be argued for years, it is immaterial, a moot point.
THE HISTORY OF how the Nazis, armed with advanced technology and the greatest hoard of treasure in history, were able to escape justice at the end of World War II is perhaps the greatest untold story of the twentieth century.
Unfortunately, as shall be seen, this might not be so far from the truth.
They escaped with the loot of Europe as well as rocket science and even more exotic technologies.
Both Nazi science and ideology were brought to America in the aftermath of World War II with the aid and assistance of the very same self-styled globalists who created National Socialism in the first place.
Their agenda matches that of the old Bavarian llluminati, who were long thought to have perished soon after the time of G eorge Washington.
But if the order died, its credo lives on— power and control through wealth by any means possible.
From the seeds of Nazism planted in America during the Cold War sprang a whole new nation, one that today has become the greatest superpower in history but has also incurred a growing hatred among the nations of the world as well as alienation and dissension among its own citizens.
At the beginning of the third millennium after C hrist, by most criteria, the once-free constitutional republic of the United States had become a National Socialist nation, an empire of the creators of the Third Reich— a Fourth Reich.
Be advised that this work has no political conviction to advocate, no conspiracy theory to press, and no hidden agenda.
It is a collection of supportable facts that leads to certain conclusions, uncomfortable and unconventional as they may be.
But first, one must understand the definition of the terms under consideration.
The First Reich is known as the Holy Roman Empire, although it was neither holy, nor Roman, nor an empire.
This monarchial empire, modeled after the Roman Empire and ruled by kaisers, or caesars, existed until 1806, when Napoleon marched his troops into Berlin.
The S econd R eich was created by P rince Otto von B ismarck, who as premier of P russia defeated Napoleon III in 1871 and became the ""Iron Chancellor"" over about three hundred independent states.
This was derived by combining the first syllable of ""NAtional"" and the second syllable of ""soZlalist"" in the name Nationalosozialistiche Deutsche Arbeiterpartei, the National Socialist German Workers P arty.
This was the small radical political party H itier built into a fascist system that threatened the entire world.
Always remember that a typical attribute of fascism is the merging of state and business leadership.
Italian dictator Benito Mussolini is credited with coining the word ""fascism,"" a name taken from his fascist Blacks hirts called F ascisti.
This term derived from the ancient R oman symbol of the fasces, a bundle of rods with a protruding axe blade.
Under fascism, the individual is subordinate to the state, usually headed by a single leader.
For the remainder of this work, fascism will be defined as the merger of state and corporate power.
In fascist Italy and Nazi Germany, the state gained control over the corporations.
DiLorenzo, professor of economics at Loyola College in Baltimore, Maryland, wrote, ""t is important to recognize that, as an economic system, fascism was widely accepted in the 1920s and 30s.
They seek to gain and maintain the controlling power that comes from great wealth, usually gained through the monopoly of ownership over basic resources.
Politics and social issues matter little to the globalist ruling elite, who move smoothly between corporate business and government service.
The desire for wealth with its attendant power and control drives their activities.
It is this unswerving attention to commerce and banking that lies behind nearly all modern world events.
But this also may be a covert plan being carried out by individuals following a definite agenda.
COMMUNISM VERSUS NATIONAL SOCIALISM As documented in Rule by Secrecy, the same financial powers that built the United States into the world's foremost superpower also created communism.
After an aborted revolution in 1905, thousands of Russian activists had been exiled, including the revolutionaries Leon Trotsky and Vladimir Lenin.
After years of attempts at reform, the czar was forced to abdicate on March 15, 1917, following riots in Saint-Petersburg believed by many to have been instigated by British agents.
In J anuary 1917, Leon Trotsky, a ferventfollower of Karl Marx, was living rent-free on Standard Oil property in Bayonne, New J ersey.
Trotsky had escaped Russia in 1905 and fled to France, from where he was expelled for his revolutionary behavior.
One of these bankers was J acob Schiff, whose family had lived with the Rothschild family in Frankfurt, Germany.
Schiff, a Rockefeller banker, had financed thej apanese in the 1904-05 Russo-J apanese Warfor control of Manchuria, and had sent his emissary George Kennan to Russia to promote revolution against the czar.
Another was Senator Elihu Root, attorney for Federal Reserve cofounder Paul Warburg's Kuhn, Loeb & C ompany.
The American International Corporation , formed in 1915, also helped fund the Russian Revolution.
AlC directors represented the interests of the, • Rockefellers • Rothschilds • Du Ponts • Kuhns • Loebs • Harrimans • the Federal Reserve, as well as, Federal Reserve cofounder Frank Vanderlip oand George Herbert Walker, the maternal great-grandfather of President George W Bush Trotsky left the United States by ship on March 27, 1917— just days before America entered the waralong with nearly three hundred revolutionaries and funds provided by Wall Street.
Trotsky, whose real name was Lev Davidovich Bronstein, was being trailed by British agents who suspected him of working with German intelligence since his stay in prewar Vienna.
When the ship carrying Trotsky and his entourage stopped in Halifax, Nova Scotia, they and their funds were impounded by Canadian authorities, who rightly feared that a revolution in Russia might free German troops to fight their soldiers on the Western Front.
But this wellgrounded concern was overcome by P resident Woodrow Wilson's alter ego, C olonel Edward Mandell House, who told the chief of the British Secret Service, Sir William Wiseman, that Wilson wanted Trotsky released.
On April 21, 1917, less than a month after the United States entered the war, the British Admiralty ordered the release of Trotsky, who, armed with an American passport authorized by Wilson, continued on his journey to Russia and history.
The train passed through Germany unhindered, as arranged by German banker Max Warburg (the brother of Paul Warburg, who cofounded the Federal Reserve System and handled United States financing during World War I) and the German High Command.
Lenin, like Trotsky, was labeled a German agent by the government of Alexander Kerensky, the second provisional government created following the czar's abdication.
By November 1917, Lenin and Trotsky, backed by Western funds, had instigated a successful revolt and seized the Russian government for the Bolsheviks.
Internal strife between the ""reds"" and the ""whites"" lasted until 1922 and cost some 28 million Russian lives, many times the war loss.
Lenin died in 1924 from a series of strokes after establishing the Third International, or Comintern, an organization formed to export communism worldwide.
Trotsky fled Russia when J oseph Stalin took dictatorial control, and, in 1940, was murdered in Mexico by an agent of Stalin's.
Some conspiracy authors have seen a dual purpose to the funding of the Bolsheviks.
It is clear that revolutionaries like Lenin and Trotsky were being used to get R ussia out of the war, to the benefit of Germany.
And communism was being supported by the globalists to advance their plan of creating tension between the capitalist West and socialist East.
Chesterson, a right-wing Britisli journalist and politician, who in 1933 joined Oswald Moseley's British Union of Fascists, observed thatto understand politics, one must make a study of power elites.
Because of the warring factions in post-revolution Russia, sending an official delegation to Russia was problematic.
Therefore, American financiers came in the form of the American Red Cross Mission.
The flight of the privileged elite from R ussia in 1918 sent Shockwaves through the capitals of E urope and America and prompted a backlash that lasted for de cades.
This fear trickled through their political representatives, employees, and on into virtually every home.
Author Gary Allen explained, ""In the Bolshevik Revolution we have some of the world's richest and most powerful men financing a movement which claims its very existence is based on the concept of stripping of their wealth men like the Rothschilds, Rockefellers, Schiffs, Warburgs, Morgans, Harrimans and Milners.
The manufactured animosity between the democracies of the West and the communism of the East produced continuous tension from 1918 through the end of the twentieth century.
They funded the rise of National Socialism in Germany and saw an armed Greater Germany as a barrier to communism in Europe.
National Socialism was a form of socialism almost indistinguishable from communism, only it was confined witliin national geographic boundaries.
Under National Socialism, the globalists could pit the various nations against each other.
But following Germany's military successes in Poland, the Low Countries, and France, these globalists realized they faced the same problem they had with the communists.
A total German victory would result in a worldwide National Socialist system unable to produce the tensions and conflicts necessary for maximizing profit and control.
They also may have feared that Stalin's S oviet U nion was about to launch an attack on Western Europe.
At some point, the globalists determined that the Axis, after blocking Russia's invasion of Europe, should lose the war.
They also began drawing up plans for the survival and renewal of a new form of National Socialism, one not dependent on racism and ethnicity.
Working with the same financiers and capitalists that had helped create German Nazism, these globalists began laying the foundation for a Fourth Reich.
Known variously as Chapter 322, the Brotherhood of Death, the Order, or, more popularly, as Skull and Bones or simply Bones, the Order was brought from Germany to Yale in 1832 by General William Huntington Russell and Alphonso Taft.
Taft, secretary of war in 1876 and United States attorney general and an ambassador to Russia, was the father of William Howard Taft, the only person to serve as both president and chief justice of the United States.
A pamphlet detailing an 1876 investigation of Skull and Bones headquarters at Yale, known as ""the Tomb"" by a rival secret society, stated, ""...its founder was in Germany before Senior Year and formed a warm friendship with a leading member of a G erman society.
H e brought back with him to college authority to found a chapter here.
The secret German society may have been none other than the mysterious and infamous llluminati.
Ron Rosenbaum, a former Yale student and one of the few journalists to take a serious look at Skull and Bones, noted that the official skull-and-crossbones emblem of the Order was also the official crest of the llluminati.
His llluminati were opposed to what they saw as the tyranny of the Catholic Church and the national governments it supported.
Weishaupt also evoked a philosophy that has been used with terrible results down through the years by H itier and many other tyrants.
Thus, for the enlightened— or ""illuminated""— any means to gain their ends is acceptable, whether this includes deceit, theft, murder, or war.
Let it never appear in any place in its own name, but always covered by another name, and another occupation,"" stated Weishaupt.
In 1777, Weishaupt rolled his brand of llluminism into Freemasonry after joining the Masonic Order's Lodge Theodore of Good Counsel in Munich.
By 1783, the Bavarian government saw the llluminati as a direct threat to the established order and outlawed the organization, which prompted many members to flee Germany, only spreading their philosophies farther.
This belief partially comes from the intriguing notion that the much denounced Protocols of the Elders of Zion— used widely since its publication in 1864 to justify anti-S emitism— was actually an llluminati document with J ewish elements added later for disinformation purposes.
No one can doubt that socialism, whether llluminati-inspired or not, has come to the United States, and socialism is the cornerstone of Nazi philosophy.
Beginning witli seemingly innocuous programs lil<e Social Security and continuing through a myriad of government programs such as Medicare, farm subsidies, food stamps, and student entitlements, it seems that nearly every aspect of life today involves the centralized federal government, which, since the attacks of 9/11, continues to draw ever more power unto itself.
USA Today reported, ""A sweeping expansion of social programs since 2000 has sparked a record increase in the number of Americans receiving federal government benefits such as college aid, food stamps and health care.
Socialism has come to America because the National Socialists of the New World Order recognize that any social program requires central authority.
And they know full well that with their immense wealth and power, they can control any central authority.
Over the years, they have masked this creep of socialism by distracting appeals to nationalism.
Americans are constantly reminded that the United States is God's gift to the world, the epitome of freedom and democracy.
P atriotism has been used to fan the flames of nationalism among Americans.
Today, anyone who criticizes foreign policy, overseas military interventions, or even questions national policies opens themselves to charges of being unpatriotic.
It is possible that the U nited States is indeed becoming the F ourth R eich, the continuation of a philosophy of National Socialism thought to have been vanquished more than half a century ago.
Many today describe what they see as ""neo-Nazism,""the movement to revive National Socialism.
Unfortunately, younger generations cannot understand the nuances of differences between fascism, corporate power, democracy, and a democratic republic.
While the USA helped defeatthe Germans in World War II, we failed to defeat the Nazis.
Many other Nazis and war criminals set up shop in a variety of other nations, and many traveled on passports issued by the Vatican.
They brought with them miraculous technology, such as the V-2 rockets, but they also brought with them Nazi ideology.
Ranking Nazis, along with their young and fanatical proteges, used the loot of Europe to create corporate front companies in many countries, including, • Spain • Portugal • Sweden • Turkey • Argentina More than two hundred fronts were created Justin Switzerland, thatbanl<ing hub that continued to handle Nazi money before, during, and after the war.
Utilizing the stolen wealth of Europe, which may have included the legendary treasure of Solomon, men with both Nazi backgrounds and Nazi mentality wormed their way into corporate America, slowly buying up and consolidating companies into giant multinational conglomerates.
They met little resistance from corporate leaders who had supported them in previous years and could not resist the temptation of obscene profits.
PART ONE THE HIDDEN HISTORY OF THE THIRD REICH A NEW REICH BEGINS HITLER'S SUPPORTGROUP FOLLOWING THE ARMISTICE OF 1918, WHICH ENDED WORLD WAR I, German soldiers returned home, to a country economically devastated by the war.
The Bavarian city of Munich was hit particularly hard, with jobless exsoldiers wandering the streets and a number of splinter political parties vying for membership.
It was in this setting that Hitler, a twenty-nine-yearold veteran, came into contact with members of theThule Gesellschaft, orThule Society, ostensibly an innocent reading group dedicated to the study and promotion of older German literature.
But the society, composed mostly of wealthy conservatives, ardent nationalists, and anti-Semites, actually delved into radical politics, race mysticism, and the occult under its emblem— a swastika superimposed over a sword.
The society also served as a front for the even more secretive Germanenorden, or German Order, a reincarnation of the old Teutonic Knights, which had branches throughout G ermany patterned after Masonic lodges.
In other words, members should pretend to be anything or anybody, adopt any philosophy, tell any lie, steal, cheat, even kill as long as it accomplishes the society's objectives.
M embers of the Thule S ociety encouraged a M unich locksmith and toolmaker named Anton Drexler to bring workers into the political process.
Hitler, unable to make a living as an artist, turned to earning extra money by serving as an army intelligence agent reporting to a Captain Karl Mayr.
I was to go there and look at the society and to report upon it,"" Hitler recalled in Mein Kampf.
H owever, the young military agent stood and ""astonished"" the small gathering by arguing against a proposal that Bavaria break ties with Prus sia.
Impressed with the nationalistic and anti-Semitic views of the fledgling party, military authorities allowed H itier to join and began funding the party's work.
Hitler's work in the party was initially supported both by funds from Captain Mayr's army intelligence unit and the dedicated anticommunists and occultists of theThule Society.
Eckartwas soon introducing the new member to the right social circles in M unich and his intellectual friends in the Thule S ociety.
It was, in fact, wealthy businessmen in Western industrial and banking circles who guaranteed Hitler's success.
Aft er Hitler lost a popular election to Hindenburg in 1932, thirty-nine business leaders, with familiar names like Krupp, Siemens, Thyssen, and Bosch, signed a petition urging the aged president Paul von Hindenburg to name Hitler chancellor.
In J anuary 1933, through a compromise with German aristocrats, industrialists, and army officers, brokered by banker Baron Kurt Freiherr von Schroeder, Hitler was appointed chancellor of Germany.
The deal to name Hitler chancellor of Germany was cut at von Schroeder's home on J anuary 4, 1933.
At that time, Germany was a free republic with one of the most educated and cultured populations in the world.
The country was at peace and enjoying a blossoming of democratic freedom under a coalition government of the Weimar Republic.
Oddly, Hitler went against tradition by choosing not to work out of an office in the German Reichstag, or parliament building, and on February 27, 1933, the Reichstag was gutted by fire.
In those slower, gentler times, this act was as great a shock to the G erman people as the destruction of the World Trade Center towers was to Americans in 2001.
Inside the building, police arrested an incoherent, half-naked retarded Dutch youth named Marinus van der Lubbe.
However, later investigation found that one person could not have started the mammoth blaze and that incendiary devices had been carried into the building through a tunnel that led to the offices of H itier's closest partner, H ermann G oering.
Law enforcement agencies quickly moved against not only the communists but also pacifists, liberals, and democrats.
As a result of the E nabling Act, the N azi government required national identity cards, racial profiling, the equivalent of a national homeland security chief , gun confiscation, and, later, mass murders and incarcerations in concentration camps.
H itier's financiers and especially P russian military officers were becoming alarmed over H itier's growing power, especially with some three million Sturmabteilung or Storm Detachment Brown Shirts under the command of Hitler's SA chief Ernst Roehm awaiting orders.
The army proposed a deal— if the power of the S A was broken, the military would pledge loyalty to Hitler.
Hitler agreed, and on J une 30, 1934, trumped-up charges of plotting a revolution caused Roehm and hundreds of Brown Shirts to be fatally purged and the SA quietly faded away.
The German military began pledging their allegiance not to their nation but to Hitler.
With the German population firmly under control due to massive propaganda and fear of government retaliation.
Hitler was free to launch invasions into former German territories as well as Poland.
SS men dressed in Polish uniforms fabricated an attack on a German radio station at Gleiwitz, which allowed Hitler to announce that a counterattack had been launched against Polish soldiers who had invaded German territory.
WITH THE DEATH of the eighty-seven-year-old Hindenburg on August 2, 1934, Hitler merged the offices of president and cliancellor and proclaimed liimself commander in cliief of tine armed forces, tine absolute leader— fuehrer— of all Germany.
He found a huge and powerful industrial base geared for war production already in place and awaiting his command.
It had been put in place at the end of World War I thanks to an influx of Western capital investment.
It caused anger and frustration among the Germans, because it meant foreign control of Germany's finances— a fact constantly pointed out by Hitler in his speeches— and appeared openended, as no final reparation amount was ever announced.
P Morgan agent Owen D Young, required burdensome monetary payments from Germany.
Financing the rearmament of Germany in violation of the Versailles Treaty proved as profitable as it was dangerous to European peace.
Finance between Germany and the Allied nations was controlled by the Bank of International Settlements , headquartered in Basel, Switzerland.
It was the brainchild of Hjalmar Horace Greeley Schacht, president of the Reichsbank (in 1930, he resigned in protest to the Young Plan but was reappointed by Hitler in 1933) and the financial genius behind Germany's economic revival.
Although his father was an American citizen, Hjalmar was born in Germany during his mother's return there and named after the famous American editor and politician.
It was S chacht who provided an ongoing link between Hitler and Germany's industrialists.
The BIS was administered by a multinational staff, which historian Ouigley called the ""apex of the system"" of bankers, to secretly exchange information and plan for the coming war.
Created in 1926 by combining six existing cliemical companies, it was tine braincliild of Hermann Sclimitz, wlio became tine firm's president.
Farben became tine largest cliemical manufacturing enterprise in tine world.
Farben had subsidiaries, offices, and representatives in ninety-three countries, including the United States.
This growth was made possible by bond sales in America, including one for $30 million offered by National City Bank, a forerunner of today's Citibank.
Farben's patented Zyklon-B, a prussic acid poison gas, that was used to kill victims in the ""shower baths"" of Auschwitz, Maidanek, and Treblinka.
Previously, the firm had received a contract to produce carbon monoxide, used to gas the sick and mentally deficient under Germany's euthanasia program.
One example of the close business ties between the United States and Nazi Germany was Walter C Teagle, chairman of Standard Oil of NewJ ersey, which was owned by Rockefeller's Chase Bank.
Farben, which changed its name to General Aniline and Film in an effort to distance itself from its German owners.
Teagle, through Rockefeller banking and oil interests, made his superiors a handsome profit just prior to the war. "" remained in partnership with Farben in the matter of tetraethyl lead, an additive used in aviation gasoline,"" wrote author Charles Higham.
Next year, Schmitz and his partners returned to London and obtained $15 million worth.
The result was that H itier's air force was rendered capable of bombing London, the city that had provided the supplies.
Following negative publicity regarding these tetraethyl transactions in 1938, Teagle resigned from the board of GAF, to be replaced by future Secretary of Defense] ames V Forrestal.
C uriously, it was this same Walter Teagle who helped create the N ational R ecovery Administration, one of President Roosevelt's New Deal agencies designed to regulate American business.
This was an odd choice if the captains of American industry were as opposed to socialism as they publicly claimed.
By the mid-1930s, with the government, military, and the German cartels now firmly in hand.
Hitler knew itwas time to strengthen his influence over international bankers and businessmen.
Despite his declared intentions to nationalize German businesses and curtail the power of international business and finance.
Hitler initially had little trouble getting funds from corporate sponsors who saw his National Socialism as a necessary alternative to worldwide communism. ""is appeal to the common people offered a chance to win the working class away from communism,"" noted J ames Pool, author of Who Financed Hitler.
In America, efforts were under way to market Nazism to tine public while concurrently practicing economic espionage.
By the late 1930s, Lee was being paid $25,000 a year for disseminating pro-Nazi propaganda in America.
Another solid conduit for Nazi propaganda and intelligence activities was the Hamburg-Amerika shipping line.
Max Warburg, a leader of Deutsche Bank, sat on the board of Hamburg-Amerika Steamship Line along with PrescottBush, father and grandfather of two future United States presidents.
The banking industry, including foreign financial houses, provided Hitler and his Nazis with the funds to both consolidate and spread their National Socialist doctrine.
Throughout World War II, the bank of Baron von Schroeder acted as financial agents for Germany in both Britain and the United States.
In fact, Dulles, in addition to providing legal services to a joint Rocke feller-Schroeder investment firm, the Schroeder-Rockefeller Company, also sat on the board of directors of General Aniline and Film from 1927 to 1934.
H Stein & Company banking house of Cologne, had long provided financial support to the N azis in hopes they would counteract the spread of communism.
Hitler had given his word to von Schroeder that ""National Socialism would engage in no foolish economic experiments""— in other words, he would not attack banking practices except in rhetoric.
He then proposed to open a German credit bank second to the Reichsbank, but one that would issue notes in pound sterling.
M ontagu N orman, governor of the B ank of E n gland, in early 1934 informed a select group of C ity of London financiers that Hitler's regime was a system with a good future.
With no opposition, it was decided to provide covert financial help to Hitler until Norman could persuade the British government to abandon its pro-French policy to one more favorable to Germany.
Thus a curious relationship developed between these powerful banks of two supposedly belligerent nations, which continued throughout the war.
Of course, it only appears curious to those who do not understand the economic cooperation among the world's ruling elite.
In December 1938, Schacht came to England as a guest at Montagu Norman's home.
One month later, the hospitality was returned when Norman stopped over in Berlin for a visit with Schacht on his way to Switzerland.
Although there was no public announcement as to what the two men discussed, it was rumored that they were attempting to create a common policy of settling Germany's foreign debts and expanding its markets.
There were also rumors that Britain's bankers might extend to Germany some $375 million in export credits.
Funds for this financial control were channeled through the Bank of International Settlements that, according to the bank's charter and with the agreement of the respective governments, was immune from seizure, closure, or censure, even if its owners were at war.
By the start of World War II, the BIS was under Nazi control with the bank's directors including Schmitz, Schroeder, Dr.
In 1939, when the Nazis moved into Czechoslovaki a, officials of the Czech National Bank removed $48 million in gold reserves to the B ank of E n gland for safekeeping.
Bank of England governor Montagu Norman unhesitatingly agreed to move the gold to Switzerland, where it went into Nazi accounts to purchase essential war materials for Germany.
Despite the obvious rearmament in G ermany in tine late 1930s, tine N azis continued to find support in Britain, even witliin tine Rotliscliild dominated Banl< of England.
This pro-Nazi proclivity by Bank of En gland officials will assume even more relevance in the events described in the next section.
Illustrating further interconnecting business associations of this time was International Telephone and Telegraph German chairman Gerhardt Westrick, a close associate of J ohn Foster Dulles, who was a partner to Dr.
Two ITT directors were German banker Schroeder and Walter Schellenberg, head of counterintelligence for the Nazi Gestapo— the Nazi Geheime Staatspolizei or Secret State Police.
America's International Telephone and Telegraph Corporation sold Germany communication and war material, including as many as fifty thousand artillery fuses per month, more than three years after Pearl Harbor.
More interconnecting business ties between America and the Nazis can be seen by studying the Rocke feller-owned Chase National Bank, now J PMorgan Chase Bank, the largest corporate bank in the United States.
Two executives of Standard Oil's German subsidiary were Karl Lindemann and Emil Helfferich, prominent figures in Himmler's Circle of Friends of the Gestapo— its chief financiers— and close friends and colleagues of the BIS's Baron von Schroeder.
F urther banking connections, noted by author William B ramley, involved G erman banker M ax Warburg and his brother Paul Warburg, who had been instrumental in establishing the Federal Reserve System in the United States.
Farben was a director of the Warburg Bank of Manhattan, which later became part of the Rockefeller Chase Manhattan Bank.
Farben president Hermann Schmitz served on the boards of Deutsche Bank and the Bank for International Settlements.
In 1929, Schmitz was voted president of the board of National City Bank, now Citibank.
In the 1930s, many people in both Britain and America were in agreement with Nazi ideology.
Automobile-maker H enry F ord became a guiding light to H itier, especially in the realm of antiSemitism.
In 1920, Ford published an anti-J ewish book titled The International J ew.
And the Fords were not alone in providing Nazi Germany witli tine means to wage war.
Bradford Snell told the Washington P ost in 1998 that N azi armaments minister Albert S peer once told him that H itier would never have considered invading Poland without the synthetic fuel technology provided by General Motors.
One future American corporate giant provided the Nazis with the means of registering, correlating, and assigning shipment schedules to the millions of J ews and others that were rounded up and sent to their deaths in concentration camps.
According to author E dwin B lack, H itier's desire to tabulate then eliminate these people was, ""greatly enhanced and energized by the ingenuity and craving for profit of a single American company and its legendary, autocratic chairman.
Using recently discovered Nazi documents and the testimony of former Polish workers.
Watson kept in close contact with his G erman subordinates, traveling to B eriin at least twice a year from 1933 to 1939.
This meant that all machines were dependent on IBM punch cards, parts, and servicing.
Indeed, IBM services coursed through the entire German infrastructure in Europe,"" noted Black.
After America's entry into the war, N azi H ermann F ellinger was appointed as G erman enemy-property custodian.
Watson, a well-connected Freemason, proclaimed ""World Peace Through World Trade"" in 1937, while in Berlin to be named president of the International Chamber of Commerce.
Kennedy was appointed United States ambassador to Britain in 1939 but was recalled in November 1940 for voicing his sympathies for Hitler.
One important example of a prewar effort to install a fascist dictatorship within the United States is the attempted overthrow of Roosevelt early in his presidency.
Only a year after Hitler came to power in Germany, many wealthy Americans looked with favor on a fascist system to counteract international communism.
M any were disgruntled with P resident Roosevelt's social policies and felt he was secretly a communist.
Knudsen in early 1934 planned to finance a coup d'etat that would overthrow the president with the aid of a $3 million-funded army of terrorists, modeled on the fascist movement in Paris known as the Croix de Feu.
The undoing of this scheme was retired Marine Corps major general Smedley Butler, the most decorated marine in United States history, who was approached by the plotters and urged to head the new military government.
Butler, who had openly attacked Roosevelt's New Deal programs, however, proved to be a loyal citizen and immediately informed Roosevelt of the treasonous conspiracy.
Not for the first or last time in his career, he was aware that there were powers greater than he in the United States,"" noted Higham.
R oosevelt decided to leak the story to the press, which generally discounted it as a ""ridiculous"" rumor.
N evertheless, some of the primary plotters skipped the country until the furor died down.
B ut the story did prompt Congress to appoint a special committee to look into the matter.
It was a scheme to paint FDR as an opponent of Wall Street and gain public support for his policies.
If this plot was legitimate, it was the last overt move against an American president by powerful business interests until 1963.
S . history but also the lengths to which powerful persons will go to subvert the principles of the United States.
Even at the time, some astute Americans could clearly see the connections between powerful national business leaders and Nazi Germany.
S . industrialists is hell-bent to bring a fascist state to supplant our democratic government and is working closely with the fascist regime in Germany and Italy.
It was not just the ruling families that looked favorably on N ational S ocialism and a fascist government.
Smith's planned religious theme park in the 1960s was never completed, but his ""Christ of the Ozarks"" draws tourists to Eureka Springs, Arkansas, to this day.
Prior to the war, no one paid serious attention to warnings against the spread of fascism, just as few people seem willing to consider the possibility of a fascisttakeover of the USA today.
There is no question that Hitler's rise to power rested heavily on the support of the major German banks— Schroeder's Cologne banking firm, the Deutsche Bank, Deutsche KreditGesellschaft, and the huge insurance firm Allianz— all with many interconnecting ties to foreign banks and companies.
But all the tightest business connections came to naught, for by 1941, the international order had turned against Hitler.
Germany's blitzkrieg had shocked the ruling elite, as first Poland, then the rest of Europe, came under Nazi control.
Britain was helpless to stop Hitler, who was already making preparations for a preemptive attack on the S oviet U nion.
THE STRANGE CASE OF RUDOLF HESS ALTHOUGH RELEGATED TO A MINOR FOOTNOTE IN HISTORY, THE strange case of Nazi deputy fuehrer Rudolf Hess in 1941 provides a rare glimpse of the elitist control over events during World Warn.
The bushy-eyebrowed Hess flew alone to En gland in May 1941, in an effort to make peace.
The conventional view of the H ess flight is that of an increasingly marginalized member of H itier's inner circle who sought to regain favor with his fuehrer by making an unauthorized visit to Britain in the hope of personally negotiating an end to the war and even enlisting E n gland's aid in the fight against Soviet expansionism.
At the N uremberg trials, H ess was found guilty of ""crimes against peace"" and spent the rest of his life a prisoner in Berlin's Spandau Prison.
In August 1987, British military authorities announced that Hess had committed suicide, a judgment that continues to be disputed.
S everal recent studies of the H ess incident show there was much deeper meaning to this intriguing story, which was only magnified by his sudden and mysterious death just as his release from captivity seemed imminent.
He was well schooled and well traveled by the time he joined the German Army during World War I, serving in the same regiment as C orporal Adolf H itier.
H e was wounded twice and later became a fighter pilot, but the war ended before he could experience much combat.
Returning to Munich after the war, Hess helped other ex-servicemen in the paramilitary Freikorps to oust a short-lived C ommunist local government.
According to author William B ramley, P rofessor H aushofer was a member of the Vril, another secret society based on a book by British Rosicrucian Lord Bulward Litton, about the visit of an Aryan ""super race"" to earth in the distant past.
A mentor to both H ess and H itIer, H aushofer had traveled extensively in the F ar E ast before becoming a general in the kaiser's army of World War I ""His early associations with influential J apanese businessmen and statesmen were crucial in forming the German-J apanese alliance of World War II,"" wrote author Peter Levenda.
Haushofer became the first ranking Nazi to form relationships with South American governments in anticipation of a war with America.
These relationships would prove instrumental in the later escape of war criminals from Europe.
H aushofer, as a professor at the U niversity of M unich, worked out H itier's policy of Lebensraum, ""living space"" for a hemmed-in Germany.
Although he gained a reputation as the ""man behind Hitler,"" H aushofer's views on geopolitics were largely accepted by H itIer, but only after they came from the mouth of Hess.
When the coup failed, Hess drove off to Austria, where he was sheltered by members of a paramilitary wing of the Thule S ociety.
Voluntarily returning to G ermany, H ess joined H itIer in Landsberg P rison after being convicted of conspiracy to commit treason.
Due to the political climate at the time, both men were released within a year.
During their months of imprisonment, H ess became a close confidant to H itIer and helped produce Hitler's book, Mein Kampf.
He moved upward through other major party positions until 1933, shortly after Hitler became chancellor of Germany, when he was appointed deputy fuehrer.
Furthermore, as a member of the Geheimer Kabinettsrat— the Nazi Secret Cabinet Council— and the M inisterial C ouncil for the defense of the R eich, H ess was well aware of the secret work to develop a German atomic bomb.
I can only say that it will be more terrible than anything that has gone before,"" Hess revealed.
It is clear that H ess was much more powerful and well connected than is generally reported.
H e was the person closest to Hitler, one who shared his aspirations and beliefs.
On the eve of war in 1939, Hess was even named the successor to Hitler after Reichsmarschall Hermann Goering.
THE EXCEPTIONAL POWER and position of Rudolf Hess demands close scrutiny of his ill-fated flight to En gland and its consequences.
J ustsuch a study was undertaken in 2001 by three British authors— Lynn Picknett, Clive Prince, and Stephen Prior.
A detailed study of H ess's flight clearly indicates that it was not just a sudden whim of an unstable individual.
H ess prepared for the flight meticulously over a period of months, even having famed aircraft designer Willy Messerschmitt modify a twinengine Messerschmitt-110.
H ess also received special flight training from M esserschmitt's chief test pilot, as well as H itier's personal pilot, Hans Baur— evidence that Hitler had knowledge of Hess's plans.
On his flight, Hess carried the visiting cards of both H aushofer and his son, Albrecht H aushofer, yet another indication of his intent as a peace mission, since the elder Haushofer had long been an advocate of maintaining friendly relations with Britain as a cornerstone of German politics.
According to the French scholars Michel Bertrand and J ean Angelini (writing under the name of J eanMichel Angebert), Haushofer passed along to Hess the names of members of the Order of the Golden Dawn, an occult society in England, as well as names of supporters of a peace initiative, such as the duke of Hamilton, the duke of Bedford, and Sir Ivone Kirkpatrick.
The G olden Dawn, most popularly connected to E ngland's foremost occultist, Aleister C rowley ""the Beast"", was an outgrowth of theTheosophical Society, from which much Nazi mysticism was derived, and had close ties with the Thule Society.
According to some theories, British Intelligence manipulated Hess's belief in the occult to provoke his flight to En gland.
Oddly enough, this scheme involved Crowley as well as British Intelligence agent Ian Fleming, who would later write the popular] ames Bond novels.
Ernst Schulte-Strathaus, an astrological adviser and occultist on Hess's staff since 1935) advocating a peace mission to E n gland,"" wrote Levenda.
But whatever Hess's motivations, it is clear that foreknowledge of his flight existed in Britain as well as Germany.
However, one letter to Hamilton from the younger Haushofer was shown to British foreign secretary Lord Halifax and air minister Sir Archibald Sinclair.
It should be recalled thatthe Windsor family have always been sensitive about their German extraction.
P eace with their relatives would have been very desirable during the war years.
In 2000, senior British government sources confirmed that private letters between the Oueen Mother and Lord Halifax showed hostility toward Churchill and even a willingness to submit to Nazi occupation if the monarchy was preserved.
Even Churchill, who was tightly connected to the empire-builders of Britain, made it clear that the object of the war was to stop G ermany— not the N azis.
In a letter to Lord Robert Boothby, Churchill explained that ""Germany's unforgivable crime before the second world war was her attempt to extricate her economic power from the world's trading system and to create her own exchange mechanism which would deny world finance its opportunity to profi"" It also must be recalled that in 1941, despite the successful Battle of Britain, En gland was economically strangled and near defeat.
At the time H itier seemed unstoppable and it was quite easy to envision a Nazi victory.
The aristocracy, industrialists, bankers, and even the royal family were eager for peace.
As for H itIer, G ermany was preparing to strike R ussia, and he did not want a two-front war, the very situation that caused Germany's defeat in World War I Hitler wanted En gland as an ally against communism.
Hitler needed peace with Britain before undertaking an attack on Russia.
Securing peace on the Western Front may have become an urgentpriority for Hitler.
According to former Soviet military intelligence officer Vladimir Rezun , Hitler was forced to launch a preemptive assault against the Soviet Union in J une 1941, to forestall an attack on Western E urope by Stalin in J uly.
Suvorov's worl< lias been publislied in eiglity-seven editions in eigliteen languages, yet has received virtually no mention in the U . . corporate mass media, despite the fact that his assertions turn conventional history upside down.
M ost people have been taught that Stalin naively trusted H itier and was totally surprised by Hitler's attack.
V Stalin made preparations for war... wide and varied preparations— beginning on dates... which he himself had selected.
While Suvorov's conclusions grate against the conventional view of Hitler's attack on Russia, he has provided a compelling argument.
Suvorov pointed out that by J une 1941, Stalin had massed vast numbers of troops and equipment along Russia's European frontier, not to defend the Motherland but in preparation for an attack westward.
Stalin's motive was to bring communism to Europe by force, a plan he expressed in a 1939 speech.
The dictatorship of such a party will only become possible as the result of a major war,"" stated Stalin.
N oting that when the G erman attack began on J une 22, 1941, they could field a mere 3,350 tanks, mostly lightly armored and gunned, as compared to the Russians 24,000 tanks, many of superior armor and armament.
Retired United States Department of Defense official Daniel W Michaels wrote, ""Stalin elected to strike at a time and place of his choosing.
S uvorov supported his contention by pointing to the fact that R ussian troops were prepared to attack, not defend, which led to the early German victories; that Rus sian troops had been issued maps only of Eastern Europe an cities, not for the defense of Russia; that Russian troops had been issued Russian-German phrase books with such expressions as ""Stop transmitting or I'll shoot""; and that none of Stalin's top commanders were ever held accountable for the Barbarossa debacle, since they had all merely followed Stalin's orders.
Suvorov concludes, ""Stalin became the absolute ruler of a vast empire hostile to the West, which had been created with the help of the West.
For all that, Stalin was able to preserve his reputation as naive and trusting, while Hitler went down in history as the ultimate aggressor.
He also said the resources of Stalin's war machine have been underestimated.
Perhaps the best support for Suvorov's claims came from Hitler himself.
I have already told the nation of the build-up of Soviet Russian military power in the East during a period when Germany had only a few divisions in the provinces bordering Soviet Russia.
Only a blind person could fail to see that a military build-up of unique world-historical dimensions was being carried out.
Of course, the victors always write history, so whether H itier's attack on the S oviet U nion was sheer aggression or a necessary preemptive strike will probably be argued for many years.
But, if it proves true that Hitler was merely forestalling an imminent attack by the Soviet Union, it places the history of World War II in an entirely different context.
It would certainly go far in explaining Hitler's otherwise inexplicable actions in starting a two-front war, the very situation he had warned against in Mein Kampf.
It also would help explain why F ranklin R oosevelt, at the bidding of the globalists, was arming the Soviet Union in blatant violation of the Neutrality Acts of 1935, 1936, and 1937.
By the end of 1940, with all Europe under German control and Britain threatened, they may have determined to stop Hitler.
Hitler clearly indicated what he saw as the machinations undertaken to prevent any negotiated end to hostilities in 1941.
P icknett, P rince, and P rior even argue that S eelowe— or S ea Lion, the code name for the proposed German invasion of England— was a ""sham right from the beginning,"" an effort by Hitler to distract Stalin by feinting west when he actually planned to strike to the east.
It was merely a cover for the mobilization of men and equipment needed for the invasion of the Soviet Union.
One clue that this tactic was in play can be seen in the fact that Hitler, who was known for constantly interfering with his generals on the smallest of details, never showed any real interest in the plans for an invasion of England, according to German military historian EgbertKieser.
These authors, along with other historians, explain that Hitler's strange order to halt the German advance at Dunkirk allowed the British Army to escape the continent.
On May 10, 1941, when Hess's ME110 arrived over Scotland, he was to have landed at an airstrip near the Hamilton ancestral home, negotiate peace terms with the anti-Churchill faction, and then be flown to Sweden as the first leg of a return trip home.
This faction was prepared to oust Churchill and agree to a ceasefire with Germany.
Interestingly, Hess's flight brought him through the weakest section of the British coastal radar net, plus he overflew a R oyal Air F orce base twice without provoking any response— clues that orders had been given somewhere along the chain of command to facilitate his arrival.
But he missed his landing spot and, low on fuel, finally was forced to bail out over a farm just south of Glasgow.
Unarmed, his ankle broken from the jump, he was captured by a farmer with a pitchfork.
The Home Guard quickly became involved and the whole secret operation was blown.
Although Hess initially claimed to be a Luftwaffe pilot named Alfred Horn, this subterfuge quickly failed.
Everyone, including Hitler, had to disavow any connection with the plot.
After all, for H itier to admit that he was preparing to make peace with B ritain would have tipped off Stalin that a G erman attack on R ussia was imminent.
He was moved to a variety of locations, some recollections of his whereabouts conflicting with others.
There was every opportunity for pulling a switch before H ess was finally locked up in the Tower of London.
Picknett, Prince, and Prior introduced yet another mystery— the death of George, the Duke of Kent, King George Vl's youngest brother and the first member of the royal family to die while on active military service since the fifteenth century.
The duke, like others in the royal family, was an admirer of the Nazis and was likely to have joined a peace group in a negotiated peace.
He also served as an unofficial intelligence officer to his brother, the king.
Superficially, the duke's death on August 25, 1942, was the result of a routine wartime air accident.
It was reported that the Sunderland flying boat in which he was a passenger crashed into a low hill called Eagles Rock, in Caithness, Scotland.
The official account of the accident said the seaplane was taking the duke on a morale-boosting mission to Iceland when the pilot changed course ""for reasons unknown,"" descended through clouds without making sure he was above water, and crashed into a hillside.
The duke's plane clearly was in the process of ascending when it crashed, indicating it may have lifted off from nearby Loch More near Braemore Lodge, where accounts place the captive Hess.
These factors, coupled with much other evidence— both hard and circumstantial— support the conjecture thatthe antiChurchill peace group waited until mid-1942, a low ebb in Britain's war fortunes, before attempting to fly the duke of Kent and Rudolf Hess to Sweden to announce a peace plan that would topple the C hurchill government.
Whether this was sabotage or an accident has not been clearly established.
If H ess died in the duke's plane, it would have presented a thorny problem for C hurchill— how to explain the mangled corpse of a man who was supposed to be their prized prisoner.
Any investigation would have revealed the involvement of ranking members of British society, even the royals, in the peace initiative.
Evidence gathered for their book by Picknett, Prince, and Prior— including Hess being reported as seen in different locations at the same time, and inconsistencies in official reports— indicated that a duplicate H ess may have been prepared prior to the plane crash.
The real H ess died in the crash and the double lived to stand trial at N uremberg and serve his sentence atSpandau.
But even these astute authors acknowledged a huge problem with such a scenario.
The idea of a Rudolf Hess double is not new, and various theories have been advanced.
One suggested that the lookalike was forced to play H ess out of fear for his family.
Another was thatthe Hess double was a German— whoever the man was, German was his first language— and an ardent Nazi, who was convinced it was necessary to the party that he maintain the subterfuge, especially since he might become the founder of a Fourth Reich.
But the most provocative explanation comes from Picknett, Prince, and Prior, who learned that former CIA director Allen Dulles, a founder of the Council on Foreign Relations and high commissioner of Germany after the war, had dispatched Dr.
Dulles expressed to Cameron his belief thatthe Hess being held in Germany was an impostor and that the real H ess had been secretly executed on orders from C hurchill.
Knowing of H ess's war wounds, Dulles wanted Cameron to especially note if there were any scars on the prisoner's chest.
Interestingly enough, British military authorities in Nuremberg refused to allow such an examination.
H e went on to become president of the American P sychiatric Association as well as the first president of the World P sychiatric Association.
He also became part of the CIA's notorious MKULTRA mind-control program.
C ameron to study H ess might have grown from the knowledge or suspicion thatthe man posing as Hess had been brainwashed into actually believing he was the N azi deputy fuehrer.
M ind-control experimentation was much further along— particularly in Europe, as shall be seen— than most people realize.
This subterfuge could account for H ess's eccentric behavior at the N uremberg trials, during which he repeatedly claimed he had lost his memory, a convenience for someone who had not lived Hess's life.
Once the peace plan went awry, all the usual methods of cover-up came into play— documents disappeared or were locked away from public scrutiny, witnesses were coerced into silence, and multiple ""theories"" from authoritative sources were spread.
One clue that a geopolitical game was being played out in the Hess affair is that the last person to dine with the duke of Kent prior to the fatal crash that killed him and perhaps the real Hess was a foreign exile.
The dinner represented an unusual gathering of the British royals at Balmoral Castle in Scotland, which, in addition to the duke and Prince Bernhard, included King George VI and Oueen Elizabeth.
Prince Bernhard originated meetings of the Bilderberg Group, a collection of world movers and shakers so secretive they have no proper name.
In 1937, he married Princess J uliana of the Netherlands and became a major shareholder and offi cer in Dutch Shell Oil, along with Britain's Lord Victor Rothschild.
It was here, after the war, that R othschild and the founder of the E urope an M ovement for U nity, P olish socialist Dr.
J oseph H ieronim Retinger, encouraged Prince Bernhard to create the Bilderberg Group.
The prince personally chaired the group until 1976, when he resigned following revelations that he had accepted large payoffs from Lockheed to promote the sale of its aircraft in H olland.
It is impossible to know for certain whether Prince Bernhard sided with the British royal family and the peace initiative or was monitoring their activities for the prowar Churchill clique.
The peace initiative was stopped and the globalists' decision to stop National Socialism at all costs proceeded.
There can be little doubt thatthe failure of Hess's peace mission to Britain on the eve of the attack on Russia created the unwanted two-frontwarthat cost Hitler the victory.
After the failure of Hess's illfated flight, his place in the Nazi hierarchy was taken by Martin Bormann, a man who will be discussed later.
Some Nazi leaders, including Himmler and Bormann, became uncertain of victory and began laying plans for their survival.
They also turned to science for new Wunderwaffen, or wonder weapons, that might turn the tide of war in their favor.
NAZI WONDER WEAPONS J UST SIX DAYS AFTER THE D-DAY INVASION OF EUROPE, ON J UNE 12, 1944, the residents of London were startled to hear a droning buzz in the skies over their city.
They were more startled when the sound suddenly stopped and moments later a huge explosion rocked the East London neighborhood of Mile End, killing eight civilians.
It was the firstof the V-1 Buzz bombs a forerunner of today's cruise missiles.
The V-1 and the later V-2 rockets that terrorized London are two of the more famous examples of German war technology.
These Vergeltungswaffe, or retaliation weapons, were developed at the secret G erman rocket facility P eenemunde and put into operation just after the D-Day landings in Normandy, France.
F rom J une 12, 1944, until August 20, more than eight thousand of the V-1 rockets (each carrying a ton of explosives) rained down on London, inflicting 45,479 casualties and destroying 75,000 buildings.
The less numerous V-2 rockets which, unlike the V-1, could not be seen, heard, or intercepted in flight nevertheless produced more than 10,000 casualties in the British capital.
German ingenuity and efficiency appeared capable of overcoming almost any obstacle.
One clear example may be found simply by comparing figures from its armaments industry.
Despite constant bombing by the Allies, overall production of tanks, small arms, ships, and aircraft was higher at the beginning of 1945 than in 1941, when Germany was victorious on all fronts and America had not yet entered the war.
Plastics, which only came into general use in the United States during the 1950s, were developed in Nazi Germany.
Bakelite, polystyrene , Plexiglas, polyethylene (forerunner of today's plastic Baggies and syringes), polyamide , and aldols were all produced during wartime.
Television, which most Americans did not get to see until the early 1950s, was highly developed in Nazi Germany.
More than 150,000 persons in twenty-eight public viewing rooms in Berlin saw clear television broadcasts of the 1936 Olympics.
In 1939, the German firm Fernseh began developing a miniaturized TV system that allowed pilots to guide both bombs and missiles after launching.
This system was used in the anti-aircraft rocket Wasserfall, or waterfall.
Tanks, which began the war as little more than armor-plated bulldozers designed to support infantry, were developed into independent, thickly armored machines powered by gas turbines, with guns stabilized while moving, hydrokinetic power transmissions, and defenses against chemical and biological attacks.
S ome G erman tanks were so far ahead of their time, they were still being utilized in other nations as late as battles in the 1970s.
The innovative 9-mm German MP-40 Schmeisser machine pistol saw extensive use during the war, and its successors, the MP-43 and the MP44 assault rifles, became the forerunners of today's ubiquitous AK-47.
Late in the war, some MP -44s carried an early but effective nightvision light and scope called the Vampyr, or Vampire.
At the end of the war in 1945, American military intelligence officers were shocked by the technology they found as Allied forces overran German research facilities.
Supersonic rockets, nerve gas, jet aircraft , guided missiles, stealth technology, hardened armor even flying saucers were just some of the groundbreaking technologies being developed in N azi laboratories, workshops, and factories.
As respected British historian Barrie Pitt noted, ""he N azi war machine swung into action utilizing as much as it could of the most up-to-date scientific knowledge available, and as the war developed, the list of further achievements grew to staggering proportions.
He said the Germans ignored Einstein and developed an approach to science based on quantum theories.
The Germans were looking at gravity from a different perspective to everyone else.
Maybe it gave them answers to things that pro-relativity scientists hadn't even thought of,"" explained Witkowski, who had unprecedented access to German wartime documents that only recently because available, due to the collapse of communism.
C onsider that at the beginning of the war, aircraft were made of canvas stretched over a wooden frame.
By 1945, Germany had become the first nation in the world to put into service an all-metal, jetpropelled jet fighterthe Messerschmitt-262.
As German scientists worked feverishly to perfect the V-2 rockets and other, more secret weapons, SS chief Heinrich Himmler was taking steps to separate his SS from normal party and state control.
Employing methods later used by the CIA, SS leaders created a number of business fronts and other organizations many using concentration camp labor with an eye toward producing revenue to suppoitSS activities.
Tliese liiglily compartmentalized groups lieaded by young, ambitious SS officers neitlier required nor desired any connection witli Germany's liigli-profile leaders.
Their purpose was to create an economic base that could continue pursuing Nazi goals long after the defeat of Germany.
Armaments minister S peer conceded that there were weapons development programs that he knew nothing about.
H e admitted that an S S scheme in 1944 to construct a secret weapons plant requiring 3,500 concentration camp workers had been concealed from him.
While the V-2 rocket program began under the aegis of the German Army, and the ME-262 jet fighter under the Luftwaffe, they were ultimately transferred to SS control.
With secret projects in the hands of hardcore SS fanatics, and with factories and research facilities scattered over and under the countryside, it is entirely conceivable that weapons far in advance of the V rockets could have been developed without the knowledge of anyone except H immler and his top lieutenants.
Other notable secret Nazi weapons nearing completion in 1945 included the Messerschmitt-163 Komet and the vertically launched Natter rocket fighters, the jet-powered flying wing Horten Ho-IX and the delta-winged Lippisch DM-1.
It has been noted that some of top-secret Nazi weaponry development was moved outside Germany, to such places as Blizna, Poland the same area where Allied aircrews first encountered the infamous ""foo-fighters,"" small glowing balls of light that shadowed Allied bombers.
The ""foo-fighters"" soon caught the attention of the American news media.
Airmen of the American Air F orce report that they are encountering silver-colored spheres in the air over German territory.
The new device, apparently an air defense weapon, resembles the huge glass balls that adorn Christmas trees.
There was no information available as to what holds them up like stars in the sky, what is in them or what their purpose is supposed to be.
H e said this innovative craft was destroyed after a ""single lucl<y wartime mission"" by retreating S S troops.
Even tliougli tine public has been conditioned for more than sixty years to dismiss any notion of flying saucers, or UFOs, the accumulation of evidence available today makes it impossible to reject the reality of such craft out of hand.
Obviously, the Nazis were experimenting with new and exotic energy technology.
The extraordinary development of the Feuerball may have provided the fi rst public glimpse into the heart of Nazi super-science.
Several writers have produced articles about the Nazi development of flying saucers.
British author W A Harbinson claimed that he got his ideas after discovering postwar German articles mentioning a former Luftwaffe engineer, Flugkapitan Rudolph Schriever.
According to information gleaned by Harbinson from articles in Der Spiegel, Bild am Sonntag, Luftfahrt International, and other German publications, Schriever claimed to have designed a ""flying top"" prototype in 1941, which was actually test-flown in J une 1942.
In 1944, Schriever said he constructed a larger, jet version of his circular craft, with the help of scientists Klaus Habermohl, Otto Miethe, and an Italian, Dr.
Drawings of this saucer were published in the 1959 British book German Secret Weapons of the Second World War and Their Later Development, by Major Rudolph Lusar, an engineer who worked in the German Reichs-Patent Office and had access to many original plans and documents.
Lusar described the saucer as a ring of separate disks carrying adjustable jets rotating around a fixed cockpit.
Schriever later said the Allied advance into Germany put an end to his ""flying disc"" experiments, with all equipment and designs lost or destroyed.
However, a Georg Klein told the postwar German press that he had witnessed the Schriever disc, or something like it, test-flown in February 1945.
Schriever reportedly died in the late 1950s and, according to a 1975 issue of Luftfahrt International, notes and sketches related to a large flying saucer were found in his effects.
The periodical also stated that Schriever maintained until his death that his original saucer concept must have been made operational prior to war's end.
These accounts would seem to be corroborated by a C lA report dated M ay 27, 1954.
Klein stated he was present when, in 1945, the first piloted 'flying saucer' took off and reached a speed of 1,300 miles per hour within three minutes.
When the Soviets occupied Prague, the Germans destroyed every trace of the 'flying saucer' project and nothing more was heard of Habermohl and his assistants.
In Breslau, the Soviets managed to capture one of the saucers built by Miethe, who escaped to France.
S . government for a short time after the war before dying of natural causes.
P rior to his death, he was quoted as saying, 'They took everything from me.
In mid-1947, two years after the war ended, ""flying saucers"" were being reported both in Europe and America.
If technical knowledge in the 1940s was advanced enough to construct a workable flying saucer, the public was never to hear about it.
Beginning in the late 1940s, a national security ""lid"" was placed on the subject.
But it is fascinating to recall that one of the first and best documented cases of mysterious abductions took place in September 1961, when Betty and Barney Hill under hypnosis recalled being taken aboard a circular craft manned by men in black uniforms.
Barney Hill described the leader as a ""German Nazi"" wearing a shiny black jacket, scarf, and cap.
Before anyone rushes out to proclaim that all UFOs are really secret Nazi technology, serious attention should be given to the wealth of public literature that clearly indicates that while some saucers, especially in the years following World War II, may indeed have been Nazi test vehicles, any objective review of the material suggests the presence of some unconventional source as well.
Another amazing and chilling aspect of N azi technology involved their development of nuclear weapons.
Researcher and author Farrell concluded from new material released from the former East Germany that the Nazis were much closer to developing an atomic bomb than previously accepted by postwar writers.
Plus, there is the cryptic remark made by KurtDiebner, a physicist involved with the Nazi atomic bomb project.
Surreptitiously recorded by British intelligence during postwar internment at Farm Hall, England, Diebner mentioned a ""photochemical process"" to enrich uranium bypassing the need for a centrifuge.
Since no modern researcher understands what process was referred to by Diebner, this may mean that the Nazis discovered a method of isotope separation and uranium enrichment that even now remains classified.
Adding to the idea that the N azis already had perfected a method of enriching uranium are the words of nuclear scientist Karl Wirtz, who was also secretly taped at Farm Hall.
To which Wirtz agreed by responding, 'They have it too,"" a clear indication that he knew of a G erman separation process.
Based on his research, Farrell wrote, ""American progress in the plutonium bomb, from the moment Fermi successfully completed and tested a functioning reactor in the squash court at the U niversity of C hicago, appeared to be running fairly smoothly, until fairly late in the war, when it was discovered that in order to make a bomb from plutonium, the critical mass would have to be assembled much faster than any existing Allied fuse technologies could accomplish.
I believe a strong prima facie case has been outlined that Nazi Germany developed and successfully tested, and perhaps used, a uranium atom bomb before the end of World War II,"" Farrell concluded.
In 2005, Berlin historian Rainer Karlsch, in a book titled Hitlers Bombe, claimed that the Nazis indeed tested nuclear weapons on Rugen Island near Ohrdruf, Thuringia, site of a subsidiary concentration camp to the infamous Buchenwald.
Karlsch's primary evidence consists of ""vouchers"" for ""tests"" and a patent for a plutonium weapon dated 1941.
He also claimed to have found traces of radioactivity in soil from the site.
However, in February 2006, the German government reported no abnormal radiation levels atthe site, even after taking into account elevated levels due to the 1986 Chernobyl disaster in Russia.
Although Nazi armaments ministers peer was questioned about a mysterious blast at Ohrdruf during the Nuremberg war crimes trials, no significant information on a nuclear test was found, either because it never happened or because a postwar cover-up was quite successful.
Mainstream historians, at the mercy of carefully concocted cover stories in both Germany and the USA, have remained skeptical that Nazi scientists could have advanced their nuclear knowledge to the point of actual testing.
F orty giant bombers with a 7,000-mile range were found on this base ""the largest Luftwaff e field I have ever seen,"" one officer said.
It should also be noted that the N azis had two prototypes of the J unkers390, a massive sixengine modification of the J unkers-290, known to have made flights to J apanese bases in Manchuria.
After the war, authorities discovered a feasibility study by the G erman Luftwaffe detailing the blast effects of an atomic bomb over N ew York's Manhattan Island.
The Nazi study was based on an atomic bomb in the fifteen-to seventeenkiloton range, approximately the same yield as the Little Boy uranium bomb dropped on Hiroshima.
If N azi G ermany had a nuclear weapon, they surely must have tested it, and a collection of disparate sources seems to indicate this was accomplished.
Italian dictator Benito Mussolini, in a ""Political Testament"" written shortly before his death at the hands of partisans in April 1945, stated, 'The wonder weapons are the hope.
It is laughable and senseless for us to threaten at this moment, without a basis in reality for these threats.
It appears there are three bombs and each has an astonishing operation.
M ussolini's mention of three bombs is intriguing because of a statement of a former R ussian military translator who served on the staff of Marshal Rodion Malinovsky, the officer who tookj apan's surrender to the Soviet Union in 1945.
As reported by the G erman magazine Der S piegel in 1992, P iotr Titarenko had written a letter to the C ommunist P arty C entral C ommittee, in which he stated that the three atomic bombs were dropped on J apan.
One of these, dropped on Nagasaki prior to the blast of August 9, 1945, failed to detonate and subsequently was given to the Soviet Union byj apanese officials.
IfTitarenko's account is accurate, this would mean that America had three atomic bombs on hand in the summer of 1945.
Yet, a report to Manhattan Project leader Robert Oppenheimer just days after P resident R oosevelt died on April 12, 1945, stated that not enough enriched uranium existed to create a viable critical mass for even one atomic bomb.
N ews stories in B ritain point to a possible N azi atomic bomb test in 1944.
An August 11, 1945, article in London's Daily Telegraph reported, ""B ritain prepared for the possibility of an atomic bomb attack on this country by G ermany in August 1944.
A modern readership would know that such disruption can be caused by the electromagnetic pulse associated with a nuclear detonation.
Other intriguing hints of a German atomic test came in the form of three separate intelligence reports.
A once-classified United States military intelligence report dated August 19, 1945, and titled ""Investigations, R esearch.
Developments and P ractical U se of the G erman Atomic B omb"" details the experience of a German pilot named Hans Zinsser, a Flak rocket expert, while piloting a Heinkel bomber over northern Germany.
Note that his experience coincides with the dates of the Berlin telephone blackout.
At the beginning of October 1944, I flew from Ludwigslust about 12 to 15 km from an atomic bomb test station, when I noticed a strong, bright illumination of the whole atmosphere, lasting about 2 seconds.
The clearly visible pressure wave escaped the approaching and following cloud formed by the explosion.
Personal observations of the colors of the explosion cloud found an almost blue-violet shade.
During this manifestation reddish-colored rims were to be seen, changing to a dirty-like shade in very rapid succession.
A cloud shaped like a mushroom with turbulent billowing sections (at about 7,000 meter altitude) stood, without any seeming connections, over the spot where the explosion took place.
Strong electrical disturbances and the impossibility to continue radio communications turned up.
It does not seem very clear to me why these experiments took place in such crowded areas.
Romersa was granted a special pass from Oberkommando Der Wehrmacht, or German High Command, to visit tlie test site on tine island of Rugen.
I cannot say what the material was made of, but I had the impression that it could have been asbestos.
After making their way to the test site proper, R omersa stated, 'The houses that I had seen only an hour earlier had disappeared, broken into little pebbles of debris.
Romersa's credibility is supported by the fact that he eventually came to the United States, where he was granted a high-security clearance.
This purports to be a decoded intercept of a message from the J apanese embassy in Stockholm to headquarters in Tokyo.
This bomb is revolutionary in its results, and will completely upset all ordinary precepts of warfare hitherto established.
I am sending you, in one group, all those reports on what is called the atomsplitting bomb.
Although it was the entire 19th Infantry Regiment of the Russians which was thus attacked, only a few bombs sufficed to utterly wipe them out to the last man.
M oreover, it is a fact that the same type of war material was tried out in the C rimea too.
Recently the British authorities warned their people of the possibility that they might undergo attack by G erman atomsplitting bombs.
The J apanese report then goes into a remarkably accurate description of the splitting of the atom, ending with the statement, ""he German atom-splitting device is the Neuman disintegrator.
Enormous energy is directed into the central part of the atom and this generates an atomic pressure of several tens of thousands of tons per square inch.
This device can split the relatively unstable atoms of such elements as uranium.
Some elements of the J apanese report were obviously in error, such as the confusion over descriptions of a fission versus a fusion bomb and the date of the Kursk offensive, which did not begin until J uly 5, 1943.
Mistakes notwithstanding, it is clear that J apanese intelligence was firmly convinced that the Germans had used a revolutionary type of weapon on the Eastern Front.
Farrell pointed out that had Nazi Germany used such a weapon, it would most likely have been against the Russians, whom the Nazis considered ""subhuman,"" in Nazi ideology.
Fully one-half of the 50 million casualties of the war occurred in Russia, and several massive explosions, such as the one that destroyed a section of Sevastopol, have never been fully explained.
It was announced that a hundred-foot below-ground ammunition bunker was destroyed after being struck by a lucky shot from Dora, a 311/2inch G erman railway gun considered the largest in the world.
Such attacks were never reported by Soviet leader] oseph Stalin, due to the fear of losing control over a panicked and war-weary Russian population.
The use of a super-weapon on the Eastern Front also might explain why more is not known about this issue.
Accurate war news from Russia was extremely hard to come by during the war and grew more so during the Cold War.
To make public the use of a nuclear or unconventional weapon ""would have been a propaganda disaster for Stalin's government,"" noted Farrell.
Some have speculated that the United States used a Nazi bomb or used Nazi enriched uranium to manufacture its bombs.
The Trinity bomb exploded near Alamogordo, New Mexico, on J uly 16, 1945, was a plutonium bomb.
Of course, this idea would fly in the face of the longaccepted Allied Legend that Germany simply couldn't manufacture an atomic bomb by the war's end.
One potential source was the secure underground laboratory of Baron Manfred von Ardenne, built in Lichterfelde outside Berlin, which contained a 2-million-volt electrostatic generator and a cyclotron.
In 1941, von Ardenne, along with Fritz Houtermans, had calculated the critical mass needed to create U235.
It should be noted that H itier visited the laboratory toward the end of the war, at a time when he spoke enthusiastically of a new wonder weapon that would turn the tide in G ermany's favor.
R eportedly, H itIer once remarked that while his party and military leadership worried about how to win the war, it was his postal minister who brought him the solution.
The site was chosen for its proximity to transportation hubs, both rail lines and rivers, as well as the nearby supply of slave labor found at the Auschwitz camp.
This site probably was also selected with the idea that the Allies would not bomb a concentration camp, a supposition that proved correct.
Yet, despite the facts established during the Nuremberg trials that more than $2 billion in today's dollars were spent; that 300,000 slave laborers had been used in both the construction and operation of this plant; and that it had consumed more electricity than B eriin, not one pound of buna, or synthetic rubber, was ever produced.
A theory has been offered that, late in the war, certain Nazis arranged the transfer of enriched uranium to the United States in exchange for immunity from prosecution.
At the heart of this transfer theory lies the saga of a Nazi submarine the U-234.
It sailed from Kiel in March 1945, with a most unusual cargo consisting of several high-level German officials, including Dr.
Heinz Schlicke, the inventor of fuses for atomic bombs, and two J apanese officers Air Force Colonel Genzo Shosi and Navy Captain Hideo Tomonaga.
On May 14, 1945, six days after the German surrender, the U-234 was intercepted by the USS Sutton and taken into captivity.
Oddly enough, the sub had been overflown several times by Allied aircraft but never fired upon.
U pon arrival at P ortsmouth, N ew H ampshire, it appeared that some of the boat's cargo was missing.
The two J apanese officers, after learning that the ship's captain planned to surrender, had committed suicide and were buried at sea with full honors.
But, suspiciously, the two ME-262s were missing, as well as the uranium oxide.
In fact, when the United States Navy prepared its own manifest for the U-234, there was no accounting for seventy tons of cargo.
Velma Hunt, a Colorado environmental scientist, said she uncovered information that the U-boat made a secret stop at South Portland, Maine, sometime between May 14 and May 17, 1945, where the cargo in question could have been unloaded.
There has been controversy as to whether this uranium had been enriched enough for use as a weapon.
Cook noted that the gold-lined cylinders indicated the uranium was emitting gamma radiation, which meant the normally harmless uranium oxide had been brought to enrichment through the use of a working nuclear reactor.
Farrell further explains, 'The use of gold-lined cylinders is explainable by the fact that uranium, a highly corrosive metal, is easily contaminated if it comes into contact with other unstable elements.
G old, whose radioactive shielding properties are as great as lead, is also, unlike lead, a highly pure and stable element, and is therefore the element of choice when storing or shipping highly enriched and pure uranium for long periods of time, such as a voyage.
Adding weight to Farrell's deduction is an anecdote regarding the German crew of the U-234.
They apparently thought their J apanese guests couldn't even get the number of the boat correct.
Some now believe the labels indicated the presence of uranium 235, the only isotope found in nature that has the ability to cause an expanding fission chain reaction in other words, the element needed for a uranium fission bomb.
Uranium that has undergone an extraction process to boost its U-235 proportion is known as enriched uranium.
Wolfgang Hirschfeld, radioman on the U-234, stated the submarine's orders were ""only to sail on the orders of the highest level.
F uehrer H ■"" H e also revealed after the war that crew members believed J apan had succeeded in testing an atomic weapon before their departure from Germany in March 1945.
The U-234 met an inglorious end in November 1947, when it was used as a torpedo target and sunk off Cape Cod.
Hydrick published copies of documents from the National Archives to show a connection between the Manhattan Project and the U-234.
One such document is a secret cable from the commander of naval operations directing tliata tliree-man party tal<e possession of tine sub's cargo.
In addition to two naval officers was the name of Major J ohn E Vance with the Army Corps of Engineers, the department of the army under which the M anhattan P roject operated.
A few days after the visit by Vance, a manifest of the cargo indicated the uranium was no longer in navy possession.
After receiving a statement from the National Archives denying that any canisters containing fissionable material was onboard the U234, Stevens, recalling that the submarine had surrendered to the USS Sutton, wrote to the Naval Historical Center at the Washington Navy Yard requesting a cargo manifest from the U-234 in the files of the Sutton.
For a $5 microfiche charge, Stevens received the manifest that was identical to the one from the N ational Archives except that the uranium oxide canisters were listed.
This discrepancy in the manifests can only be explained by someone altering the documents.
A Plutonium bomb, such as the one Manhattan scientists were developing, required a critical mass to be achieved within l/3000th of a second, a speed far exceeding the capabilities of fuses available at that time.
According to F arrell, there is evidence to support the idea that the necessary fuses were obtained from U-234 passenger Dr.
A message from the chief of Naval Operations to the authorities in Portsmouth, where the U-234 was taken after its surrender, indicated that Dr.
Schlicke along with his fuses were to be taken to Washington accompanied by naval officers.
Once there, the doctor was scheduled to present a lecture on his fuses in the presence of a ""Mr Alvarez,"" apparently meaning Dr.
Luis Walter Alvarez, the man who is credited with producing fuses for the plutonium bomb.
Alvarez and his student Lawrence J ohnson are credited with designing the exploding-bridgewire detonators for the spherical implosives used in the Trinity bomb test as well as the N agasaki bomb.
On March 3, 1945, President Roosevelt received an ominous memo from Senator] ames F Byrnes, a Democrat from South Carolina and a longtime confidant to the president.
Byrnes, who went on to become a secretary of state and a S upreme C ourt justice, was voicing the concern of many that the atom bomb project was foundering and might even prove a failure.
Byrnes may have been aware of a letter dated December 28, 1944, in which Eric J ette, chief metallurgist at Los Alamos, expressed reservations over the lack of sufficient amounts of uranium for the atomic bomb.
According to Hydrick, Edward Hammel, a metallurgist who worked at Los Alamos, where enriched uranium was made into material for the atomic bomb, reported that very little enriched uranium was received there until less than a month before the bomb was dropped on Hiroshima.
Little Boy, the bomb dropped on Hiroshima, carried 64.15 kilograms of enriched uranium, virtually the entire quantity that could have been produced since mid-1944 by the enrichment facilities at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, even working around the clock.
One explanation for the lack of enriched uranium was that some of this fissionable material had been used to produce plutonium in E nrico F ermi's breeder reactors at Hanford, Washington.
The mounting pressure on Manhattan Project directors to produce a bomb before the planned invasion of the J apanese home islands must have been terrific.
Schlicke's fuses, its acquisition by the United States solved two pressing problems of the M anhattan atomic bomb project a lack of sufficient amounts of uranium and adequate fuses.
The American bomb-makers may have been greatly relieved that the two major problems facing the Manhattan Project were solved with the surrender of the U-234.
While it may remain a controversy whether the acquisition of the U-234 was a fortuitous capture or the planned transfer of technology from Germany to the United States, the evidence strongly indicates the latter.
If additional uranium was obtained from the U-234, this would have provided more than could ever have been produced by the M anhattan P roject, and the equivalent of about eight H iroshima bombs.
It also means the German nuclear program was much further advanced than believed by conventional historians.
In late J uly 1945, atomic bomb components and perhaps additional German uranium bombs were delivered to Tinian Island in the P acific following a secret and rushed voyage from California by the USS Indianapolis.
After delivering its deadly cargo, this Portlandclass heavy cruiser suffered the largest single at-sea loss of life in United States naval history and became the last American ship sunk in World War II after being torpedoed by a J apanese submarine in the Philippines.
Farrell voiced the suspicion that the Indianapolis may have delivered much more than America's atomic bomb it may have carried a German bomb in addition to its cargo of uranium and fuses.
He was supported by Stevens, who wrote that the, ""unexploded German atomic bombs fell into the hands of the Americans at the end of the war in Europe in May 1945, two months before the 'first' explosion of an atomic weapon in the New Mexico desert.
All they did was to put new tail fins on the bombs, repaint them, and drop them on J apan.
One answer seems to be thatthey did not have a reliable delivery system in place.
Witkowski voiced his suspicions that the fatal flight of Lieutenant J oseph Kennedy, older brother to the future president, might have been an ill-fated attempt to destroy the V-3 complex at M imoyecques, F ranee.
The giant airfield in N orway, liome to tine massive six-engine bombers, liaci not yet been completed.
This idea was echoed by Stevens, who became convinced that the Third Reich produced an atomic bomb.
What the Germans could not do, in these dying days of the Third Reich, was to match up one of these nuclear weapons with an effective delivery system.
One thought that must have crossed the minds of Nazi leaders was the total destruction of Germany that would have resulted from the use of a nuclear weapon.
Further, high-ranking Nazis, such as Hitler's secretary Martin Bormann, who by war's end had become the second most powerful man in Nazi Germany, realized the war was lost, and used advanced technology as a bargaining chip with the Western allies.
Although there was criticism over Hydrick's technical descriptions of both the atomic bomb and its detonators, his mass of documentation concerning the transfer of nuclear technology from Germany to America is compelling.
But Farrell had an even more horrifying thought about why the Nazis did not drop an atomic bomb.
HOWEVER , THE ANSWER to this question may be found by studying the man in charge of Germany's high-tech weapons programs.
Kammler, whose name has been largely lost to history, may have played a large role in developing and hiding away the technology secrets of Hitler's Third Reich.
Kammler did not have higher purposes in mind when he set out to develop rockets and energy manipulation.
Born in 1901, Kammler completed engineering studies at a technical university and began working for the German Air Ministry.
Aft er joining the Nazi SS, he managed finances and construction for the SS until 1942, when he became chief of G roup C under the Wirtschafts und Verwaltungshauptamt, or the Economic and Administrative Central Offi ce of the SS, one of five key branches of the Black Shirts.
This branch controlled all economic enterprises as well as all concentration and extermination camps.
Beginning in 1943, Kammler took control of all ""special tasks,"" which included ""Kammler special construction""the creation of secret underground facilities as well as exotic weapons programs.
His official title was SS Obergruppenfuehrer, or lieutenant general, and he had worked his way up to command the Third Reich's most precious wartime secrets.
In mid-1943, SS chief Heinrich Himmler senta letter to armaments minister S peer.
Himmler then placed Kammlerin charge of the project, one of Germany's most secret high-tech weapons systems.
Due to the devastation brought on by incessant Allied air raids, by the end of 1944, Kammler had taken control of weapons research as well as the construction of underground factories and concentration camps.
In connection with his new responsibilities, Kammler created an SS Sonderkommando, or special command, independent from the normal German military and bureaucracy.
It was ""a place of vision, where imagination could run free, unfettered by the restraints of accountability.
Kammler also had use of computer technology that was only dreamed of in American science fiction stories.
Kammler had the benefit of knowledge, hardware and software that was developed by the computing pioneer.
Zuse built the first digital computer in 1938 and the first programmable software language, Plankaikuel.
He also was instrumental in developing magnetic tape as a computer storage medium.
It was Kammler and his Sonderkommando that became the repository for the Reich's most advanced technology, going far beyond the rockets and flying discs.
Kammler worked closely with Wernhervon Braun and his superior, Luftwaffe Major General Walter Dornberger.
Von Braun, who had been a member of the SS since 1940, carried the rank of SS Sturmbannfuehrer, or major.
Because of a navigation ""blunder,"" much of the underground and well-camouflaged Peenemunde site was left undamaged.
Apollo and the Whistleblowers, speculated that the B ritish air raid on P eenemunde was designed not to knock out the V-rocket site but to force it to move to safer environs, to ensure the safety of the rocket program.
They showed how the raid bombed the site's northern peninsula rather than the main facility, due to misplaced target indicators.
These authors noted that of the eight hundred personnel who died in the air raid, about half were mostly R ussians from the prisoner labor force and the other half were technicians and their families.
After this raid, the irreplaceable Hermann berth was transferred to the safety of the Reinsdorf works near Wittenberg, to continue his work.
It was clearly CRUCIAL that these rockets, plans and parts were spared,"" they stated.
Someone with high authority wanted this Nazi technology available to them after the war.
Nick Cook also saw the connection between such exotic technology and the mysterious Hans Kammler.
One clue to what this revolutionary technology might involve was found in the capture of physicist Walter Gerlach, one of the Nazi scientists brought to the United States after the war.
Gerlach has been connected with the German attempts to build an atomic bomb, yet his background indicated even more esoteric knowledge.
In 1921, Gerlach received a Nobel Prize, notfor nuclear research but for magnetic spin polarization, dealing with the momentum of electrons of atoms situated in a magnetic field.
Such work had little to do with the atomic bomb but much to do with energy manipulation to include antigravity.
Hilgenberg, a student of Gerlach, which indicated the focus of Gerlach's work.
Interestingly, Gerlach's wartime work diaries were confiscated by United States authorities and remain classified today.
The location was perfect for security purposes as it was outside Germany yet within the Greater Third Reich.
During their journey, Witkowski revealed his access to a formerly classified Soviet document detailing the interrogation at the end of the war of a Rudolf Schuster, who had been a member of the R eichssicherheitshauptamt, or R eich C entral S ecurity Office, N azi G ermany's version of the Department of H omeland S ecurity.
Schuster revealed that in J une of 1944, he was transferred to a special evacuation Kommando called General Plan 1945, formed by Martin Bormann to evacuate valuable science and technology from the R eich.
S chuster, who was not privy to the plan's overall agenda, nevertheless located much of these evacuation activities in the area of the Wenzeslaus Mine.
Schuster's testimony, coupled with other information, convinced Cook that the Bormann evacuation plan had been one of the N azis' greatest secrets.
It was this unacknowledged evacuation operation that saved the Reich's most precious technology.
Cook and Witkowski found remnants of what once had been a secret SS testing and production facility that may have even included a giant early superconductor.
In 1931, the Wenzeslaus Mine suffered an accident that caused bankruptcy and a takeover by the P olish government.
With the occupation of P oland, the mine was reconditioned by the N azis as a gigantic science center.
This valley, about three hundred yards across, was bisected by rail lines, and lined with a variety of structures, concrete bunkers, and guard stations, many covered with dirt and trees to act as camouflage.
Today the site is virtually ruins and overgrown with trees and vegetation.
Sporrenberg's testimony and affidavits, the only known description of the strange experiments at the mine, were given during a postwar trial in P oland.
In the closing days of the war, most of the local population was evacuated westward.
In fleeing the Russians, many of these refugees died during the fighting or froze in one of the coldest winters on record.
Today, most of the local residents are newcomers with no recollection of what transpired at the mine during the war.
A central shaft led downward to the original mine as well as a labyrinth of additional underground facilities dug by Germans.
But what most intrigued Cook and Witkowski was a huge circular concrete structure.
The circular structure was formed by twelve thick columns supporting a dodecagon-shaped reinforcing concrete ring about ninety feet in diameter.
Initially, Witkowski thought this might be the remains of a cooling tower.
He abandoned this idea once he saw cooling towers at a different location on photographs of the area, taken in 1934.
Learning that high-voltage current cannot be used in mines with the potential for flammable gas such as the Wenzeslaus Mine Cook and Witkowski determined that the structure had nothing to do with mining but was used in connection with the strange experiments described to his captors by the SS officer Sporrenberg.
These experiments centered around a bell-shaped object appropriately enough codenamed Die Glocke, or the Bell which was housed in a concrete chamber hundreds of feet underground.
According to the research of Witkowski and Cook, the Bell was made from hard, heavy metal and cylindrical in shape with a semicircular cap and hook or clamping device on top.
Huge quantities of electricity were fed into it through thick cables dropping into the housing chamber from the outside.
Inside the Bell was a thermos-like tube encased in lead and filled with a metallic liquid.
During operation, the Bell was covered by a ceramic material, apparently to act as insulation.
Inside, two contra-rotating cylinders filled with a mercury-like and violet-colored substance spun a vortex of energy, which emitted a strange phosphorescent blue light and made such a buzzing sound that operators nicknamed it the Bienenstock, or beehive.
Due to the phosphorescent light and reports that operators suffered from nervous-system disruption, headaches, and a metallic taste, Witkowski concluded the Bell's operation involved iodizing radiation as well as a very strong magnetic field of energy.
The scientists experimenting with the Bell would place various plants, animals, and animal tissue within its energy field.
H owever, it was given the highest and perhaps most unique classification possible in the Third Reich.
In a few captured documents, experimenters with the B ell were said to be working on something Kriegsentscheidend, or decisive for the war.
M ost topsecret G erman weapons, including the V rockets, were classified Kriegswichtig, or important to the war.
One major reason that so little is known about the Bell was the loss of the scientists involved in the project.
The whole concept is a nightmare N azis tinkering with the building blocks of the universe.
TO TRY AND understand the purpose of the Bell requires a brief side trip into the amazing world of cutting-edge science and quantum physics.
While discussions and articles about energy manipulation whether termed cold fusion, antigravity, or free energy have been generally discouraged as science fiction in mainstream America, many credible writers have dealt with the subject.
Advanced Weapons, Strategies, and Concepts for the Post-9/11 World, Colonel J ohn B Alexander noted, ""A potential link between superconductor quantum mechanics and gravity has been inferred from recent quantum gravity research.
Another approach to modifying gravity involved the manipulation of the quantum vacuum ZPE field.
One proposed experiment to manipulate the ZPE involves the use of ultrahigh-intensit/ lasers to irradiate a magnetized vacuum.
The idea of gaining mastery and power from the environment around us is nothing new.
Such ideas were advanced by American physicist Thomas Townsend Brown, who, in the early 1920s, experimented with antigravity based on his understanding that a charged capacitor tended to move toward a positive plate when sufficiently energized in the hundred kilovoltand upward range.
Brown's theories echoed those of United States electrical engineer Nikola Tesia, whose discovery in 1888 of the rotating magnetic field led to alternating-current electricity transmission.
TesIa foresaw limitless free energy by simply tapping into the Earth's natural magnetic energy field.
Every ponderable atom is differentiated from a tenuous fluid, filling all space merely by spinning motion, as a whirl of water in a calm lake.
It appears, then, possible for man through harnessed energy of the medium and suitable agencies for starting and stopping ether whirls to cause matter to form and disappear.
At his command, almost without effort on his part, old worlds would vanish and new ones spring into being.
H e could alter the size of this planet, control its seasons, adjust its distance from the sun, guide it on its eternal journey along any path he might choose, through the depths of the universe.
He could make planets collide and produce his suns and stars, his heat and light, he could originate life in all its infinite forms.
To cause at will the birth and death of matter would be man's grandest deed, which would make him the master of physical creation, make him fulfill his ultimate destiny.
The belief that antigravity or other exotic technologies were passed from the N azis to the Allies has been further supported by sporadic periodical coverage of antigravity in the late 1940s and early 1950s.
The article added, 'There are gravity research projects in every major country of the world.
The article stated that the weight of some materials utilized in this research had been reduced by as much as 30 percent by ""energizing"" them.
Some of the companies involved in this cuttingedge research, according to the Interavia Aerospace Review article, included • Lear, Inc.
During the 1960s and 1970s, public discussion of energy manipulation such as antigravity was virtually closed off, scorned as fantasy or conspiracy theory.
Yet, it is clear that within government and military circles, work continued secretly in this area.
Bruce L Cathie, a former New Zealand commercial pilot, theoretician, and an advocate of the existence of a worldwide energy grid, wrote in 1971, ""Somewhere, I knew, system contained a clue to the truth of U nified F ield which, he had postulated, permeates all of existence.
The only way to traverse the vast distances of space is to possess the means of manipulating, or altering, the very structure of space itself; altering the space-time geometric matrix, which to us provides the illusion of form and distance. ... for distance is an illusion.
If it were possible to move from one position to another in space in an infinitely small amount of time, or ""zero time,"" then both the positions would coexist, according to our awareness.
By speeding up the geometric of time we will be able to bring distant places within close proximity.
This is the secret of UFOs they travel by means of altering the spatial dimensions around them and repositioning in space-time.
One hint that the United States government experimented with such technology came in December 1980, when Betty Cash, Vickie Landrum, and Landrum's seven-year-old grandson Colby encountered a large, glowing, diamond-shaped object hovering in the air near the small town of Huff man, Texas.
The trio, supported by other witnesses in the area, said the object was surrounded by military CH-47 helicopters.
Days later, the trio experienced painful swellings and skin blisters, along with headaches, nausea, and hair loss, all symptoms of intense electromagnetic radiation.
In 1985, the three victims sought $20 million in damages from the United States government, but the following year, their suit was dismissed, based on denials by the government that any such craft existed in its inventory.
Yet another small public exposure to exotic energy manipulation may have come with the accidental discovery of single-atom elements in the 1970s by P hoenix-area cotton farmer David Hudson.
His discovery was followed by several scientific papers exploring the mysteries of the atomic structure, nucleus deformation, and electromagnetism.
Hudson found thatthe nuclei of such monatomic matter acted in an unusual manner.
Under certain circumstances, they began spinning and creating strangely deformed shapes.
It was found, for example, that in the element rhodium 103, the nucleus became deformed in a ratio of two to one, which made it twice as long as it is wide, and entered a highspin state.
When all electrons are brought under the control of the nucleus of an atom, the nucleus attains a ""highward,""or high-spin, state.
When reaching a state of reciprocal relationship, the electrons turn to pure white light and the individual atoms fall apart, producing a white monatomic powder.
U sing thermo-gravimetric analysis, it was found that a sample of H udson's monatomic matter lost 44 percent of its original weight when reduced to this white-powder state.
British author Laurence Gardner noted, ""Hudson was then asked to reverse the process fully by turning the powder back into a piece of metallic gold.
By late 1995, the difficulties had been overcome and the figurative apple had indeed been rebuilt from the apple sauce.
From this, there was no doubt that it was possible to manufacture gold from a seemingly non-gold base product.
From a commencing sample which registered as iron, silica, and aluminum, emerged an ingot which analyzed as pure gold.
Gardner amassed a wealth of material linking the white powder of gold to alchemists, the legendary Knights Templar, Solomon's treasure, the manna of the Israelites, Moses, and ancient Egypt.
The significance of these connections will become apparent in the next section.
By the early 1990s, scientific papers were being publislied by tine N iels B olir Institute and Argonne National and Oak Ridge National Laboratories, substantiating the existence of these high-spin, monatomic elements and their power as superconductors.
Hal Puthoff, director of the Institute for Advanced Studies in Austin, Texas.
Puthoff performs cuttingedge research into zero-point energy and gravity as a zero-point fluctuation force.
He and other scientists have theorized that enough energy exists in the space found in the atoms inside an empty coffee cup to boil all the oceans of the Earth if fully utilized.
P uthoff had also theorized that matter reacting in two dimensions should lose about 44 percent of its gravitational weight, exactly the weight loss found by H udson.
When it was found that H udson's elements, when heated, could achieve a gravitational attraction of less than zero, Puthoff concluded the powder was ""exotic matter"" capable of bending time and space.
The material's antigravitational properties were confirmed when it was shown that a weighing pan weighed less when the powder was placed in it than it did empty.
Adding to their amazement, it was found that when the white powder was heated to a certain degree, not only did its weight disappear but the powder itself vanished from sight.
When a spatula was used to stir around in the pan, there apparently was nothing there.
Yet, as the material cooled, it reappeared in its original configuration.
The material had not simply disappeared; it apparently had moved into another dimension.
Hudson also saw evidence of perpetual energy through the use of a superconductor.
Come back a hundred years later and it is still flowing exactly as when you left.
This new technology dealt with the manipulation and control of basic energy.
Some scientists believed that such control at the atomic and subatomic level might do much more than offer new propulsion technology.
It might open the door to antigravity, limitless free energy, a cure for diseases such as AIDS and cancer, an end to the aging process, faster-than-light speeds, and much more, perhaps even inter-dimensional and time travel.
Since science is coming to the conclusion that gravity and time are interconnected aspects of energy, it is possible that the Bell was used for experimenting with time travel.
This possibility is not as outrageous as it sounds, as many notable scientists and authors have written seriously about the possibility of time travel.
Right now we're in one of those classic, wonderfully evocative moments in science when we don't know, when there are those on both sides of the debate, and when what is at stake is very mystifying and very profound.
If we could travel into the past, it's mind-boggling what would be possible.
F or one thing, history would become an experimental science, which it certainly isn't today.
The possible insights into our own past and nature and origins would be dazzling.
For another, we would be facing the deep paradoxes of interfering witli tine sclieme of causality tliat lias led to our own time and ourselves.
I have no idea whether it's possible, but it's certainly worth exploring.
J enny Randies, a science-oriented British author, presented compelling examples of recent discoveries in her 2005 book Breaking the Time Barrier, which indicate the very real possibility of time travel.
After discussing ""worm holes"" in time and space, and other possible means of time travel, she pointed out, ""... rom our understanding of physics if you travel faster than light, then you can overtake the flow of events that light happens to transmit.
Since the passage of these events forms what we interpret as time, then by traveling faster than light you ought to travel through time.
Today, more than one scientist has claimed to have broken the light barrier, though official acceptance has been lacking.
TIME-TRAVELING NAZIS This horrendous idea sounds preposterous, but the science is there and the Bell did exist.
No wonder certain powerful persons would go to any lengths to obtain or conceal such knowledge.
J ust such attempts began in the closing days of World War II, as the victors sought to learn the secrets of Nazi superscience.
Consider the rush into Czechoslovaki a by General George S Patton's Third Army even as the Europe an war wound to a close.
Allied dash away from Berlin and to south-central G ermany and P rague are consistent with American knowledge, at some very high level, of Kammler's SS Sonderkommando black projects and secret weapons empire,"" wrote Farrell.
R eed, organized the escape of the Lippizan horses from the Spanish Riding School at the end of the war, an event memorialized in the 1963 Disney film Miracle of the White Stallions.
The Allies' rejection of S S chief H immler's last-minute offer to surrender may not have been due to the ""frantic attempts of a desperate mass murderer to avoid his inevitable fate,"" as described by mainstream historians, but instead because Himmlerhad lost real control over the exotic technology.
After all, Himmler was too high-profile a person to be allowed to live on after the war.
He reportedly committed suicide by taking a poison capsule on May 23, 1945, after being caught trying to sneak through British lines disguised as a German Army private.
Hans Kammler, on the other hand, was largely unknown to the public, though he undoubtedly was high on the list of wanted N azi war criminals, considering his involvement in the construction of concentration camps and their gas chambers as well as his participation in the leveling of the Warsaw ghetto.
If such a deal was made with P atton, he did not live to see the results.
On December 9, 1945, while riding in his 1939 Cadillac staff car, Patton suffered a head injury when his car was struck by a 21/2-ton military truck that turned in front of them.
Patton's driver and a passenger, his chief of staff Major General Hobart""Hap""Gay, were uninjured.
Paralyzed from the neck down, Patton was taken to a military hospital in Heidelberg, Germany, where he died on December 21.
Since the war, there have been several conspiracy theories regarding Patton's death one being that he was killed by his own government.
M ost have concentrated on his vocal assertions that the U nited States should have carried the war on into Russia and put an end to communism, plus his public advocacy of reinstating ranking Nazis to help rebuild Germany.
As the war drew to a close, Kammler made no secret that he intended to use both the V-2 scientists and rockets under his control as leverage for a deal with the Allies.
On April 2, 1945, on Kammler's orders, a special train carried rockets and five hundred technicians and engineers escorted by a hundred SS troopers to an Alpine redoubt in Bavaria.
According to von Braun and Dornberger, Kammler planned to ""bargain with the Americans or one of the other Allies for his own life in exchange for the leading German rocket specialists."" "" came to me in early April in order to say good-bye,"" recalled Nazi armaments minister Speer.
On the contrary, he seemed insecure and slippery with his vague, obscure hints about why I should transfer to Munich with him.
As everyone knows, von Braun and Dornberger, along with other scientists and many of the V-2 rockets, eventually made their way to the U nited States, becoming founding members of its modern space program with no help from Kammler.
Even more disturbing is the fact that the architect of the concentration camps, builder of the gas chambers, executioner of Dora, overall chief of all the SS missiles has sunk into oblivion.
As the war drew to a close, Kammler, ""had the good fortune to inspect the Czechoslovakian stretch of the front,"" wrote Witkowski.
One version has him committing suicide in a forest between P rague and P ilsen two days after Germany surrendered, while another said he was shot by his own SS aide in Prague.
The Red Cross initially reported Kammler as ""missing,"" but this was later changed to ""dead"" upon the testimony of a relative.
The one common denominator regarding Kammler's various death reports was that he was last seen in north central Czechoslovakia, in close proximity to the Wenzeslaus Mine and the Bell.
Despite the lack of a body, no effort appeared to have been taken to establish the truth of Kammler's death and, unlike his superior Bormann, Kammler was not tried in absentia at Nuremberg.
Whoever controlled such secret technology was certainly in a strong position to strike a deal with one of the Allied nations.
With secret projects in the hands of the fanatical SS and with factories and research facilities scattered over and under the countryside, it is entirely conceivable that saucers, uranium weapons, the Bell, and other exotic technologies could have been developed without the knowledge of anyone except Himmler, Bormann, and Kammler.
The highprofile Himmler had been taken out of the loop as far back as 1943.
The fates of Bormann and Kammler remain unproven. ""he evidence is strong enough to suggest collusion at the highest levels between the United States and Nazi Germany governments and that collusion extends down to those within U-234, its officers, crew and passengers and has been maintained by powerful parties with vested interests on both sides of the Atlantic ever since,"" stated Hydrick.
If the highest circle of America's ruling elite indeed obtained Nazi super-science in the wake of World War II, it came with a price one these prewar, pro-Nazi sympathizers were willing to accept.
When American authorities realized the alternative and nonlinear physics within Nazi science, they knew it was beyond the frame of reference of most United States scientists, which is why they recruited so many Germans and brought them to America.
The intense interest of the N azi leadership in occult or hidden subjects from ancient artifacts to legends of prehistorical high-tech super-races is well documented.
Toward the end of the war, their acquisition of super-science may have been matched by the recovery of an amazing and precious treasure.
ATREASURE TROVE IN MARCH 1944, THE CRAGGY PEAKS SURROUNDING THE ANCIENT Cathar fortress of Montsegurin southern France reverberated with the grinding gears and revving engines of military machines.
The trucks and command cars belonged to a battalion of Nazi SS troopers led by Adolf Hitler's top commando, SS Standartenfuehrer Otto Skorzeny.
Standing six feet and four inches, Skorzeny was larger than life among his comrades, and his exploits during World War II only enhanced this reputation.
An old dueling scar creased his face from the left cheekbone to his chin, earning him the nickname Scar.
By 1939, he had been accepted as a member of H itier's personal bodyguards.
S ent home from the R ussian F ront in 1942 due to wounds, S korzeny soon was directing secret agents in other countries.
But worldwide attention became focused on Skorzeny in September 1943, when he led a glider assault by commandos on a mountaintop hotel where the dictator Benito Mussolini was being held captive following a coup in Italy.
In a daring daylight operation, Skorzeny and his men liberated Mussolini, who had been contemplating suicide, and whisked him off to safety.
Hitler declared Mussolini the rightful leader of Italy and the war there continued until Germany surrendered in May 1945.
The Nazis had gained freedom of movement in the historic Languedoc region, located in the foothills of the Pyrenees mountains, which separate France from Spain.
But in early March 1944, something more than military victory was on Skorzeny's mind as his troops entered the area encompassing M ontsegur and the village of R ennes-leC hateau, the site of a great mystery since the discovery of strange documents by a young priest in 1891.
SKORZENY'S THOUGHTS UNDOUBTEDLY were centered on the location of a fabulous treasure believed to have been located by a German author and occult researcher named Otto Rahn.
During his time in school, Rahn had become fascinated with legends of the Holy Grail as well as the little-understood Cathars— ""pure ones,"" as they were called— who had opposed the Roman Church and thus suffered near annihilation in a papal military campaign in 1209, known as the Albigensian Crusade.
In the early 1930s, Rahn traveled widely in the Languedoc region of Southern France, even spelunking among the maze of cave systems in the foothills of the Pyrenees mountains.
Here he gained firsthand knowledge about the Cathars and their descendants, many of whom became members of the fabled Knights Templar.
Rahn's book Crusade Against the Grail was published in 1933, the same year Hitler came to power.
This and other books on the Cathars and Grail legends, as well as his many travel articles, brought him to the attention of SS chief Heinrich Himmler, who, along with many other top-ranking Nazis, had a keen interest in occult artifacts and knowledge.
R ahn's knowledge of both the C athars and the Templars apparently intrigued H immler, as R ahn was inducted into the SS as a lieutenant in 1936.
Himmler and his cronies must have been entranced with Rahn, who had drawn connections between the Cathar fortress of Montsegur and a fabulous cave housing the Holy Grail called Montsavat, mentioned in Parzival by Wolfram von Eschenbach in the thirteenth century.
And by March 1944, the Nazis were free to move troops into Languedoc in search of this ancient wealth, known as King Solomon's treasure.
He resigned his commission in the SS in February 1939 and, barely a month later, reportedly died of exposure after having been caught in a snowstorm during a hiking expedition.
THE FABLED TREASURE of King Solomon is the greatest cache of riches known to humankind.
Gold, silver, and precious gems— such as diamonds, pearls, emeralds, amber, amethyst, topaz, sapphires, rubies, turquoise, and others— comprised this priceless hoard of riches.
But Solomon's treasure also contained riches of quite a different sort.
It included ancient scrolls, texts, and tablets upon which was inscribed some of the world's most esoteric and occult knowledge.
This knowledge had been handed down for thousands of years from the time of the world's first recorded civilization in ancient Sumer— presentday Iraq.
Thousands of translated Sumerian tablets along with their inscribed cylinder seals are now available and they tell of astonishing technology apparently in use prior to N oah's flood.
With recent scientific advancements— sucli as powered fliglit, tine space program, DNA manipulation, and cloning— many experts are beginning to rethink the idea that today's world is the apex of civilization's evolution.
It is now possible to consider that a technically advanced civilization was on the E arth in the far distant past, possessing knowledge that mankind is only just now relearning.
Bits and pieces of ancient knowledge that survived the Great Flood formed the essence of the riches that were transported to E gypt by Abraham, the inheritor of the secrets of E noch and the biblical patriarch of both Arabs and the J ews.
Abraham, a native of S umer, known early on as Abram, by some traditions was said to possess a tablet of symbols representing all of the knowledge of humankind handed down from the time of Noah.
Other Bible verses— Exodus 24:12 and 25:16— make it clear that these tables are not the Ten Commandments.
This table of knowledge was passed from Egypt and Mesopotamia to Greek and Roman masters, such as H omer, Virgil, Pythagoras, P lato, and Ovid.
In more recent times, it was passed through such secret societies as the Rosicrucians and Knights Templar and on to the Stuart Royal Society in England.
In J ewish history, the Cabala, also spelled as Kabbalah or Oabbalah, was supposed to contain hidden meanings.
These books, which predate the Talmud, a compilation of early J ewish laws and traditions first written in the fifth century A.D., were produced centuries before the time of J esus.
These elder secrets were then passed on through Adam's sons to Noah and on to Abraham long before the Hebrews existed as a distinct people.
M uch like our understanding of history and religion today, the information within the C abala became both incomplete and garbled over the centuries through losses due to war and natural disasters as well as misinterpretations and foreign influences.
B ut it was this ancient wisdom, taken from E gypt at the time of the Great Exodus, that formed the core of Cabalistic knowledge handed down through the centuries via several secret societies, some of which remain active among us even today.
By the time of this looting, Solomon's Temple had been built over to become the palace of King Herod.
With the certain advance intelligence thatthe Romans would be sending troops to put down the J ewish rebellion, keepers of the knowledge buried away much of the treasure in the catacombs beneath Herod's palace.
To have hidden all the treasure would have prompted a strenuous search by the Roman authorities.
As it was, they were content to move what they found to Rome as war booty.
The best part of the treasure, including both wealth and knowledge, was safely buried under the Temple M ount and all but forgotten, as most religious leaders were killed or taken to R ome as prisoners.
Alaric had been proclaimed king over the Visigoths with the death of Theodosius, and he began his march on Rome after invading Greece and Northern Italy.
It was the first successful attack on Rome in more than eight hundred years.
Alaric's troops took the portion of Solomon's treasure in Rome along with other prizes of war.
The Visigoths secured their booty in the Pyrenees foothills located in the Languedoc region of what was to become southern France.
This area encompasses the Cathar stronghold atMontsegur as well as the small village of R ennes-le-C hateau.
The secrets of this treasure were handed from the G oths and the early Franks to the Cathars, the ""pure ones"" of southern France.
They considered their C hristian beliefs more pure than those of the C hurch of R ome, probably because they had access to original documents and were not dependent on the Church hierarchy to translate and interpret the Bible.
In fact, according to Otto Rahn, Cathar beliefs were greatly influenced by Druids, priests, and soothsayers who had spread from Mesopotamia through eastern and western Europe to the British Isles.
The Cathar faith, sometimes described as ""Western Buddhism,"" might have spread to all the corners of Europe but for the blood and fire of the Albigensian Crusade begun in 1209, which may well have been more of a F rench civil war than a religious campaign.
It was fought between the tightly controlled and austere northerners and the cultured, freedom-loving peoples of the south.
Phoenicians, Persians, Medeans, Getules , Armenians, Chaldeans , and Iberians,"" he wrote.
P rior to the Vatican-approved bloodletting, the provinces of southern F ranee were virtually indepen dent republics that allowed extraordinary freedom of education, culture, and diversity.
Many of the Cathars, while Christians, nevertheless still worshipped the feminine goddesses— Isis and Athena— as had their Gothic and Frankish ancestors.
When translated in the mid-1950s at M anchester U niversity, this scroll proved to be an inventory of a great treasure.
With its detailed directions to hidden Hebrew valuables, the Copper Scroll was literally a treasure map.
Less than twenty years after the crusaders took J erusalem and placed King Baldwin II of Le Bourg in charge of the occupied territories, nine knights were granted a military order called the Poor Knights of C hrist and of the Temple of S olomon.
This title was soon shortened to the Knights of the Temple, or Knights Templar.
They were allowed to be billeted in H erod's palace, the exact location of the hidden treasure as described in the Copper Scroll.
These knights were led by Hugh de Payens, a nobleman in the service of his cousin, Hughes, count of Champagne, and Andre de Montbard, the uncle of Bernard of Clairvaux, later known as the Cistercian Saint Bernard.
At least two of the original knights, Rosal and Gondemare, were Cistercian monks prior to their departure forj erusalem.
In fact, the entire group was closely related both by family ties and by connections to the Cistercian monks and F lemish royalty descended from the C athars.
Ostensibly, this order of knights was to protect the roads to J erusalem, but their actions were of a very different nature.
Rather than guard roads, the Templar knights spent years excavating under Herod's palace, the old Temple of Solomon.
British Royal Engineers led by a Lieutenant Charles Wilson discovered evidence of the Templars while mapping vaults under Mount Moriah in 1894.
They found vaulted passageways with keystone arches, typical of Templar handiwork.
They also found artifacts consisting of a spur, parts of a sword and lance, and a small Templar cross, which are still on display in Scotland.
It was during their excavations, according to several accounts, that the Templars acquired material wealth as well as texts of hidden knowledge, most probably including some dealing with the life of J esus and his associations with the Essenes and Gnostics.
When the Knights Templar transported the remainder of Solomon's treasure back to the Languedoc region of southern France, it was reunited with the portion the Goths had brought from Rome more than seven hundred years earlier.
The material wealth— King Solomon's diamonds, precious gems, gold, and silver— formed the base of the Templars' legendary fortune.
Th e esoteric treasure— scrolls and tablets of ancient knowledge— were kept hidden from the R oman C hurch in the elaborate cave systems of the Pyrenees.
On Friday, October 13, 1307, the greedy French king Philip, in debt to the Templars, moved against the Templars with the blessing of Pope Clement V Like their Cathar forebears, the Templars were charged with all forms of heresy.
The last Templar grand master, J acques de M olay. was burned at the stake in 1314.
But many Templars simply cast off their distinctive surcoats, identifiable by the red M altese cross, and blended into the local populations only to emerge in later years as Freemasons.
The treasure had been removed by the Templars, who apparently dispersed it to several different locations.
Some went to Scotland, where R obert the B ruce provided the Templars sanctuary, some went to pre-C olumbus America, and some returned to the caverns of Languedoc.
C enturies passed while the devout in southern F ranee kept the secret of the hidden treasure from both church and state authorities.
Th is secret briefl y broke into public view in the late 1890s, when the young priest of the small village of R ennes-le-C hateau discovered some documents hidden in the alter of his church, which had been consecrated to M ary M agdalene in 1059 and stood on Visigoth ruins dating to the sixth century.
In 1891, Father Francois Berenger Sauniere discovered two genealogies dating from 1244 and 1644, along with two texts written in the 1780s by a former parish priest.
The Bigou texts were unusual and appeared to be written in different and indecipherable codes.
Sauniere took his discovery to his superior, the bishop of nearby C arcassonne, who sent him on to P aris to meet with the director general of the Saint-Sulpice Seminary, reportedly a center for an unorthodox society called the Compagnie du Saint-Sacrement, reputed to be a front for the Priory of S ion.
This priory is thought to include members committed to keeping secret the Templar treasure and knowledge.
H e journeyed to P aris, where he mingled with the Parisian cultural elite and soon came into great wealth.
He also had the town's road and water supply upgraded, assembled a massive library, and built a zoological garden, a lavish country house named Villa Bethania, and a round tower named Tour Magdala, orTower of Magdalene.
Sauniere began to exhibit a defiant independence toward his Church superiors, refusing to disclose the source of his newfound wealth or accept a transfer from R ennes-le-C hateau, where he and his house keeper were seen digging incessantly in the graveyard around the church.
Yet, when push came to shove, the Vatican supported Sauniere, a good indication of the significance of his discoveries.
A nearby priest was called to administer last rites but, ""visibly shaken,"" refused to do so after hearing Sauniere's confession, which has never been made public.
His house keeper and companion, Marie Denarnaud, kept her silence about Sauniere's activities, living quietly in the Villa B ethania.
Toward the end of her life, she sold the villa to a man whom she promised she would tell a secret that would make him both wealthy and powerful.
Unfortunately, she too died of a stroke before passing along this secret.
Whatever Sauniere found, it seems to have been linked to Solomon's treasure long hidden in the nearby cave systems by first the Goths and later the Templars.
In review of what is known about the Father Sauniere affair, it appears doubtful that the priest actually found the lost treasure.
It is more likely that his find was some ancient genealogies inimical to the Catholic Church and perhaps some clues to the location of the treasure.
Such clues were expanded upon by the work of Otto Rahn with further expeditions to Languedoc financed by SS chief Himmler.
By the start of the war, Rahn was dead but his knowledge was kept alive by Himmler.
According to author Angebert, as early as J une 1943, a group of German geologists, historians, and ethnologists camped near Montsegur and began excavations that lasted into November.
BUT OTTO SKORZENY, dispatched by Himmler in early 1944, apparently had better luck.
They spent a few days exploring the C athar fortress and in reconnaissance of the surrounding mountains.
They discovered remnants of what had once been a 3,000-step stairway which led from the castle to an exit in the valley below,"" wrote Colonel Howard Buechner.
Skorzeny, disdaining intellectual study of the problem over the treasure's location, set about his work from the standpoint of a tactician.
H e quickly surmised that Rahn and the members of the 1943 expedition had looked in the obvious— and wrong— locations.
The Germans promptly found a secret path used as an escape route for the Cathars during the siege of Montsegur, which ended in March 1244, exactly seven hundred years earlier.
Perhaps it was the grotto of Bouan, which was the last refuge of the Cathars after the fall of Montsegur.
According to Colonel Buechner, there followed an amazing coincidence of events.
Each March 16, local descendants of the C athars gathered at M ontsegur to pay homage to their ancestors who had died there seven hundred years earlier.
In 1944, the local German military governor refused to grant permission, claiming Hitler's Third Reich had ""historic rights"" to M ontsegur.
In defiance of this prohibition, a group of pilgrims traveled to M ontsegur anyway and there encountered Skorzeny and his men.
The giant commander chief, who had a reputation for defying bureaucracy, granted their request, since he had control of the treasure.
That year's seven hundredth anniversary delegation of pilgrims was much larger than usual.
Near noon, a Fieseler Storch, or Stork, light airplane bearing German markings approached and created a giant spectacle for the gathered crowd.
The airplane, which may have carried either H immler, N azi ideologist Alfred R osenberg, or both, used skywriting equipment to produce a huge Celtic cross across the sky over M ontsegur.
The next afternoon, an official delegation arrived and congratulations and medals were handed out.
Wolfram Sievers, a ranking member of the Ahnenerbe SS, the organization dealing with esoteric and occult matters for Himmler's Black Shirts.
According to Colonel Buechner's sources, the treasure was carried out of the Pyrenees by pack-mule train to the village of Lavelanet, where it was loaded onto trucks for the journey to a rail head.
Guarded rail cars carried the treasure to the small town of Merkers, located about forty miles from Berlin, where it was catalogued by hand-picked members of the Ahnenerbe SS and then moved to other locations, including Hitler's redoubt at Berchtesgaden, where some of the treasure was carried into the extensive tunnel system, large parts of which remain inaccessible today.
The Nazis apparently had secured the world's greatest treasure trove— both of wealth and of lost secrets.
Three gold plaques on the cup were inscribed with cuneiform script in an ancient language.
H owever, there were many crosses from different periods, made of gold or silver and adorned with pearls and precious stones.
By the time the Allies occupied Germany, much of the treasure had been melted down into bars and shipped out of the country.
A vast amount of gold and silver, as well as pieces of art and religious artifacts, were taken into Allied hands in the town of M erkers, but the most rare and valuable items dropped from public view.
Bormann's wife suffered from cancer and was released by the Allied authorities.
Lest anyone consider Colonel Buechner's account of Otto Rahn and the taking of Solomon's treasure some personal fantasy, they would do well to consider his credentials.
Buechner was a medical officer with the 3rd Battalion, 157th Infantry Regiment of the 45th Infantry Division, the unit that arrived first at Dachau concentration camp.
Buechner was the first American physician to enter the camp upon its liberation.
He was later promoted to colonel while serving in the postwar reserves.
It was during his wartime experiences, on the scene, that C olonel B uechner first learned of the loss of S olomon's treasure.
Buechner's awards included the Medical Combat Badge, the Bronze Star, three battle stars, the Army Commendation Medal, the War Cross, and the Distinguished Service Cross of Louisiana.
He also became a professor of medicine at Tulane and served as emeritus professor of medicine at LSU, where an honorary professorship was established in his name.
His papers on tuberculosis and other lung diseases made him an internationally recognized expert.
Such wealth made it possible for B ormann and other N azis to misdirect West G erman investigations and silence foreign governments and news organizations.
And it provided the means to infiltrate and buy out numerous companies and corporations, both outside the United States and within.
To understand how a shadowy Nazi empire was created, one must return to German business history and take note of Bormann's activities beginning in mid-1944.
THE WRITING ON THE WALL IN THE FALL OF 1942, THE GERMAN SIXTH ARMY WAS RAMPAGING virtually unhindered through the Ukraine in Russia.
With these oil reserves in hand, H itier planned to turn south and capture the oil of the M iddle E ast in a combined operation with Field Marshal Erwin Rommel's famed Afrika Korps' assault from North Africa.
This scheme was thwarted by Rommel's defeat at El Alamein— made possible by the now-known decoding of German Enigma messages— and the eventual destruction of the German Sixth Army at Stalin grad, a city on the Volga River.
Stalin grad, which the Germans had entered in strength by late September of that year, soon turned into a cauldron of death and destruction.
Even breathing became a chore due to the constant shelling and bombing.
Though of dubious strategic value, both Hitler and Stalin insisted there be no withdrawal from the fiercely defended city, the namesake of the S oviet leader.
Russian pincer attacks isolated the Sixth Army in late November, but organized resistance did not end until February 2, 1943, with the surrender of more than ninety thousand German soldiers— most of them reduced to skin and bones through lack of supplies.
With the loss of the Sixth Army, ranking N azis recognized that the war's momentum had turned against them on the E astern F ront.
Six months later, after the disastrous Battle of Kursk, in which the Nazi war machine lost nearly threefourths of its entire mechanized force, it became clear that the defeat of Germany was more than a possibility, it was a probability.
Top Nazis began to draw up plans for escape and the continuation of their goals.
C urt R eiss, a noted news correspondent of the time, who traveled extensively in E urope, wrote in detail about the Nazis' plans for survival, in his book The Nazis Go Underground.
Astonishingly, this was published in the spring of 1944, prior to the Allied D-Day landings in France thatj une.
Reiss wrote, 'They had better means for preparing to go underground than any other potential underground movement in the entire previous history of the world.
They worked very hard, but they did nothing hastily, left nothing to chance.
Everything was thought through logically and organized to the last detail.
R eiss pointed out that when the N azi P arty gained control in G ermany, the apparatus of the party was simply transferred over to the apparatus of the state.
According to Reiss, some misgivings about the fate of Germany arose even before the defeat of the Sixth Army at Stalin grad.
He reported on a private meeting on November 7, 1942, in Munich, between SS chief Heinrich Himmler and Hitler's top lieutenant Martin Bormann.
This meeting occurred only two days after Allied armies had landed in North Africa.
Himmler later confided the topic of discussion, telling his most trusted associates, ""It is possible that Germany will be defeated on the military front.
In May 1943, in the wake of the defeat at Stalin grad, Reiss said German industrialists met in Chateau H uegel near E ssen, home of the Krupps, and reviewed the situation of their nation.
Farben Director Georg von] Schnitzler declared that it would be much easier for them to work after the war if the world were certain that G erman industry was not owned and run by the N azis.
R eiss explained why these captains of industry faked a divorce from N azism rather than mounting genuine opposition— because they had prospered under Hitler.
H e had ""liberated"" them from the threat of worker unions and strikes, kept taxes much lower than other industrialized nations, and brought them unprecedented profits through his rearmament program.
Their counterparts in En gland and America were all capitalizing on the worldwide conflict.
Reiss pointed out that only days after the meeting of industrialists, Farben's von Schnitzler flew to Madrid and declared he had escaped Germany just ahead of the Gestapo.
Switzerland or Sweden would have been much healthier places to repair to,"" noted Reiss.
Reiss said Schnitzler's ""flight"" was nothing but an elaborate ruse, similar to that of Germany's steel magnate F ritz Thyssen, who moved to F ranee in 1940, reportedly to escape the N azis, but ended the war in Germany's prestigious hotel Adion, where he remained in contact with his old friend, banker Kurt F reiherr von S chroeder.
Reichsbank president Hjalmar Horace Greeley Schacht had left the Fatherland for Switzerland, ostensibly for health reasons.
It was similar to that of S chnitzler— a collaboration between G erman and Allied corporate business with the major German banks acting as clearinghouses for such transactions.
Despite his activities as one of the Reich's principal money men, S chacht suffered no real penalties after the war.
H e was acquitted by the N uremberg war crimes court, which stated that rearmament was not itself a criminal act.
H e was convicted in a G erman court and sentenced to eight years in prison, but this was overturned on appeal.
By late August 1944, following the D-Day invasion of E urope and despite the advent of the V-1 wonder weapon, many in the Nazi leadership were beginning to see the writing on the wall.
When the French town of Saint-L6, center of the German defense line facing the Allied beachhead in Normandy, fell on J uly 18, opening all of southern France to Allied armor and infantry, they knew the end of the war was only a matter of time.
According to captured medical records, H itier was on a rollercoaster ride of euphoria and depression due to large daily doses of amphetamines, and had increasingly lost contact with reality.
However, the second most powerful man in the Reich, Hitler's deputy Martin Bormann, was not so incapacitated.
Bormann, a stocky, nondescript man with thinning brown hair, was born in 1900 in Halberstadt in central Germany.
Young Bormann dropped out of high school after one year and was later drafted into the army during World War I, where he served with the field artillery.
Returning from the war, Bormann joined the right-wing Freikorps and served a year in prison in 1924 for his part in the murder of his former elementary school teacher, who had been accused of betraying a Nazi leader when the Ruhr was under French occupation.
Shortly after Hitler became German chancellor in 1933, Bormann was appointed chief of staff to Deputy Fuehrer Rudolf Hess.
After Hess's ill-fated flight to Scotland in 1941, Bormann assumed his duties as well as becoming secretary to Hitler.
Nazi leaders dubbed Bormann the ""brown eminence"" and ""the Machiavelli behind the office desk,"" as he soon became the most powerful man in Nazi Germany.
According to Heinrich Hoffman, Hitler's personal photographer and the man who introduced him to his mistress Eva Braun, Hitler once said of Bormann, ""I know he is brutal, but what he undertakes he finishes.
This ""track"" came to be known as Aktion Adierflug, or Operation Eagle Flight.
It was nothing less than the perpetuation of National Socialism through the massive flight of money, gold, stocks, bonds, patents, copyrights, and even technical specialists from Germany.
C opies of all transactions and even field reports were maintained and later shipped to B ormann's archives in South America.
The names of various companies and corporations would be changed and interchanged to create confusion as to ownership.
Another tactic was to name a compliant citizen from each country as the nominal head of a given corporation.
Meanwhile, the directors would be a blend of German administrators and bank officials.
Officers at senior and management levels would be German scientists and technicians.
The real ownership of the corporation would be Nazis holding bearer bonds as proof of stock ownership.
These individuals, all part of the Bormann operation, would remain in the shadows.
The targeted nations generally were appreciative of Bormann's scheme, as it meant increased employment and a more favorable balance of trade.
After war was declared, Bormann merely had operatives in neutral countries such as Switzerland and Argentina buy American stocks using foreign exchange funds in the B uenos Aires branch of Deutsche Bank and Swiss banks.
United States Steel, American Steel and Wire, and National Tube had to work in conjunction with the Krupp empire.
He also mentioned Zeiss Company, the Leica Company, and the Hamburg-Amerika line as firms that were especially effective in protecting Nazi interests.
Bormann's complex, yet well organized, flight capital operation confounded Orvis A Schmidt, the United States Treasury Department's director of foreign funds control.
Legal authority to operate this organizational machinery has been vested in the concerns that have majority capacity in the key industries, such as those producing iron and steel, coal and basic chemicals.
The F arben complex already had produced many scientific breakthroughs for the Third R eich.
Latin American firms all maintained, unrecorded, in their books, secret cash accounts in banks in the names of their top officials,"" wrote Manning.
German enterprises such as Tubos Mannesmann, Ferrostaal, AEG, and Siemens-Schuckert played a dominant role in the construction, electrical, and engineering fields.
The foundation for a multinational German business empire was in place.
AS IN THE 1930s, the largest banking enterprises provided the underlying financial foundation for the resurgence of National Socialism.
Hermann] osef Abs, was particularly important to the Nazi flight capital program.
Martin Bormann maintained a cordial relationship with the Berlin banker.
Deutsche Bank, Dresdner Bank, and Commerzbank constituted the three major German banks, but it was Abs's Deutsche Bank that took the lead in establishing economic authority over the banks and corporations of the occupied countries.
During the war, Deutsche Bank coordinated Nazi gold transactions, purchasing 4,446 kilograms of gold from the R eichsbank and selling it in Turkey.
It arrived atthe R eichsbank in crates and suitcases, sometimes marked with their place of origin, such as Auschwitz or Lublin.
Both Abs and Schmitz taught Bormann how to protect his wealth by depositing it in Swiss banks.
Bormann saw to it that while the Reich allowed occupied countries to continue printing their own currency, the major commercial banks of Germany dealt in gold.
Ironically, it was a 1934 law passed in Switzerland that preserved Nazi loot.
The law that prohibited the disclosure of the owners of private bank accounts was initially meant to keep the Gestapo from locating the savings of German] ews.
Today many American corporations have followed Bormann's lead by depositing their money in Swiss banks.
Swiss officials claim that their policies toward the Allied and Axis powers were those of balanced neutrality, but the scales were heavily tipped in favor of the Nazis, at least on economic matters.
According to LeBor, ""Swiss banks supplied the foreign currency that the Third Reich needed to buy vital war material.
Swiss banks were the vital financial conduit that allowed Nazi economic officials to channel their loot to a safe haven in Switzerland.
Bormann had a personal account at the Reichsbank under the fictitious name ""Max Heiliger,""into which he siphoned a substantial portion of the Reich's wealth.
Utilizing both gold and ""treasure,"" Bormann, through his chief of economics.
Abs presents a classic example of the survivability of high-level bankers.
H e not only survived the war but was instrumental in Germany's postwar revival, becoming a financial adviser to West Germany's first chancellor, Konrad Adenauer.
He maintained his positions on the boards of Deutsche Bank, Daimler-Benz, and Siemens.
In 1978, Abs headed a West German consortium that managed to buy and return nearly $20 million worth of artwork taken from Germany in the 1930s by the J ewish Baron Robert von Hirsch.
McCloy, onetime chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank, the Ford Foundation, and the Council on Foreign Relations.
McCloy served as a member of President Lyndon B.J ohnson's Warren Commission and was a legal adviser to the Rockefeller family.
This ""understanding"" was principally between Abs and Lord Hartley Shawcross, a leader in the City of London financial center and a board member of many international companies.
Abs, formed the Society for the Protection of Foreign Investments of World War II, headquartered in Cologne, West Germany.
Bormann's Operation Eagle Flight was substantially helped by the close connections with foreign banks and businesses begun long before the war.
Loftus is president of the Florida Holocaust Museum and the author of several books on CIA-Nazi connections, including The Belarus Secretand The Secret War Against the J ews.
The attorneys for these dealings were J ohn F oster Dulles and his brother Allen.
Eisenhower while Allen became one of the longestserving CIA directors before being fired by President] ohn F Kennedy in 1961.
On October 20, 1942, the office of United States Alien Property Custodian, operating under the 'Trading With the Enemy Act"" , seized the shares of UBC on the grounds that the bank was financing Hitler.
Also seized were Bush's holdings in the Hamburg-America ship line that had been used to ferry Nazi propagandists and arms.
Itwas through Fritz Thyssen's Dutch Bank, originally founded by Thyssen's father in 1916, that Nazi money was passed.
Loftus noted, 'Thyssen did not need any foreign bank accounts because his family secretly owned an entire chain of banks.
The leading shareholder in UBC was E Roland Harriman, son of Edward H Harriman, who had been an early and important mentor to P rescott B ush.
He was named ambassador to the Soviet Union by President Roosevelt in 1943 and participated in all major wartime conferences.
Both Harrimans had been members of the Yale secret society Skull and Bones and were closely connected to the globalists at the C ouncil on F oreign R elations.
On November 17, 1942, United States authorities also seized the SilesianAmerican Corporation, managed by Prescott Bush and his father-in-law, George Herbert Walker, and charged the firm with being a Nazi front company that was supplying vital coal to Germany.
Brown Brothers Harriman, the oldest privately owned bank in America, was formed in 1931 when the Brown brothers, originally importers of Irish linen, merged with railroad tycoon Edward H Harriman.
This may be due to the fact that the patriarch Bush was ""instrumental in the creation of the USO in late 1941,"" according to a news release from the United Service Organization in 2002.
After all, it would have looked very bad during wartime to publicly prosecute as a Nazi asset the man who helped create the USO, so beloved by United States servicemen in all subsequent wars.
It was rumored that the trial transcripts of the 1942 prosecution of Prescott Bush were destroyed in the September 11, 2001, collapse of World Trade Center 7, which housed offices of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
The SEC admitted that more than seven thousand prosecution files were lost with the building, including files on E nron and World .com.
Prescott Bush's banking connection to Nazis was not the only object of United States investigations during the war.
Rockefeller-owned Standard Oil also came under scrutiny for a series of complex business deals that resulted in desperately needed gasoline reaching Nazi Germany.
However, it was established tliat Standard Oil shipped oil to fascist Spain throughout World War II, paid for by Spanish dictator Francisco Franco from funds that had been unblocked by the Federal Reserve Bank and passed to Nazi Germany from the vaults of the Bank of En gland, the Bank of France, and the Bank for International Settlements.
Such shipments through Spain to Hamburg indirectly but materially assisted the Axis.
What was not explained was that Standard Oil, under the leadership of William Stamps Farish, had early on changed the country of registration for Standard's tanker fleet to Panama.
Another aspect of Bormann's flight capital program concerned Hermann Schmitz, who, as a director of Thyssen's steel empire, owned companies in neutral Sweden, along with other German firms.
As bad as financing the Nazi war machine may seem, aiding and abetting the Holocaust was worse.
Thyssen's coal mines used J ewish slaves as if they were disposable chemicals.
ALONG WITH THE desire to create a Nazi-directed European economy, Martin Bormann and his henchmen also drew up plans to create a new generation of National Socialists, beginning in Germany but with an eye toward other nations.
Heimschulen, or home schools, were created within Germany to train youngsters in the techniques of explosives and sabotage as well as how to live and act in foreign countries.
In a move that has been duplicated within the modern United States intelligence community, many SS members seemingly resigned from the Black Shirts but secretly retained their loyalty and affiliation.
Some of them will even leave the party, so as to be completely neutralized.
These latter may officially disavow the party before public witnesses, who can be used later to testify how anti-Nazi they have been for a long time,"" wrote Reiss.
But what has not yet become known is that all this also applies to a much greater number of anonymous persons all over Germany, those on the second and third levels of the Nazi strata.
These men get new documents which 'prove' that they have always been anti-Nazi.
N otes are inserted in their personal files saying they must be watched on account of their anti-H itier attitudes and 'unworthy' behavior.
Some of them will undoubtedly be sent to concentration camps for crimes which they have never committed, but which will make them look dependable in the eyes of the Allies; some have perhaps already succeeded in joining anti-Nazi circles and are pretending to conspire against Hitler.
N azi sympathizers across the world were brought into the plan for resurrecting N ational S ocialism through the Auslandsorganisation , or the League of Germans Abroad.
Various forms of this organization had been in existence since the 1800s and have manipulated thousands of persons in many different countries.
In Czechoslovakia, Holland, Belgium, and Norway, members aided the Nazi invasions, becoming known as ""fifth columnists."" ""he Nazis, long before they came to power, put their men or men they trusted into these leagues.
At a party meeting in Hamburg it was decided to setup Nazi cells within all these organizations.
This was the basis of the gigantic files which the AO was to organize later,"" stated Reiss.
In 1944, Reiss pondered when the flight capital program might bear fruit.
Even under the most favorable circumstances— that is, most favorable for them— it will take ten or fifteen years.
Even then it would be a blitzkrieg, an underground blitzkrieg with somewhat different conceptions of time, ""he wrote.
It is not the relative strengths of the different powers that must change, but the relations of the human beings within all the countries of this world.
In due time, it will make itself felt far beyond the borders of Germany.
It will certainly make itself felt in this country— and no ocean will be broad enough to stop it.
It is as international as murder, as greed for power, as injustice, as madness.
If we don't stamp out the Nazi underground, it will make itself feltall over the world; in this country too.
But it is possible to fight this danger if we know it, if we remain aware of its existence.
Armed with super-science and technology, plus the lootof Europe— to include perhaps Solomon's treasure— the Nazis and their ideology were well placed to begin their Fourth Reich.
PART TWO THE REICH CONSOLIDATES THE RATLINES CONSIDERING THE VAST ECONOMIC RESOURCES ATTHEIR DISPOSAL-especially if they held dark secrets concerning advanced technology such as tactical nukes, flying saucers, or a device for manipulating energy— it is now certain that the surviving N azi leadership wielded enough power to misdirect investigations and silence foreign governments and news organizations.
J osef Mengele, the ""Angel of Extermination"" at Auschwitz • Gestapo chief, SS Gruppenfuehrer Heinrich ""Gestapo"" Mueller According to various unsubstantiated reports, Mengele suffered a stroke while swimming, and drowned in Brazil in 1979 after hiding there, as well as in Argentina and Paraguay, for decades.
Another ranking SS official, Obersturmbannfuehrer Adolf Eichmann escaped to Argentina but was abducted to Israel in 1960, where he was convicted of war crimes and executed.
Toward the end of the war, M ueller distanced himself from his boss H immler and moved closer to Bormann.
However, in 1963, a court-ordered exhumation revealed thatthe grave contained three skeletons, none of which matched Mueller's height or bone structure.
But the biggest fish to getaway was Reichsleiter Bormann, the ultimate power behind the Nazi superscience projects and the architect of Operation Eagle Flight.
In 1972, Munich bishop J ohannes Neuhausler made public a postwar church document stating that Bormann had escaped Berlin during the final days and gone to Spain by airplane.
West German officials held a news conference proclaiming that Berlin workmen had unearthed two skeletons near the ruins of the Lehrter railroad station and that one of the skeletons had been identified as Bormann.
However, the entire case for the Berlin death of Bormann rested on dental records prepared from memory by a dentist who had been a loyal N azi for many years, and the sole statement of a dental technician who had been imprisoned in Russia due to his proclaimed knowledge of Bormann's dental work.
Adding to suspicions that Bormann's death announcement was most convenient for anyone wishing to cover B ormann's tracks was the fact that Willy B randt's government canceled all rewards and warrants for Bormann and instructed West German embassies and consulates to ignore any future sightings of the Reichsleiter.
These suspicions were compounded by statements from several persons who told Paul Manning that the body found near the railroad station was placed there in 1945 by S S troops commanded by ""G estapo"" M ueller, who was known to have used decoy bodies on other occasions.
According to Manning, Bormann was escorted from dying Berlin by selected SS men who passed him along a series of ""safe houses"" to Munich, where he hid out with his brother, Albert.
In early 1946, Bormann was escorted on foot over the Alps to the northern Italian seaport of Genoa.
In mid-1946, a steamer ship carried Bormann, provided with false identification papers, to Spain, where he entered the Dominican monastery of San Domingo in the province of Galicia, once the home of S panish dictator F rancisco F ranco, a supposed neutral who covertly supported H itier.
Manning noted that in 1969, when Bormann became aware that Israeli agents were sniffing along his escape route, there was a fire in San Domingo.
Curiously, the fire started on the very shelves where the monastery kept its book of visitors, which contained Bormann's name.
In the winter of 1947, a large freighter carrying Bormann and several SS officers anchored in the harbor of B uenos Aires, where an organized network of supporters awaited them.
Even before the shooting war ended, lesser-known SS members and hardcore Nazis were fanning out across the world through covert distribution systems.
Chief among these ratlines were the Kameradenwerk and the ODESSA, the Organization der ehemaligen SSAngehorigen, or the organization of former SS members.
ODESSA was created by Bormann and Mueller, but later administered by Otto Skorzeny, who had escaped war crimes convictions.
Ladislas Farago, author of popular histories as well as an acclaimed biography of General George P atton, also wrote that he had proof of B ormann's postwar survival.
Snyder described ODESSA as a ""vast clandestine Nazi travel organization"" to aid the escape of SS members and top Nazis.
According to Farago, the Kameradenwerk was the real focal point for escaping Nazis.
It was founded by Luftwaffe colonel Hans Ulrich Rudel, an air ace who lost a leg flying 2,530 combat missions for Germany.
After the war, Rudel almost alone put together one of the most far-reaching and best financed of the rescue groups— the Kameradenwerk.
To understand the seemingly puzzling relationship between Hitler's Nazis and the Holy Roman Church, one must look back to a 1929 agreement signed between the Vatican and the government of fascist Italy.
Under this concordat, known as the Lateran Treaty, the Italian government bought favor from the Church by paying almost a billion lire in gold as compensation for church property taken during the nineteenthcentury Risorgimento, or reorganization, that helped create modern Italy.
The Lateran Treaty also established Vatican City in Rome as a sovereign state, as well as making Roman Catholicism the only state religion in Italy.
On J uly 20, 1933, a similar concordat was reached between Pope Pius XI and Nazi Germany.
This concordat, still in effect today, was signed by Franz von Papen on behalf of German president Paul von Hinderburg.
Von Papen was tried at Nuremberg but released despite being denounced as a primary mover in Hitler's aggression in Europe.
According to the 1933 concordat, there was to be no interference by the Church in political affairs.
It also required all bishops to take a loyalty oath to the state and required all priests to be German citizens and subordinate to government officials.
Prior to the concordat's ratification, the Nazi government also reached similar agreements with the major P rotestant churches.
R umors have circulated for years that a secret codicil of the concordat involved papal leniency toward National Socialism in exchange for Catholicism being proclaimed the state religion of Europe after an appropriate period of time of total Nazi control.
Regardless, it mattered little, as Hitler quickly took steps against all churches, including the Catholics.
His sterilization laws, attempts to dissolve the Catholic Youth League, and arrests of priest, nuns, and lay leaders all angered the Catholic community.
In the letter, the pope accused the Nazis of both violating and evading the concordat and even foresaw ""threatening storm clouds"" of war and extermination.
A year later, P ius XI addressed the N azi persecution of the J ews by proclaiming worldwide, ""Mark well that in the Catholic Mass, Abraham is our patriarch and forefather.
I say to you it is impossible for a Christian to take part in anti-Semitism.
But if Pius Xl's turn against National Socialism was legitimate, it unfortunately was short-lived.
On February 10, 1939, the day before Pius XI was scheduled to deliveryet another scathing public attack on fascism and anti-S emitism, he died, reportedly of a massive heart attack.
Petacci, one of the Vatican physicians atthe time, was the father of Clara Petacci, the longtime mistress of Fascist leader Benito Mussolini.
The whispers were that Petacci gave the pope an injection that caused his fatal attack.
Strong support for this rumor came some years later, when the same allegation was found in the personal diary of French cardinal and former French Army intelligence agent E ugene Tisserant.
Pope Pius XII, born Eugenio Maria Giuseppe Giovanni Pacelli, was certainly less antagonistic toward fascism and, in fact, had been an honored guest atthe society wedding of Clara Petacci and Italian Air Force Lieutenant Riccardo Federici in 1934.
The marriage did not last long, and Clara was soon visiting Mussolini at night via a secret staircase in the Palazzo Venezia.
Catholic historian and journalist J ohn Cornwell, in 1999, stunned the Catholic world with his book Hitler's Pope.
A former seminary student, Cornwell explained that he originally intended to defend the actions of Pope Pius XII but as his research in Vatican archives progressed, his attitude changed.
The material I had gathered, taking the more extensive view of P acelli's life, amounted not to an exoneration but to a wider indictment,"" Cornwell wrote.
The author eventually saw that this pope's actions— or inaction— actually aided in H itier's rise to power and the ensuing Holocaust.
Needless to say, Cornwell's perception was immediately and savagely attacked as inaccurate reporting and misinterpretation.
R egardless of motives, it is historical fact that many top N azis and S S men escaped E urope with passports issued by Catholic officials.
Luftwaffe ace Rudel admitted as much in 1970, stating, ""In Rome itself, the transit point of the escape routes, a vast amount was done.
One of those helpful clerics was Bishop Alois Hudal, who voiced opinions comparable to those of Hitler's Viennese friend J org Lanz von Liebenfels, publisher of Ostara, a magazine with occult and erotic themes.
A Cistercian monk who founded the anti-Semitic secret Order of the New Templars, von Liebenfels and his mentor Guido von List sought to revive the medieval brotherhood of Teutonic Knights, those heroes of Hitler's youth, who had used the swastika as an emblem.
While von Liebenfels headed his Order of the New Templars, Bishop Hudal was named procurator general of the Catholic Order of German Knights.
On May 1, 1933, in a Nazi-sanctioned celebration of the pagan Walpurgis holiday, Hudal made a particularly impassioned speech in Rome before assembled Church and Nazi leaders as well as the expatriate German community.
It was, in fact, a Franciscan friar serving under Bishop Hudal who helped arrange a Red Cross passport and visa to Argentina in 1950 for Obersturmbannfuehrer Adolf Eichmann, the exterminator of J ews who had managed to slip away from American captors at the end of the war.
Bishop Hudal, in his later memoirs, thanked God he was able to help so many escape with false identity papers.
Many of these ""false identity papers"" were documents issued by the Commissione Pontificia d'Assistenza, or the Vatican Refugee Organization.
While not full passports themselves, these Vatican identity papers were used to obtain a Displaced Person passport from the International Red Cross, which, in turn, was used to gain a visa.
Supposedly, the Red Cross checked the backgrounds of applicants, but usually it was sufficient to have the word of a priest or a bishop.
Ante P avelic, the wartime pro-N azi fascist dictator of C roatia, who was given a private audience with Pope Pius XII shortly after taking power in 1941, escaped to South America after the war with a R ed C ross passport gained through a Vatican document.
ONE OF THE countries in which the Auslandsorganisation worked with particular success was Argentina.
Although many Nazis found safe havens in Brazil, Paraguay, Chile, and Uruguay, no South American nation was more accommodating than the Argentina of Dictator J uan Domingo P eron and his lovely second wife, Eva Maria Duarte de Peron, popularly known as Evita.
After participating in a successful military coup in 1943, Peron was voted in as president in 1946 by a majority of voters, who lauded his efforts to eliminate poverty and dignify workers.
He was elected against the intense and overt opposition of the United States.
Such opposition appeared justified, for soon after his election Peron began to nationalize and expropriate British and American businesses.
Lil<ewise, many Nazi SS and Gestapo fugitives from justice served in the Argentine Army and police forces.
Tank, a fighter plane designer and former director of the F ocke-Wulf aircraft factory, had slipped away from Germany in disguise and, armed with false identity papers provided by Peron himself, arrived in Buenos Aires with microfilm of aircraft designs hidden in his pants.
Soon, about sixty of his old Nazi comrades had joined him, using the same system.
THE MAN MOST responsible for fostering pro-Nazi feelings in South America was General Wilhelm von Faupel.
In 1900, Faupel went to China as a member of the German military legation.
In 1911, he joined the staff of the Argentine War College in Buenos Aires.
Faupel returned to Argentina after serving Germany in World War I and obtained the job of military counselor to the inspector general of the Argentine Army.
Von F aupel not only imparted military theories to the armies of Argentina, B razil, and P eru, he also instilled in them the political theories of National Socialism.
Faupel most likely was speaking for many globalists who had significant holdings in South America and did not wish to relinquish them to leftists, communists, nationalists, or reformers.
Although he is widely seen as a dictator, many ""P eronists"" still view J uan P eron as a champion of the working man.
Few realized at the time that he was stashing away an estimated $500 million in Swiss bank accounts.
According to Manning, at least $100 million came from the Bormann organization.
Peron reciprocated for this generosity by allowing many war criminals to immigrate, legally and illegally, to Argentina.
He reportedly provided more than a thousand blank passports for escaping Nazis.
H is private secretary, R udolfo F reude, also was chief of internal security.
The Argentine dictator was greatly honored to shelter Deputy Fuehrer Bormann.
After several low-key meetings with Bormann, Peron saw Bormann's flight capital program as a means of boosting the Argentine economy.
Evita took on the role of liaison between her husband and Nazis seeking asylum.
As a mistress to other army officers, she caught the eye of handsome military strongman J uan Peron.
While in Spain, she reportedly met with Otto Skorzeny, who headed a ratline known as die Spinne or the Spider, and arranged the transfer of millions in Nazi lootto Argentina.
She also traveled to Genoa, where she met with Argentine shipping fleet owner Alberto Dodero, who within a month was ferrying Nazis to South America.
But the primary purpose of the trip appeared to be the meetings Evita held with bankers in Switzerland.
In 1955, P eron was ousted in a military coup and forced to flee to neighboring P araguay and later to exile in Madrid, Spain.
He left without the body of Eva, who had died from cancer in 1952, at age thirty-three.
H er popularity was such that eight persons were trampled to death in the tumultuous crowds who flocked to see her embalmed body lying in state.
THE IMPACT OF transplanted Nazis continues to be felt in South America.
SS Hauptsturmfuehrer Klaus Barbie, the ""butcher of Lyon, ""after working for the United States Army's Counterintelligence Corps following Germany's defeat, ensconced himself in Bolivia under the name Klaus Altmann.
Using his contacts in the Kameradenwerk, he began running guns between Bolivia, Peru, and Chile.
On J uly 17, 1980, Barbie abetted right-wing officers in the army during a coup over the left-of-center Bolivian government.
With Barbie's aid, Bolivia was soon a primary and secure source of cocaine for the emerging Medellin drug cartel.
Barbie was captured and extradited to France, where he died in 1991 from cancer while serving a life sentence for crimes against humanity.
ODESSA also turned to gun-running as a means of financing its operations.
In fact, it was never intended only as an escape route for N azis, but, at B ormann's instructions, it was set up as a profitable business enterprise as well.
The plentiful supply of surplus arms in E urope turned out to be an immediately profitable commodity.
In late 1945, United States military authorities became aware of a huge black market enterprise being operated outof Passau, a picturesque city located ninety miles northeast of Munich at the confluence of the Danube, Inn, and llz Rivers.
It was a connecting point between Germany, Austria, and Czechoslovakia, and a collection center for Axis arms.
It was here that the weapons from three complete armies— the Hungarian Fifth Army and the German Fifth and Twelfth Armies— were stockpiled in an American-run depot.
Rifles, machine guns, and ammunition were gathered at Passau while millions of dollars worth of vehicles were cached at M attinghoffen, Austria.
About $10 million worth of these war materials went missing, sold by black marketers, mainly ODESSA agents, German officials, and criminals, aided by a few Allied soldiers.
In one of the greatest ironies of history, the bulk of this material was being shipped to Palestine for use both byj ews trying to create the state of Israel and by Arabs who violently opposed such an effort.
On J anuary 5, 1946, United States military intelligence officers under the command of Colonel William Weaver of General Patton's G-2 staff were sent to Passau to make arrests.
Instead, the agents were murdered and the house in which they were staying was burned.
Hospitalized with a kidney stone, Spector narrowly missed the massacre at Passau.
S pector did learn that one of the men involved with the stolen arms as well as the agents' deaths was a Romanian national named Robert Abramovici.
Abramovici later changed his name to Robert Adam and started an arms company called Intermecco Socomex, which became closely associated with the CIA's arms company, Interarmco.
The arms deals in Palestine were handled byJ oseph Beidas and Eduardo Baroudi and his brothers, who sold weapons to both Arabs and J ews.
Baroudi later became a vice president of Intrabank, based in B eirut, Lebanon, a major conduit for black market funds.
M illionaires were made immediately after the war by both war surplus and black market arms deals.
Palestine was to be partitioned into a J ewish homeland, and they intended to destroy it at birth.
B ut now, J ewish buyers, funded from America and elsewhere, entered the marketplace.
They were barred from purchasing guns and American surplus P-51 Mustang fighter planes by P resident Truman, and their only recourse for survival was to trade on the E urope an black market, which, unknown to them, was rapidly coming under the control of ODESSA agents.
However, the J ewish agency's buyers might have purchased from the devil himself if it meant survival of the small, defenseless nation, just come into being on May 14, 1947"" Again, the behind-the-scenes maneuvering of wealthy globalists can be seen in the creation of modern Israel.
This began in 1917, when 2nd Baron Rothschild, Lionel Walter Rothschild, received a letter from British foreign secretary Arthur Balfour replying to his query regarding Balfour's position on Palestine.
Balfour expressed approval for the establishment of a home for J ews there.
In 1922, the League of Nations approved the Balfour mandate in Palestine, thus paving tine way for tine later creation of Israel.
Lord Rothschild was an ardent Zionist, who had served as a member of the British Parliament.
The Zionist movement, composed of both J ews and non-J ews, had been working toward the creation of Israel since the late 1800s.
Lord Rothschild was the eldest son of Nathan Rothschild, who had controlled the Bank of England and funded the Cecil Rhodes diamond empire.
It also appears that the Zionists employed blackmail to aid in the formation of Israel.
Their most famous target was N elson R ockefeller, who in 1940 was named to the intelligence position of coordinator of interAmerican affairs by Secretary of Defense Forrestal.
In 1944, Rockefeller was selected to serve as assistant secretary of state for Latin American affairs.
Due to the extensive business dealings between the German Nazis and American globalists, as detailed previously, Loftus and Aarons noted that during the war, the Germans in South America got anything they wanted, from refueling stations to espionage bases, while the British had to pay cash.
Rockefeller and his cronies would take over B ritain's most valuable Latin American properties.
S oon, R ockefeller controlled much of S outh America and was able to bring that influence to the newly created United Nations.
But when Rockefeller pushed through UN membership for pro-fascist Argentina over the objections of P resident Truman, he lost his government position.
In 1947, when Zionist leader David Ben-Gurion was desperate for votes to ensure the passage of a UN resolution partitioning Palestine and thus creating the state of Israel, he turned to Nelson Rockefeller.
Rockefeller had been able to deflect several investigations into his family's prewar and wartime dealings with the Nazis, but according to Loft us and Aarons, 'Then the J ews arrived with their dossier.
Loftus, as a United States attorney with unprecedented access to classified CIA and NATO files as well as former intelligence operatives, in 1994 joined with Australian broadcastjournalistMark Aarons to produce a national bestseller titled The S ecret War Against the J ews, which probed the role of Western intelligence agencies in the affairs of Israel.
These authors interviewed one of the J ews present at the meeting with Rockefeller.
In return for the votes of the Latin American bloc, lie wanted guarantees tliat tine J ews would keep their mouths shut about the flow of Nazi money and fugitives to South America.
There would be no Zionist Nazi-hunting unit, no testimony at Nuremberg about the bankers or anyone else, not a single leak to the press about where the Nazis were living in South America or which Nazis were working for Dulles.
On November 29, 1947, the UN General Assembly approved a resolution recommending the partition of Palestine.
The vote shocked the Arab world, which had not foreseen several Latin American countries switching their vote at the last minute.
The J ews had traded silence for their new country's security, but they didn't take it lying down.
To this day, Israeli leaders have in turn blackmailed the Western employers of Nazi refugees and war criminals, guaranteeing nearly unconditional support for Israel and its policies.
J ohn Pehle worked with Orvis Schmidt in the United States Treasury's Foreign Funds Control office.
It is apparent that the globalists in both Europe and America were more concerned with gaining a foothold in the oil-rich Middle East than in pursuing escaped Nazis and their treasure.
Through such organizations, SS men and Nazi officials escaped through southern France and across the Pyrenees into Spain.
These were not forprofit enterprises like ODESSA, but still they received funding and orders from the Bormann group.
Die Spinne was a creation of commando Otto Skorzeny and was largely composed of troops from his old wartime commando unit.
After the meeting with Eva Peron in 1947, many Spinne members made their way to Argentina. ""he number of Germans who went to South America, both along these ... routes and by less organized means after Martin Bormann had declared his flight capital program in August 1944, totaled 60,000, including scientists and administrators at all levels, as well as the former SS soldiers commanded by General Mueller,"" noted Paul Manning.
Even before the end of the war, the Nazis used concentration camp prisoners and hired specialists to manufacture respectable-looking but phony identification papers.
With these and aided by the general chaos in Europe at war's end, they developed their own effective witness protection program.
Many of these false identities have withstood the test of time and are still in use.
While on the run at the end of the war, B ormann controlled his vast commercial empire through an elaborate but well-planned communications system.
Then there was a police report from Cordoba Province dated April 22, 1955, in which a police agent with special knowledge of Bormann spotted the Nazi in the company of two other men in a hotel and trailed them.
By 1972, it was apparent to anyone who desired to know that Martin Bormann had been operating in South America for some time.
Researcher and author Ladislas Farago caused a minor sensation in that year with his articles published in En gland's Daily Express, detailing Bormann's activities.
It stated, ""Argentine secret service sources said today that Martin Bormann was sheltered in the country after World War II, but could not confirm reports that he still lived there.
Sources in Salta confirmed thatthe ranch where Bormann was said to have lived was owned by German industrialists.
Of course, only Bormann, Mengele, Eichmann, and a few other leading Nazis garnered occasional news headlines.
Thousands managed to slip through the hands of authorities unnoticed, thanks to business connections or passports provided by the Vatican.
It seems apparent that it was not only business interests protecting the N azis but individuals within the American government.
S . archives later took steps to obliterate any record of Kammler or his fate.
THE NAZI ORGANIZATION that may have made the greatest impact on the United States was not a ratline but a spy network created by General-major Reinhard Gehlen.
This Nazi network was to become America's eyes and ears in the early days of the Cold War.
The son of a Catholic bookshop owner, Gehlen was born in 1902 and joined the German Army in 1920.
His middleclass family nevertheless boasted military officers on both sides.
In the 1930s, Gehlen moved from the German Staff College to the Army General Staff with the rank of captain.
In 1940, he was promoted to major and served on the staffs of two German generals.
By 1942, Gehlen, now a Lieutenant colonel, became the head of Fremde Heere Ost, or Foreign Armies East, a curious title for the section of the German General Staff analyzing all intelligence on the Russian Front.
In an attempt to avoid conflicts with the Abwehr, Germany's counterintelligence service, Gehlen created his own network of spies and informers.
This system soon began making major contributions to the Nazi war effort by upgrading the level of intelligence on the Soviets.
Gehlen made use of whatever anticommunists could be found and in particular the anti-Soviet spy network of Russian general Andrei Vlasov, a Rus sian officer who began working with Gehlen and the Nazis against the Stalin regime.
Gehlen soon put together a remarkable network of agents and spies, all sworn to utmost secrecy, even from their own families.
This combined Vlasov/Gehlen operation became known as the Gehlen Organization, a spy network that was continued by United States authorities long after the war.
Such vitriol may have led to Gehlen lending a sympathetic ear to plotters against Hitler.
But whatever his role, if any, in the failed J uly 1944 bomb plot against the fuehrer, Gehlen managed to survive.
By then, he had a new plan— one that was to have lasting effect on the Allied nations and particularly the United States and Russia.
In April 1945, realizing that the war was lost for the Germans, Gehlen offered his spy network in Russia to the British but received no answer.
Gehlen also showed no signs of being anything other than an unrepentant National Socialist.
In other words, Gehlen's only objection to Nazi aggression was that Hitler lost.
Gehlen and his organization stashed their voluminous intelligence files in more than fifty sealed steel containers and buried them as they retreated westward— one cache was stored near the Wendelstein Mountains, another in tine Algau province of soutliwest Bavaria, and tine tliird in tlie Hunsrucl< mountain range in tine Rliineland.
After liiding out in a mountain lodge for some time, Gelilen made liis move.
Initially spurned by American officers who failed to recognize his importance, including a member of the Counterintelligence Corps , Gehlen finally arrived in front of Brigadier General Edwin L Sibert, senior intelligence officer of the American occupation zone in Germany.
Sibert listened attentively as Gehlen detailed ""the actual aims of the Soviet Union and its display of military might,"" despite United States Army regulations that prohibited personnel from listening to any remarks made by a German against their erstwhile ally in the East.
Gehlen and some of his staff members were soon flown to Washington in a military plane belonging to Walter Bedell Smith, General Eisenhower's chief of staff, who went on to direct the CIA from 1950 to 1953 and also succeeded Averell Harriman as United States ambassador to the SovietUnion.
Smith was to become an early member of the secretive Bilderberg Group initially headed by former SS officer Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands.
Under the proposal, Gehlen would operate independently and as an equal, offering the Americans only the information they requested or he decided to share, but never in any way conflicting with the interests of his Fatherland.
In other words, virtually everything the United States learned about Soviet aims and capabilities at the end of World War II came from an anticommunist underground filtered through a Nazi organization with connections to the international financial elite.
Carl Oglesby, author of The Yankee and Cowboy War, wrote that by 1948, following the formation of the CIA, ""Gehlen had grown tight with Dulles and his organization and become in effect the CIA's department of Russian and East European affairs.
It has been made public in recent years that the Gehlen organization received an aggregate of $200 million in CIA funds from Allen Dulles.
Much of Gehlen's intelligence proved questionable, although this was not known atthe time, since the Russians had tight control over information behind the Iron Curtain.
In 1946, he returned to Germany and began forming an intelligence organization that evolved into the Bundesnachrichtendienst, or federal intelligence service, in West Germany.
True to the initial agreement, Gehlen became president of the BND from its inception in 1956 until 1968, when he was forced to resign in the wake of a political scandal.
Following his death in 1979, Gehlen, a member of the Knights of Malta, was hailed as the consummate Cold War spymaster.
In 1938, following the Anschluss, or unification, of Germany and Austria, the organization came under Nazi control and until the end of World War II functioned as an intelligence and enforcement arm of the Gestapo.
During those years, Interpol was headed by some of the most notorious Nazi war criminals, such as SS Obergruppenfuehrer Reinhard Heydrich, who chaired the infamous Wannsee Conference where the Holocaust was planned; Arthur Nebe, the criminal police chief who also commanded Einsatzkommandos, or killer squads, that liquidated ""undesirables""; and Ernst Kaltenbrunner, who succeeded the slain Heydrich and was hanged at Nuremberg for war crimes.
Working with Heydrich at Interpol was a young SS officer named Paul Dickopf.
After the war, Dickopf served as president of Interpol from 1968 to 1972.
Atthe recommendation of FBI director Hoover, who always seemed more concerned about communists than Nazis, the United States formally joined Interpol just two weeks after the 1938 Nazi Anschluss of Austria.
Hoover kept up a friendly correspondence with Nazi Interpol leaders until a few days after Pearl Harbor, when apparently he felt such connections might tarnish his image.
After the war, Interpol officials insisted that all its files were destroyed in Allied bombings.
However, according to researcher Vaughn Young, a Swedish policeman named Harry Soderman, who had worl<ed with Interpol since its inception, argued that an aborted attempt in 1945 to take the files out of Germany left them in French hands.
The next year, Interpol was reestablished with strong support from the French police and headquartered in Paris.
Also in 1946, Hoover sidestepped the United States State Department by attending a meeting in Brussels to formally reconstitute Interpol, where he was elected vice president.
To this day, Interpol officials have declined to seek out Nazi war criminals, claiming such action is beyond its jurisdiction.
BY 1980, MARTIN Bormann, then in his eighties, had traveled extensively in South America, often just ahead of Nazi hunters.
He lived in a luxurious estate near Buenos Aires, writing his memoirs while still under the protection of ""Gestapo"" Mueller.
Paul Manning said this aging recluse remained the guardian and silentmanipulator of a gigantic industrial pyramid centered in Germany.
Bormann also had become mentor to a new generation of lawyers, bankers, and industrialists.
Nazi in Exile, Manning stated, 'The Bormann organization is not merely a group of ex-Nazis.
It is estimated that as many as 100,000 ranking N azis remained at large after the war.
Colonia Dignidad, or Dignity colony, today is called Villa Baviera, or villa Bavaria.
It was founded in 1961 by Paul Schaefer, formerly of the Nazi Luftwaffe, and was made up of German immigrants who had been living there since the early 1950s.
The large compound boasted its own power plant, two runways, and a restaurant, all surrounded by barbed wire, searchlights, and guard towers.
In 1986, an inspection by Amnesty International discovered underground cells where prisoners suffered remotecontrol torture by means of electronic sound systems and electric shock.
The compound was run by approximately three hundred Nazi exiles, some of whom still live there today.
An estimated three thousand persons died and thirty thousand were tortured during the violent overthrow of Chile's democracy by Pinochet, which included the still-disputed circumstances of President Salvador Allende's death.
In 1997, Schaefer fled Chile after being accused of sexually molesting two young boys atthe colony.
While there can be no doubt that Bormann's surviving Nazi empire still exerts tremendous control over world economies and politics even today, the full extent may never be known.
What is known is that many of Nazi Germany's most brilliant minds continued their work outside Europe after the war, most notably in the United States.
PROJECT PAPERCLIP AND THE SPACE RACE ON MAY 19, 1945, JUST TWELVE DAYS AFTER GERMANY'S unconditional surrender, Herbert Wagner, creator of the first Nazi guided missile used in combat, landed in Washington, D.C., in a United States military aircraft with blackedout windows.
It began as Operation Overcast, a program authorized by the J oint Chiefs of Staff to exploit the knowledge of Nazi scientists.
This operation was renamed P aperclip and formally authorized in August 1945 by P resident H arry Truman, who was assured that no one with ""N azi or militaristic records"" would be involved.
By mid-November, more Nazi scientists, engineers, and technicians were arriving in America, including Wernher von B raun and more than seven hundred other N azi rocket scientists.
By 1955, nearly a thousand German scientists had been granted citizenship in the United States and given prominent positions in the American scientific community.
By the 1990s, when details of P aperclip finally reached the public's ears, the infusion of N azis into America's military-industrial complex was complete.
It should be noted that the Dulles brothers were both attorneys for and business partners with Averell Harriman.
It should also be noted that Allen Dulles, as OSS station chief in Bern, Switzerland, satatthe nexus of United States intelligence as well as Soviet intelligence, such as the infamous Rote Kapelle, or Red Orchestra, spy network.
It was during his stint as assistant to the United States ambassador that Dulles used SS Brigadefuehrer, or brigadier general, Walter Schellenberg to communicate with his immediate superior, Reichsfuehrer Heinrich Himmler.
Dulles moved from Bern to become OSS station chief in Berlin atthe end of the war.
In 1947, when the OSS was rolled into the newly created CIA, Dulles's translator was an army intelligence officer named Henry Kissinger, who would go on to become secretary of state under President Richard Nixon, a lifelong friend to Dulles.
P roject P aperclip quickly came under the control of an ""old boy"" network encompassing members of the globalists centered in the Council on Foreign Relations.
After former Nazi spymaster General Reinhard Gehlen met with the CIA director Dulles and offered to turn over his extensive spy network to the C lA in exchange for non-prosecution of their N azi pasts, the scientists' dossiers were rewritten to eliminate incriminating evidence of their work for the Nazis.
Likewise, von Braun's brother, Magnus, who had been declared a ""dangerous German Nazi"" by counterintelligence officers, was brought to America and his pro-Nazi record expunged.
President Truman, who had explicitly ordered no committed Nazis to be admitted under P roject P aperclip, was evidently never aware that his directive had been violated.
Again, this is evidence of control at a level higher than the president.
Potential intelligence assets were recruited from all across Europe, many of them zealous Nazis who could be relied upon to be anticommunists.
In an effort to avoid the negative publicity that had burdened some of the early P aperclip activities— some Americans just did not think it proper to bring former N azis to the U nited States and place them in responsible positions— J lOA officers began bringing Nazis from Argentina, that haven for the Bormann organization.
No longer were Nazi scientists the sole objective; recruitment of Nazis now included Eastern Europeans thought to be helpful against the communists, and even convicted Nazi war criminals.
Prevailing myth has it that the first group in National Interest, the German scientists, were employed solely because of their scientific expertise, but there were other reasons as well.
First, defense contractors and universities could hire German scientists for substantially less money than they could American employees.
Salary statistics show that the Germans signed contracts for approximately $2,000 a year less than their American counterparts received in comparable positions.
Of course, the Germans were unaware of the salary discrepancy, since they had earned even less money in West Germany.
The J lOA, however, took advantage of the situation by promoting cheap salaries to convince corporations to participate in the project.
Second, because of the J oint Chiefs of Staff connection with the National Interest project, German scientists could obtain necessary security clearances more easily than could American scientists.
Defense contractors looking for new employees to work on classified projects found this aspect of National Interest to be particularly advantageous.
National Interest placed German scientists at major universities in research or teaching positions, regardless of their Nazi pasts.
Even the United States Office of E ducation helped J lOA send fliers to universities all over the country touting the advantages of hiring the Germans on federally financed research projects, since they could obtain security clearances more easily than Americans.
Another program, code-named simply Project 63, was designed specifically to get German scientists out of Europe and away from the Soviets.
The P roject 63 effort to import N azis grew so public— in 1952, J 10 A deputy director Air F orce colonel Gerold Crabbe and a gaggle of military officers.
Conant may not have realized his appeal was aimed atone of the architects of the very program he was trying to end.
On October 4, 1957, the Russians launched Sputnik I into orbit around the Earth and the space race was on.
Interestingly, even as we were bringing foreign defectors into the USA, we discovered a traitor within our own government.
When arrested in 1962, Whalen was an intelligence adviser, which permitted him access to any information pertaining to the J oint Chiefs of Staff planning and allocation of military forces, including communications and electronic intelligence-gathering.
Though charged with espionage, in 1966 Whalen made a deal with the J ustice Department, in which he pled guilty to a lesser charge in exchange for his cooperation.
Federal judge Oren Lewis, while accusing Whalen of ""selling me and all your fellow Americans down the river,"" nevertheless sentenced the spy to a mere fifteen years in prison.
Imported Nazis had every opportunity to pass national securit/ information out of the country.
F urthermore, anyone receiving any more than 50 percent support from a P aperclip specialist constituted a ""dependent,"" according to their contracts.
It was revealed that at the end of the war, the rocket scientist had been caught sending a map overseas to General Dornberger and concealing information from United States officials.
F urther investigation revealed that P aperclip specialists were allowed to make unsupervised trips off base and even out of town, the only requirement being that they report when they arrived at their destination.
H e believed that it was reasonable to assume that friendly contacts between the two groups still existed.
Apparently, overseas communication between the Nazis in America and the Nazis in Russia continued unabated, which has raised the possibility of a parallel space race controlled or manipulated by the very globalists who had created and financed both communism and the Third Reich.
ALMOST EVERYONE WHO was of age in 1969 recalls vividly the pride and excitement of the United States Apollo mission's moon landing on J uly 20.
It is difficult then for them to seriously consider the many contradictions and anomalies of the six moon landings.
What may be even more difficult is to consider that the space race was never a true competition between the United States and the former Soviet Union; rather, it was a combined space program run by Nazi scientists and controlled by high-level globalists.
As the Allies closed in on Nazi Germany in the spring of 1945, top American commanders were given orders to leave all the rockets and their plans at the Nazi facility at Nordhausen for the Russians.
However, some commanders unofficially absconded with about a hundred V-2s, along with a large collection of plans, manuals, and other documents.
Here was more evidence of the collusion taking place at the level of the globalists who were already directing activities that would lead to the C old War.
After the war, at NASA's George C Marshall Space Flight Center in Huntsville, Alabama, the Nazi rocket scientists established nearly a carbon copy of their organization at the wartime secret N azi rocket facility at P eenemunde.
According to Linda Hunt, J ames Webb, NASA administrator during the Kennedy years, complained that the N azi scientists were circumventing the system to the extent of attempting to build their own Saturn V rocket in-house at the Marshall Center.
And their positions at Marshall and the Kennedy Space Center at Cape Canaveral, Florida, were similar to those they had held during the war,"" wrote Hunt.
Rudolph, who gained American citizenship after entering the USA with his boss von Braun under the program that was to become P aperclip, was credited with helping to place Americans on the moon.
However, a West German investigation of Rudolph stated there was no factual basis for charging him with war crimes and granted him German citizenship.
AS RECENTLY RELEASED files from behind the Iron Curtain have revealed, many of the scientists in P aperclip as well as some on the M anhattan P roject indeed were spying for the S oviet U nion.
Some spied for pay, some for ideology, but all were manipulated by intelligence chiefs far above them.
J oseph P Farrell, who holds a doctorate degree in patristics (the study of early Christian writers and their work) from the U niversity of Oxford, also has researched ancient history and physics, to include the space program.
This idea is somewhat supported by the fact that the space programs of R ussia and America moved along different paths.
At the start, the Russians proved more capable of attaining space flight than the Americans.
Under the leadership of their brilliant engineer Sergei Korolev, the Russians produced giant heavy-lift rockets while their American counterparts were busy developing the internal technology for guidance and control.
Colonel Yuri Gagarin, and return him safely • to place a live animal, the dog Laika , and Valentina Tereshkova, the first woman into orbit • to land unmanned vehicles on the moon • to conduct an extravehicular ""space walk"" by cosmonauts • to place nuclear warheads on Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles Both nations used captured Nazi V-2 rockets to begin their space programs.
A common joke in the 1950s involved an argument between a Russian and an American.
Yet, the evidence indicates that the American rocl<et scientists were indeed placed into a holding pattern while their S oviet counterparts caught up with their technology.
Winterstein S, a retired United States Army lieutenant colonel and one of the rocket engineers on NASA's Apollo team, noted in his 2002 book Gestapo USA, 'The space history of this country reveals that during the 1950s, the von B raun team had developed a multistage rocket by adding solid propellant rocket stages to a Redstone rocket as booster.
In 1956, such a rocket with two solid stages made successful highspeed rocket reentry tests with model warheads covered with ablative heat protection.
With three solid stages, such a rocket could have placed a satellite into orbit more than a year before the United States was defeated by Sputnik.
However, and almost unbelievably, the von Braun team was given direct orders from Washington to stop further development.
It has been argued that a primary incentive of the German scientists was the sheer desire to continue their work.
However, in some cases, such as that of von Braun, the connection between the work and the Nazis was close and continuous.
Von Braun, the son of a wellconnected Prussian minister who founded the German Savings Bank, was brought into Germany's rocket program by Luftwaffe general Walter Dornberger, who, although charged as a war criminal for the rocket attacks on London and Antwerp, was never brought to trial.
S . space program, was found to have been a N azi P arty member, a member of the SS with the rank of major, a friend to SS Reichsfuehrer Heinrich Himmler, and, according to Linda H unt, was accused by survivors of the rocket factories at M ittlewerk and P eenemunde of at least once ordering the execution of slave laborers.
According to documents obtained by Hunt, in 1942 Debus turned a colleague over to the Gestapo for making anti-Hitler remarks.
The Soviet experts and the Germans worked side by side in the same factory, but in separate areas.
Information was passed between these teams without the Germans ever meeting their Soviet counterparts.
In 1945, Lieutenant Walter J essel was assigned to investigate how much trust to give the scientists before bringing them to America.
Secret codicils within the 1945 Yalta Agreement between Roosevelt, Churchill, and Stalin allowed for the partitioning of E urope between the Allied powers.
Wilhelm Voss, the former head of the S koda M unitions Works in P ilsen, had handled much of the material for Kammler's Kammlerstab Special Projects Group.
In May 1945, when elements of the American Army arrived in the Czech city of Pilsen, Voss attempted to hand over a truckload of Kammlerstab documents but was told by the commanding United States officer that he was under orders to give everything to the Russians.
While entire G erman divisions were trying desperately to surrender to the Western Allies, it is well known thatPatton's Third Army had reached the outskirts of Berlin before being ordered back a hundred miles to await the arrival of the R ussians, who were required to fight desperately for every block of the city.
Such a withdrawal is clear evidence of the deals being made at the highest levels.
As has been noted, there was communication between the two groups of N azi scientists even though they were half a world away from each other.
This could have been facilitated by the interconnected business and banking interests already described.
As detailed in the section ""Communism versus National Socialism"" the same Western bankers and financiers who funded Hitler's National Socialism also supported Communism in Russia.
The United States federal government's leniency toward communism has been well documented, beginning with President Franklin D Roosevelt, who began his career as a Wall Street attorney specializing in corporate law.
Roosevelt echoed his Wall Street cronies' warm regard for both Stalin and communism.
S . government was rife with globalist agents conveying secrets back to Russia.
Donovan's personal assistant, Duncan Chaplin Lee, was a spy,"" Fleming wrote.
Another possible crossing point for aerospace information may have been the British Interplanetary Society , according to Bennett and Percy.
While the BIS was reportedly created in September 1945 by combining several existing organizations interested in the future of space exploration, itwas not officially inaugurated until December of that year.
At that time, Wernher von B raun, the man behind the V-2 rockets, was named as an honorary fellow.
Arthur C Clarke, an early member of the BIS, claimed the society had been in existence long before the war and was merely in ""suspended animation"" from 1939 to 1945.
Their insinuation is that valuable rocket technology information was passed along via the BIS, possibly with the approval of von Braun.
P resident E isenhower, aware of the American public's concern that the S oviets might be winning the space race, ordered a Manhattan Project approach to the problem.
This mandate resulted in a structure that became compartmentalized and shrouded with secrecy.
All relevant information was on a strictly ""need to know"" basis, controlled by members of the self-styled globalist elite, the plutocrats who owned the emerging multinational corporations.
To fully understand how this control over parallel space programs worked, one must look past the Eisenhower administration and study the National Security Act of 1947.
On September 15 of that year— only three months after pilot Kenneth Arnold saw flying discs over Mount Rainier, and just two months after something crashed near Roswell, New Mexico— President Harry S Truman signed into law the National Security Act of 1947, which, among other things, created the National Security Council and the Air Force as a separate branch of service, united the military branches under a Department of Defense, and created America's first peacetime civilian intelligence organization, the Central Intelligence Agency.
An important example of the tight inner government control by secret society members may be found in the NSC, which has come to dominate United States policy decisions, including the use of armed force.
The council principals are the president, vice president, and secretaries of state and defense, positions predominantly held throughout the later twentieth century by members of the globalist societies, the Council on Foreign Relations, or the Trilateral Commission.
The NSC staff is directed by the president's national security adviser.
To coordinate covert operations, the NSC created the 5412 Committee, also called the Special Group, which has changed names several times to avoid public exposure.
Within tliis organization— wliicli included sucli familiar names as Nelson Rockefeller, Robert McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, Gordon Gray, and Allen Dulles— was a subcommittee dealing with science and technology.
It is here that the connection between the corporate and financial world and government-held technological secrets may be found.
Here is centered control over rocketry, space, alternative energy sources, and even UFOs.
The film contained eight pages of what appeared to be official United States government documents stamped TOP SECRET/MAJ IC EYES ONLY and dated November 18, 1952.
Also, ""four small human-like beings had apparently ejected from the craft "" were found dead about two miles east of the wreckage site.
Later, when the weather balloon story became discredited, the story was changed to a Mogul balloon, used to monitor the upper atmosphere for S oviet A-bomb testing, though why such a monitoring device would be launched from New Mexico was never explained.
The ""briefing"" papers ended by stating, ""Implications for the National Security are of continuing importance in that the motives and ultimate intentions of these visitors remain completely unknown.
In addition, a significant upsurge in the surveillance activity of these craft beginning in May and continuing through the autumn of has caused considerable concern that new developments may be imminent.
Debunkers claimed to have found all sorts of discrepancies— from misspellings to identical signatures.
However, no one has been able to definitively disprove all the MJ -12 documents as fakes and, in fact, there is much evidence to indicate their authenticity.
Wood, who managed research and development at McDonnell Douglas for forty-three years, found that the typeface and style of the SOM 1-01 manual matched that of United States government printing presses in use during the 1950s.
If the information in the MJ -12 documents is proven correct, it is strong evidence that certain persons within the U nited States had access to remarkable technology, both taken at R oswell and similar to that described as being in N azi hands toward the end of the war.
A cursory look at the men identified as the original MJ -12 group, as well as their corporate and intelligence connections, makes clear the potential for high-level control over exotic technologygroundbreaking technology that could upset the monopolies over energy, transportation, and communications held by the wealthy globalists who financed Hitler.
After serving as the third director of Central Intelligence Group, he became the first director of the CIA upon its formation in September 1947, obviously a good choice for a topsecret group like MJ -12.
Vannevar Bush, an eminent American scientist, who in 1941 organized the National Defense Research Council, and in 1943 the Office of Scientific Research and Development that led to tine production of the first atomic bomb.
Bush was anotlier prime candidate for a high-level group dealing with space.
He also was a close ft'iend to Averell Harriman, the United States ambassador to tine Soviet Union, who had ownership in Union Banking Corporation along with Prescott Bush.
In 1949, the United States Intelligence Board asked Bush to study ways of combining intelligence from all agencies.
Bush's plan was initiated by America's first secretary of defense, J ames V Forrestal, who also is listed as an MJ -12 member.
Bush joined the Massachusetts Institute of Technology as a professor in 1919, and in 1936 was awarded a major grant by the Rockefeller Foundation.
Bush also served on the board of directors of the Metals and Controls Corporation, which in 1959 merged with Texas Instruments to become the first United States governmentapproved fabricator of uranium rods.
Bush also was a presence in the corporate world of pharmaceuticals, eventually becoming chairman of the board of M erck and C ompany, one of the world's most powerful drug companies.
Merck has been among the leaders in researching the human genome, the DNA structure that forms cells into humans.
Bush also was connected to the Carnegie wealth, serving as president of the Carnegie Institute from 1935 to 1955.
After the war, he returned to Read and Company and by 1937 was named president.
This was at a time when Dillon and Read were the most profitable of all Wall Street syndicate managers handling German industrial issues in the United States capital market.
In 1957, Fortune magazine named Clarence Dillon as one of the wealthiest men in America, with a fortune estimated to have been between $150 and $200 million.
M ilitary G overnment C artel U nit who tried to break up the Nazi corporate syndicates at the end of the war, was blocked in his efforts by Brigadier General William H Draper, who along with Forrestal was an officer of Dillon and Read.
Farben with 91. percent ownership by the brother-in-law of Farben chairman Hermann Schmitz.
Forrestal became secretary of defense inj uly 1947— the time of the Roswell incident— but resigned in March 1949, a month before he reportedly committed suicide atBethesda Naval Hospital.
General Walter Bedell Smith, who had been Eisenhower's chief of staff and former United States ambassador to Moscow, replacing Averell Harriman.
In 1950, Smith replaced Admiral Hillenkoetter as Director of Central Intelligence.
Most intriguing was Smith's close relationship as friend and business partner with Prince Bern-hard of the Netherlands, the former SS officer who, with Smith's help, founded the secretive Bilderberg Group.
This was the day the R oswell Air B ase press release regarding the recovery of a flying saucer was issued.
On September 23, 1945, just as the air force became a separate service.
General Hoyt S Vandenberg, a West Point graduate and military man, who served as United States Air Force chief of staff and Director of Central Intelligence.
As a named MJ -12 member, Vanderberg did not appear to have solid Wall Street connections.
However, he was a close relative to the powerful United States senator Arthur Vandenberg, who served as president pro tempore of the Senate, third in line of succession to the presidency, and chaired the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations.
Senator Vandenberg also participated in the creation of the U nited N ations.
In J anuary 1945 the senator made headlines by announcing his conversion from isolationism to internationalism.
As such, he orchestrated bipartisan support for the Truman Doctrine and the Marshall Plan.
In the early 1950s, it was General Vandenberg who ordered the destruction of the original Project Sign Air Force report stating that UFOs were real.
Detlev Bronk, a physiologist and biophysicistwith international credentials, who chaired tine National Research Council and was a member of the medical advisory board of tine Atomic Energy Commission.
From 1953 until 1968, he was president of the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, during which time he was given a $600,000 mansion.
Bronk maintained a long correspondence with Vannevar Bush and also was on the Scientific Advisory Committee of the Brookhaven National Laboratory along with Dr.
J erome Hunsaker, an aircraft designer, who chaired the departments of mechanical and aeronautical engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics.
It should be noted that less than three months after the 1984 death of Dr.
M any feel H unsacker's death may have signaled to someone in the official world that it was now permissible to leak the MJ -12 Eisenhower briefing document.
Sidney W Souers, a retired rear admiral who in 1946 became the first Director of Central Intelligence, appointed by President Truman.
He was executive secretary to the National Security Council in 1947 and remained a special consultant on security matters for a time after leaving that post.
Between 1920 and his death in 1973, Souers held executive positions in the Mortgage and Securities Company of New Orleans, FirstJ oint Stock Land Bank, the Canal Bank and Trust Company of New Orleans, the Aviation Company, and the General American Life Insurance Company.
Reynolds Tobacco Company fortune, who was assistant secretary of the army in 1947, became secretary of the army in 1949, and a year later was named a special assistant on national security affairs to President Truman.
Gray was named director of the government's Psychological Strategy Board , established in 1951 to undertake disinformation and psychological warfare against enemies.
During his stint on the PSB, Gray's chief consultant was Henry Kissinger, who was also a paid consultant to the Rockefellers.
Gray directed a psychological strategy study of UFOs, consulted by CIA director Walter B Smith.
Gray was also a member of the Council on Foreign Relations from the Truman through the Ford administrations.
He also was chairman of the board forthe communications companies Piedmont Publishing Company, Triangle Broadcasting Company, and Summit Communications.
Donald Menzel, a director of the Harvard College Observatory, a respected astronomer who led a double life.
However, physicist Stanton Friedman, after studying Menzel's unpublished biography and interviewing his widow, discovered that M enzel had been a covert consultant for both the C lA and the N SA with a top-secret ultra security clearance.
Menzel also worked closely with the State Department, especially on Latin American affairs.
J ust before the outbreak of World War II, Menzel unsuccessfully tried to interest the R ockefeller F oundation and H oward H ughes in funding a highaltitude observatory at B oulder, Colorado.
In Menzel we find a man who, while publicly known simply as a notable astronomer, had intriguing and high-level intelligence connections.
He also served as director of the Antiaircraft and Guided Missile Branch of the army's Artillery School as well as commanding general of the Sandia Atomic Energy Commission facility in Albuquerque, New Mexico, from J uly 1947 to February 1951.
His responsibilities included security atthe White Sands Proving Ground.
Lloyd V Berkner, who worked under Vannevar Bush as executive secretary of the J oint Research and Development Board in 1946 and headed a study that resulted in the creation of the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group.
Robertson, which deflected public attention away from UFOs by concluding that they did not constitute any direct threat to national security.
Funding for the AU I came from such luminary institutions as C ornell, H arvard, J ohns H opkins, M IT, and Yale.
One of the institutions closely connected to the AUI is Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island, long-rumored to be involved with both defense weaponry and UFOs.
These distinguished men appeared to have two things in common— they were all connected to the highest levels of the national security as well as American corporate business.
They were also all dead at the time the MJ -12 papers surfaced, thus unable to answer any questions about their role, if any, in such a group.
J ohnson, who in 1954 became the youngest Senate majority leader in United States history, was in a position to serve those in both the military and the corporations.
In 2007, President George W Bush echoed J ohnson's remarks by calling for new space missions and the weaponization of space.
ADDING TO J OHNSON'S puzzling statement about ""the masters of infinity"" are facts indicating an astounding connection between the welldocumented occultism of the Nazis, the NASA space program, and the S oviet space program.
In 1992, H oagland briefed UN officials on the mathematical and geometric linkage connecting the sitting of ""Cydonia""on Mars, the location of the Martian ""Pyramids""and ""Face, ""with the Egyptian location of the pyramids and sphinx on Earth.
According to Hoagland, these crosscorrelated public records now provide firm evidence of an astonishing, official link between NASA's supposedly strictly ""scientific"" missions and millennia-old occult beliefs.
In fact, the original official NASA Apollo Lunar Program logo of the 1960s clearly depicted the ""belt"" in the constellation of Orion, long thought to represent Osiris, a central figure in Egyptian celestial mythology.
H e concluded that the extraordinarily complex and expensive mission-planning for the entire Apollo Lunar Program, far from being merely ""represented"" by this ""interesting"" Egyptian mythological connection, was in fact completely controlled by, and designed around, this crucial Orion symbolism.
In other words, someone with enough authority to set the launch date and time for an Apollo space mission, as well as many others, was guided by the astrological alignment of the stars and planets rather than an objective scientific basis.
Mary Ann Weaver, a former Boeing engineer and computer professional, was intrigued by the data produced by Hoagland and his associate Michael Bara.
As a former researcher with the antenna division of Boeing, she was experienced in 3-D computer modeling, computational analysis, and developing equations and analytic methods for problem-solving.
Weaver concluded that the star alignments for the mission activities and launches did not happen by accident. ""hey must happen by design,"" she stated.
F uithermore, it is improbable tliat tine frequency of tliese stellar alignments are tied to weather or lighting conditions, because of the fact that they occur for a variety of mission events, even those that do not require specific lighting or weather conditions,"" she concluded.
Michael Bara pointed to a disturbing similarity with Russian space flights.
He noticed that the launch of the first module for the new International Space Station was launched from the Baikonur Cosmodrome located in Kazakhstan, now an independent nation that borders Russia and the Caspian Sea, and was apparently designed to coincide with a number of the significant celestial alignments already found in NASA's long-established ritual pattern.
This would indicate some connection between the former S oviet space program and NASA, perhaps through the Nazi scientists working in both.
NASA, citing a number of minor technical considerations, refused the Russian request and the launch went off as originally scheduled and was witnessed by NASA administrator Dan Goldin.
Considering thatthe program was already a year behind schedule, another minor delay would not, despite NASA protestations to the contrary, have led to a significant problem.
The point is that someone high enough in power in the United States government— and, apparently, in Russia— to be able to order the dates and times of space missions does believe in such things.
President] ohn F Kennedy may have been aware of a parallel space program and decided to make it public policy.
On November 12, 1963, ten days before his assassination, he instructed NASA administrator] ames Webb to develop a program of ""joint space and lunar exploration"" with the Soviet Union.
This proposal, which may startle Americans today, was verified by Sergei Khruschev, the eldest son of the former Russian premier, in 1997.
Strong evidence suggests they may well be the subject of this book— those global National Socialists and their minions, who have a goal of controlling the entire world.
In modern warfare, there is also the struggle for control over the hearts and minds of whole populations, whether by psychological or chemical means.
NAZI MIND CONTROL NAZI INVESTIGATIONS IN TO EXOTIC SCIENCES DID NOT END WITH flight and weapons technology.
S ince prior to the twentieth century, G ermans had delved into psychology and psychiatry with an eye toward their application to warfare, even to the extent of exploring occult practices.
As well documented in a number of books, articles, and videos, there was a very definite and underlying occult aspect to National Socialism.
As elucidated in Rule by Secrecy, Unholy Alliance, The Occult and the Third Reich, The Spear of Destiny, and other works.
World War II was largely the result of infighting between secret occult societies composed of wealthy businessmen on both sides of the Atlantic.
Eventually the tensions between these groups provoked open warfare that consumed the entire world.
Sir Winston Churchill, ""was insistent that the occultism of the N azi P arty should not under any circumstances be revealed to the general public,"" stated author Trevor Ravenscroft, who wrote that he worked closely with Dr.
This remarkable statement was corroborated by Airey Neave, one of the Nuremberg prosecutors, who said the occult aspect of the Nazis was ruled inadmissible because the tribunal thought that such beliefs, so contrary to Western public rationalism, might allow Nazi leaders to go free by pleading insanity.
Even Hitler acknowledged that Nazi ideology ventured into a spiritual realm, when he stated, ""Anyone who interprets National Socialism merely as a political movement knows almost nothing about it.
To attempt this creation, the Nazis turned to occultists such as, • Baron Rudolf Freiherr von Sebottendorff • J org Lanz von Liebenfels • Guido von List • Dietrich Eckart • Karl Haushofer, ...all of whom had immersed themselves in the philosophies of the Theosophical Society.
Theosophy, derived from the G reek theos and sophia , was an attempt to blend Christianity with Cabalistic and Eastern mysticism.
One tenet of theosophy was that ""Great Masters,"" sometimes called the ""Great White Brotherhood,"" are secretly directing humankind's evolution.
Rudolf Steiner's Anthroposophical Society, and the Order of the Golden Dawn.
Such groups were, ""concerned with raising their consciousness by means of rituals to an awareness of evil and nonhuman Intelligences in the Universe and with achieving a means of communication with these Intelligences.
And the Master-Adept of this circle was Dietrich Eckart [the man Hitler called ""spiritual founder of National Socialism""],"" noted Ravenscroft.
As previously mentioned, the deeply occulted Germanenorden contrived the Thule Society as a cover organization.
In light of the occultism apparent in modern space missions mentioned earlier, recall that General Karl H aushofer, who used astrology to provoke the strange flight of R udolf H ess to E ngland, was a member of the mysterious Vril, an occult society that practiced telepathy and telekinesis.
It is surmised that it was perhaps through such occult practices that psychic contact was made with nonhuman intelligences, thus providing the Nazis with the concepts that led to their futuristic technology.
Although rumors have floated about for years that the Nazis captured a UFO, no credible evidence has ever been produced.
Some of those who have studied this issue have come to suspect that any such knowledge of nonhuman technology may instead have come through Nazi occultists using psychic means similar to remote viewing, a psychic ability studied, taught, and used operationally by the United States Army, the CIA, and the National Security Agency beginning in the early 1970s.
R emote viewing, known in parapsychological terms as clairvoyance, is the ability to discern persons, places, and things at a distance by means other than the normal five senses.
According to former United States military intelligence agent Lyn Buchanan, who atone time trained the United States Army's remote viewers, the N azis formed a unit of psychics and called it Doktor G ruenbaum.
This name was for the psychic project, not a person, although apparently a G erman psychic who assumed the name G ruenbaum may have lived in the United States after the war.
The name G ruenbaum, or green tree, apparently was a reference to the green-tree symbol in the Cabala, which relates to the ""tree of knowledge"" in the Garden of Eden.
Interestingly enough, it was reported that the Nazi Doktor Gruenbaum unit was connected to a broader program called Majik.
This name has prompted comparisons to America's original UFOsecrecy group, Majic Twelve.
Since this ability is intuitive and not always crystal-clear, German viewers may have perceived the buildup of Soviet forces but been unable to foresee the end resultof Barbarossa— the eventual defeat of Germany.
Whether or not the N azis used psychic mental abilities to acquire exotic technology, it is beyond question that the study of the human mind began in earnest in Germany, with far-reaching consequences.
Behind the horrors of the Nazi regime rested a foundation of Europe an study of the human mind.
J ustification of euthanasia and extermination programs was provided by some of Germany's most learned men.
It is the overlooked yet utterly central piece of the puzzle,"" wrote Dr.
Thomas Roeder and his coauthors Volker Kubillus and Anthony Bur-well in their 1995 book Psychiatrists— the Men Behind Hitler.
The result was a strange, incongruous marriage of Darwin's observations of the animal world with Malthus's emotional assumptions about the uncontrollable population growth and social solutions to preserve the British aristocracy,"" noted Roeder, Kubillus, and Burwell.
They added that social Darwinism was perhaps the Nazis' most central theoretical foundation.
F rom the viewpoint that certain people are more evolved and thus more competent to judge others came the profession of psychiatry.
The term itself came from the G reek psyche, or soul, and iatros, or doctor.
However, these doctors of the soul quickly became preoccupied with more material matters— the physical brain and how to manipulate or destroy it.
In 1871, 'The Psychical Degeneration of the F rench P eople"" was published, a paper that left the impression that simply being F rench constituted a mental illness.
At the time of World War I, the attempt to bring respectability to the emerging psychiatric profession resulted in a certain bonding between psychiatry and the aristocratic German government.
Based on the idea that antiwar behavior was a chemo-biological dysfunction, the ""Kaufmann therapy"" consisted of applied electrical shocks, actually more of a disciplinary mea sure than true medical therapy.
The army was delighted that recalcitrant troops, following electroshock, quickly agreed to return to service.
Psychiatry continued to grow in power even as its agenda continued to widen.
Such arrogance of belief soon led to the creation of various psychiatric organizations, such as the Gesellschaftfur Rassenhygiene, or Society for Racial Hygiene, which only served to further the ambitions of the profession.
Since no one has yet found a significant and general ""cure"" for insanity, psychiatrists turned to the dubious concept of prevention.
This came to be known as ""mental hygiene,"" a bland term for the prevention of mental illness, whatever form that might take.
In the Germany of the 1930s, the rush to isolate and ""cure"" mental defectives quickly was interpreted to include malcontents and dissidents opposed to the Nazi regime.
This openended concept resulted in the N azi Sterilization Act, which went into effect in J uly 1933, just six months after H itier's ascension to power.
One of the leading and articulate authorities behind the rationale for this act was Dr.
It was well received by those present as many Americans, especially among the globalists, had come to embrace the racist and elitist views of the German philosophers.
Nazi interest in science and psychological warfare was paralleled by their concern with eugenics, the scientific study of selective breeding to improve the human population.
The term ""eugenics"" was coined in the late 1800s by Francis Galton, a British psychologist and halfcousin of Darwin's, who wanted to extend the theory of natural selection into deliberate social engineering.
These R ockefeller-funded institutions ensured their early entry into the fields of medicine, pharmaceuticals, and education.
The R ockefellers were also interested in the eugenics movement, a program of scientifically applied genetic selection to maintain and improve their ideal for human characteristics, which included birth and population control.
It seems the wealthy elite of America were as concerned with bloodlines as the Nazis.
By 1924, Kraepelin's research institute, rescued from bankruptcy by Loeb's money, had become incorporated into the prestigious Kaiser Wilhelm Institute, and the growing Nazi leadership was paying attention to its science.
Initially, they went for the most defenseless of the German population— the children.
On J uly 14, 1933, only six months after H itier was named chancellor of the R eich, the Law for the P revention of Genetically Diseased Children was passed.
A leading proponent for this legislation was Ernst Rudin, by then director of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute.
The N azi euthanasia program was not carried out in the open but instead by secret decrees, as H itIer steadfastly refused to seek a legal ruling, knowing that such a program was illegal under existing laws.
It is estimated that more than 400,000 people were sterilized as ""life unworthy of life"" between 1934 and 1945.
One revealing anecdote involving this medical-driven policy was the release in 1933 of a mental patient who had been imprisoned as a violence-prone hardened criminal, a ""dangerous lunatic,"" according to a local official.
Werner Heyde, however, pronounced TheodorEicke fit for discharge, and Eicke was soon named the first commandant of Dachau concentration camp.
In 1934, E icker was promoted to inspector general and chief of all concentration camps.
E icke, whose influence and spirit within the SS was ""second only to that of Himmler,"" died in 1943, when his plane was shot down behind Russian lines.
H eyde, whose recommendation released E icke from prison, went on to become the medical director of the infamous Nazi T4 euthanasia program begun in 1940.
The approved method of killing ordered by Hitler, acting on the advice of Dr.
In a prototype of the Nazi death camps, a fake shower room, complete with benches, was constructed and used to gas the first victims.
Great pains were taken to employ what Robert] ay Lifton called ""bureaucratic mystification,"" a snarl of red tape and bureaucracy so convoluted that the victims, their families, and even those working within the system did not realize the full extent of the euthanasia program.
Interestingly enough, in 1941 Hitler ordered the official T4 euthanasia program halted for no recorded reason.
Some have argued that Hitler may have developed pangs of conscience, while others believe that as more and more of the German population became aware of the killing, cries of objection could have caused Hitler a political problem.
Authors Roeder, Kubillus, and Burwell argued that the program was stopped simply because it had achieved its original quota of victims.
But that did not mean that a new euthanasia program wasn't waiting to begin,"" they wrote.
Starting in April 1941, the now-experienced doctors of T4 began visiting the Nazi concentration camps and soon were practicing their newest euthanasia program in earnest— the Endlosung, or final solution.
DURING THE WAR , as today, both medical doctors and psychiatrists were quite vulnerable to peer pressure as well as the goodwill of the state, which provided the credentials and certificates necessary for their practice.
S o it seemed natural that mind manipulation through psychiatry and psychology was soon joined by a companion therapy— drugs.
German psychiatrists were merely following the lead of medical doctors, who in the twentieth century increasingly moved away from the tradition of homeopathy, which involved using minimal doses of drugs as therapy, to allopathy, the straightforward treatment of disease with drugs.
What therapy could not accomplish through psychological means might be accomplished through drugs.
This trend to increase the use of prescription drugs set the stage for the rise of the giant pharmaceutical corporations during the twentieth century.
During the time of the Opium Wars of the late 1800s, any type of drug was used for profit.
For example, in 1898, the German Bayer Company began mass production of heroin and used that name to market the new remedy.
Bayer described heroin as a non-addictive panacea for adult ailments and infant respiratory diseases.
In the late 1800s, Bayer also promoted cocaine, which until the 1920s was an ingredient in the soft drink Coca-Cola.
But as more easily produced petrochemical drugs made their debut, they prompted the attention of the major global corporations.
According to the center's literature, it has ""long been a leader in cancer surgery, chemotherapy, and radiotherapy.
Farben and Standard Oil, represented Rockefeller interests with the firm of Rohm and Haas, still one of the world's largest suppliers of specialty chemicals.
Current company literature states, ""From maintaining the freshness in fruits and vegetables to purifying antibiotics, we help customers create products that enhance the way of life for people around the world.
According to M ullins, the American College of Surgeons maintained a monopolistic control of United States hospitals through its Hospital Survey Committee, with members Winthrop Aldrich and David McAlpine Pyle representing the Rockefellers.
In 1909, J ohn D Rockefeller Sr. extended his reach into the southern states by a $1 million donation to establish the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission, dedicated to eradicating hookworm disease. ""espite its philanthropic goals, the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission required financial contributions from each of the eleven southern states in which it operated, resulting in the creation of state departments of health in those states and opening up important new spheres of influence for their Drug Trust,"" wrote Mullins.
The physician who served as director of the Rockefeller Sanitary Commission during World War I was Dr.
Olin West, a primary figure in the creation of the Tennessee State Department of Health.
West went on to become a top executive for forty years at the American M edical Association.
S ., as well as many small institutions in every state, received aid from the Board.
When the Rockefeller Syndicate began its takeover of our medical profession in 1910, our citizens went into a sharp decline.
Mullins pointed to Britain's Wellcome Trust as one of the world's largest medical research charities.
The knighted Sir Oliver S Franks, described as ""one of the founders of the postwar world, ""directed the Wellcome Trust as well as serving as British ambassador to the United States from 1948 to 1952.
H e was a director of the R ockefeller F oundation and its principal representative in E ngland.
ANOTHER ASPECT OF Nazi medical science employed in America involves the toxic chemical sodium fluoride.
The controversy over the fluoridation of municipal water supplies has raged since the 1950s and continues today.
Through a chemical called cryolite the material is converted into aluminum.
A by-product of this process is sodium fluoride, which for many years was used as a rat poison.
According to the Alzheimer Association, this brain-destroying disease is the seventh leading cause of death in America today.
Although aluminum has been associated with Alzheimer's, such claims have been disputed.
Some have claimed that Alzheimer's disease is more common in areas where the aluminum content in the water supply is highest, but the method and results of these studies have been questioned.
B ut it is true that, in 1986, the Reagan administration's Environmental Protection Agency raised the ""safe"" level of sodium fluoride in public water supplies from 2 parts per million gallons to 4 parts, even though one part per million has been shown to impair neurological efficiency.
In October 2007, despite ""heated hearings"" in 2003, the Los Angelesbased Metropolitan Water District began fluoridating the drinking water of 18 million Southern Californians in six counties, including San Diego.
According to a report by the E nvironmental Working G roup , a Washington-based, nonprofit organization whose mission is to ""protect public health and the environment,"" the plan to fluoridate water in Southern California, ""will put 14. percent of children under one year old, and 12. percent of children one to two years old, over the recommended fluoride exposure limits published by the N ational Academy of S ciences' Institute of Medicine and endorsed by the American Dental Association.
Bill Walker, EWG's vice president for the West Coast, pointed to recent studies that call into question claims that fluoridation is safe.
That finding was echoed by a December 2006 study published in the prestigious, peer-reviewed journal The Lancet, which identified fluoride as an ""emerging"" neurotoxin; and a 2006 peer-reviewed study at Harvard strongly supported concerns that fluoridated water is linked to osteo-sarcoma, an often-fatal form of bone cancer, in boys.
The H arvard study found a five-fold increase in bone cancer among teenage boys who drank fluoridated water from ages six through eight, compared to those drinking non-fluoridated water.
Brain studies reported by the Alzheimer's Society in England show that aluminum accumulates in nerve cells that are particularly vulnerable to Alzheimer's disease, although not all persons exposed to aluminum develop Alzheimer's.
Although many studies on animals and on isolated cells have shown that aluminum has toxic effects on the nervous system, it is claimed thatthe doses of aluminum used were much higher than those occurring naturally in tissues.
This obviously raises the question of how much fluoride/aluminum the public is ingesting from nonnatural sources, such as the fluoridation of drinking water.
By the mid-1990s, studies were indicating a link between Alzheimer's and aluminum.
But just as the debate over the link between cigarettes and cancer lasted decades, due to the obstructionist studies funded by the tobacco industry, the controversy over aluminum— and sodium fluoride— continues today.
Numerous Web sites and periodicals have carried the accusation that sodium fluoride was placed in the drinking water of N azi concentration camps to l<eep inmates pacified and susceptible to external control.
A Christian Science Monitor survey in 1954 showed that seventy-nine of the eighty-one Nobel Prize winners in chemistry, medicine, and physiology declined to endorse water fluoridation.
Yet, today, two-thirds of all municipal water and most bottled water in the United States contain sodium fluoride, which has long been used as a rat poison.
M ost people do not realize that fluoride is a key ingredient in Prozac and many other psychotropic drugs.
More than 21 million prescriptions for fluoxetine were filled in the United States in 2006, making it one of the most prescribed antidepressants.
Every United States Public Health Service surgeon general from the 1950s to this day has supported the introduction of this poison into America's water supply, even though fluoride, this poisonous waste product of aluminum manufacture, accumulates in the human body and has been shown to affect tooth decay only in children under twelve years of age.
It is quite ironic that Prozac, which is 94 percent fluoride and given to hyperactive children, requires a prescription from a licensed physician while the same substance can be placed in our drinking water by dealers who have no medical training, no license to dispense medications, and no idea to whom they are administering this corrosive, toxic, and impairing substance.
In 1946, Oscar E wing, a Wall Street attorney and former counsel to the Aluminum Company of America , was appointed by President Harry S Truman to head the Federal Security Agency, which placed Ewing in charge of not only the United States Public Health Service but also the S ocial S ecurity Administration and the Office of E ducation.
Miller, a physician turned Republican politician, said that E wing had been placed in his position and highly paid by the Rockefeller syndicate to promote fluoridation.
Water fluoridation is the most important aspect of the Cold War that is being waged on us— chemically— from within, by the R ockefeller-S oviet axis.
It serves to blunt the intelligence of a people in a manner that no other dope can.
This committee did no research or investigation on the poisonous effects of water fluoridation.
P ubIic H ealth Service] on the order of boss Oscar Ewing, who had been 'rewarded' with $750,000 by fluoride waste producer.
He then developed the 'public spirit' that impelled him to take a $17,500 job as Federal Security Administrator.
It is interesting to note that West Germany banned the use of fluorides in 1971, a time when it was still heavily occupied by Allied soldiers.
BUT THE SCIENTIFIC minds encouraged by globalist funding were not content with drugs to merely pacify a population.
The infusion of N azi mind-control specialists within the fledgling C lA resulted in P roject M KU LTR A , a code name for mind-control research that continued until the late 1960s, when it was said to have been discontinued.
Project MKULTR A was created in 1953 by CIA officer Richard Helms, a good friend to CIA psychiatrist Dr.
Dulles reportedly was intrigued by reports of mind-control techniques allegedly conducted by Soviet, Chinese, and North Koreans on United States prisoners during the Korean War.
Published accounts show this project not only used drugs to manipulate a person's personality, but also electronic signals to alter brain functioning.
According to a 1975 internal CIA document, ""MKULTR A was a group of projects, most of which dealt with drug or counter-drug research and development.
The Director of C entral Intelligence and the Deputy Director of P lans were kept informed on the program via annual briefings by Chief Technical Services Division or his deputy.
The objectives were behavioral control, behavior anomaly production, and countermeasures for opposition application of similar substances.
Work was performed at United States industrial, academic, and governmental research facilities.
THE CIA HAS even admitted that its drug testing on college campuses resulted in the ""drug revolution"" of the 1960s.
Albert Hofmann, working for Sandoz Laboratories in Basel, accidentally absorbed through his fingertips a chemical derived from the cereal fungus ergot.
He proceeded to experience a semiconscious delirium complete with kaleidoscopic colors and visions.
As this was the twenty-fifth compound of lysergic acid diethylamide, synthetically produced by Sandoz, Hofmann named itLSD-25.
P Morgan J operative and head of the Office of Strategic Services , which conducted irregular and unorthodox warfare, began searching for a drug that would loosen the tongues of captured spies and enemy soldiers.
Donovan called together a group of psychiatrists, who tested numerous drugs, including alcohol, barbiturates, and even caffeine.
Plant extracts such as peyote, scopolamine, and even marijuana were also tested.
In 1947, the old OSS was superseded by the newly created CIA, within which drug experimentation continued, though with mixed results.
Liaisons were formed between academics in universities, police departments, criminology laboratories, doctors, psychiatrists, and even hypnotists.
Secret CIA funding was provided and experiments were not limited to laboratory animals.
Like the Nazis before them, they also used sometimes unsuspecting human guinea pigs.
These experiments were carried out in collaboration with hundreds of known Nazi scientists, who had experimented with these same drugs on prisoners in concentration camps.
These scientists were brought into the United States after the war to continue their work.
At first, the agency personnel tested LSD only on themselves, but later decided they would slip LSD into each other's food or drinks without prior notice, to observe the effects.
Timothy Leary, along with Richard Alpert, later known as Ram Dass, conducted a series of experiments with LSD and psilocybin.
Leary had come to Harvard after serving as director of clinical research and psychology atthe Kaiser Foundation Hospital in Oakland, California.
Kaiser, a wealthy industrialist and ship builder who in 1946 began Kaiser Aluminum.
Current partners in the United States include MTV, BET, Univision, Viacom/CBS, and Fox.
It is no wonder that the aluminum waste product fluoride has received such favorable media attention over the years.
Many stories circulated around Harvard concerning LSD parties and undergraduates selling LSDlaced sugar cubes on and off campus.
Leary was fired from the university in 1963, officially because he missed a committee meeting.
Alpert, too, was dismissed, reportedly for violating an agreement not to supply LSD to undergraduates.
This was the first time in the twentieth century that Harvard faculty members had been fired.
Both Leary and Alpert began writing articles chastising Harvard and extolling the virtues of drugs.
As the drug culture grew rapidly in the late 1960s, ""it was widely observed that young people paid little or no attention to dire warnings against the hazards of marijuana-smoking, LSD-using, and other forms of drug use,"" noted the editors of Consumer Reports.
After the major media began to report stridently on the campus drug scene, public interest grew, as did demand, and the campus drug revolution of the 1960s was off and running.
The intelligence community of this nation, which requires a shroud of secrecy in order to operate, has a very sacred trust from the American people.
The CIA's program of human experimentation of the fifties and sixties violated that trust.
It was violated again on the day the bulk of the agency's records were destroyed in 1973.
One certain violation involved the death of a scientist working on mind control.
Frank Olson, a biological and mind-control scientist working for the United States Army at FortDetrick, Maryland, was surreptitiously given an LSD-laced drink by Dr.
Sidney Gottlieb, while attending a conference at Deep Creek Lodge in Maryland.
However, Olson's close friends and family members still believe Olson was murdered to prevent him from speaking out against the MKULTRA program, which he had come to both regret and despise.
RESEARCH BASED ON Nazi pharmaceutical science even spread to more exotic attempts at mind control.
In 2005, at the Eighth Annual Ritual Abuse, Secretive Organizations and Mind Control Conference held atthe Doubletree Hotel in Windsor Locks, Connecticut, one speaker was Carol Rutz, author of A Nation Betrayed.
R utz claimed to be the victim of government abuse and mind-control experiments.
Referring to a woman who described ""eye experiments"" at a residential school where, ""they were trying to change our eye color from brown to blue,"" Rutz stated, 'This particularly caught my attention, since the change of eye color was a pet project of Auschwitz 'Doctor'] osef Mengele, aka Dr.
Another seedy side to this experimentation on unwitting subjects involved a CIA contract agent named George Hunter White, who worked under the auspices of Dr.
White would bring unsuspecting men from local bars to a CIA-financed bordello in San Francisco, where he would give them LSD-spiked drinks and then watch the men have sex with prostitutes from behind a two-way mirror.
S . taxpayers paid for it all, as White would send bills for his ""unorthodox expenses"" to Dr.
White once said of this work, ""I was a very minor missionary, actually a heretic, but I toiled wholeheartedly in the vineyards because it was fun, fun, fun.
Much of the drug experimentation was centered at secret facilities atthe Edgewood Arsenal, located on Chesapeake Bay northeast of Baltimore.
In 1955, thanks to the influx of Nazi chemists, a new drug-testing program was instituted at Edgewood.
They were told they would only suffer temporary discomfort,"" wrote mind-control researcher and author Walter H Bowart.
I am one of the 6,720 enlisted soldiers used at E dgewood in 1955-1975.
I am glad C ongress investigated it in '75 and the army shut the program down— at least they won't do it openly anymore.
I am now forty-nine and totally disabled, I have the body of a seventy-year-old, and the VA says the army didn't do anything to me.
Despite a congressional investigation in the 1970s and a lawsuit by one of the soldier victims, M aster Sergeant] ames Stanley, which went to the United States Supreme Court in 1986, the work at Edgewood never reached the public.
The fact that P aperclip scientists worked at Edgewood at various times between 1947 and 1966 has been kept a closely guarded secret,"" wrote Linda Hunt.
Rahr was deported back to G ermany in 1948 after another scientist, H ans Trurnit, accused him of being a communist.
Other Edgewood scientists included TheodorWagner-J auregg and Friedrich Hoffman.
These men initially studied the Nazi poison gasses, tabun and sarin, the most deadly agents the United States military had ever encountered.
United States soldiers were exposed to tabun and mustard gas in an E dgewood gas chamber reminiscent of those in the Nazi death camps.
F riedrich H offmann, another P aperclip chemist, traveled the world in search of exotic and new psychochemicals.
H e used the U niversity of Delaware's chemistry department as a cover to prevent anyone from connecting him to Edgewood Arsenal.
This subterfuge was easy enough to maintain, because both the department chairman William Mosher and Professor] ames Moore were heavily involved in the MKULTRA program.
SS Brigadefuehrer, or brigadier general, Walter Paul Emil Schreiber, whom one United States Army officer described as ""the prototype of an ardent and convinced N azi who used the party to further his own ambitions,"" worked for more than a decade for the chemical division of the United States Europe an Command.
The Untold Story Behind CIA Experiments with MKULTRA & Germ Warfare, ""Walter S chreiber had been the paymaster for all the doctors working the N azi biochemical warfare programs.
A year later, Schreiber, fearing that the media might discover his background, obtained a visa and found a job in Argentina, where his daughter was living.
Hunt may not have noticed the interconnectedness of the personalities and business interests in both Germany and America before, during, and just after the war.
But one person who did notice thatfunny business was taking place within the CIA was J ohn K Vance, a graduate of C olumbia U niversity who had served as a military translator at the N uremberg trials.
Vance stumbled upon MKULTRA in the spring of 1963 while working on an inspector general's survey of the CIA's technical services division.
As the result of Vance's discovery and the inspector general's report, the agency began scaling back the project, which was eventually said to have ended in the late 1960s.
The MKULTRA program, which used patients in psychiatric hospitals, and other unwitting subjects, to develop mindcontrol techniques, became public knowledge in 1977, during hearings conducted by a Senate committee on intelligence chaired by Senator Frank Church.
Some of the most distinguished figures in psychiatry participated in MKULTRA, including Dr.
Ewen Cameron, the man whom Allen Dulles sent to study Rudolf Hess and who later served as president of both the American and Canadian Psychiatric Associations as well as the World Psychiatric Association.
Any in-depth study of M KU LTR A shows that the CIA, in addition to seeking a truth serum, also was highly interested in the ability to program individuals to act in accordance with someone else's will.
The 1962 Frank Sinatra film The Manchurian Candidate portrayed a programmed assassin ordered to kill a ranking political figure.
This movie came out at the same time the C lA was actively working on just such a program, thanks in great part to the groundwork laid down years earlier by N azi mindcontrol experts.
It was run by the CIA and designed to control a subject's mind and will to the point where he or she would become an assassin.
To achieve this I was forced to undergo extensive drugging, electroshock, sensory deprivation, hypnosis, partake in pornographic films, act as a prostitute, and much else.
I finally have realized I cannot keep hiding tliat it lias left me only a shell of life to live.
A full accounting of the Nazi-inspired mind-control experiments— whether failures or successes— will never be known, because in 1973, on orders of Helms, Gottlieb destroyed all MKULTRA files before leaving the agency.
BUSINESS AS USUAL WITH THE United States MILITARY-INDUSTRIAL COMPLEX PENETRATED BY unrepentant Nazis and their ideology, the globalists' attention to business and politics remained unabated.
In the war's aftermath, some of the same personalities who helped place Hitler in power came back into play.
McCloy, wartime assistant secretary of war, close friend to Deutsche Bank chairman Dr.
As such, he pardoned more than seventy thousand Nazis accused of war crimes.
One example of M cC loy's magnanimity came after forty-three S S officers, including their leader, ObersturmbannfuehrerJ oachim Peiper, were condemned to death in 1946 for the massacre of more than a one hundred American prisoners near Malmedy, Belgium, during the Battle of the Bulge.
McCloy, the American high commissioner, commuted all the remaining death sentences to life imprisonment.
Once again, hidden from public scrutiny, high United States officials had moved to free convicted Nazis.
According to former United States attorney J ohn Loftus, about three hundred ranking N azi sympathizers from the Belarus region of the Soviet Union were brought to the United States after the war in hopes they could provide intelligence on the motives and abilities of the Soviets.
Loftus found that the OPC had recruited Nazi collaborators to fight against communism.
When it was discovered that their work was ineffectual, these Nazis were allowed to immigrate to the United States, their former activities concealed.
Such men included • former Belarusian president Radislaw Ostrowsky, who was offered immunity from prosecution for war crimes • Franz Kushel, an SS general who commanded the Belarus Brigade and was responsible for the execution of more than forty thousand J ews • Stanislaw Stankievich, who organized the execution of seven thousand] ews • E manuel J asiuk, who, as the wartime mayor of Kletsk, supervised the execution of more than five thousand J ews in just one day.
B oth strowsl<y andjasiul<are buried in a S outh R iver, N ew J ersey, cemetery near a monument to Belarusian war veterans, which is topped by the image of an Iron Cross.
In 1948, soon-to-be CIA director Allen Dulles, who had been on hand in 1921 for the creation of the Council on Foreign Relations, authorized to use false paperwork to maintain the Vatican ""ratlines"" for escaping Nazis.
Within a year, Wisner's Nazis were working for CIA propaganda fronts such as Radio Liberty and the Voice of America.
Dulles had encouraged the choice of Wisner as head of the OPC, which undertook active operations against the Soviet Union as the Cold War developed.
EVERY United States GOVERNMENT administration since the CFR's inception has been packed with council members.
This trend continued through both the Bill Clinton and George W Bush administrations.
EVEN TODAY'S TERRORIST groups may be traced back to the Nazis, which prompts speculation on who is truly behind them.
According to Peter Levenda's Unholy Alliance, Otto Skorzeny, the Nazi commando who may have found Solomon's treasure, made his way to postwar Egypt, where he created an Egyptian ""Gestapo"" staffed almost completely with former SS officers.
This operation encompassed the Naziassociated Muslim Brotherhood, a progenitor of today's alQaeda terrorist organization.
The connection between Muslim fanatics and Nazis, according toj ohn Loftus, began with Muslim Brotherhood founder Hassan al-Banna, who formed a group of Egyptian youth dedicated to social reform and Islamic morals.
He was a devotee of Muhammad ibn Abd al-Wahhab, the eighteenth-century Muslim who founded the Wahhabi sect that teaches that any additions or interpretations of Islam after the tenth century are false and should be eradicated, even by violence.
And alBanna formed this nationalist group called the Muslim Brotherhood.
Al-Banna was a devoutadmirer of Adolf Hitler and wrote to him frequently.
They hated J ews; they hated democracy; and they hated the Western culture.
It became the official policy of the Third R eich to secretly develop the Muslim Brotherhood as the fifth Parliament, an army inside Egypt.
While they obviously failed in this, it is a fact that Arab raiders caused continual problems for Allied forces.
After World War II, the Muslim Brotherhood and its German intelligence handlers were sought for war crimes, as they were not considered regular military units.
Following arrests in Cairo, captured Brotherhood members were turned over to the British Secret Service, who hired them to fight against the infant state of Israel in 1948.
Only a few people in the Mossad know this, but many of the members of the Arab Armies and terrorist groups that tried to strangle the infant State of Israel were the Arab Nazis of the Muslim Brotherhood.
The idea was that we were going to use the Arab N azis in the M iddle E ast as a counterweight to the Arab communists.
Nasser ordered all of the Muslim Brotherhood outof Egypt or be imprisoned, and we would execute them all.
Now when they arrived in Saudi Arabia ... student was named Osama bin Laden.
Osama bin Laden was taught by the Nazis of the jviuslim Brotherhood who had emigrated to Saudi Arabia.
In 1979 the CIA drew fanatics from these Saudi Brotherhood members and sent them to Afghanistan to fight the Soviet Russians.
Once out of Afghanistan, the mujahideen became known as al-Oaeda, or the Base.
Following the Soviet withdrawal from Afghanistan, the Saudis didn't want the fanatics to return, so they bribed Osama bin Laden and his al-Oaeda followers to stay out of Saudi Arabia.
So the Muslim Brotherhood became this poison that spread throughout the Middle East, and on 9/11, it began to spread around the world,"" concluded Loftus, who added that current CIA members don't know this history. ""he current generation CIA are good and decent Americans and I like them a lot.
They're trying to do a good job, but part of their problem is their files have been shredded.
DURING THE 1950s, while Dulles headed the CIA, his brother, J ohn Foster Dulles, was President Eisenhower's secretary of state.
The German banking industry particularly profited from such connections as the Dulles brothers and McCloy.
Allied authorities ordered the breakup of Germany's largest bank, Deutsche Bank.
By the turn of the current century, Deutsche Bank was reunited and had become a world banking leader.
Astute authorities in botli Britain and tine United States undoubtedly recognized Deputy Fuelirer IMartin Bormann's fliglit capital plan.
But they were dissuaded from action by the general euphoria at the war's end, the chaotic conditions in Europe, the idea that growth would restore the wrecked Europe an economy, and the increasing belief that the United States would soon have to confront a victorious and powerful Soviet Union.
There was also the behind-the-scenes power of men in banking and commerce who had been in league with the N azis and still carried sympathy for their cause.
Investigators were reassigned by their superiors, some of whom had been business partners with the Nazis for years.
One such example was attorney Russell A Nixon, who, as a member of the United States Military Government Cartel Unit, found himself working directly under Brigadier General William H Draper], an advocate of eugenics who sat with J ames F orrestal on the board of directors of Dillon, R ead C ompany, the firm that early on had helped finance the German cartels.
N ixon was blocked at every turn in his attempt to break up the F arben cartel.
The general was told Draper had canceled orders to dismantle or destroy F arben facilities, lied about bomb damage to F arben plants, and deliberately violated General Eisenhower's orders to break up the Farben cartel.
When N ixon took the initiative and had N azi industrialist R ichard F reudenberg arrested, United States ambassador to Germany Robert Murphy ordered him released.
Department of J ustice attorney] ames Stewart Martin, was sent to United States Military Command in London to investigate collaboration between the Nazis and American businessmen.
Martin bristled when he found his commanding officer was a Colonel Graeme K Howard, an official with General Motors.
After M artin pointed out the cozy relationship G eneral M otors had with the N azis, H oward was quietly reassigned back to the States.
Martin later investigated tine fate of ITT's German cliairman Gerliardt Westricl<, wlio, after tine war ended, liad fled Berlin and hidden out in a castle in southern Germany.
After presenting a report on the status of ITT firms to United States military authorities, Westrick was given a light prison sentence and released.
We had been stopped in Germany by American business,"" Martin wrote in the 1950 book All Honorable Men.
Whatever it was that had stopped us was not 'the government' But it clearly had command of channels through which the government normally operates.
One of those insiders who helped protect Nazi interests in the wake of World War II was aforementioned William H Draper], a business partner with Prescott Bush, who, in J uly 1945, was appointed head of the economic division of the United States Control Commission, which decided which Nazi corporations would be saved and who would face war crimes prosecution.
M artin also may have stumbled across the answer to why the international business community turned against Hitler.
The leading bankers and industrialists were looking forward to a postwar world composed of intertwining corporate business connections among the nations of the world— a N ew World Order.
Hitler, on the other hand, was planning to attack the United States just as soon as he had effective rocket and long-range bomber delivery systems in place.
The globalists did not desire a continuous war, nor did they want H itier to control a world N ational S ocialist government.
Manning revealed that, ""there are United States Treasury old-timers of World War II still not aware of the magnitude of the Bormann operation and of its success.
No one in a position of power within the financial centers of Washington, Wall Street, the City of London, or Paris desired a real search for the scattered German assets.
Without the German industrial base that had been its foundation for years, the Europe an economy was suffering.
U.S.J oint Chiefs of Staff directives had ordered that nothing be done to rebuild Germany's industries.
But business is business, and by the summer of 1947, President Roosevelt's friend and chief of staff General George Catlett Marshall had become secretary of state under PresidentTruman.
The son of a prosperous coal producer and a participant in every high-level policy conference from Casablanca to Yalta and P otsdam, M arshall convinced Truman that it was in the best interests of E urope an prosperity that Germany be allowed to rehabilitate its economy.
Thus, the Marshall Plan was born, and millions of dollars of aid began pouring into war-devastated Europe.
Many Americans, including Colonel Robert McCormick, editor of the Chicago Tribune, and Senator J oseph M cC arthy, attacked the M arshall P Ian as merely another R ockefeller scheme to bilk American taxpayers.
Attorneys for the firm werej ohn Foster Dulles and Allen Dulles of Sullivan and Cromwell.
Future CIA director and Warren Commission member Allen Dulles sat on the board of Schroeder.
It is interesting to note that throughout the war, C base maintained its financial connections with the Nazis through its Paris bank.
Farben chief Hermann Schmitz served as Chase president for seven years prior to the war.
Farben executives stood trial at Nuremberg for crimes against humanity, including the building and maintenance of concentration camps and the use of slave labor.
Schmitz was convicted of war crimes in 1948 at Nuremberg, but served a mere two years in prison, although it was under Schmitz's leadership thatthe giant chemical combine produced and distributed the notorious Zyklon-B gas, used for human extermination in Nazi concentration camps.
These longstanding banking and business connections coupled with the Schmitz business network allowed Reichsleiter Martin Bormann to forge a formidable Nazicontrolled organization for postwar activities.
Interestingly enough, the Nazis' attempt at central control through the economic sector produced the early stages of a united E urope so sought by H itier.
AFTER THE WAR , a devastated Europe looked to Germany for economic leadership.
The economic steps taken that became the C ommon M arket took the shape of prewar N azi plans. ""omehow the Germans had the answer originally in 1942 when they were melding the economic institutions of the C ontinent into their own design,"" noted Manning.
It is interesting to note that the present E uropean U nion began as merely economic measures.
F rom this reasonable beginning as a trade organization, the C ommon M arket evolved into the E urope an U nion, a supranational and intergovernmental body with tendrils into all aspects of E urope an life.
In 1950, French foreign minister Robert Schuman proposed the joint management of the French and West German coal and steel industries.
The 1951 treaty between Belgium, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Luxembourg, and West Germany provided for the shared production of coal and steel.
It was thought that this mutual endeavor would ensure against another war between these nations.
It also could be seen as a means of consolidating the Nazi business holdings of the Bormann organization.
The E urope E conomic C ommunity, better known as the C ommon M arket, was established in 1957 by the Treaty of Rome, signed by the same nations as in 1951.
Again, the Common |Viarl<etwas styled as merely a step toward equalizing trade balances and tariffs.
But with the 1992 signing of the Treaty Establishing the Europe an Community, popularly known as the Maastricht Treaty, the word ""Economic"" was deleted from both the treaty and the community.
By 2000, the Europe an Union was composed of various economic, political, and judicial institutions including the E urope an C entral B ank, the E urope an P arliament, the E urope an C ourt of J ustice, and a unified Europe an currency, the Euro.
BUT IF THE reality of the Nazi vision of a united Europe appeared to signal success for the emerging Fourth Reich, nothing showed more success than the seeds that had been sown in the postwar United States.
In the postwar period, FDR Democrats, who looked favorably on federal social and economic controls, were firmly in the pocket of the global corporate elite, although there was a small problem with President Harry S Truman, who was never fully under their command.
The real problem lay with the R epublicans, longtime supporters of less government and more economic freedom.
One willing accomplice of the globalist/Nazi nexus was an obscure Republican politician from California.
According to authors J ohn Loftus and Mark Aarons, ""When Truman was reelected in 1948, N ixon became Allen Dulles's mouthpiece in Congress.
Nixon, who joined the Council on Foreign Relations in 1961 but resigned in 1965 after his membership became a campaign issue, got an initial boost to his political career by befriending a Nazi named Nicolae Malaxa.
A Romanian who was a former business partner of Nazi Luftwaffe chief Hermann Goering, Malaxa had belonged to Baron Otto von Bolschwing's Gestapo network, as had his associate.
Both were members of the Nazi Iron Guard in Romania and had fled prosecution for their role in the deaths of manyj ews.
Their common interest was in Richard Nixon, who was elected vice president in 1952.
In late 1946, Nixon's influence, along with that of the Dulles brothers, freed Malaxa's money frozen in Chase National Bank during the war.
The Treasury Department official whose firm won Malaxa's case to release the money was the same man who froze these assets in the first place.
Malaxa had escaped from Europe with more than $200 million in United States dollars.
In America, following the retrieval of his frozen assets, Malaxa gained another $200 million from Chase Manhattan Bank.
The legalities were handled by the Dulles brothers' law firm of Sullivan and Cromwell.
A company called Western Tube was another effort to further help Malaxa.
In 1951, Nixon introduced a private bill in Congress, which would have allowed Malaxa to remain in the United States despite provisions of the Displaced Persons Act, which prohibited persons with Fascist backgrounds.
When this effort failed, Malaxa pretended to create Western Tube, which manufactured a seamless tube that he claimed was vital to the Korean War effort.
Loftus and Aarons reported, ""H e set up his company in N ixon's hometown of Whittier, C alifornia, and registered it in the same building as the law firm of Bewley, Kroop & Nixon.
It was the $2 million fee Nixon received from Malaxa that funded his successful election campaign for Congress.
In 1952, in spite of being granted permanent resident status in the United States, Malaxa moved from Whittier to Argentina, where he joined Argentine dictator] uan Peron and Hitler's chief commando Otto Skorzeny in profitable business dealings with the network created by Martin Bormann and Allen Dulles.
Elmer Holmes Bobst of WarnerLambert P harmaceutical, described as ""a mentor and father figure"" to N ixon, was a power behind Nixon's 1960 presidential campaign.
Bobst was a close associate of Otto von Bolschwing, head of the Gestapo network that included Malaxa and Trifia.
To mask the wave of Nazis flooding into the United States and to gain tighter federal control over Americans, the prewar specter of the Communist Menace was resurrected.
In 1953, half a million citizens of the socalled German Democratic Republic staged a revolt against the E ast G erman regime, only to be violently suppressed by troops and tanks.
N o further large-scale demonstrations were to take place in East Germany until 1989, the year before the GDR ceased to exist.
Three years later, P olish workers attempted their own rebellion against the C ommunist regime.
Widespread violence was only averted after China's MaoTse-tung convinced Russian Premier Nikita Khrushchev to allow Polish Communist Wladyslaw Gomulka to assume authority and institute reforms in Poland.
In late October 1956, the people of Hungary spontaneously rose up against their Soviet occupiers, many in response to broadcasts of support by the BBC, Radio Free Europe, and the Voice of America.
Put offguard by initial offers of compromise by the Russians, the Hungarians were unprepared for the fullscale military assault on Budapest on November 4.
Thousands were killed and an estimated two hundred thousand fled the country.
This S oviet show of force maintained their control over central Europe and also perpetuated the idea that Communism was monolithic and irresistible.
KENNEDY ANDTHE NAZIS MOST AMERICAN LEADERS THROUGHOUT THE COLD WAR COULD only see the danger of international communism.
One exception may have been President] ohn F Kennedy, who warned of the dangers of unnecessary secrecy and secret societies such as Skull and Bones, the Council on Foreign Relations, and the Bilderberg Group.
Kennedy was the first American president born in the twentieth century and was one of the besteducated, having graduated from Harvard cum laude.
The book that first made him a public figure was the bestseller Why E ngland S lept, a treatise on prewar British-German diplomacy.
This work showed clearly that Kennedy had a keen understanding not only of geopolitics but of the behind-the-scenes machinations of the globalists.
Interestingly enough, his political career may have come about because of his relationship with an alleged Nazi spy.
Early in World War II, the FBI suspected Inga Arvad a former Miss Denmark, who had attended the wedding of Germany's Field Marshal Hermann Goering and metwith Adolf Hitlerof being a Nazi spy.
After eavesdropping on her, agents determined that one of her visitors was Naval Ensign J ohn F Kennedy, then worl<ing for Naval Intelligence in Washington.
IN 1960, RICHARD Nixon was expected to be the next president of the United States.
Corporate heads and their Nazi backers must have been mollified to know that Kennedy was being guided by his father, J oseph P Kennedy, a pro-Nazi sympathizer.
But in December 1961, J oseph Kennedy suffered a stroke that left him totally incapacitated.
H is son now held the nation's highest office with no real control over him.
By mid-1963, Kennedy was beginning to exert his autonomous influence over the most powerful and violentgroups in United States society.
Obviously, persons affected by these moves felt that something had to be done.
Today, most people agree that the assassination of P resident Kennedy was the result of a conspiracy, the full details of which are still not known due to a cover-up at the highest levels of the federal government.
It is fascinating to note that the connections between Kennedy's death and N aziconnected persons, groups, and firms are many and well documented.
The CIA, which had passed hundreds of millions of dollars to the Nazi Gehlen Organization, has long been fingered as a major player in the assassination.
Operatives such as, • future Watergate burglars E Howard Hunt and Frank Sturgis • CIA officer Desmond FitzGerald • mobsterj ohnny Roselli • Cuban minister Dr.
Rolando Cubela • defrocked New Orleans priest David Ferrie • anti-Castro Cubans Carlos Bringuier, Orlando Bosch, and Carlos Prio Soccaras, ...all played roles in the CIA/intelligence mix surrounding the assassination.
But more pointedly, George DeMohrenschildt, a Dallas oil geologist who was the last known close friend to accused assassin Lee Harvey Oswald, began his intelligence career as a Nazi agent.
According to one CIA document, DeMohrenschildt had applied to work for United States intelligence as far back as 1942 but was turned down because he was a Nazi espionage agent.
His cousin, Baron C onstantine M aydell, was one of the top N azi intelligence agents in N orth America and, after the war, was recruited into the Gehlen Organization to direct the CIA's Russian emigre programs.
Oswald's other close associates in Dallas just prior to the assassination were Ruth and Michael Paine.
And Dallas police found incriminating photos Oswald claimed they were fabricated of Oswald in Mrs.
Payne's garage, holding a rifle authorities identified as the assassination weapon.
Her husband worked for Bell Aerospace Corporation in Hurst, Texas, later Bell Helicopter, where P aperclip N azi Walter Dornberger was a vice president.
This document first appeared under the pen name of William Torbitt but was actually written by a Texas attorney named David Copeland.
Copeland told this author he had received the information from friends in both the FBI and the Secret Service.
Based on this information, Torbitt/Copeland spent considerable effort searching for evidence to support the paper's thesis.
Torbitt explained, 'The director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation was in charge of NASA's Security Division and the Defense Industrial Security Command in his position as head of counterespionage activities in the United States.
His agents investigated every employee of the space agency as well as the employees of the pertinent contractors doing business with NASA and also prospective employees of every arms and munitions manufacturer.
Bloomfield in directing activities of the munition-makers' police agency, the Defense Industrial Security Command.
North American won the NASA contract despite the fact that its own source evaluation board had recommended another company.
It was not official, and it was not an American operation, but was simply the independent action taken by these men, some of whom happened to hold official positions,"" he wrote.
Torbitt's tale of a NASA conspiracy was supported by New Orleans District Attorney] im Garrison, who was investigating the Kennedy assassination.
In 1968, Garrison telephoned magazine editor Warren H inkle to say, ""Important new evidence has surfaced.
Those Texas oilmen do not appear to be involved in P resident Kennedy's murder in the way we first thought.
It was the military-industrial complex that put up the money for the assassination— but as far as we can tell, the conspiracy was limited to the aerospace wing.
When Garrison attempted to subpoena the testimony of their employees, NASA refused to provide them, citing reasons of national security.
Why Oswald, who had tried to defect to R ussia and voiced hostility toward the U S A and its policies, thought he could go to work for the nation's leading aerospace agency was never explained.
According to the Torbitt document, this complex matrix of government agents, NASA employees, and Nazis was managed by Louis Mor-timer Bloomfield of Montreal, Canada.
In 1967, New Orleans DA J im Garrison charged Clay Shaw, a former OSS officer and founder of the city's International Trade Mart, with conspiracy to assassinate the president.
The Trade Mart was connected with CMC through yet another shadowy firm named Permindex , also in the business of international expositions.
According to Torbitt, Bloomfield held half of the shares of Permindex and was in total command of its operation in Europe and Africa as well as the North and South American continents.
The prince was a wealthy aristocrat who had been undersecretary of agriculture under the dictator Benito Mussolini, and whose daughter-in-law was related to Nazi minister of finance Hjalmar Schacht; Carlo D'Amelio, an attorney for the former Italian royal family; and Ferenc Nagy, former premier of Hungary and a leading anticommunist.
The Italian media reported that Nagy was president of Permindex, and the board chairman and major stockholder was Louis Mortimer Bloomfield, the powerful Montreal lawyer who represented the Bronfman family as well as serving United States intelligence services.
Whatever the truth behind C entro M ondiale C ommerciale and its companion company P ermindex, and their connection to Kennedy's assassination, the Italian government saw fit to expel both firms in 1962 for subversive activities identical to those in the much-publicized P ropaganda-2 M asonic Lodge scandal of the Reagan years.
Today it is clear that C lay S haw was tightly connected to the C lA and intelligence work despite his denials at the time of the G arrison investigation.
Army during World War II, Shaw worked as aidedecamp to General Charles 0.
Thrasher and as a liaison officer to the headquarters of Winston Churchill.
At the time of his arrest in New Orleans by Garrison, Shaw's personal address book was taken.
It revealed the names and contact information of important Europeans, many of them pro-Nazi royalty or Bilderberg members.
ANOTHER ODD CONNECTION was SS Obergruppenfuehrer Karl Wolff , who had headed the Gestapo in Italy.
As part of Allen Dulles's hidetheNazi program, Wolff was sentenced to four years' imprisonment after the war but served only a week.
The boat then belonged to Goering's widow, Emmy, whose estate attorney was the celebrated Melvin Belli.
Belli had also represented the Naziconnected actor Errol Flynn, as well as J ack Ruby, the man who shot Lee Harvey Oswald.
Even odder is a letter smuggled out of the Dallas CountyJ ail and later bought by earlyj FK assassination researcher Penn J ones.
Ruby pointed to Lyndon J ohnson as one of those behind Kennedy's death.
They will know that only one kind of people that would do such a thing, that would have to be Nazis, and that is who is in power in this country right now,"" he added.
Considering J ohnson's close connections to the Nazi-riddled NASA, perhaps Ruby was not as unhinged as he was portrayed in the media at the time.
On a CIA assignment in Africa in late 1963, Streikher was quoted as saying, ""One of the worst-kept secrets in the , is the truth about the president's murder.
One was the action end with the killers; the other was the deeper part, the acceptance and protection of that murder by the intelligence apparatus that controls the way the world operates.
No serious assassination researcher truly believes that Kennedy was killed solely by German Nazis.
But, as previously reported, men with Nazi connections— before, during, and after World War II— who were also members of secret societies, were most opposed to Kennedy's policies.
They also had the power and influence to affect such an assassination and certainly were capable of blocking any meaningful investigation— whether by government or the media— right up to today.
When McCloy served as a high commissioner in Germany or as president of the World Bank or as a member of the so-called Warren Commission, he did so as a servant of that ruling elite.
H is most extensive ties to that elite were to various R ockefeller family interests.
The Kennedy Presidency, Gibson made a cogent argument that the primary factor behind thej FK assassination was that he was at loggerheads with the Wall Street E stablishment, those same globalist financiers who first promoted communism and then N ational Socialism.
Citicorp was directly tied to 49 top companies, and Chase Manhattan, Chemical Bank, and Metropolitan Life each had 24 other top companies represented on their boards.
Rostow discussed this with at least one unidentified person in the minutes immediately following Oswald's death. ournalist]J oseph Alsop applied pressure to LBJ less than 24 hours later.
The cover-up was essentially an operation of private power based in the East Coast Establishment,"" Gibson concluded, adding the Warren Commission was ""essentially an Establishment cover-up.
And, as has been seen, the inner-core United States establishment was filled with supporters of N ational Socialism, just as they had supported communism before that.
This global elite was working to lay the groundwork for their New World Orderworldwide socialism broken into three economic blocs to be played against each other for profit and control.
With the assassination of 1963 and its subsequent cover-up, the globalists, who first created communism and then National Socialism, had finally gained a new empire, a Fourth Reich.
PARTTHREE THE REICH ASCENDANT REBUILDING THE REICH, AMERICAN-STYLE WITH KENNEDY DEAD AND LYNDON B.JOHNSON IN THE White House, the Nazlflcatlon of the United States moved ahead largely unhindered.
During the J ohnson years, the president was surrounded by a coterie of advisers, collectively known as his ""wise men.
McCloy, Averell Harriman, Dean Rusk, William Bundy, Dean Acheson, George F Kennan, and Robert A Lovett.
With young people, the media, and members of Congress fixated on the Vietnam War, few people were aware of the growing power and influence of the military and the immense war machine assembled behind it.
On the contrary, it was designed to suck tax dollars from the public treasury, centralize power in the government and its corporate sponsors, and spread the new Reich's influence across the globe.
Under the banner of freedom and democracy, yet pursuing the agenda of the globalists who supported the Nazis, the United States slowly turned from one of the most admired nations in the world to one of the most despised.
The result of America's empire-building national policy has been dismal at best and catastrophic at worst.
This brought the shah to power, with the monarchy assuming complete control in 1963, and turning Iran into a client state of the United States.
Thousands of Iranians, perhaps millions, died during tine repressive rule of the shah and his brutal SAVAK secret police.
The shah was finally forced out in 1979 by the Ayatollah Khomeini, who quickly became tine United States' latest foreign enemy, despite the fact that he had been on tine CIA payroll while living in Paris.
The shah was granted asylum in the United States, and a medieval version of Islam took control over Iran, which by 2007 was again a targeted enemy.
Prominent American government officials such as former CIA director Walter Bedell Smitli, then CIA director Allen Dulles, Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs] ohn Moors Cabot, and Secretary of State J ohn Foster Dulles were all closely connected to United Fruit.
An estimated 120,000 Guatemalan peasants died in the resulting military dictatorships.
He was swiftly labeled a communist, and the CIA organized anti-Castro Cubans, which resulted in numerous attacks on Cuba and tine failed Bay of Pigs Invasion in 1961.
The island nation has been tine object of United States economic sanctions since tliat time.
The troops ostensibly were sent to prevent a communist takeover, although later it was admitted that tliere had been no proof of such an attempt.
Two years later, American troop strength in Vietnam had grown to 380,000, and soon after climbed to more than 500,000.
United States dead by the end of that Asian wartotaled some 58,000, with casualties to the Vietnamese, both North and South, running into the millions.
Allende was killed, and some 30,000 persons died in subsequent violence and repression, including some Americans.
Chile was brought back into the sphere of influence of the United States and remained a military dictatorship for the next two decades.
But CIA-backed Contra insurgents operating from Honduras fought a protracted war to oust the Ortega government, and an estimated 30,000 people died.
The ensuing struggle came to include such shady dealing in arms and drugs that it created a scandal in the United States called IranContra, which involved persons connected to the National Security Council selling arms to Iran, then using the profits to buy drugs in support of the C ontras.
M arines landed in Lebanon in an attempt to prevent further bloodshed between occupying Israeli troops and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Thousands died in the resulting civil war, including hundreds of Palestinians massacred in refugee camps by rightwing Christian forces while Ariel Sharon, then an Israeli general, looked on with apparent approval.
Despite the battleship shelling of Beirut, and the destruction of that great Mediterranean city, American forces were withdrawn in 1984 after a series of bloody attacks on them.
More than two decades later, the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians remains as intractable and deadly as ever, in large part due to the virtually unconditional support of Israel by the United States, which has been sustained by the Israel lobby.
The official explanation was to rescue a handful of American students who initially said they did not need rescuing.
The only real damage inflicted in this tiny war was to a mental-health hospital partly owned by a White House physician and widely reported to be a CIA facility, possibly used for mindcontrol experiments.
In 1981, it was claimed thatQaddafi had sent hit teams to the United States to assassinate President Reagan, and in 1986, following the withdrawal of U . . oil companies from Libya, an air attack was launched, which missed Qaddafi but killed several people, including his infant daughter.
Bush sent United States troops to invade that C entral American nation to arrest onetime ally, M anuel N oriega.
The excuse was that the P anamanian dictator was involved in the importation of drugs to the United States.
United States News & World Report noted that a year later, the amount of drugs moving through Panama had doubled.
It has been estimated that more than a million Iraqis, including women and children, have died as a result of the continued missile and air attacks not including those killed since the United States invasion in 2003 as well as of economic sanctions against that nation.
Once again in 2004, the United States fomented and backed the toppling of the democratically elected president and replaced him with an unelected gang of militarists, CIA operatives, and corporate predators.
Other nations that have felt the brunt of C lA and/or United States military activity as a result of globalist foreign policy include Somalia, Afghanistan, Serbia, Kosovo, Bosnia, Brazil, Chad, Sudan, and many others.
Liddy had named the Watergate ""plumbers"" afl:er that vast secretive organization that helped N azis escape both E urope and justice afl:er the war.
These Nixon officials included] ohn Ehrlichman, Egil Krogh, Donald Santarelli, and Robert Mardian.
With Nixon's resignation in August 1974, the United States entered a period of further turmoil.
The Church Committee uncovered conspiracies, including assassination plots within the CIA, and recriminations started, following the loss in Vietnam.
Gerald Ford, a Republican insider, had been appointed vice president with the resignation of Spiro Agnew, who was under indictment for tax evasion.
At the time, most people could not understand B ush's appointment, having forgotten that his N aziconnected grandfather.
They created an outgrowth ofthe old Council on Foreign Relations called the Trilateral Commission.
THE CONCEPT OF the Trilateral Commission was brought to David Rockefeller in the early 1970s by Zbigniew B rzezinski, then head of the R ussian studies department at C olumbia U niversity.
While at the Brookings Institution, B rzezinski had been researching the need for closer cooperation between the trilateral nations of E urope, N orth America, and Asia.
H e saw this larger community being funded by ""a global taxation system,"" similar to one that is now being proposed in the United Nations.
Brzezinski's plan for a commission of trilateral nations was first presented during a meeting ofthe ultrasecret B ilderberg G roup in April 1972, in the small B elgian town of Knokke.
The Trilateral Commission was officially founded on J uly 1, 1973, with David Rockefeller as chairman.
North American members included Georgia governor] immy Carter, United States Congressman J ohn B Anderson , and Time Inc. editor in chief Hedley Donovan.
Foreign founding members included Reginald Maudling, Lord Eric Roll, Economist editor Alistair Burnet, FIAT president Giovanni Agnelli, and French vice president of the Commission of Europe an Communities Raymond Barre.
Even the establishmentoriented media expressed uneasiness over the preponderance ofTrilaterals in government in early 1977.
So are the new secretaries of state, defense and treasury, Cyrus R Vance, Harold Brown and W Michael Blumenthal.
Antony C Sutton and Patrick M Wood, authors ofTrilaterals Over Washington, commented, ""If you are trying to calculate the odds of three virtually unknown men [Carter, Mondale, and Brzezinski], out of over sixty commissioners from the United States, capturing the three most powerful positions in the land, don't bother.
Despite being a creation of the Rockefeller-dominated Trilateral Commission and following some of their aims, such as eliminating price controls for domestic petroleum production by establishing a national energy policy and further drawing power to the federal government by creating the departments of energy and education, C arter apparently failed to satisfy the globalists.
The mass media were already focusing on conservative C alifornia government R onald R eagan as the man of the hour.
Reagan's nomination as GOP presidential candidate for the 1980 election seemed assured.
C arter asked for and was granted a national television spot during prime time, and many media pundits predicted that he was about to announce sweeping changes in government as well as new initiatives that would move his upcoming presidential reelection campaign off high center.
Carter journeyed to California, where he was to address a Hispanic crowd in the Los Angeles C ivic C enter M all celebrating C inco de M ayo, the day the M exicans defeated the French Army in 1862.
A few days later, a handful of newspapers carried a small story stating that a ""grubby transient"" had been arrested there and was being held on suspicion of the attempted assassination of the president.
However, a few days later, another news item appeared, which reported that the thirty-five-yearold Anglo suspect was being held in lieu of $50,000 on charges of conspiring to kill the president.
Finally, a one-time story in the May 21, 1979, edition of Newsweek revealed more details of the incident.
A .22, eight-shot revolver was found on the man along with seventy rounds of blank ammunition.
A short time later, the suspect implicated a second man, a twenty-one-year-old Hispanic, who also was taken into custody and subsequently held in lieu of $100,000 bail.
The second suspect at first denied knowing the other man, but finally admitted that the pair had test-fired the blank starter pistol from a nearby hotel roof the night before Carter's appearance.
Both men said they were simply local street people hired by two hit men who had come up from Mexico.
They were to create a diversion with the blank pistol, and the two hit men were to assassinate President Carter with high-powered rifles. ar Lending credence to their story, both suspects led authorities to the shabby Alan H otel located near the civic center.
Here investigators found an empty rifle case and three rounds of live ammunition in a room that had been rented under the name U mberto C amacho.
The Anglo suspect's name was Raymond Lee Harvey and his Hispanic companion's name was Osvaldo Ortiz.
No further news stories appeared, and the disposition of the case against Lee Harvey and Osvaldo apparently has never been made public.
A recent search of the federal prisoner database indicated no such persons are currently incarcerated.
He canceled his national TV speech and went into seclusion at C amp David.
By midNovember the following year, the United States took a conservative turn and elected Republican Ronald Reagan.
Reagan's victory was due, in large part, to a failed military attempt to rescue United States hostages held by Iranian radicals, followed by the collapse of negotiations regarding their release in mid-October 1980.
REAGAN, A FORMER spokesman for General Electric Company, stocked his administrations with current and former members of globalist groups, the very people he had criticized while campaigning.
During the 1980 presidential campaigns, Reagan verbally attacked the nineteen Trilaterals in the C arter administration and vowed to investigate the group if elected.
Bush for the nomination, Reagan lambasted Bush's membership in both the Trilateral Commission and the CFR and pledged not to give Bush a position in a Reagan government.
Yet during the Republican National Convention, a strange series of events took place.
With Reagan secured as the presidential candidate, there was a contentious fight to see who would be vice president.
In midweek, national media commentators suddenly began talking about a ""dream ticket"" to be composed of President Ronald Reagan and Vice President Gerald F ord.
It was even suggested that since F ord had been president, he should choose half of the R eagan cabinet.
F or one brief moment, the power of those who control the corporate mass media was revealed.
Reagan never again uttered a word against the globalist groups such as the Trilateral Commission and the Council on Foreign Relations.
Following his election, Reagan's fifty-nine-member transition team was composed of twenty-eight Council on Foreign Relations members, ten members of the elite Bilderberg Group, and at least ten members of the Trilateral C ommission.
H e even appointed prominent C F R members to three of the nation's most sensitive offices Secretary of State Alexander Haig, Secretary of Defense Caspar Weinberger, and Secretary of the Treasury Donald Regan.
Additionally, he named Bush's campaign manager] ames A Baker III, who then served as a chairman of the R eagan-B ush campaign committee, as his chief of staff.
B aker is a fourthgeneration member of a family long connected to Rockefeller oil interests.
After Reagan won in November, it was alleged that Bush, along with CIA Director William Casey, had privately cut a deal with Iranian leaders to hold American hostages until after the N ovember election, thus assuring a Reagan victory.
Later testimony confirming this ""October surprise"" came from several people involved, including R ichard B renneke and H einrich R upp, who claimed to have flown C asey to a meeting with the Iranians and the Iranian foreign minister.
Because of his damaging testimony, Brenneke was tried for perjury but found not guilty.
Despite this verdict, no action was taken by the Reagan-Bush administration, thanks primarily to debunking by a House Task Force led by Congressman Lee Hamilton, the same man Bush's son would name to cochair his 9/11 Commission in late 2002.
On J anuary 20, 1981, claims of this ""October surprise"" conspiracy were further supported by the facts that just minutes after Reagan was sworn into office, the American hostages were released, and within weeks, military supplies that Carter had withheld from Iran began moving to that nation.
Then, just two months after taking office in 1981, President Reagan was shot by would-be assassin] ohn W Hinckley, who exhibited the symptoms of brainwashing and whose brother had scheduled dinner with Neil Bush the very day Reagan was shot.
For many weeks, while many Americans prayed for Reagan's recovery, the son of Prescott Bush ran the nation.
Bush had exerted his influence to have Alexander Haig appointed secretary of state, and only days before the attempted assassination of Reagan had named Haig to head a special emergency preparedness committee.
Haig, a ranking globalist member of the Council on Foreign Relations, was N ixon's chief of staff from 1973 to 1974.
It should also be noted that Bush's name including his then littlepublicized nickname ""Poppy,"" which has caused many to wonder if this referred to his parenthood or the narcotic plantaddress, and phone number were found in the personal notebook of oil geologist George De-Mohrenschildt, the last known close friend of Lee H arvey Oswald.
Some saw Hinckley's action as an attempt to bring Bush to power eight years before he was elected president.
What they don't understand is all that constitution stuff is pushed aside once they declare national emergencies.
Constitutionally, the next in line in the order of succession is the vice president, then the speaker of the House, then the Senate president pro tempore, then the secretary of state.
He was eventually brought to court and declared not guilty by reason of insanity for the assassination attempt.
And Bush was virtually unassailable, due to his hidden but powerful support base.
Coming to Bush's defense was an impressive network of friends in high places.
ANOTHER INDICATION THAT the Reagan administration may have been under the influence of fascists came in May 1985, when the president laid a wreath at a soldiers' cemetery in Bittburg, Germany, where many Nazi SS officers were buried.
Although a hue and cry went up from veterans organizations and J ewish groups prior to his visit, Reagan followed through with his plan to honor war dead.
In his remarks, he placed the blame for Nazi atrocities on ""the awful evil of one man,"" an obvious reference to Adolf Hitler.
This effort to foist off all the blame for N azism onto one person was perhaps an indication of the influence of pro-N azi elements within his party.
Weyrich garnered large support by appealing to Christian fundamentalists and anticommunists.
Pasztor built up the GOP emigre network and was founding chairman of the Republican Heritage Groups Council.
Pasztor reportedly belonged to the Hungarian Arrow Cross, a group that helped liquidate J ews there during the war.
The authors quote Nixon as telling J ohn Ehrlichman, ""Eliminate everyone except George Bush.
Indeed, it was the elder Bush who fulfilled Nixon's pledge to make emigres with Nazi backgrounds a permanent part of Republican politics.
Galdau was a supporter of Valerian Trifa, convicted of war crimes when he headed tine Romanian Iron Guard in Bucharest.
As a ranking member of the Ukrainian Congress Committee of America, Fedorak lobbied Congress trying to stop J ustice Department prosecutions of pro-Nazi Ukrainian war criminals.
J ust weeks before the 1988 election, the Washington J ewish Week revealed that several Nazis and J ew-haters were involved in the coalition supporting Bush's Republican campaign.
When this news broke, at least four of those mentioned by name were forced to resign.
Online J ournal reporter Caria Binion wondered aloud if Reagan, Bush, or Reagan's CIA director William Casey realized they were being aided and supported by Nazis and Nazi collaborators.
This charge is confirmed by a list of nearly two thousand ""Former Nazi and Fascist Individuals Entering the United States under Official Auspices,"" recently released by the National Archives after being locked away for years by presidential order.
Peter Levenda also has studied the connection between old Nazis and ranking Republicans.
After noting the prosecution of P rescott B ush for being a financial frontman for H itier, he wrote, ""We cannot, of course, hold former President Bush responsible for the sins of his father; nor can we hold his son responsible.
Yet, we can expect a higher degree of moral responsibility in their actions as men and as political leaders.
Writing about a streak of anti-S emitism in the globalist individuals and companies that supported H itIer and continued to support N azism even after the war, Levenda stated, ""I believe that the entire racial theory of Nazism was a comfortable environment for these men.
DURING THE REAGAN years, as most Americans were lulled into a false sense of security, the minions of the fascist globalists took steps to change the power structure of America.
J ames M ann, former B eijing bureau chief for the Los Angeles Times and a senior writer-in-residence at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, took note that during the 1980s, when Bush was in virtual command of the White House during Reagan's hospitalization and recuperation, Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld were conspicuously absent at least once a year.
C heney and R umsfeld, along with several dozen federal officials and one member of the cabinet, would travel to Andrews Air Force Base, usually in the middle of the night, and from there would proceed to a remote location in the United States, such as a decommissioned military base or an underground bunker.
Mann reported that, ""Cheney was working diligently on Capitol Hill as a congressman rising through the ranks of the Republican leadership.
Searle and Company, he dedicated time and energy to the success of such commercial products as NutraSweet, Equal, and Metamucil.
Yet for periods of three or four days at a time no one in C ongress knew where C heney was, nor could anyone at Searle locate Rumsfeld.
C heney and R umsfeld were involved in one of the most highly classified programs of the R eagan administration, a program that called for setting aside the legal rules for presidential succession.
This ""continuity of government"" program was created by a secret executive order from Reagan.
According to Mann, one of the program's participants told him, ""One of the awkward questions we faced was whether to reconstitute Congress after a nuclear attack.
It had its own building in the Washington area, run by a two-star general, and a secret budget adding up to hundreds of millions of dollars a year.
Bush was elected president, in 1988, members of the secret Reagan program rejoiced; having been closely involved with the effort from the start.
Bush wouldn't need to be initiated into its intricacies and probably wouldn't reevaluate it.
Although the elder Bush gained his own time in the White House in 1988, it was limited to one term due to the controversies and conspiracies swirling about him, not the least of which was his father's pro-N azi background.
It was to escape this heritage that, in 1949, young G eorge had moved from his ancestral home in Connecticut to the more receptive environs of Texas.
During the C linton administration, those who knew about the ""continuity of government"" plan considered it an outdated relic.
Mann reported that, in the Presidential Emergency Operations Center under the White House, Cheney told President Bush to delay his planned flight back from Florida, while atthe Pentagon, Rumsfeld instructed Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz to leave Washington for the safety of one of the underground bunkers.
Of course, there was no mention of the Naziconnected globalists who had inspired it.
They stayed in touch with defense, military, and intelligence officials, who regularly called upon them.
Rockwell, a former navy pilot during World War II and failed artist like his hero, Adolf Hitler, saw the telltale signs of conspiracy abroad in America, but, like Senator] oseph McCarthy and the more recent H olocaust deniers, attributed it to ""international communism"" coupled with the anti-S emitic view of a worldwide] ewish conspiracy.
He formed various National Socialist political organizations and made headlines trying to conduct public rallies in various places.
R ockwell, as well as the more recent N azi skinheads, merely served to focus public attention on these fringe elements of society and away from the military-industrial empire being created all around them.
The United States has long been governed by men connected to secret societies such as the Council on F oreign R elations and the Trilateral C ommission, both of which can be traced back to much earlier societies, like the previously mentioned Bavarian llluminati and Freemasonry.
These groups can, in turn, be traced back to even earlier societies, such as the Knights Templar and Rosicrucians, which all had a particular interest in alchemy and the occult.
Whether or not the infamous llluminati still exists, its credo ""the end justifies the means"" lives on in the hearts of the corporate owners of today globalists who value the blending of state and corporate power, the very definition of fascism.
One organization that forms the connective tissue between these various secret groups may be the shadowy Bilderberg Group powerful men and women, many of Europe an royalty, who meet in secret each year to discuss the issues of the day.
Founded by Prince Bernhard, the Bilderberg Group is composed of the inner-core elite of the Council on Foreign Relations and the Trilateral Commission.
Dutch prince Bernhard full name Bernhard J ulius Coert Karel God-fried Pieter, prince of the Netherlands and of Lippe-Biesterfeld was the primary impetus for the Bilderberg meetings.
In 1937, he married Princess] uliana of the Netherlands and became a major shareholder and officer in Dutch Shell Oil, along with Britain's Lord Victor Rothschild.
J oseph Hieronim Retinger encouraged Prince Bernhard to create the Bilderberg Group, which began as unofficial meetings between members of Europe's wealthy elite.
The official creation of this highly secret organization came about in the early 1950s, following discussions between Prince Bernhard and Dr.
R etinger was brought to America by Averell H arriman just after the war, when H arriman was United States ambassador to England.
In America, Retinger visited prominent citizens, such as David and Nelson R ockefeller , J ohn F oster Dulles, and then C lA director Walter B edell S mith, all men with close connections to the Nazis.
P reviously, R etinger had formed the American C ommittee on a U nited E urope, working alongside future C lA director and C F R member Allen Dulles, then C F R director G eorge F ranklin, C lA official Thomas Braden, and former OSS chief William Donovan.
P Morgan] and was known as an ""Anglophile,"" a supporter of close BritishAmerican relations.
Retinger continued his participation in Bilderberg meetings until his death in 1960.
In 1991, then Arkansas governor Bill Clinton was honored as a Bilderberg guest, and the next year he ran for and won the presidency of the United States.
After his election, Clinton made no mention of the Bilderberg meetings.
Hillary Clinton attended a meeting in 1997, becoming the first American first lady to do so.
Thereafter, talk steadily grew concerning her future role in politics, and by 2008 she was a leading Democratic presidential candidate.
One illustration of globalist control within the Clinton administration can be found in the person of President Clinton's treasury secretary Robert E Rubin, a former cochairman of Goldman Sachs, who was named to head Clinton's National Economic Council.
Goldman Sachs and other investment banks were paid many millions of dollars to arrange these deals.
For example, Goldman Sachs earned $10 million arranging United States Steel's 1982 buyout of Marathon Oil.
In 2007, Rubin was vice chairman of the board of directors of the Council on Foreign Relations.
NOT J UST FRINGE conspiracy theorists have spoken out about hidden control in the world.
President Woodrow Wilson, who was intimately connected with conspiratorial power, once wrote, ""Some of the biggest men in the United States, in the field of commerce and manufacture, are afraid of somebody, are afraid of something.
C olonel L F letcher P routy, a liaison officer between the P entagon and the C lA in the 1960s, was able to witness the control mechanisms over both intelligence and the military.
P routy said the United States is run by a ""secret team, ""answerable only to themselves.
Their power is derived from their vast covert intragovernmental infrastructure and its direct connections with private industries, mutual funds, investment houses, universities, and the news media, including foreign and domestic publishing houses.
P routy would have been horrified to learn that this ""secret team"" might include N azis brought into the military-industrial complex after the war.
Another insider who confirmed that a plot was afoot was President Truman's choice for America's first secretary of defense, J ames V Forrestal, a man intimately connected with the globalists.
They do not make mistakes that favor the best interests of the American people.
Take, for example, the position assumed by the George W Bush administration toward the Russian Federation.
Following the collapse of Communism, there was a splendid opportunity to create new friendship and working arrangements with the eighty-six political entities that comprise the new Russian Federation.
Yet, suddenly, following the arrival of the Bush administration and the attacks of 9/11, Russia has been presented as a potential enemy and the United States has provoked hostility there by aggressive diplomatic and military maneuvers.
Not only did we bring Poland into NATO, we brought in Latvia, Lithuania, and Estonia, and virtually the whole Warsaw Pact, planting NATO right on Mother Russia's front porch.
Others saw America's reaction to Russian peace overtures as nothing less than aggression, perhaps a continuation of the National Socialist agenda of destroying the old Soviet Union.
It was also noted that it was Bush's America, not Russia, that withdrew from the antiballistic missile treaty, a move that reminded some of the USSR's Cold War-era public pledge never to be the first to use nuclear weapons, a pledge never reciprocated by the United States.
In mid-2007, such actions prompted federation president Vladimir Putin to chastise the United States in a major press conference atthe Forty-third Munich Conference on Security Policy.
Putin's reasoned remarks were little reported in the corporate-controlled United States mass media.
Equally disturbing was Bush's announced advocacy of an American first-strike nuclear capability as well as his proposed ""missile defense"" system, which though defended as a deterrent to rogue nations, such as North Korea, nevertheless will be placed in Europe.
Nobel PrizewinnerThomas C Schelling of Harvard, an early advocate of the United States Mutual Assured Destruction C old War strategy, which theorized that equal nuclear capability would deter a nuclear exchange, shifted his rhetoric from ""deterrence"" to ""compellence,"" a newspeak term for blackmailing nations into submission through the threat of nuclear weapons.
Following the tempestuous Clinton administration, the Republicans took power and swiftly set out on a new ""neoconservative"" path for the party.
BUT NOT ONLY the grandson of financier Prescott Bush, Nixon cronies, or the neoconservatives have shown sympathy for National Socialist ideals.
Arnold Schwarzenegger, the Austrian-born former bodybuilder turned actor turned governor of California, has a background of pro-Nazi statements and friends.
I admire him for being such a good public speaker and for what he did with it.
H is admiration for H itier may have come from sitting at his father's knee.
In 1938, H itier's N azis took control of Austria in an Anschluss, unifying that country with Germany.
Arnold's father, Gustav, one year later joined Hitler's infamous Sturmabteilung storm troopers , known as the Brown Shirts.
Schwarzenegger also caught flak because of his friendship with Kurt Waldheim, former secretary general of the United Nations, who lost the presidency of Austria in 1992, after his Nazi past was revealed.
An Unauthorized Biography by Wendy Leigh, Schwarzenegger toasted Waldheim at his 1986 wedding to Maria Shriver by proclaiming, ""My friends don't want me to mention Kurt's name, because of all the recent Nazi stuff and the United Nations controversy.
In an effort to rehabilitate this Nazi background, Schwarzenegger has subsequently renounced Hitler and made hefty contributions to the Wiesenthal Center in Los Angeles, named forthej ewish Nazi hunter Simon Wiesenthal.
Butif prominent Americans have tried to distance themselves from their Nazi pasts, this same concern did not apply to Nazi-developed ideals and substances.
GUNS, DRUGS, AND EUGENICS WHILE NAZI SCIENCE WAS BROUGHT TO AMERICA AFTER WORLD War II, so were attendant Nazi restrictions on scientific liberty.
Since 1940, America's scientists have become faceless members of teams working under the auspices of the military-industrial complex or the corporate world.
Such tight inner control over scientific advances was reminiscent of the late-war Nazi SS control over technology in the Third Reich.
Hitler's Germany was not only the first nation to use or advance television, rocketry, and computers but also the first to build a national freeway system, to address occupational health issues, restrict the use of firearms, attack the use of alcohol and tobacco, pass laws for the protection of the environment, and wage war against cancer.
H itier realized that he needed the support of his wealthy conservative followers, so he directed much of his public statements to them, particularly in the areas of rearmament and foreign policy.
B ut his social programs in many cases were a liberal's dream come true.
For example, gun control was already widespread in a pre-Nazi Europe unaccustomed to the freedom to bear arms.
Anti-gun control advocates have long pointed out that it was an unarmed population that allowed the Nazis to both gain and maintain power.
Ironically, the Nazis used the Weimar Republic's gun-control laws intended to restrict private armies such as Hitler's SA to keep the population disarmed.
Hitler and his ilk were against keeping arms in the hands of citizens, especially conquered peoples.
History shows that all conquerors who have allowed their subject races to carry arms have prepared their own downfall by so doing.
Still, the Nazis were not content with the stringent gun laws already on the books.
In 1938, they strengthened these laws by asserting that only loyal Nazis could own weapons.
A group opposed to gun control, calledj ews for the Preservation of Firearms Ownership, Inc. , has made the shocking but well-supported argument that United States gun-control legislation is based on this Nazi law.
The 1928 law was enacted by a center-right, freely elected German government that wanted to curb 'gang activity,' violent street fights between Nazi party and Communist party thugs.
The assassination of President J ohn F Kennedy precipitated a cry for gun control in the United States, and the corporate media went into high gear promoting this agenda.
Yet, resistance was strong and the idea languished until after the 1968 murders of Dr.
Following these shocking deaths, the Gun Control Act of 1968 was passed in October of that year, after strenuous debate and compromise.
Some conspiracy researcliers see tliis as a classic example of creating a problem, offering a draconian solution, and settling for a compromise that still fulfills the original agenda.
The gun legislation of 1968 stated only licensed dealers could send and receive firearms across state lines, thus ending mail-order sales.
It also allowed bureaucrats in Washington to decide what types of firearms Americans could own.
The term ""sporting"" guns was not clearly defined, allowing whole classes of firearms to be banned.
Dodd, a Democrat who lost to Republican Prescott Bush in a 1956 Senate election but gained the state's other Senate seat two years later.
Dodd had served as a special agent for the FBI in the 1930s and as executive trial counsel for the Office of the U nited States C hief of C ounsel for the P rosecution of Axis C riminality at the N uremberg war crimes trials at the end of the war.
It may have been during his time in N uremberg that he became familiar with the Nazi gun laws.
A letter from the Library of Congress to Dodd in J uly 1968 showed that four months prior to his guncontrol legislation being passed, he received an English translation of the Nazi Weapons Law based on the original German law document he supplied to the library.
Dodd, a member of the Council on Foreign Relations, won his father's seat in the Senate.
The younger Dodd, a liberal, nevertheless took money from and lent considerable support to corporate miscreants like E nron and Arthur Andersen, indicating his willingness to support the globalists.
But control of weapons was not the only item on the fascist globalist agenda.
WHILE EVERYONE KNOWS of the Rockefeller control of oil, most do not know the extent of Rockefeller wealth and influence over modern medicine and drugs.
The Story of the Medical Conspiracy Against America, the drug industry is controlled by a Rockefeller ""medical monopoly,"" largely through directors of pharmaceutical boards representing Chase Bank, Standard Oil, and other Rockefeller entities.
Winthrop Aldrich also served on the Committee on the Cost of Medical Care , which was originated by Dr.
Other notable choices were Winthrop Aldrich, president of Chase National Bank; J ohn Frey, secretary-treasurer, AFL; William T Foster, director of the Pollack Foundation in Economic Research; Olin West, M.D., executive secretary, AMA; and fifteen physicians plus two dentists in private practice.
F ive physicians from P ubiic H ealtli were cliosen, and tlie director of researcli for tine M ilbanl< IMemorial Fund.
Representatives from insurance, liospital, nursing, pliarmacy sources were appointed and six members from positions.
The full-time staff was headed by Harry H Moore of Washington, who in 1927 published 'American Medicine and the People's Health' while a member of Public Health Service.
Smith noted that a minority of the committee recommended, among other things, that government competition in the practice of medicine be discontinued and that corporate medicine financed through intermediary agencies, such as Health Maintenance Organizations , should be opposed, because they fail to provide high-quality health care and exploit the medical profession.
R ockefeller control over the medical establishment also was exercised through the R ockefeller Sanitary Commission and the Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research, at one time headed by Dr.
Mullins also pointed to the Nazi connections of GlaxoSmithKline , the second-largest pharmaceutical company in the world after Pfizer.
The history of the Big Pharm giant can also serve as an example of the consolidation of drug companies in recent years.
Burroughs Wellcome & Company was founded in London in 1880 by two American pharmacists, Henry Wellcome and Silas Burroughs.
Glaxo, a New Zealand firm that originally manufactured baby food, became Glaxo Laboratories and went multinational inl935.
After the postwar acquisition of other companies, including Meyer Laboratories, Glaxo moved its facilities to the United States.
Smith, Kline and Company merged with the French, Richard and Company, and changed its name to Smith Kline and French Laboratories in 1929.
By 1969, the firm had spread its business worldwide and purchased seven additional laboratories in Canada and the United States.
In 1982, it merged with Beckman Incorporate, becoming Smith-Kline Beckman.
International Clinical Laboratories, SmithKline Beckman grew by 50 percent.
The latest merger took place with GlaxoWellcome in 2000, and the firm became GlaxoSmithKline.
According to Eustace Mullins, the original Burroughs Wellcome drug firm was wholly owned by Wellcome Trust, whose director was the British lord Oliver Franks.
Recalling thatj ohn D Rockefeller 's father, William ""Big Bill"" Rockefeller, once tried to sell unrefined petroleum as a cancer cure, M ullins, who spent more than thirty years researching the ""R ockefeller medical monopoly,"" commented.
Farben and the drug companies it controlled in the United States through the R ockefeller interests were responsible for the suppression of effective drugs until a monopoly could be established.
For example, from 1908 to 1936, Farben withheld its discovery of sulfanilamide, an early sulfa drug, until the firm had signed working agreements with the important drug firms of Switzerland, Sandoz and Ciba-Geigy.
In one of the largest corporate mergers in history, these two firms joined in 1996 to form Novartis.
It has been previously detailed how the support of globalists and transplanted E urope an fascists helped put the Reagan-Bush team into power in 1980.
Against this background, it is instructive to look atone of the many controversial drugs now being used by millions of Americans aspartame, an additive sugar substitute found in most diet soft drinks and more than five thousand foods, drugs, and medicines.
Aspartame is found in most sugar substitutes, such as NutraSweet, Equal, Metamucil, and Canderel.
When heated to more than 86 degrees F ahrenheit keep in mind that the human body temperature is 98. degrees aspartame releases free methanol that breaks down into formic acid and formaldehyde in the body.
One quart of an aspartame-added beverage is estimated to contain about 56 milligrams of methanol.
Countering claims that laboratory tests indicated little harm from small amounts of aspartame.
Before 1980, the Federal Drug Administration had refused to approve the use of aspartame.
Adrian Gross testified to Congress that aspartame caused tumors and brain cancer in lab animals and, therefore, violated the Delaney Amendment that forbids putting anything in food that is known to cause cancer.
Aspartame also is blamed for the increase in diabetes as it not only can precipitate the disease but also stimulates and aggravates diabetic retinopathy and neuropathy, which, when interacting with insulin, can cause diabetics to go into convulsions.
She was the founder of Mission Possible International, working with doctors around the world in an effort to remove aspartame from food, drinks, and medicine.
For sixteen years the F DA refused to approve it, not only because it's not safe but because they wanted the company indicted for fraud.
Both United States prosecutors hired on with the defense team and the statute of limitations expired.
Skinner went on to become secretary of transportation, squelcliing tine cries of tine pilots wlio were now liaving seizures on tliis seizure-triggering drug, aspartame, and tlien cliief of staff under President Busli's fatlier.
When ohn] Ashcroft became attorney general Thompson from King and Spalding Attorneys became deputy under Ashcroft.
It interacts with all antidepressants, L-dopa, Coumadin, hormones, insulin, all cardiac medication, and many others.
It also is a chemical hypersensitization drug, so it interacts with vaccines, other toxins, other unsafe sweeteners, like Splenda that has a chlorinated base like DDT and can cause autoimmune disease.
Both being excitotoxins, the aspartic acid in aspartame, and MSG, the glutamate, people were found using aspartame as the placebo for MSG studies, even before it was approved.
The FDA has known this for a quarter of a century and done nothing even though it's against the law.
Searle went on to build a Nutra-Sweet factory and had $9 million worth of inventory.
The new FDA commissioner, Arthur H ull H ayes, overruled that board of inquiry and then went to work for the P R agency of the manufacturer, Burson-Marstellar, rumored at $1,000 a day, and has refused to talk to the press ever since.
There were three congressional hearings because of the outcry of the people being poisoned.
The first hearing was in 1985, and Senator Hatch and others were paid by Monsanto.
This bill would have put a moratorium on aspartame, and had the NIH do independent studies on the problems being seen in the population, interaction with drugs, seizures, what it does to the fetus, and even behavioral problems in children.
Reagan's FDA commissioner Hayes initially approved aspartame only as a powdered additive.
But in 1983, just before he left his position, he approved the additive for all carbonated beverages.
Attempting to study or report on aspartame is a thankless task for mainstream academics.
J anet Starr Hull, an OSHA-certified environmental hazardous-waste emergency-response specialist and toxicologist, in 1991 was diagnosed with incurable Graves' disease (a defect in the immunization system that leads to hyperthyroidism) only to learn through her own research that she had been poisoned by aspartame.
Some will say aspartame research isn't worth the effort because they cannot get published in American scientific journals.
Illustrating the battle between experts in regard to aspartame was the 2005 research by Dr.
Morando Soffritti, scientific director of the European Ramazzini Foundation of Oncology and Environmental Sciences in Bologna, Italy.
Soffritti conducted a three-year study on 1,800 rats and concluded that aspartame is a multipotential carcinogen.
His work was peer-reviewed by seven world experts, and in April 2007, Dr.
He noted that only a small amount of aspartame can trigger cancer, and babies of mothers who ingested aspartame could grow up to contract cancer.
These studies, largely unreported in the United States media, confirmed aspartame's carcinogenicity in laboratory rats.
In 2006, media reports spoke of a ""new study"" that countered Soffritti's research.
Lim and colleagues worked with 473,984 men and women between the ages of fifty and seventy-one who participated in this diet-and-health study.
In 1995 and 1996, participants were asked how much they drank of three popular diet beverages soda, fruit drinks, and iced tea.
C ritics noted that this study was subject to ""recall bias,"" since those in the study were being asked to remember what and how much they drank.
There also was no consideration of the many other foods and additives that contained aspartame, which added to the daily intake.
According to the Center for Public Integrity , in the past seven years the pharmaceutical and health-products industry spent in excess of $800 million to lobby legislators and government officials at both the federal and state levels.
Manufacturers of pharmaceuticals, medical devices, and other health products spent nearly $182 million on federal lobbying from J anuary 2005 through] une 2006.
It should also be noted that the large pharmaceutical corporations annually spend nearly twice as much money on marketing as they do on research and development.
In 2004, the C PI reported that pharmaceutical direct-toconsumer advertising has grown from $791 million in 1996 to more than $3. billion in 2004.
The cross-corporate ownership of both pharmaceutical houses, medical institutions, and the mass media, combined with the extraordinary amount of pharmaceutical advertising, might explain the media's hesitation in reporting the deleterious effects of drugs.
M arcia Angell, former editor in chief of the N ew E ngland J ournal of M edicine, profit is the driving force behind medicine today.
How They Deceive Us and What to Do About It brings focus to the argument that the current power of the pharmaceutical industry can be directly traced to its phenomenal growth during the Reagan years.
Angell and a number of others took note of a strong pro-business attitude shift during the ReaganBush years not just in government but within American society.
There was a time in the not-so-distant past when educated persons of class looked upon commercial businessmen only slightly more kindly than they had once looked upon theater folk.
Scientists, teachers, public servants such as firemen and policemen chose their careers for service and community betterment rather than for lavish salaries and retirement benefits.
Today, the corporate mass media portrays the race for wealth as practically virtuous.
She went on to say that before 1980, pharmaceuticals was a good business, but afterward, it was a stupendous one.
The success of Big Pharma has more to do with marketing than with the efficiency of its drugs.
This term is applied to large drug corporations' attempts to convince healthy people they are sick and need drugs.
R eferring to the colossus that the pharmaceutical industry has become.
Beginning in the 1980s, important new laws were passed relaxing restrictions on pharmaceutical corporations.
These included the Bayh-Dole Act, after its chief sponsors, Indiana Democratic senator Birch Bayh and Kansas Republican senator Robert Dole.
The Bayh-Dole Act allowed universities and small businesses to patent discoveries from research underwritten by the National Institutes of Health , the major distributor of tax dollars for medical research.
It also allowed taxpayer-financed discoveries formerly in public domain, to be granted to drug corporations through exclusive licenses.
Angell said that today universities, where mostNIH-sponsored work is carried out, can patent and license their discoveries and charge royalties.
Subsequent but similar legislation allows the NIH itself to directly transfer NIH discoveries to industry.
Today, ""all parties cash in on the public investment in research,"" she noted.
U nder this system, research paid for by public money becomes a commodity to be sold for profit by private concerns.
Angell provides examples of the large consulting fees paid by pharmaceutical corporations to individual faculty members and to NIH scientists and directors, increasing the intrusion of the globalist pharmaceutical corporations into medical education and the almost complete domination of medical education, particularly when it comes to drugs.
R ecall that it was an N IH study that refuted peerreviewed research linking cancer to the sweetener aspartame.
Approximately half of the largest pharmaceutical corporations are not American.
All price their drugs much higher here than in other markets,"" stated Dr.
The lucrative connection between Big Pharma and medical schools and hospitals has brought about a definite corporate-friendly atmosphere.
She also blasted pharmaceutical corporations for their claims that high drug prices are necessary to fund research and development.
F or the top ten companies, they amounted to only 11 percent of sales in 1990, rising slightly to 14 percent in 2000.
The biggest single item in the budget is neither R&D nor even profits but something usually called 'marketing and administration' a name that varies slightly from company to company.
In 1990, a staggering 36 percent of sales revenues went into this category, and that proportion remained about the same for over a decade.
Angell further noted what many people see as excessive salaries of pharmaceutical executives such as Charles A Heimbold J, the former chairman and CEO of Bristol-Myers Squibb, who made $74,890,918 in 2001.
This does not count his $76,095,611 worth of unexercised stock options.
Stafford, chairman of Wyeth, made $40,521,011, not counting his $40,629,459 in stock options.
C ongress expressly prohibited M edicare from negotiating lower drug prices through its bulk purchasing power and, in 1997, the FDA permitted the drug industry to do direct advertising, previously restricted to physicians, to the public, with no mention of side effects except for the most serious.
The excesses of the globalists' pharmaceutical corporations have prompted many Americans to seek price relief by traveling to C anada or M exico to purchase drugs.
Angell concluded that only an aroused American public can rein in the power of the pharmaceutical monopoly.
Noting that drug companies have the largest lobby in Washington, and they give copiously to political campaigns.
Angell said legislators and the mass media corporations are now so dependent on the pharmaceutical industry for campaign contributions and advertising that it will be exceedingly difficult to break their power.
That is why citizens should know what is really going on... there will be no real reform without an aroused and determined public to make it happen,"" she said.
This report intensified the controversy over chemical food and drink additives that have been linked to hyperactivity in children.
One British news report on sodium benzoate quoted the makers of Coca-Cola, Pepsi Max, and Diet Pepsi, which all contain sodium benzoate, as saying they entrusted the safety of additives to the government.
U nfortunately, many government agencies are under the control of the giant pharmaceutical corporations.
C linton made during her husband's time in office campaign contributions data released in April 2007 showed that, with the exception of Republican jviitt Romney, both Clinton and Obama were the largest recipients of Big Pharma largess in campaign funding.
C linton to pass laws to prevent insurers from charging higher rates to people in poor health, the insurance industry contributed a whopping $226,245 to her campaign.
WHILE THE FASCIST globalists took swift charge of Nazi drug technology after the war, it is most interesting that they neglected a little-known and little-publicized aspect of the Third R eich the fight against cancer, tobacco, alcohol abuse, and occupational hazards.
In fact, the National Socialists' predilection for health foods and preventative medicine may have been yet another reason the globalists turned against H itier and his regime.
After all, most food additives, colorings, and preservatives are petrochemicals, and any decrease in human consumption would spell loss of profits to the globalists' corporations.
E arly on, the N azi regime instituted policies designed to create healthier environments within the workplace.
However, as the imperatives of wartime production grew, these measures lost priority.
One example of globalist neglect of Nazi science can be seen in the issue of asbestos.
By the late 1930s, Nazi Germany had firmly documented the link between asbestos and lung cancer.
This connection was flatly stated in a 1939 textbook, and by 1943 the N azi government had recognized asbestos-induced cancer as a compensable occupational disease.
This N azi research would be used in later years to counter asbestos producers' claims that they were unaware of the danger of asbestos until modern studies.
In addition to confining occupational health hazards to the shadows in corporate America, the owners of the United States tobacco industry fought a successful, decades-long rearguard action against the claims that cigarettes are a leading cause of cancer.
Utilizing one hired expert after another, they bought time while they diversified their ownership away from tobacco.
C ontrary to the popular belief that the link between smoking and cancer was demonstrated in postwar Britain and America, ""it was in G ermany in the late 1930s that we first find a broad medical recognition of both the addictive nature of tobacco and the lung cancer hazard of smoking, ""according to Proctor.
The Nazis were among the first to ban smoking in public places such as Nazi party offices, post offices, hospitals, resthomes, and waiting rooms a restriction today becoming prevalent across America.
Much of the attack on alcohol and tobacco stemmed from the Nazi ideals of racial hygiene and Aryan purity.
As in America from the 1960s to the 1980s, German tobacco interests formed organizations and hired various experts to counter the claims of antitobacco activists.
As in America, they claimed that the medical evidence against tobacco was ""unscientific"" and the propaganda of health fanatics.
But it was an uphill fight, considering the amount of scientific data then available, plus the fact that H itier disdained tobacco and alcohol.
In the widespread National Socialist effort to stamp out both smoking and drinking, it was continually pointed outthatHitler neither smoked nor drank.
Hitler would not permit his lover, Eva Braun, or his deputy, Martin Bormann, to smoke in his presence.
It was also publicly noted in wartime propaganda that while Hitler, Mussolini, and Franco were nonsmokers, Churchill, Roosevelt, and Stalin all smoked cigarettes, cigars, or a pipe.
The Nazis, like modern American corporations, came to realize that tobacco-related illnesses could impact the hospital industry as well as the insurance industry.
This concern, coupled with the increasing demands for healthy wartime workers, undoubtedly was an added stimulus for the antitobacco campaign.
This is a fascinating example of how social idealism can be subverted for tyrannical purposes.
THE NAZIS' CONCERN over rising cancer rates also resulted in a bizarre confrontation over the use of X-rays.
Otto Warburg, a relative of the banking family and director of B eriin's Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Cell Physiology.
Warburg's institute was founded in 1931, following a substantial donation by the Rockefeller Foundation to the Kaiser Wilhelm Gesellschaft, today known as the Max Planck Institute.
All normal body cells meet their energy needs by respiration of oxygen, whereas cancer cells meet their energy needs in great part by fermentation.
In other words, while most living cells require oxygen to live, cancer cells can do well without oxygen, instead drawing energy from the fermentation of sugars.
To maintain normal health, humans require a minimum of 22 percent oxygen in the air they breathe.
Most American cities regularly fall below this minimum, and on so-called ozone-alert days, the oxygen level often drops to 18 percent or lower.
And the less said about the amount of sugar in the American diet the better.
Warburg is correct, and he stated that, ""on the basis of anaerobiosis there is now a real chance to get rid of this terrible disease,"" it is astounding that nothing has been done to cure cancer in the intervening four decades.
M eanwhile in America, R ockefeller executive F rank H oward, after convincing Alfred S loan and Charles Kettering of General Motors to fund a cancer institute, was named chairman of the new Sloan-Kettering Institute.
Howard chose Cornelius ""Dusty"" Rhoads, former chief of research for the medical division of the United States Chemical Warfare Service, to direct the institute's experimentation with chemotherapy.
Later, Howard represented Rockefeller interests in the drug company Rohm and Haas.
IT IS INTRIGUING that in modern health-conscious America, very little has been done to educate citizens about the dangers of overly prescribed drugs, including the depressant alcohol.
During the Third R eich, there was even a substantial anti-alcohol movement in beer-loving G ermany, including a sizeable German Anti-alcoholism Association with a membership numbering in the thousands.
The Nazis outlawed alcohol advertising aimed at youth, as well as any that suggested alcohol was healthful.
Alcohol-related hazards such as cirrhosis of the liver, cardiomyopathy, fetal abnormalities, and esophageal cancer were well known even prior to the rise of National Socialism but mostly ignored in modern America's popular media.
Yet, like Prohibition in America, the Nazi anti-alcohol effort largely failed, due to the pressure for consumption from a thirsty population, coupled with the sizeable amounts of money gained by the government through taxes on alcohol.
Like Americans today, the Nazis introduced a variety of nonalcoholic beers and even produced some made from liquefied vegetables.
In 1936, a certification system was instituted, designed to protect children from ""unsuitable"" drinks.
Coca-Cola was declared one such beverage due to its sugar and additives.
In fact, today's ""New Age"" issues echo aspects of National Socialism in the Third Reich.
In addition to liigli-ranl<ing Nazis' fascination witli tine occult, organic foods, herbs, and healing plants were all encouraged in Nazi Germany, along with a ""back to nature"" idealism and respect for the rural life.
About 83,000 voluntarily participated in his vegetarian-lifestyle program.
Although he disdained both hunting and eating meat, he did not attempt to force his ideals on his followers, for purely pragmatic reasons.
In viewing the realit/ behind benign, if tyrannical, government efforts at social control, Robert N Proctor correctly concluded, 'The Nazi campaign against tobacco and the 'wholegrain-bread operation' are, in some sense, as fascist as the yellow stars ews] and the death camps.
THE FASCIST GLOBALISTS, in addition to making unconscionable profits from tobacco and dangerous drugs such as aspartame, may be promoting a program of population reduction.
Third Reich Nazis, as well as their prominent American business partners, were greatly interested in the field of eugenics, the study of scientifically applied genetic selection to maintain and improve ideal human characteristics, which grew to include birth and population control.
The concept grew from the writings of the Victorian scientist S ir F rancis G alton, who after study reached the conclusion that prominent members of B ritish society were such because they had ""eminent"" parents.
Of course, to determine who was dirtying the gene pool required extensive population statistics.
Harriman, the wife of railroad magnate Edward Harriman and mother of diplomat Averell Harriman.
The first International Congress of Eugenics was convened in London in 1912, with Winston Churchill as a director.
Obviously, the concept of ""bloodlines"" was significant to these people.
Ernst Rudin of the Kaiser Wilhelm Institute for Genealogy and Demography in Berlin.
Rudin was unanimously elected president of the International Federation of Eugenics Societies for his work in founding the Deutschen Gesellschaftfur Rassenhygiene, or the German Society for Racial Hygiene, a forerunner of Hitler's racial institutions.
Honored personally by Hitler in 1939 and 1944, Rudin continued to be acknowledged as a leader in psychiatry.
Despite much public renunciation of eugenics following the revelations of the Nazi racial extermination programs at the N uremberg trials, work continues right up to today, under more politically correct names.
General William H Draper] was a ""supporting member"" of the International Eugenics Congress in 1932 and, despite or because of his ties to the Harriman and Bush families, was named head of the economic division of the United States Control Commission in Germany at the end of hostilities.
Bush, and he and his son were in charge of Bush's campaign fund-raising in 1980.
The younger Draper went on to work with populationcontrol activities of the United Nations.
Early efforts at reducing the birth rate by sterilization met with resistance in the United States, so the rhetoric was softened and other means pursued.
The abortion controversy stems from the eugenics views of the globalist families and their belief that some form of population control must be allowed in a well-run society.
The Human Genome Project has only elevated fears that human DNA can be manipulated and controlled.
In 2006, more than a third of the group's contributions came from corporate and foundation grants.
Rudin's eugenics work was, in a large part, funded by Rockefeller money.
General Maxwell Taylor, a former chairman of thej oint Chiefs of Staff and United States ambassador to South Vietnam, who began addressing the Council on Foreign Relations in 1952, reflected his fellow globalists' viewpoint in a 1981 interview with Executive Intelligence Review.
Taylor stated that the underlying cause of world problems was overpopulation.
He said it would be necessary by the beginning of the twenty-first century to reduce the human population, mostly in Third World countries, by disease, starvation, and regional conflicts.
The population crisis and the food-supply question dictate that we should not even try.
When one considers the starvation that wracks so many poor countries, the AIDS epidemic sweeping Africa, and the ongoing strife in Afghanistan and Iraq, plus dozens of smaller conflicts all over the world, it would seem that Taylor's vision of the future has come to pass.
But the real fear is to be found in the desire to control others, not in voluntary population control or human genes. ""he twentieth century suffered two ideologies that led to genocides,"" said MIT cognitive scientist Steven P inker, author of the 2002 book The B lank S late.
R eferring to the wrongness of N azi genetics beliefs, P inker observed, 'The other one, Marxism, had no use for race, didn't believe in genes, and denied that human nature was a meaningful concept.
Before anyone looks for relief from social manipulation from heaven, it is instructive to see the parallels in the use of religion both in the Third Reich and in modern America.
RELIGION PRESIDENT GEORGE W BUSH HAS BEEN ONLY THE MOST RECENT world leader who has used religious factions to gain support for his policies and objectives.
It has been shown that Goebbels quite consciously used religious terminology in many of his speeches.
Moreover, Nazism was a total worldview which by its very nature excluded all others.
From this it followed that traditional Christianity was a rival, not a friend.
In Mein Kampf, Hitler spoke condescendingly of religion, offering this rationalization for organized religion.
He also saw in Christian fundamentalism a reflection of his own National Socialist zeal and ambition.
An educated man retains the sense of the mysteries of nature and bows before the unknowable.
An uneducated man, on the other hand, runs the risk of going over to atheism (which is a return to the state of the animal) as soon as he perceives that the state, in sheer opportunism, is making use of false ideas in the matter of religion, while in other fields it bases everything on pure science.
I've thus prevented my Catholic and Protestant supporters from forming groups against one another, and inadvertently knocking each other out with the B ibie and the sprinkler.
The dogma of C hristianity gets worn away before the advances of science.
All that's left is to prove that in nature there is no frontier between the organic and the inorganic.
When understanding of the universe has become widespread, when the majority of men know that the stars are not sources of light but worlds, perhaps inhabited worlds like ours, then the Christian doctrine will be convicted of absurdity.
It's only gradually that it became transformed in this direction, with the object of maintaining the rule of the priests, who can live only to the detriment of society collectively.
Because of his private opposition to true Christianity, Hitler quickly took steps to subdue the church.
On J uly 23, 1933, just six months after he came to power, a Nazi-dominated National Synod in Wittenberg named a former German Army chaplain and virulent anti-Semite, Ludwig Mueller, as Reich bishop.
Six months later, Mueller issued what came to be known as the ""Muzzling Order,"" a decree designed to bring control over the German Evangelical Church.
Ministers were forbidden to speak about controversial or political matters; hence there could be no opposition to the Nazi regime.
This same no-involvement-with-politics message can be heard in many churches in America today.
Despite Nazi hostility to Christianity and thanks to Goebbels's propaganda, many Germans believed that Hitler was heaven-sent.
And, with the notable exception of some anti-N azi clerics such as P astors M artin N iemoeller and the martyred Dietrich Bonhoeffer, the German congregations all fell into lockstep with the Nazi government.
Many churchgoers were zealous Nazis, but many were simply hesitant or afraid to speak up against their noisy fellow members.
GERMANY IN THE 1930s was a predominantly religious nation with the majority divided between Catholics and Lutherans.
The fascist globalists realized that the multisectarian United States could not be brought under one religious control system.
Through their corporate control over the large media outlets, these would-be global rulers have instituted a decades-long campaign to undermine and discredit organized religion, regardless of denomination.
Some wayward TV evangelists and Catholic priests have only exacerbated this campaign.
There also appears to be a movement to control the church's message in the campaign for the 2008 election.
Why the Right Gets It Wrong and the Left Doesn't Get It, has invited Democratic presidential candidates Sen.
Soledad O'Brien, a CNN anchor and correspondent, was asked to moderate the forum.
Detractors accuse Wallis of attempting to divide evangelical C hristians to the benefit of secular liberals.
According to a special report by the Traditional Values Coalition, which claims to be the largest nondenominational, grassroots church lobby in America, 'Throughout the history of Sojourners, Wallis has taken a consistently left-wing and anti-American stance.
The report goes on to accuse Wallis of supporting socialist programs, noting that while Wallis was in seminary, he founded a magazine he named PostAmerican.
Other critics saw Wallis as an example of the plutocracy's propensity for supporting and thus controlling both sides of an issue.
Considering Hillary's ties to the secretive Bilderbergs, her husband's membership in the Council on F oreign R elations and the Trilateral C ommission, as well as her work with the N azi-connected group called The Family, it could be said that she provides a connective tissue between the globalists and their new Fourth Reich.
Pastor Lutzer described what he saw as attempts to suppress and denigrate Christianity in presentday America.
Interpreted in oneway, it can mean that the church should be free to exercise its influence and practice religion without interference from the state.
That kind of separation is exactly what the church in G ermany so desperately needed.
To them, it means that religious people should not be allowed to practice their religion in the realm that belongs to the state.
Religion, we are told, should be practiced privately; the state must be 'cleansed' from every vestige of religious influence.
Some churches in America are already feeling the eyes of the government on them.
In 2007, Pastor Mark Holick of the Spirit One Christian Center in Wichita, Kansas, urged the IRS to brush up on the constitutional freedoms guaranteed by the United States Constitution.
This came after his church received a letter from IRS officials warning it against ""political activity"" and demanding answers to thirty-one questions regarding its beliefs.
Holick notified the IRS that, ""the church cannot agree to not engage in any activity that may favor or oppose a candidate.
Simply preaching the word of God on a moral issue to which a candidate is opposed, may be deemed to oppose a candidate.
Evangelist Bill Keller, founder of the fifteen-year-old Bill Keller Ministries, which created the Liveprayer with Bill Keller television program and Liveprayer.com, reportedly the world's largest interactive C hristian Web site, publicly complained that he too faced problems with his right to free speech.
Of course, this is designed to intimidate people into silence, even though in 76 previous attempts yet to be successful in getting anyone's tax exemption pulled.
Keller also complained his freedom of speech was being curtailed by Internet corporations.
These new filters are 'content filters' and work off of a dictionary that can have any words added the operator wants.
For six months, we have been getting our Daily Devotional blocked sporadically by Microsoft's servers based on the 'content' of my message.
This is also happening to other Christian organizations as well as conservative political groups who rely heavily on e-mail.
The issue here is not abortion or content but the right of free speech, whether it is a church or an individual.
Large mainstream monied churches have long been used as platforms for politicians, both local and national.
They seem to fare well but it is the fringe churches and religions where we find longestablished freedoms being chipped away.
FOR THOSE UNAWARE of the tactics of the fascist globalists, it must seem strange that churches can be intimidated by the government much like in Nazi Germany, even with a professed Christian in the White House.
Some Christians have been less restrained in their comparison between professed fundamental C hristianity on today's political scene and the use of religion in N azi G ermany.
An Online] ournal contributing writer, Schwarz stated, ""In fact, if you look real close at Bush-Cheney and understand the fundamental dynamics of what brought H itier to power, how he controlled the masses, how he sold the G reat Lie, it is very easy to see that Bush-Cheney 'compassionate Conservatism' and Fascism are one and the same.
But most people appeared not to notice the parallels between the fascism of Nazi Germany and the conservative Christian movement in America today, both with deep roots in the conservative faction of the population.
In America, this faction tends to be pro-business, which makes it a prime target of the fascist globalists, who largely control the corporate life of the nation.
This faith-based political movement began in the late 1970s with the formation of the Moral Majority, a coalition of C hristian conservative groups who were seeking to defeat P resident J immy C arter in the 1980 election.
One of its founders was Southern Baptist preacher Pat Robertson, who in 1988 severed all connections with the church in order to run for president on the R epublican ticket.
Robertson went on to become an influential TV evangelist, primarily thanks to the Christian Broadcasting Network he founded in 1961.
In 2005, he was forced to apologize for comments interpreted by many as advocating the assassination of Venezuelan president Hugo Chavez.
It's a whole lot cheaper than starting a war, and I don't think any oil shipments will stop,"" Robertson told his audience.
Another M oral M ajority founder was J erry F alwell, a televangelist who became a firm supporter of George W Bush's Faith-based Initiative.
Erik Prince, a former Navy SEAL, is the founder of Blackwater USA, a private security contracting firm that has grown into one of the largest private armies in the world.
In 2007, Blackwater came under criticism and congressional scrutiny following more than two hundred shooting reports in Iraq, one in September of that year that left seventeen Iraqis dead and more than two dozen wounded.
Prince's father, Edgar, a self-made millionaire from selling auto parts, supported the Family Research Council , a right-wing fundamentalist Christian group close to the Bush administration.
Both men were significant contributions to the elections campaigns of George W Bush.
Edgar's widow served on the boards of FRC and another heavyweight Christian right organization, Dobson's Focus on the Family.
She runs the Edgar and Elsa Prince Foundation, of which Erik is a vice president.
The foundation gave more than $1 million to the Christian right from J uly 2003 to 2006.
Author] eremy Scahill compared Prince's private army to Hitler's ""Brownshirt"" storm troopers.
It has been noted that prewar G ermany and the U nited States both had C hristian roots, a widespread acceptance of biblical social values, and a basic commitment to private virtue.
P astor Lutzer pointed out that America has differed from Germany in that it has benefited from a constitutional guarantee of the separation of church and state, as well as its history of democracy.
Like so many in modern America, most Germans of the 1930s offered no resistance to the everencroaching fascism of National Socialism.
N one in the area of religion seems able to get a clear picture of what is happening in modern America.
The push-pull between liberty and security, scripture and social consciousness appears to have created a stultifying tension.
The globalists have found that such ongoing controversies coming from many different directions is an effective mechanism to keep Americans arguing with each other, off balance, and ineffective in uniting to learn the truth behind their New World Order agenda.
On three separate occasions Matthew 12:3131, M ark 3:2829, and Luke 12:10 J esus specifically stated that all sins can be forgiven, even from those who choose not to believe in him or have blasphemed against him.
But he stated the one sin that can never be forgiven is to speak against the holy spirit.
STATED PROFESSOR GEORGE MOSSE IN his bookNazi Culture, ""for if an ideology can be institutionalized through the education establishment, it has won a major battle.
U pon close inspection, it will be found that the American education establishment has been created and guided for many years by the progenitors of the globalists who created both communism and National Socialism.
The oil magnate] ohn D Rockefeller created the General Education Board in 1903 to dispense Rockefeller donations to education.
By 1960, it had ceased operating as a separate entity and its programs were rolled into the Rockefeller Foundation.
According to current school literature, the facility engages in, ""enrolling students from kindergarten through grade 12.
From its outset, the Lincoln School was described frankly as a revolutionary school for the primary and secondary schools of the entire United States.
Between 1890 and 1914, Rocl<efeller , tlirougli tlie society, lianded out close to a million dollars to many different schools.
But the lynchpin of his attempt to guide American education was his formation of the National Education Board and the continuing R ockefeller support to the U niversity of C hicago.
The mammoth university now encompasses an undergraduate college, four graduate divisions, six professional schools as well as libraries, laboratories, museums, clinics, and other institutions; nursery and K-12 schools; a continuing-studies program; and an academic press.
In 2003, a university center opened in Paris to accommodate the school's program of Europe an studies.
C losely connected to R ockefeller 's U niversity of C hicago is the E nglish world's most accepted authority on everything.
Encyclopaedia Britannica, headquartered in Chicago, also owns Merriam-Webster Incorporation, one of the world's leading publishers of dictionaries and thesauri.
During World War II, he served as assistantsecretary of state in Washington, D.C., until 1947, during which time he was active in organizing the U nited N ations.
H e served as a member of and delegate to numerous United Nations and international conferences and commissions.
A declared Democrat, he was United States senator from 1949 until 1953.
From 1943 until his death in 1973, Benton was chairman of the board and publisher of Encyclopaedia Britannica.
BankJ acob Safra Switzerland is part of the Safra Group, a far-flung chain of financial institutions.
The only difficulty was that education, on the whole, wasn't in bad shape,"" explained Paolo Lionni, author of The Leipzig Connection, his 1993 book that traced the deleterious effects of experimental psychology on the education system back to German professor of philosophy Wilhelm Max Wundt, the founder of experimental psychology.
J efferson had maintained that in order to preserve liberty in the new nation, it was essential that its citizenry be educated, what ever their income.
These school systems included ones established by the Quakers in Pennsylvania and the Midwest, the free school movement in N ew York, and a large number of ""normal schools,"" so named for helping to set the norms for education.
By the start of the twentieth century, the U nited States was home to many major universities, which turned out thousands of well-trained teachers each year.
Students learned how to read not comic books but the essays of Burke, Webster, Lincoln, Horace, Cicero.
Their difficulties with grammar were overcome long before they graduated from school, and any review of a typical elementary school arithmetic textbook printed before 1910 shows dramatically that students were learning mathematical skills that few of our current high school graduates know anything about.
The agenda behind Rockefeller's creation of the GEB may have been revealed in correspondence from Frederick T Gates, Rockefeller's choice to head the board.
Gates wrote, ""In our dreams, we have limitless resources and the people yield themselves with perfect docility to our molding hands.
The present education conventions fade from their minds, and unhampered by tradition, we work our own good will upon a grateful and responsive rural folk.
We shall not try to make these people or any of their children into philosophers or men of learning, or men of science.
We have not to raise up from among them authors, editors, poets or men of letters.
We shall not search for embryo great artists, painters, musicians nor lawyers, doctors, preachers, politicians, statesmen, of whom we have an ample supply.
Well, the views in most of those areas are fundamentally flawed and they don't lead to the best solutions in 'mental health,' education, medicine, sanity, and happiness.
Now, with the collapse of communism, the advent of the United Nations and NATO, along with various economic treaties now in place, it would appear that this globalist goal is close to becoming realized.
He added that these entities had been subverted from the original goals of their creators by subsequent directors another example of wealth taking control of existing organizations.
G ibbs, associate professor of political science at the U niversity of Arizona, noted that the intelligence community has long taken advantage of academia to propagate their views and philosophies as always, through the distribution of money.
In 1935, Ernst Mueller, head of the German-American Settlement League, acquired lakeside property in Yaphank, Long Island, and invited Americans of German descent to visit and relax.
The youth in Yaphank constructed tents on platforms, called Camp Siegfried.
N euss's father initially was friendly with the G erman organization but soon turned against them because of their anti-Semitism and un-American speeches.
Although many German-American organizations existed in the prewar United States, the Bund was among the only ones to express support for Nazi ideals.
In February 1939, Bund leader Fritz Kuhn addressed a crowd of about twenty thousand in Madison Square Garden and railed against President ""Frank D Rosenfeld"" and the ""Bolshevik-J ewish conspiracy"" threatening America.
Once the nation entered the war, some Bund members fled the country while others were placed in internment camps.
Although the American Nazi Bund never developed into a serious threateven Hitler tried to distance himself from it the subversion of the educational process under which it prospered continued.
THE NATIONAL TEACHERS Association, now l<nown as tine National Education Association, was founded in 1850 as a professional teacher organization, but today has become the largest labor union in the United States, representing almost 3 million educators.
In 1966, the NEA merged with the American Teachers Association, an organization primarily concerned with education in the black community, yet another special interest of the R ockefellers, who funneled money into black education programs and organizations.
By 1964, Rockefeller's General Education Board had spent more than $3. million in gifts to support black education, criticized by some as merely a means to instill white values and worldviews in black students.
Ideology and Power in America, 1865-1954, J ohn D Rockefeller Sr. was more concerned with shaping a new industrial social order than providing a useful education.
Conservative Republican Pat Buchanan decried the efforts of the NEA as a negative influence on American education.
Opposing the Ex-Gay Educators Caucus atthe 2004 NEA National Convention was KevinJ ennings, a former private-school teacher in Massachusetts and founder of the Gay Lesbian Straight Education Network, who has partnered with the NEA in promoting acceptance of homosexuality using curriculum materials in the nation's schools, beginning as early as kindergarten and the elementary grades.
At the convention, J ennings was presented the NEA's human rights ""creative leadership"" award.
In years past, if a child was acting up or caught staring out the window, he or she received a rap on the knuckles with a ruler and was told to stay with the rest of the class.
Today, the child is sent to the school nurse, who oftentimes tells the parents the student has attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder and recommends the administration of Prozac or Ritalin, psychotropic drugs that have been shown to produce psychosis in lab rats.
Republican State Representative Lenny Winkler, one of the bill's primary sponsors, quoted studies showing the number of children taking R italin nationally jumped from 500,000 in 1987 to more than 6 million by 2001.
The bill also prohibited the state's Department of C hildren and F amilies from taking children away from parents who decline to put their children on moodaltering drugs.
A 1999 study at the H uman Development C enter at the U niversity of Wisconsin in E au C laire found that thirteen ""ADHD"" children on medication, over four years, performed progressively worse on standardized tests than a group of thirteen normal children with similar IQs and other characteristics.
Gretchen LeFever, an assistantprofessor of pediatrics and psycliiatry at Eastern Virginia IMedical Scliool, revealed tliat wliile cliildren in lier community used tine drug Ritalin two to three times more than the national rate, their academic performance in relation to their peers showed no improvement.
For her persistence in questioning the rising incidence of drug use in schoolchildren.
The difficult-to-control male child is certainly not a new phenomenon, but attempts to give him a medical diagnosis are the product of modern psychology and psychiatry.
N ow it's just assumed to be a real disease, regardless of the failure to prove it so.
According to J ohn Cornwell, author of Hitler's Scientists, the center of psychoanalysis shifted from Germany to the United States after the war. ""any of the homegrown analysts were German trained,"" he noted.
Thomas Roeder, Volker Kubillus, and Anthony Burwell in their book Psychiatrists the Men Behind Hitler.
The influx of Nazi-trained psychiatrists after World War II, particularly in the military and intelligence fields, has produced a blossoming of psychological disorders.
Helmut Remschmidt, who directed the Society for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry until 1984, was a leader in research into hyperactivity in children.
Hermann Stutte, who was associated with Nazi psychiatrists involved in the German euthanasia program and had received his doctorate from Robert Sommer, director of the Deutscher Verband fur psychische Hygiene, or the German Association for Mental Hygiene.
Remschmidt, long after the war, still pointed to ""a genetic answer"" to hyperactivity and was a leading proponent of the use of drugs such as Ritalin.
What is equally frightening and obvious is that the racist and elitist theories of the original child psychiatrists as documented in 1940 at the F irst C ongress have not only survived but flourished.
It has been a natural passage of poison from teacher to student, from the N azis to subsequent generations of child and adolescent psychiatrists.
O'Meara pointed to a 2001 study at the Brookhaven National Laboratory that confirmed the similarities between cocaine and R italin, but found that R italin is more potent than cocaine in its effect on the dopamine system, an area of the brain many doctors believe is most affected by these drugs.
Drugs such as Ritalin, now used to treat questionable mental afflictions, are taken by tens of millions of American youngsters.
Americans wonder why there has been a rash of school shootings and teen suicides in recent years, yet virtually all of these killings have involved a student on moodaltering drugs or just coming off them.
In five cases of school shootings between March 1998 and May 1999 including the tragedy at Columbine High School at least seven of the students involved were being medicated.
It was downplayed but reported that Seung-Hui Cho, the gunman in the Virginia Tech shootings in April 2007, had been undergoing psychological counseling and had prescription psychoactive drugs in his possession.
Peter Breggin analyzed the clinical and scientific reasons for asserting that E ric H arris's violence at C olumbine was caused by the prescription drug Luvox.
A Web site called TeenScreenTruth is dedicated to gathering information off the Internet to help teens ""connect the dots to see the revealing connections"" between moodaltering drugs and teen violence.
This assessment was echoed in a 1999 article in Health and Healing by Dr.
In 1998, GlaxoSmithKline, maker of Paxil, was ordered to pay $6. million to surviving family members after Donald Schnell, sixty, flew into a rage and killed his wife, daughter, and granddaughter just forty-eight hours after taking Paxil.
The TeenScreenT ruth site and the Indianapolis Star compiled a list of violent episodes dating as far back as 1985, when Steven W Brownlee, an Atlanta postal worker on psychotropic drugs, killed two coworkers.
He had been given a drug aft:er a fiveminute phone consultation with a psychiatrist.
Solomon, flfl:een, opened flre at Heritage High School in Conyers, Georgia, while on a mix of antidepressants.
She shot and wounded another student at Bishop Neumann High in Williamsport, Pennsylvania.
Eli Lilly, which makes Prozac, later seti:led a lawsuit brought by survivors.
Debora Green set her Prairie Village, Missouri, home on fire, killing her children, ages six and thirteen.
It would appear that G erman drug science and G erman psychiatry have provided the foundation for action toward today's schoolchildren who are being increasingly steered to drugs for any complaint, from true antisocial behavior to mere daydreaming.
Direct-to-consumer pharmaceutical advertising grew from $791 million in 1996 to more than $3. billion by 2004.
Those familiar with this subject claim media executives fear the loss of advertising revenues from the giant pharmaceutical corporations, some of the largest advertisers in the nation.
M any have, but they don't receive significant coverage in the corporate mass media, and many more fear reprisals from both the drug corporations and the federal government.
That effort dwarfs the [pharmaceutical corporations'] advertising expenditures,"" explained Alan Mathios, a dean at the College of Human E cology at C ornell U niversity.
Signed into law by President George W Bush on j anuary 8, 2002, the act nevertheless brought immediate criticism from educators, state authorities, and libertarians alike.
They questioned the act's sweeping proposals, which range from forcing teachers to conform to federally mandated curricula to inflicting monetary punishments on school districts that do not live up to federal expectation, and even taking state control or turning them over to private management companies.
They also questioned the $410 million apportioned for the education of migratory children, most of whom come from the families of illegal aliens.
Standardized testing has proven a handicap to children who speak English as a second language.
While no caring person would want to be caught leaving some poor child ""behind,"" there was nevertheless the irksome feeling by many that the act was a thinly disguised attempt to force conformity on students and standardize the minds of American youth.
It smacks of the same uniformity of education sought by the N ational S ocialists under H itier.
S ome conservatives and libertarians even claim that the act is an usurpation of state authority by the federal government.
For example, in 2005, when Utah passed a state law allowing school districts to ignore portions of NCLB, the Department of Education threatened to withhold federal education funds.
The backbone of NCLB is federally mandated standardized testing, which long has been accused of cultural bias.
In fact, the entire practice of testing as a determinant of educational quality has been called into question, because the emphasis on tests forces teachers to teach only material that will get students to pass the tests, leaving a deficiency in grasping greater understanding and thinking critically.
It should also be realized that both the textbook publishers and the standardized testing firms are, for the most part, controlled by the same globalist corporations under discussion.
The act rewards districts with better test scores, so critics claim that schools lower their standards to show improvement on test scores.
A 2007 report from the C enter on E ducation P olicy indicated increased test scores in reading and math, but it was unclear if this reflected enhanced learning or lower standards on student tests.
Another portion of the NCLB Act that rankled libertarians was S ection 9528, which requires schools to give military recruiters the name, home phone number, and address of every enrolled student.
Schools are not required to tell the students or parents that their information has been passed on, but students can ask to not have their contact information shared.
B ut filing the required form often means student information is withheld from universities and job recruiters as well as the military.
As a result, there are claims that other areas of schooling have been neglected, especially physical education.
This idea was reinforced by recent data from the Centers for Disease Control, showing kids between the ages of six and nineteen, some nine million youngsters, suffer from obesity.
I don't get it,"" questioned PE teacher Garrett Lydic, Delaware's 2006 Teacher of the Year.
Hence NCLB's merciless testing, absurd timetables and reliance on threats,"" commented USA Today education writer Alfie Kohn.
He echoed the statement of J ohn D Rockefeller, founder of the National Education Board, who said, ""I don't want a nation of thinkers.
H itier also felt that intellectuals might not only present a rival to N azi ideology but could form a group separate from the common man through a feeling of superiority due to their knowledge and education.
Bush, Biden recalled, just looked at him, unflappably sure that the United States was on the right course and that all was well.
Biden said that Bush stood up and put his hand on the senator's shoulder.
The Fourth Reich in America, it seems, is guided by ""instincts, ""just as during Hitler's Reich.
ONE MAJ OR DIFFERENCE between the Third Reich and the Fourth is the lack of emphasis on flag ceremonies and repetitious pledges.
In Nazi Germany, a school day did not pass without these ceremonies of the state.
But in multicultural and globalized America, although schoolchildren still recite the Pledge of Allegiance and raise the United States flag, any formal ceremony has dropped away.
Today, hardly any American child or adult knows or observes proper flag protocols.
If the Pledge of Allegiance is used in schools, it is generally spoken over the loudspeaker.
If they can obtain a note from their parents, they are not even required to stand.
P atriotic allegiance to one's nation is not conducive to the globalists' agenda of borderless countries under the control of multinational corporations.
Today, such nationalistic trappings have been replaced by ubiquitous corporate logos and slogans.
More and more educational programs are being underwritten and guided by corporate officials.
President Bush's secretary of education Margaret Spellings hosted the 2006-07 Siemens Competition in Math, Science, and Technology.
Business leaders began to realize that education had failed to keep up with the corporatism of America.
Prudential CEO Art Ryan complained that hiring high school graduates today is a high risk.
Another rising concern in education tliat can be traced bacl< to corporate intrusion is tine rise of advertising in scliools.
According to a debate posted on tine official NEA Web site, teacliers liave complained that getting kids to buy products, feel good about a corporation, or adopt the viewpoints of an industry on an important issue is not the purpose of education and that promotional sponsored education materials blur the line between education and propaganda and lead to distorted lessons.
Manny Lopez, a fourth-grade teacher atthe International Community School in Oakland, California, warned, ""Upon entering our schools, advertisers would dictate the placement of their billboards, banners, and lightboxes.
The highly visible areas normally reserved for students' artwork, bulletin boards, and school/community message centers would be taken over.
Retired Georgia teacher Elizabeth Gould wrote, "" gives students a warped sense of the world.
Arguing in favor of school advertising, Kathleen McMahon, a fourth-grade teacher at Alice Costello School in Brooklawn, New J ersey, said, ""In an ideal world, schools would have all the money they need to fund programs and buy equipment, but we're not living in Utopia.
Gary Ruskin, writing in Advertising Age magazine, urged advertisers to exercise self-restraint or face future legal restrictions.
Channel One, the in-school advertising service, was removed last school yearfrom Nashville, and will soon be kicked out of Seattle.
In the late 1800s, a group of Chicago businessmen became concerned that education in Germany and Austria was moving ahead of American education.
But even in the 1800s, thoughtful persons questioned the propriety of business guiding education.
In mid-2007, billionaires Bill Gates and Eli Broad announced they had pooled $60 million to finance a campaign to emphasize education in the 2008 elections.
NATIONAL SOCIALISM IN the Germany of the 1930s made a strong appeal to its youth.
The N azis fully realized that if the younger generations could be brought to their worldview, the future of National Socialism would be assured.
Modern America also has witnessed conflict between the younger and older generations.
The genesis of this generational conflict began with the rockand-roll music of the 1950s and grew full-blown with the Vietnam War, when families were split along lines of age.
The young embraced the antiwar movement while the older generations, tempered by the propaganda of World War II, supported the war policies of Lyndon J ohnson and Richard Nixon.
Here again was a reflection of Nazi Germany, where Hitler's promises of a more prosperous future held considerable sway with the younger generations.
This generational conflict, caused by control over popular culture such as music, films, art, etc., was merely another use of the divideand-conquer tactic.
American journalist and educator Milton Mayer was both J ewish and of German ancestry.
He traveled in E urope before the war and tried unsuccessfully to gain an audience with H itier in 1935.
Seven years after the war ended, Mayer traveled in Germany, searching to understand what had made the average German blindly follow National Socialism.
But I found ten Germans sufficiently different from one another in background, character, intellect, and temperament to represent, among them, some millions or tens of millions of Germans and sufficiently like unto one another to have been Nazis.
I was overcome by the same sensation that had got in the way of my newspaper reporting in Chicago years before.
Mayer recounted the story of one unnamed German academic, a language teacher, and his experience as Hitler's Third Reich grew in prominence.
This teacher said that after 1933 no one seemed to notice the ever-widening gap between the government and the people.
It was all rigmarole, of course, but it consumed all one's energies, coming on top of the work one really wanted to do.
You can see how easy it was, then, not to think about fundamental things.
The dictatorship, and the whole process of its coming into being, was above all diverting.
It provided an excuse not to think for people who did not want to think anyway.
Then they came for the S ocialists and the Trade U nionists, but I was neither, so I did not speak out.
Then they came for the J ews, but I was not a J ew so I did not speak out.
A great part of this hesitancy to resist encroaching fascism was not due to fear, according to the academic Milton Mayer, but to genuine uncertainty that anyone else was seeing the things as he did.
In Nazi Germany, people who questioned the motives behind government policies were deemed alarmists.
In America today, they are called conspiracy theorists. ""n small gatherings of your oldest friends, you feel that you are talking to yourselves, that you are isolated from the reality of things.
It is clearer all the time that, if you are going to do anything, you must make an occasion to do it, and then you are obviously a troublemaker.
So you wait, and you wait,"" explained an unnamed teacher quoted by Mayer.
He said thatthe person who is aware suddenly sees the world in a new way.
The forms are all there, all untouched, all reassuring, the houses, the shops, the jobs, the mealtimes, the visits, the concerts, the cinema, the holidays.
B ut the spirit, which you never noticed because you made the lifelong mistake of identifying it with the forms, is changed.
N ow you live in a world of hate and fear, and the people who hate and fear do not even know it themselves; when everyone is transformed, no one is transformed.
And the people in Germany who, once the war had begun, still thought of complaining, protesting, resisting, were betting on Germany's losing the war.
N azi-occupied E urope, and even many G ermans toward the end of the war, looked hopefully to the Allied nations for their liberation.
PSYCHOLOGY AND PUBLIC CONTROL WHILE NOT DIRECTLY RELATED TO EDUCATION , IT SHOULD ALSO be noted that in Nazi Germany, while labor was extolled and glamorized, the power of labor unions was all but abolished.
All labor matters were combined into the Deutsche Arbeitsfront, or German Labor Front, a monolithic N azi organization created by H itier to replace the old labor union system.
Again, the agenda of the corporate globalists was at work to curtail any meaningful power within the working class.
However, despite early labor support based on pro-labor Nazi slogans and propaganda, the workers soon realized that the promised labor-professional equality was a myth, and labor problems continued to plague the N azi government right through the end of the war.
In light of the continuing problems in Nazi Germany, the globalists declined to create a laborcontrolling mechanism with modern America.
Instead, they began a successful program of buying corrupt labor leaders, making deals with the crime syndicates that controlled certain unions, and crippling labor through federal legislation pushed through Congress with corporate money.
One example of this occurred in the 1980s, when the Reagan administration crushed collective bargaining by air traffic controllers, who desired increased air safety through better working conditions rather than just higher wages.
Another example came in mid-2002, when a labor dispute between the International Longshore and Warehouse Union and the Pacific Maritime Association caused a stack-up of cargo ships along the West Coast from San Diego to Seattle, which threatened to cut deeply into the 200203 holiday season profits.
The strike was broken in October, when President Bush invoked the TaftHartley Act, a controversial 1947 union-busting law that was passed over President Truman's veto.
It has already been demonstrated how many United States government and corporate policies have been instituted by firms and organizations created and controlled by America's wealthy elite globalists.
The globalists also created the myth thatthe Rockefellers represent the apex of America's wealthy elite, a description the Rockefellers have done little to discourage.
The long-standing idea that American oil magnate J ohn D Rockefeller was driven solely by greed obscured the fact that he was financed by outside sources.
According to Eustace Mullins, the Rockefeller combine has never been an independent power.
It was this R ockefeller myth of a homegrown elite that distracted attention from the international globalists and allowed the American public to accept the family as the nation's preeminent power. ""he Rockefeller oil trust the 'military-industrial complex,' which assumed political control of the nation; the Rockefeller medical monopoly attained control of the health care of the nation; and the Rockefeller Foundation, a web of affiliated tax-exempt creations, effectively controlled the religious and educational life of the nation,"" wrote Mullins.
According to Mullins, 'This is tine final control, which ensures that no one can quit the organization.
Not only would he be stripped of all assets, but he would be under contract for immediate assassination.
In pointing to the awareness of the J ustice Department, Mullins, like authors J ohn Loftus, Gary Allen, M ark Aarons, and others, was fully aware of the lack of detection or prosecution of N azi war criminals who came to America, or of any serious prosecution of prominent corporate miscreants.
Examples of the machinations of foreign financial powers in the United States, including the secret societies behind the War Between the States, may be found in my book Rule by Secrecy.
While it is true that the families that originated the wealthy elite in America the Rockefellers, the M organs, the S chiffs, and the Warburgs have in recent years lost much of their previous influence, their giant global enterprises today remain as powerful as ever, maintaining all the functions for which they were first organized.
This mechanism today has been brought under the control of the fascist globalists, who created both communism and National Socialism using the wealth brought from Europe by the Nazi ratlines.
AMAZINGLY, IN JANUARY 1945, with their cities in ruins from round-the-clock Allied bombings, German war production was actually higher than in 1940, the year of spectacular military successes.
Germans were still heading off to work each day, and production facilities, many moved underground, were producing at record capacity.
Historians have faithfully recorded the reasons for this propaganda and hidden terror.
The official, controlled government news bombarded the public with assurances that there was light at the end of the tunnel.
N ew secret weapons were coming on line, they were told, and this, as has been noted, was not a total lie.
According to their media, God was on their side and all would end well.
There also was the knowledge, only heard in whispered rumors, that anyone who spoke out about the true state of Nazi Germany would disappear into the offices of the Gestapo, likely never to be seen again.
The globalists have learned from the N azis of the Third R eich how to employ these methods to ensure obedience from an intimidated public.
From the constantly changing terrorist alerts and color codes in public places, since September 11, 2001, Americans have learned to live with fear.
Unspoken fear is rampant in many levels of contemporary American society, and it is not all caused by unknown foreign terrorists.
Beginning with the still-controversial assassinations of President] ohn F Kennedy, Robert F Kennedy, and Dr.
Martin Luther King J, on through the 2002 fatal plane crash of Minnesota Democratic senator P aul Wellstone eleven days before an election whose seat was then taken by a R epublican, which created a Republican majority in the Senate the trail of dead dissidents, witnesses, accusers, and whistleblowers has grown longer with each passing year.
J ust as in the days of the Third R eich, if any individual threatens to become too popular or brings too much attention to the fascist activities, they seem to disappear from the scene quickly.
One such person was Republican Texas senator] ohn Tower, whose Tower Commission was highly critical of the Reagan-Bush handling of the Iran-contra scandal, and Tower had confided to friends that he planned to write a tell-all book.
Tower, who had chaired the powerful Senate Armed Services Committee and the Republican Policy Committee, was killed in a plane crash at Brunswick, Georgia, on April 5, 1991.
Other persons who died under suspicious circumstances included Clinton White House counsel Vince Foster, whosej uly 1993 death was ruled a suicide, and J ames McDougal, a convicted partner of Bill Clinton in the Whitewater scandal, who was a source of insider information to prosecutor Kenneth Starr.
M cDougal died of an apparent sudden heart attack while being held in solitary confinement in a Fort Worth federal institution.
Others, while not actually killed, have been shot or intimidated from running for office, such as former Alabama governor George Wallace and 1992 presidential candidate Ross Perot, who publicly stated his reason for dropping out was concern for the safety of his family.
Thanks to the modern surveillance state, many members of C ongress find themselves susceptible to blackmail by damaging information from any number of government and corporate databases.
Edgar Hooverperhaps with files from Interpol, as previously discussed blackmailed government employees and congressmen into supporting his agendas.
All too oft en, this type of coercion is more effective than campaign contributions.
BUT IT IS not only Congress members who find themselves at the mercy of increasing surveillance and control.
Beginning in December 2009, Americans will face the prospect of carrying their ""papers"" to conduct daily life, similar to the identity papers demanded by the Nazi Gestapo.
Under provisions of the Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act for Defense, the Global War on Terror, and Tsunami Relief , popularly known as the Real ID Act, for all practical purposes, a national identity card will be required of every citizen.
Today it has become unlawful not to provide identification documents to a police officer upon demand.
The sheer act of failing to properly identify oneself can today result in arrest and jail.
Under the pretext of combating terrorism, this law requires national standards for state-issued driver's licenses as well as non-driver identification cards.
It specifically states that no federal agency can accept any state ID card or license unless it meets the requirements as stated in the Real ID Act.
Since the Transportation Security Administration provides security at airports, anyone without identification compliant with Real ID Act may be unable to fly on commercial aircraft.
And as the federal Social Security Administration requires states to maintain a new-hire directory, employers would no longer be able to hire anyone without a Real ID Act-compliant document.
Of particular concern to libertarians is the requirement that all financial institutions would be required to accept only Act-compliant IDs.
Customers without such federally approved documentation could be denied financial and banking services.
This thinly disguised nationwide citizen-registration law languished in a hesitant Congress until it was attached as a rider to a military spending bill and signed into law on May 11, 2005.
In 2007, perhaps in light of several states passing legislation opposing the Real ID Act, it was announced that enforcement of the law would be delayed until December 2009.
In 2007, states that opted out of the Real ID Act were told their citizens might not be able to travel freely around the country.
Author Steven Yates is a teaching fellow at the Ludwig von Mises Institute in Auburn, Alabama, a research and education center of classical liberalism, libertarian political theory, and economics.
Following the intellectual tradition of Ludwig von Mises, a renowned economist who has been called the ""uncontested dean of the Austrian school of economics,"" the institute supports publications, programs, and fellowships.
He and many others see the slow encirclement of law-abiding United States citizens with national ID technology advancing a globalist agenda while doing little if anything to safeguard us against terrorism.
H owever, many legislators, such as R epresentative J ane H arman of C alifornia, seemed agreeable to citizen registration.
Asked if she thought the public was ready for such measures, Harman replied, ""I think most people are really there.
What disturbs many thinking people is a vision of the near future in which, should the feds decide to stifle dissent, they could ""freeze"" the dissident's assets by reprogramming his database information.
Scanners would not recognize him and he would become officially invisible, unable to drive or work legally, have a bank account, buy anything on credit, or even see a doctor.
Lest anyone think this is naive or even paranoid nonsense, consider that in late October 2002, Applied Digital Solutions, Inc., a high-tech development company headquartered in Palm Beach, Florida, announced the launching of a national promotion for its new subdermal personal verification microchip.
The ""Get Chipped"" promotion was describing a device that can be implanted under a person's skin to transmit data to various locations.
The ""VeriChip,"" according to company literature, is, ""an implantable, 12mm by 2.1mm radio frequency device... about the size of the point of a typical ballpoint pen.
Utilizing an external scanner, radio frequency energy passes through the skin, energizing the dormant VeriChip, which then emits a radio frequency signal containing the verification number.
In addition to ""VeriChip Centers"" in Arizona, Texas, and Florida, the firm also fields the ""ChipMobile,"" a motorized marketing and ""chipping"" vehicle.
The new ""Get Chipped"" campaign was launched just days after the Food and Drug Administration ruled that the chip is not a regulated medical device and stated it found ""reasonable assurance"" that the chip was safe.
However, neither the manufacturer nor the FDA mentioned a series of veterinary and toxicology studies conducted in the mid-1990s, which found that chip implants ""induced"" malignant tumors in some lab mice and rats.
Several leading cancer experts contacted by the AP cautioned that while animal tests do not necessarily apply to humans, they were ""troubled"" by the findings and urged further study before the chips were implanted in people.
Some stated they would not allow their family members to receive such implants.
The head of the federal Department of H ealth and H uman S ervices when the VeriC hip was approved was Tommy Thompson, who after leaving his government post joined VeriC hip C orporation as a director.
H e resigned from the company in early 2007 to run an unsuccessful campaign as a Republican presidential candidate.
Uses for the chip include controlling access to nonpublic facilities such as government buildings and installations, nuclear power plants, national research laboratories, correctional institutions, and transportation hubs either using the chip by itself or in conjunction with existing security technologies such as retina scanners, thumbprint scanners, or face-recognition devices.
C ompany officials envision the chip will come to be used in a wide range of consumer products, including P C and laptop computers, personal vehicles, cell phones, homes, and apartments.
They said the implanted chip will help stop identity theft and aid in the war against terrorists.
By early 2006, fears of the chip became reality when a Cincinnati video surveillance firm, C ityWatcher.com, began to place the VeriC hip in the arms of some of its employees who worked in sensitive areas.
While the firm did not require employees to receive the chip to keep their jobs, some saw the company as establishing an unsettling precedent.
Today, authorities are availing themselves of technologies the Nazis of the Third Reich could only have dreamed about.
Satellite surveillance and the increasingly ubiquitous cameras in public places have curtailed privacy to a large extent in the industrialized world.
Sophisticated miniature cameras now can read license plates and track vehicles even traveling at speeds of more than sixty miles per hour.
The United States federal government utilizes an electronic eavesdropping satellite and computer system called Echelon.
This system tracks international telephone calls, faxes, and e-mail messages all around the world.
It was so secret that the government would neither confirm nor deny its existence until 2001.
According to a study by the Europe an Union, Echelon accumulates electronic transmissions like a vacuum cleaner, using keyword-search software in conjunction with massive computer data banks.
The Echelon system, housed within the National Security Agency at Fort Meade, Maryland, has caused protests in several nations excluding the United States, whose population rarely sees any news concerning this powerful global wiretapping system.
As technology continues to advance, so does the means of manipulating, even controlling, whole groups of individuals.
The means to control the human mind has come a long way since the days of Nazi concentration camps and the subsequent CIA drug experimentation.
Today, beamed electromagnetic frequencies can alter perceptions, instill emotions, and even cloud normal reasoning.
All organic life consists of living cells controlled by the DNA within them.
The chemical action within the cells is driven by electromagnetic frequencies that pulse, oscillate, and vibrate.
Collectively, the energy within a living organism creates a surrounding, albeit weak, electromagnetic field.
Royal Raymond Rife demonstrated the ability of precise electrical frequencies to disrupt viral and bacteria cells.
Thomas Rivers of the Rockefeller Institute, who had not even seen Rife's equipment in operation.
By 1934, R ife had isolated a virus that bred cancer and stopped it by bombarding it with electromagnetic frequencies.
He was successful in killing both carcinoma and sarcoma cancers in more than four hundred tests on animals.
F oord, succeeded in using his frequencies to cure sixteen cancer patients diagnosed as terminal by conventional medicine.
The virus or bacteria is destroyed and the body then recovers itself naturally from the toxic effect of the virus or bacteria.
A general analogy to this effect is glass shattering when a singer's high note is sounded.
It did not take long for the medical establishment to realize that such a device not only would wreck the pharmaceutical industry but damage medicine in general, since cures meant fewer visits to the doctor.
False claims were made against him, test procedures were altered, causing his demonstrations to fail, and impossible and diverting demands were made on Rife's research.
After he declined an offer to partner with M orris F ishbein, then head of the American M edical Association, Rife's troubles turned more serious, with lawsuits and health authorities coming at him from all sides.
Rife was marginalized, and his device today is available only as a costly research instrument employed by a few doctors and private citizens.
But while electromagnetic energy manipulation was seeking to make humans healthier, such technology also brought horrific possibilities for mind control.
By the early 1970s, within certain military and academic circles, it became clear that human behavior could be modified by the use of subtle energetic manipulations.
It is destructive to living organisms; can cause behavior modification by transmitting frequencies through normal telephone, TV, and radio networks; and can produce frequencies to paralyze the central nervous system.
Several methods have been found to allow persons to hear sounds and speech without the use of the ears or normal auditory pathways such as the Neurophone.
This device uses a vibrational technology developed by Patrick Flanagan in 1958, which allows the transmission of sound vibrations through the skin, much like the vibration of a speaker.
Bypassing the ear, a completely different part of the brain processes the sound, creating new neural pathways.
S uch technology is used to increase concentration while studying or learning languages, and it helps with meditation, relaxation, and healing.
Unfortunately, it was also found that amplified brainwave frequencies can be imposed on others.
S . patent even described how very low or very high audio frequencies can be used to transmit subliminal messages to the human brain.
The reason that the Soviets set their safety standards as low as they did was because they detected biological effects at levels ignored by the West,"" he explained.
But while microwaves may be affecting large segments of the population in the United States, this issue pales when one considers the possibility of a program to consciously target whole populations.
Such a program exists in the High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program , a vast array of powerful transmitting dishes located near Gakona, Alaska.
Begicli and otiier scientists, claim this powerful array can be used as a weapon, to deliver energy blasts equal to an atomic bomb, destroy communications across the planet, and even influence human behavior.
C ritics argue that H AAR P has the capability of stimulating the ionosphere to return a pulsed electromagnetic signal, which, at the proper frequency, can override normal brain functions.
A complaint letter from the Russian State Duma to President Vladimir Putin stated that HAARP was influencing near-Earth atmosphere with high-frequency radio waves.
This new type of weapon differs from previous types in that the near-E arth medium becomes at once an object of direct influence,"" stated the letter.
Despite this objection, no discernible action has been taken by the United States, and the HAARP system continues to operate.
INCREDIBLY, COMPUTER SYSTEMS are under development today to anticipate criminal or antisocial behavior.
They are designed to read human body language that might indicate potential ""criminal"" activity and summon authorities, reminiscentof prewar Nazi plans to preempt crime and dissent.
In Vienna, during September 1940, atthe First Conference of the German Society for Child Psychiatry and Therapeutic Education later changed to the German Society for Child and Adolescent P sychiatry Dr.
The trend to identify and detain potential troublemakers before they have actually committed a crime is being perpetuated today.
The British government, in May 2007, responding to news accounts, acknowledged it had secretly established a new national antiterrorist unitto protect VIP s by first profiling, then arresting persons considered to be potentially dangerous.
Amazingly, this power to detain suspects even before they actually committed a crime was based on mental health laws.
It was hailed as the first joint mental healthpolice unit in the United Kingdom and a ""prototype for future joint services"" in other areas.
Meanwhile, the British government was introducing legislation to broaden the definition of mental disorders to give doctors and now police more power to detain people.
If you are going to allow doctors to take people's liberty away, they have to be independent.
That credibility is undermined when the doctors are part of the same team as the police.
F irst, that you have a unit that allows police investigation to lead directly to people being sectioned without any kind of criminal proceedings.
Libertarians fear that such measures might be slipped into legislation such as funding for the military or H omeland S ecurity.
Once offenders are picked up, today they face new types of unconstitutional trials.
Another eerie parallel between the Bush administration and the Third Reich involved the Fuehrerprinzip, or leader principle, which was outlined in Hitler's book Mein Kampf.
This principle stated the leader embodied National Socialism and therefore the people.
National Socialism, like our democracy, was supposedly a movement of the masses.
But its leadership had little faith in its followers. "" ideology denounced civilian methods of elections, negotiation, and compromise as horse trading and called for authority of command, discipline and obedience,"" noted P rofessor Louis L Snyder in his Encyclopedia of the Third Reich.
This top-down leadership principle sounds eerily similar to calls by President George W Bush for a ""unified presidency"" as well as his comment to reporters in April 2006, ""I hear the voices, and I read the frontpage, and I know the speculation.
Bush and Ronald Reagan,"" noted Kathryn Dunn Tenpas, a senior fellow with the Brookings Institution.
Civil libertarians historically have heeded the statement of patriot Thomas Paine, who wrote in Common Sense, ""In America, the law is king.
Yet, Bush has argued that actions allowing him to ride roughshod over the Congress, the courts, and the Constitution were somehow necessary to preserve the presidency.
In launching the invasion of Iraq in 2003, Bush preempted the power of Congress, as the United States C onstitution under S ection 8 clearly states that only C ongress has the power to declare war.
When he and his appointees rammed the USA PATRIOT Act through a cowed Congress, with little or no input, he likewise took powers from the representatives of the people.
It was hurriedly and enthusiastically signed into law by President Bush on October 26, 2001.
The speed with which this legislation was presented to Congress left little doubt in many minds that it had long been prepared and simply needed some provocation as an impetus for action.
According to some congressmen, many lawmakers had not even read the entire document when it was passed.
The ACLU also reported that some members of Congress had less than one hour to read the extensive changes of law contained within the act.
The great fear began when we had to evacuate the Capitol on September 11.
It continued when we had to leave the Capitol again when a bomb scare occurred as members were pressing the CIA during a secret briefing.
It is present in the camouflaged armed national guardsmen who greet members of C ongress each day we enter the C apitol campus.
Texas congressman Ron Paul, one of only three Republicans to vote against the House bill, said he objected to how opponents were stigmatized by the name alone.
I thought it was undermining the C onstitution, so I didn't vote for it therefore I'm somehow not a patriot.
Paul confirmed rumors that the bill was not read by most members of the H ouse prior to their vote.
Paul's view of the PATRIOT Bill was echoed by the only independent in the House, Congressman Bernie Sanders of Vermont, who said, ""I took an oath to support and defend the Constitution of the United States, and I'm concerned that voting for this legislation fundamentally violates that oath.
Most Americans would be surprised to learn that since March 9, 1933, the United States has been in a state of declared national emergency.
In fact, until 1976, the USA operated under four presidentially proclaimed states of national emergency the one declared by P resident R oosevelt in 1933; a national emergency proclaimed by P resident Truman on December 16, 1950, during the Korean conflict; and two states of national emergency declared by President Nixon, on March 23, 1970, and August 15, 1971.
Years of debate over the need for such emergency powers resulted in the creation in 1973 of the United States Senate's Special Committee on the Termination of the National Emergency.
By 1976, the committee had consolidated the emergency declarations and produced the National Emergencies Act (50 U.S.C. 1601-1651), which limits such emergencies to two years.
These hundreds of statutes delegate to the president extraordinary powers, ordinarily exercised by the Congress, which affect the lives of American citizens in a host of all-encompassing manners.
This vast range of powers, taken together, confer enough authority to rule the country without reference to normal constitutional processes.
F ew people in the U nited S tates today have been informed that they have been living under a state of emergency since September 11, 2001.
The implication was that he would lead the entire government, not just the executive branch.
ALSO TROUBLESOME IS Bush's contention that he must defend his office from the loss of power.
InJ anuary 2006, Vice President Cheney stated on NBC, ""For thirty-five years that I've been in , there's been a constant, steady erosion of the prerogatives and the powers of the president of the United States.
The American president today carries far more power than ever imagined by our F ounding F athers or even more modern chief executives, like Franklin D Roosevelt, as expounded in Richard Loss's 1990 book The M odern Theory of P residential P ower.
J ohn W Dean, the White House counsel to Nixon, who served jail time after Watergate, said, ""the institutional powers of the presidency all but overwhelm those of Congress.
Dean added, 'To claim a need for secrecy to restore presidential power is disingenuous at best, and a deliberate falsehood at worst.
A J une 29, 2006, Supreme Court ruling bolstered efforts of those in Congress who had been trying to curtail overreaching presidential power that claims unilateral authority to determine not only how terrorism suspects are tried, but also to set rules for domestic wiretapping, to interrogate prisoners, and to pursue other wartime powers.
It was this 5-3 decision to overrule the president's actions that required the Bush administration to draw up the M ilitary C ommissions Act of 2006.
Volumes have been written about the B ush White House's penchant for secrecy.
Bush's secretive manner of drawing ever more power unto liimself came in tine form of ""signing statements"" written responses by tine president issued upon tine signing of a bill into law.
Such statements have drawn severe criticism from credible legal sources.
She criticized this activity by noting thatfrom 1817 until the end of the Carter administration in 1981, only 75 ""signing statements"" were issued.
From the Reagan administration until the end of the Clinton administration, this number had grown to 322.
Such signing statements convey a president's view toward the law and his own power.
Charlie Savage, writing in the Boston Globe, said Bush is the first president in modern history who has never vetoed a bill, thus giving Congress no chance to override his judgments.
Bush often invites the bills' sponsors to signing ceremonies, at which he lavishes praise upon their work.
Van Bergen took particular note of Bush's signing statement while he was signing into law legislation curtailing torture on prisoners.
This is really big, very expansive, and very significant,"" Cooper said.
Little is said of such things, because the Bush White House is more closed-mouthed than any previous administration.
In the Nixon, Reagan, Clinton, and both Bush administrations, loyalty has been seen as a requisite for those serving the White House.
Many people working with the highest levels of power in the United States see their superiors as public servants, only looking after the best interests of America.
Such unquestioning loyalty and allegiance was a hallmark of the Third Reich.
M any loyalists around N ixon, R eagan, C linton, and the two B ushes truly saw their leader as a paragon.
They appeared blinded to their leader's actions, as happened to so many in the Third Reich.
She was twenty-two years old when, in 1942, she was selected to become a secretary to Hitler.
Soon after the War on Terror got underway, the Germans, who should know, could see the parallels between their Nazi era and modern America.
German justice minister Herta Daeubler-Gmelin brought heated criticism from President George W Bush in September of 2002, when, in criticizing Bush's policy in Iraq, she stated publicly, ""Bush wants to distract attention from his domestic problems.
For her remark, Daeubler-Gmelin was asked to resign by German chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, an attendee of Bilderberg meetings.
And it is not just politicians who must be careful of voicing their opinions in the new American empire.
Demonstrators are routinely herded into fenced ""free speech zones,"" or arrested for speaking out.
Thanks to the Internet, millions witnessed twenty-one-year-old Florida university student Andrew Meyer screaming in pain afl:er being tasered by campus police on September 17, 2007, afl:er simply asking J ohn Kerry why he had not challenged the 2006 presidential election.
On top of the ubiquitous nature of surveillance technology and the intimidation of dissenters, there is very real control through the print and electronic matrix we know as the mass media.
PROPAGANDA ONE TOOL OF PUBLIC CONTROL OUICKLY UNDERSTOOD AND WELL utilized by the Nazis of the Third R eich was propaganda.
The 1952 edition of The New Webster Encyclopedic Dictionary of the English Language defined propaganda as.
So, where the definition of propaganda once included allegations and false information, today it is just ""organized"" and ""selected"" information, of the type seen daily in the mass media.
A noteworthy component of propaganda is not just false or spun information, but the omission of critical material that is essential to enable the reader or viewer to place the presented information in a meaningful context.
C ritics see the single greatest failing of the modern corporate mass media as that while it daily bombards its audience with facts, figures, and statistics, it rarely attempts to bring coherence or meaning to this data.
M any people complain that the major media are superficial, conformist, and subjective in their selection of news.
A Pew Research Center poll showed respondents who thought news reporting unfair and inaccurate ranged into the 60 percentiles.
A survey by the news industry publication Editor & Publisher showed that journalists themselves do not disagree.
N early half of its participants indicated their belief that news coverage is shallow and inadequate.
H itier was stating that most people are honest and would never tell a great lie; therefore, it is hard for them to believe that anyone especially an admired leader would tell one.
For example, during the Nuremberg trials, Reichsmarschall Hermann Goering explained how to persuade the public to go to war.
Voice or no voice, tine people can always be brought to the bidding of the leaders.
Ubiquitous propaganda remains a prime method for controlling public thought and worldviews.
The use of the public media to frame the issues of the day and bolster support for the government was quickly understood by Hitler and his top lieutenants.
In America today, there are thousands of persons working in the advertising agencies, public relations firms, and programming departments of the TV networks and cable/satellite channels all under the command of their corporate owners toiling unceasingly to present the corporate worldview to their viewers.
They weave an electromagnetic ""matrix"" around our society, which is difficult to break with even for the most sophisticated and educated.
BY 2008, SIX multinational corporations controlled almost everything the average American reads, sees, or hears.
The Internet has done a marvelous job of bringing alternative news and information but only to those who own and can use a computer.
Time magazine, one of the corporation's media assets, noted, 'The combination will be, for better or worse, the world's biggest media conglomerate.
Ifs a vast empire of broadcasting, music, movies and publishing assets, complemented by AOL's dominant Internet presence, all fed to consumers, ultimately, through Time Warner's cable network.
Time Warner is in the traditional media business; AOL is an Internet company.
Because the two didn't overlap, antitrust lawyers saw no need for concern.
But the more people looked, the more they thought this was not just a marriage of two companies in different arenas.
The AOL-Time Warner conglomerate involved twelve film companies, including, Warner Bros.
AOL-Time Warner president and CEO, Richard Dean Parsons, and at least one other director are members of the Council on Foreign Relations.
The Walt Disney Company, in a far cry from its Mickey Mouse origins, has grown into one of the largest media and entertainment corporations in the world.
Bogart is a Media Studies Center fellow and former general manager of the Newspaper Advertising Bureau.
Viacom is a media conglomerate created from the remerging of Viacom and CBS Corporation in 1999.
The corporation's properties include CBS with its two hundred affiliates.
Blockbuster, Paramount Pictures, MTV Films, Nickelodeon Movies, Dream-works, United International Pictures , Republic Pictures, MTV and Nickelodeon cable networks, TV Land, CMT, Spike TV, VHl, BET, Comedy Central, book publishers, almost two hundred radio stations; and Infinity Outdoor, the largest advertising company in the world.
Vivendi Universal Entertainment was created by the 2000 merger of Vivendi media with the Frenchbased Canal-i-television and the purchase of Universal Studios from the Seagram Company of Canada.
By 2006, with the sale ofVivendi Universal Entertainment to General Electric, it was reformed as NBC Universal.
News Corporation, a creation of Australian news magnate Rupert Murdoch, originally was incorporated in Australia, but in late 2004, it was reincorporated in the United States under the laws of the State of Delaware.
With his media conglomerate reaching tens of millions each day, Murdoch remarked in an older News Corporation annual report, ""Our reach is unmatched around the world.
Bertelsmann AG, the world's largest publisher in the English language, is a multinational media corporation based in Gutersloh, Germany, which employs more than 88,000 employees in sixty-three countries.
It also owns YES Solutions, a large provider of creative, media, and operational services.
N ot publicly listed, B ertie, as B ertelsmann is sometimes called, is 76. percent owned by the Bertelsmann Foundation created by the German Bertelsmann and Mohn families.
During wartime, Bertelsmann had close ties to Goebbels's Reich Ministry of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda and published 19 million books, which made it the largest publisher for the German Army, according to the Independent Historical Commission for Investigating the History of the Bertelsmann House During the Third Reich , a group created in Britain in the late 1990s.
The group also found that Bertelsmann made indirect use of ""slave labor"" in some occupied countries.
Bertelsmann's history came under scrutiny in 1998, when the company took over Random House, the largest book publisher in the United States.
In public announcements, the firm said it was closed down by the Nazis.
The IHC, however, reported that this story was a ""legend"" and that the firm's closure in 1944 was more likely due to shortages of material than any subversive activities.
Although Bertelsmann spokesman Tim Arnold said, 'The values of Bertelsmann then are irreconcilable with the company today.
The company is now a global player in the media industry,"" many Americans, especially World War II veterans, might wonder about the propriety of a German corporation once tied so closely to the Nazis controlling so much of their media.
As has been noted here previously, many of today's wealthiest multinational corporations might deserve the same scrutiny as Bertelsmann.
IT HAS BEEN said that freedom of the press belongs to whomever owns the press, and when it comes to media ownership, the name of the game is money.
A Center for Public Integrity investigation of campaign contributions through November 2006 showed the communications industry has spent $486 million since 1997 to affect election outcomes and influence legislation before Congress and the White House.
Lewis also explained how media companies win influence with lawmakers and regulators.
Not only does the media aggressively lobby and contribute to the two political parties and politicians at the federal level, they also decide whose face and voice make it onto the airwaves.
Lewis illustrated this power by noting that when P resident C linton requested that the F ederal C ommunications C ommission provide free or reduced-cost television time to candidates, within days, ""the powerful broadcast corporations and their Capitol Hill allies managed to halt this historic initiative.
In the Senate, incoming Commerce Committee chairman J ohn McCain, the Arizona Republican, and Conrad Burns, a Republican from Montana and the chairman of that panel's communications subcommittee, announced that they would legislatively block the FCC's free air-time initiative.
A regulated industry has a stranglehold over the regulator and its congressional overseers.
Not according to studies by the nonpartisan Project for Excellence in J ournalism.
They found that ""hard"" news stories, which constituted more than half of all news reports thirty years ago, today have fallen to less than one-third.
F urthermore, story content today has moved away from discussions of the political process, war and peace, and policy, to people, human interest, and news you can use.
There is also increasing emphasis on scandal, the bizarre, and fear of the future.
Declining viewership and readership has become commonplace in the mass media and does not seem to overly concern corporate managers.
Increasingly, the attempt to present news objectively has given way to advocacy, which borders on sheer propaganda.
Distraction, ignorance, and fear are integral parts of the fascist globalists' plan for a new American empire.
President George W Bush has used both nationalism and middleclass moral values to gain the unquestioning allegiance of a large swath of the public.
Georges Eugene Sorel, a French conservative Socialist whose philosophical work provided a foundation for fascism, noted at the start of the twentieth century that all great political movements are generated by ""myths,"" defined as the belief held by a group who believe themselves to be an army of truth fighting an army of evil.
The N azis used the myth of Aryan brotherhood and superiority to create their N ational S ocialist empire.
In the United States, it has become the myth of America's God-ordained right to create an empire which has launched a worldwide warfor American-style freedom and democracy.
Today, numerous books and articles have been written about a new American empire or Reich, in German.
The creation of this empire has been facilitated by the power of the corporate mass media, increasingly falling into fewer and fewer hands.
The ownership of the corporations that today control the information available to the broadest portion of the public can be traced back to the same families and companies who backed Hitler.
Like Hitler, who sought to bring individuals alienated by the Industrial Revolution and Depression into a hive-like German Volk, or united people, the globalists who control America's mass media have attempted to bring citizens into one common worldview by the unremitting dissemination of homogeneous news and information.
Networks and cable channels routinely accept reports from ""pool"" reporters, which results in many channels presenting the same version of the news.
Only those who consciously tune in to alternative media or surf the Internet gain access to information differing from the party line.
H itier achieved this conformity of thought among his followers through the use of radio, mass rallies, and meetings.
Today, it is the corporatecontrolled mass media that determines the worldview of most Americans.
The corporate media owners, many of them members or close associates of the fascist globalists' secret societies, have learned the lessons of Nazi media manipulation well -e., simplistic catchwords repeated constantly with no real opposing viewpoints allowed.
For example, at the time of the Iraqi invasion, the corporate media called the enemy ""insurgents,"" defined as anyone who opposed the established authority.
S . occupation, but the term ""Iraqis"" did not fit well with government pronouncements about United States troops being well received by that nation's population.
By 2007, the term ""insurgent"" was being superseded by the term ""al-Qaeda"" in an effort to connect fighting in Iraq to the attacks of September 11, 2001.
This attempt came in the wake of President Bush's admission that neither Saddam Hussein nor Iraq played any role in the attacks.
Likewise, the mass media long and loudly has trumpeted the term ""War on Terror,"" with its attendant warnings to be watchful for terrorists trying to slip weapons of mass destruction into the United States, yet noticeably failed to report that even seven years after 9/11, no serious attempt has been made to secure the nation's borders.
Official government pronouncements are merely broadcast uncritically, with very little effort to check their reliability.
Also, like Hitler, the directors of modern American viewpoints speak of a brighter and better tomorrow, yet constantly regale the public with images and evocations of great moments in history.
The attacks of 9/11 initially were compared to P earl H arbor, and P resident B ush early on garnered criticism for calling his War on Terror a ""crusade,"" a term with ugly historical connotations.
The sacrifices of wartime America during World War II were pointed to as models for the war against terrorism.
Such ""us against them"" mentality has been used by despots for centuries to rally populations behind them.
The arrogance of the N azi mindset along with their accepted method for hoodwinking the public was voiced by an unnamed aide to President George W Bush in 2002.
And while you are studying that reality judiciously, as you will we'll act again, creating other new realities, which you can study too, and that's how things will sort out.
This clearly echoes Hitler's stated belief that big lies repeated loudly and often will sway the masses of people more effectively than well-articulated arguments based on reason and facts.
It also reflects the arrogance of the fascist globalists, those who feel they are somehow superior to others and that they alone are fit to rule.
This reach for empire the ""Future Belongs to Us"" Nazi mentality cannot be separated from its cultural context, for a nation's culture clarifies its worldview and sensibilities.
In describing Nazi culture under Hitler, Professor George L Mosse might well have been describing popular tastes and prejudices reflected in America today.
Do not care for the distorted pictures of expressionists; they do not understand the searchings of such art.
People like their pictures simple and easily understandable and their novels should have gripping plots and large amounts of sentiment.
A cursory count showed more than four hundred Web-site citations on Google, a major Internet search engine, in which Americans have drawn parallels between the attacks of September 11, 2001, and the R eichstag fire that launched H itier's Third R eich the destruction of a prominent national structure with the immediate affixing of blame on terrorists, the rapid passage of restrictive laws and the curtailment of civil liberties.
But because of the tight corporate control over news and information in America, many citizens still have not been exposed to the controversies, contradictions, and unexplained events of 9/11.
Despite attempts by both government and corporate leaders to deny that the attacks were anything but what was claimed, separate national polls show a growing number of Americans have declined to fully accept the official explanation, which, when carefully examined, is nothing more than a conspiracy theory.
In mid-J une 2006, when questioned as to why Osama bin Laden's Most Wanted poster did not include any mention of the 9/11 attacks.
The conspiracy theory accepted by the Bush administration and the corporate mass media contends that nineteen fanatical M usiims somehow overcame the $40 billion United States defense system, simultaneously hijacked four commercial airliners, managing to disconnect their transponders at approximately the same time, and crashed them into the World Trade Center towers and the P entagon, with the fourth crashing in western P ennsylvania as the result of a revolt by the passengers the entire operation conducted under the command of a M usiim cleric using a computer in a cave in Afghanistan.
Zogby International poll results released in September 2007 showed that 90 percent of persons on the East Coast and 75 percent of those in the western United States believe the attacks of 9/11 have been the most significant historical event of their lifetime.
However, 65 percent of those polled gave President Bush's attempts to combat terrorism negative marks, a dramatic drop from those who supported his efforts just after 9/11.
And despite the globalist control over the mass media, national polls, such as a September 2006 poll of more than 64,000 persons, have shown more than half the country has failed to buy into the official story of the attacks.
Only slight mass media coverage was given to a Zogby poll conducted between August 24 and 26, 2004, on the eve of the Republican National Convention.
Despite the political implications of such an accusation, nearly 30 percent of registered Republicans and more than 38 percent of those who described themselves as ""very conservative"" supported this proposition.
This means a whopping 68 percent were at least open to the suggestion that 9/11 was contrived within the United States government.
Various exercises with names like Vigilant Warrior, Vigilant Guardian, Nortliern Vigilance, and Tripod II were being conducted by the North American Aerospace Defense Command and other government agencies that morning.
According to Sergeant Lauro Chavez of the United States Central Command, these exercises included a scenario of hijacked commercial airliners being used to crash into prominent United States buildings, specifically naming tine World Trade Center towers.
Chavez, who worked with the command center's computers, also noted tliat false images called ""inputs"" representing hijacked planes were placed on military radar screens, causing much initial confusion.
Chavez said, much to the surprise of the military, it was announced shortly before 9/11 that command over NORAD, normally a military position, had been assumed by Vice President Cheney.
Although it was not hit by airplanes, it fell neatly between the Verizon Building and the United States Post Office, neither of which suffered critical damage.
These comprise only a short list of the more pertinent questions that have not been addressed or adequately explained.
Evidently, the ""watchdog"" mass media has been cowed by its corporate masters.
Nor have these and many other questions been answered by any of the official government investigations, including P resident B ush's handpicked panel, the N ational C ommission on Terrorist Attacks upon the U nited States, popularly known as the 9/11 Commission.
Bush initially tried to appoint globalist Henry Kissinger to head his commission but was thwarted by public outcry.
The LIHOP argument is that certain individuals within the federal government had foreknowledge of the attacks more than a dozen nations, including Israel, Cuba, and even the Taliban in Afghanistan attempted to warn Washington of the coming attacks yet did nothing to prevent them, as the attacks furthered their political agenda, while the MIHOP supporters took notice of the close relationships between the Bush and bin Laden families, as reported in the Texas media, as well as the role of Saudi Arabia and the CIA in the creation of al-Oaeda.
They argue that the attacks were actually precipitated by elements within the United States government.
The controversy over the truth of the 9/11 attacks undoubtedly will continue for many years, but how long it will take before the corporate mass media are allowed to objectively investigate and report on this festering scandal is anybody's guess.
The major corporations that control the mass media, like the other corporations previously discussed, are for the most part filled with honest and honorable people.
They, like most of their corporate superiors, are men and women with credible backgrounds.
We are constantly bom barded with ""official"" pronouncem ents and advertising.
Television is everywhere ■ in bars, waiting room s, airports, and usually constantly on in our very living room In our fastpaced society, no one has tim e to thinl<, much less read deeply, B usiness, especially corporate business, is king, G la nt corporations, governed by faceless directors answering to shadowy owners, control everything, from water to wing nuts.
F reedom to F a seism , there is no law requiring Am erica ns to pay an incom e tax.
Of course, the IR S , through its myriad rules and regulations, can drag into court and even jail those who fail to fulfill ""voluntary compliance."" ""ascism's principles are wafting in the air today, surreptitiously masquerading as something else, challenging everything we stand for.
The cliche that people and nations learn from history is not only overused, but also overestimated; often we fail to learn from history, or draw the wrong conclusions.
Laurence W Britt, in an article for Free Inquiry, a long-standing publication of the Council for Secular Humanism, which promotes secular humanist principles.
Following a careful study of the regimes of Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, Franco's Spain, Salazar's Portugal, Papadopoulos's Greece, Pinochet's Chile, and Suharto's Indonesia, Britt concluded that these fascist governments had observable similarities.
Powerful and continuing expressions of nationalism F rom the prominent displays of flags and bunting to the ubiquitous lapel pins, the fervor to show patriotic nationalism, both on the part of the regime itself and of citizens caught up in its frenzy, was always obvious.
Catchy slogans, pride in the military, and demands for unity were common themes in expressing this nationalism.
It was usually coupled with a suspicion of things foreign that often bordered on xenophobia.
Examples of such patriotic zeal may be found in the ever-present yellow ribbons showing support for United States troops to the plethora of American flags and bunting at large public events such as the Super Bowl.
Disdain for tine importance of liuman riglits Tine regimes tliemselves viewed liuman riglits as of little value and a hindrance to realizing the objectives of the ruling elite.
Through clever use of propaganda, the population was brought to accept these human rights abuses by marginalizing, even demonizing, those being targeted.
When abuse was egregious, the tactic was to use secrecy, denial, and disinformation.
In November 2007, former federal judge Michael B Mukasey was sworn in as attorney general of the United States, despite contentious confirmation hearings focused on the issue of torturing prisoners.
G onzales, who was criticized for his part in crafting the B ush administration's secretive legal arguments permitting the torture of suspects.
Identification of enemies/scapegoats as a unifying cause The most significant common thread among these regimes was the use of scapegoating as a means to divert the people's attention from other problems, to shift blame for failures, and to channel frustration in controlled directions.
The methods of choice relentless propaganda and disinformation were usually effective.
Active opponents of these regimes were inevitably labeled as terrorists and dealt with accordingly.
Examples of such tactics can be heard from the mouths of those who constantly use racial slurs.
Afghanistan's former ""freedom fighters"" have semantically changed into ""insurgents"" then into ""al-Oaeda terrorists"" in the news columns, while such epitaphs as ""rag head"" and ""sand nigger"" are commonly used in the general population.
The supremacy of the military and avid militarism Ruling elites always identified closely with the military and the industrial infrastructure that supported it.
A disproportionate share of national resources was allocated to the military, even when domestic needs were acute.
The military was seen as an expression of nationalism, and was used whenever possible to assert national goals, intimidate other nations, and increase the power and prestige of the ruling elite.
The United States military budget for many years has consumed the bulk of the national spending.
President Bush's 2008 budget provides $439. billion for the Department of Defense's base budget a 7 percent increase over 2006 and a whopping 48 percent increase over 2001.
This figure does not include military-related expenditure such as nuclear weapons research or the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Neither does it count trust funds, anticipated costs of Social Security, and Veterans Administration costs of services to veterans.
By totaling all government figures relating to the military, the WRL estimated that more than half (51 percent) of all federal spending goes to the military.
Rampant sexism Beyond the simple fact that the political elite and the national culture were maledominated, these regimes inevitably viewed women as second-class citizens.
These attitudes were usually codified in draconian laws that enjoyed strong support by the orthodox religion of the country, thus lending the regime cover for its abuses.
This practice is less prevalent in the United States today, although many women still find it difficult to break through what has been termed the ""glass ceiling,"" in which they can see higher positions in the workplace but never seem to get there.
Modern America also differs from Nazi Germany and other cultures in that women are beginning to fill the corporate chairs formerly held by men.
A controlled mass media Under some of the regimes, the mass media were under strict direct control and could be relied upon never to stray from the party line.
Methods included the control of licensing and access to resources, economic pressure, appeals to patriotism, and implied threats.
The leaders of the mass media were oft en politically compatible with the power elite.
The result was usually successful in keeping the general public unaware of the regimes' excesses.
As previously detailed, the American corporate mass media today is essentially in the hands of six giant multinational communications corporations.
The owners of these corporations are proponents of ""free trade"" in business policies, yet coverage of alternative news and views is mostly ignored.
Whether it is television, radio, newspapers, magazines, books, or the Internet, a few giant conglomerates are determining what we see, hear, and read.
Obsession with national security Inevitably, a national security apparatus was under direct control of the ruling elite.
It was usually an instrument of oppression, operating in secret and beyond any constraints.
Its actions were justified under the rubric of protecting ""national security,"" and questioning its activities was labeled unpatriotic or even treasonous.
While all Americans should be concerned about national security, many see it as a pretext to strip away constitutional rights.
Thoughtful persons also worry about a man like Michael Chertoff, son of a J ewish rabbi, who has been accused of having dual citizenship and was a major architect of Bush administration policies, being named secretary of the Homeland Security Department.
Religion and ruling elite tied together Unlike communist regimes, the fascist and protofascist regimes were never proclaimed godless by their opponents.
In fact, most of the regimes attached themselves to the predominant religion of the country and chose to portray themselves as militant defenders of that religion.
The fact that the ruling elite's behavior was incompatible with the precepts of the religion was generally swept under the rug.
A perception was manufactured that opposing the power elite was tantamount to an attack on religion.
Earlier in this work, the obvious parallels have been drawn between the use of religion in Nazi Germany and modern America to support government policies.
Power of corporations protected Although the personal life of ordinary citizens was under strict control, the ability of large corporations to operate in relative freedom was not compromised.
The ruling elite saw the corporate structure as a way to not only ensure military production but also as an additional means of social control.
Members of the economic elite were often pampered by the political elite to ensure a continued mutuality of interests, especially in the repression of ""have-not"" citizens.
According to the Federalism Projectof the American Enterprise Institute, a group that conducts and sponsors original research on American federalism, ""Consumer advocates, plaintiffs' attorneys, and state officials argue that broad federal preemption claims often by federal regulatory agencies, without a clear congressional mandate interfere with the states' historic role in protecting citizens against corporate misconduct.
Power of labor suppressed or eliminated Since organized labor was seen as the one power center that could challenge the political hegemony of the ruling elite and its corporate allies, it was inevitably crushed or made powerless.
The poor formed an underclass that was viewed with suspicion or outright contempt.
Those with long memories know that labor news has largely dropped from the mainstream media's radar screen.
Disdain and suppression of intellectuals and the arts Intellectuals, and the inherent freedom of ideas and expression associated with them, were anathema to these regimes.
Intellectual and academic freedom were considered subversive to national security and the patriotic ideal.
Universities were tightly controlled, politically unreliable faculty harassed or eliminated.
Unorthodox ideas or expressions of dissent were strongly attacked, silenced, or crushed.
To these regimes, art and literature had to serve the national interest or they had no right to exist.
In the wake of the 9/11 attacks, many conservative groups on college campuses denounced academic freedom, according to a report byj ohn K Wilson, coordinator of tine Independent Press Association's Campus J ournalism Project.
Other academics were fired or reprimanded for merely speaking out on the issues of war or questioning the official story of 9/11.
Obsession with crime and punishment Most of these regimes maintained draconian systems of criminal justice, with huge prison populations.
The police were oft en glorified and had almost unchecked power, leading to rampant abuse.
Fear and hatred of criminals or ""traitors"" was often promoted among the population as an excuse for more police power.
The U nited States today has a higher incarcerated population than all E urope an jails combined, and in certain areas, such as Washington, D.C., police presence is at an all-time high.
One visitor to Washington in the summer of 2007 asked a police officer why there were so many cops around.
Rampant cronyism and corruption Those in business circles and close to the power elite oft en used their position to enrich themselves.
With the national security apparatus under control and the media muzzled, this corruption was largely unconstrained and not well understood by the general population.
The cronyism and outright nepotism of the Bush administration has been well documented.
Elizabeth Cheney, the vice president's daughter, was named as a deputy secretary of state in late February 2002, and within about a week, her husband, Philip Perry, became chief counsel for the Office of Management and Budget, where he joined director Mitchell Daniels, whose sister Deborah is an assistant attorney general.
F ormer secretary of state C olin L P owell is the father of M ichael P owell, who chaired the F ederal Communications Commission.
Fraudulent elections Elections in the form of plebiscites or public opinion polls were usually bogus.
When actual elections with candidates were held, they would, as a rule, be perverted by the power elite to get the desired result.
Common methods included maintaining control of the election machinery, intimidating and disenfranchising opposition voters, destroying or disallowing legal votes, and, as a last resort, turning to a judiciary beholden to the power elite.
Americans are well aware of the controversies concerning the presidential elections of 2000 and 2004.
George W Bush's first term was decided by the Supreme Court, not the voters.
Controversy over both elections continues today and in 2008 charges of vote fraud were already being voiced in the state primary elections, primarily over computer voting machines.
Many Americans noticed the similarities between George W Bush's unprovoked attacks on Afghanistan and Iraq and Hitler's unprovoked attacks on Poland, the Low Countries, and France.
After all, this is America, officially a democracy with the rule of law, a constitution, a free press, honest elections, and a well-informed public constantly being put on guard against evils.
Historical comparisons like these are just exercises in verbal gymnastics.
It seems that by comparing Britt's characteristics of fascism to current events, the argument can definitely be made that globalist fascists are turning the once free and independent United States into a not-so-profitable subsidiary of their global corporate structure their empire of the rich.
But when secular humanists, conservative Christians, J ews, liberal Democrats, bedrock Republicans, and moderates, not to mention the activist fringe elements, all start issuing the same warning against fascism, perhaps it is time we start paying serious attention.
Commentators like Noam Chomsky and Gore Vidal have spoken out against the ""national security state"" from the left.
The late S enator B arry G oldwater and evangelist P at R obertson have spoken out from the right.
When historical figures along with concerned citizens from opposite ends of the political spectrum all say the same thing, it is time to consider the true state of the American union.
And perhaps time to stand up and be counted for true freedom freedom from the corporate state.
Every nation has the right to defend itself, the right to expect the government to do what is best for its citizens.
Media critic Michael Parenti observes, 'To oppose the policies of a government does not mean you are against the country or the people that the government supposedly represents.
Either we have the right to democratic dissent and criticism of these policies or we all lie down and let the leader, the fuehrer, do what is best, while we follow uncritically, and obey whatever he commands.
There are those who would argue that it is perhaps unpatriotic or at least not politically correct to speak out on issues involving taxation, immigration, political beliefs, race, eugenics, or criticism of the militaryindustrial complex.
Today many believe that definition has grown to include the perceived need to conform to restrictions on speech and behavior set by politicians, corporate leaders, and other self-appointed authorities.
This is the same self-imposed restriction that was adopted by too many G ermans during the Third Reich.
Not only was the man on the street afraid to speak out against the Nazi regime but free speech was denied the intelligentsia.
Germans in the Third Reich did not l<now the term ""political correctness,"" but they well understood the penalties for freely voicing their opinions.
Recent legislation targeting socalled hate speech can easily slip into official punitive action against any speech that arouses the ire of politicians, police, or judges.
Rauch quoted author Salman Rushdie, who was sentenced to death in absentia by Muslim ayatollahs after writing a book they claimed slandered the beliefs of millions of M usiims.
Rauch wrote thatthe public should learn a lesson from Rushdie's experience.
Even though the German Nazis preached the unity of the Volk and spoke out against the old divisions of class and education, the leaders operated in an entirely different manner.
Likewise, the globalist rulers of America pit bureaucrats, politicians, academics, corporate leaders, and the public against one another in an agenda of divide and conquer.
They maintain control in a society fragmented by combative ideologies and philosophies as well as competing corporate interests.
In today's America it seems the only common denominator is consumerism and debt.
Because of their loss of control over Hitler, the globalists learned well the dangers of allowing any one individual to gain the power over masses of people.
Consequently, there has not been one prominent figure in recent American history who has commanded the popular respect and esteem of a majority of the population.
Even the assassinated PresidentJ ohn F Kennedy, beloved by so many, never held popular goodwill to the extent of Franklin D Roosevelt.
Since World War II, no national leader has gained the stature of Roosevelt, Churchill, or Hitler.
B ut many of the basic attitudes and prejudices which went into his worldview are still with us, waiting to be actualized, to be directed into a new mass consciousness,"" prophesied P rofessor M osse from the relatively naive year of 1966.
Martin Bormann and the Fourth Reich, wrote: 'The despicable forces loosed by the Third R eich are not expunged, although, like some virulent virus, they may have changed to other forms and be difficult to identify.
These sentiments came from writers unaware of the fascist globalists' plan being woven around them.
Yet, they could sense that Americans could easily fall sway to the pernicious ideology of National Socialism.
THE BIGGEST STUMBLING block to the plans of the globalists has always been the United States, with its tradition of individual freedom, its Constitution that guarantees that freedom, and the fact that so many Americans own firearms to protect their freedoms.
National politicians no longer refer to the ""republic,"" because modern America has ceased to be one.
Obviously, there are dissimilarities between Hitler's Third Reich and the new American Reich.
After all, the United States today is a very different time and culture.
But it has been demonstrated how the same philosophies and methodologies employed by the same families, corporations, and organizations that at one time supported H itier's Third R eich, have now found roots in modern America.
It has been necessary for these fascist globalists to break up the United States into divisions of race, sex, age, generation and culture.
This has been accomplished through a degrading of popular culture, downgrading the education process, permitting a steady flow of illegal immigrants, and the fragmentation of the population overissues such as abortion, immigration, nonheterosexual relationships, and foreign policy.
Control over a diminished national economy and corporate downsizing has brought undue stress on workers, resulting in the gradual destruction of the nuclear family.
N one of this construction of the new American empire has come about suddenly.
The owners of the multinational corporations, with their membership in secret societies, know their goals will not be achieved overnight, although since 9/11 they seem to have redoubled their efforts, speeding up the timetable.
While businessmen deal with yearly quarters, and the average worker lives for his weekly paycheck, these people look ahead fifty years or a hundred, if that's what it takes.
They realize that their program of a global fascist socialism is the only means of maintaining their power and control, the only way in their view to maintain the purity of their race and class.
They laugh at the concepts of true individual freedom and multiculturalism, for they have no faith in the innate goodness of humankind or its ability for self-government.
They have no real faith in G od and use religious ideals and concepts merely as another tool for social control.
The struggle against such steadfast will to power and its attendant control will not be easy.
But it can be done hopefully before the United States falls into depression, anarchy, and then a police state.
Technological breakthroughs await only the change of attitude on the part of conventional politics, commerce, and finance.
A sea change in the public consciousness is well under way, although it is not reflected in the corporate-controlled mass media.
Informed consumers are beginning to realize they can vote with their spending.
If enough people refuse to buy a certain product whether it's a brand of car, gasoline, or something else or even reject a federal policy proposal, it can force a change of direction in the controllers.
In a 1940 address, he stated, 'The history of recent years proves that the shootings and the chains and the concentration camps are not simply the transient tools but the very altars of modern dictatorships.
They may talk of a 'new order' in the world, but what they have in mind is only a revival of the oldest and the worst tyranny.
The proposed 'new order' is the very opposite of a United States of Europe or a United States of Asia.
It is not a union of ordinary, self-respecting men and women to protect themselves and their freedom and their dignity from oppression.
It appears that the ""New World Order"" is really just the ""Old World Order"" packaged with modern advertising slickness new names, logos, and slogans.
What once was traditional American conservatism has been molded into fascist forms, beginning with the infusion of N ational S ocialism ideals into the military-industrial complex, which then spread into science, corporate life, the mass media, and even political parties.
This change has been engineered by the globalist elite who hold monopolies over basic resources, energy, pharmaceuticals, transportation, and telecommunications, including the news media.
As detailed throughout this work, the same men, families, and companies that first supported communism in Russia funded and supported National Socialism in prewar Germany.
With the defeat of the Germans, they simply shifted their attention to the United States.
They were abetted by Nazis financed by the stolen wealth of E urope perhaps including S olomon's treasure and utilizing a vast network of worldwide corporations.
Thousands of Nazis escaped to both North and South America, their way facilitated by supporters in Wall Street, the Bank of En gland, and the Vatican.
Using German advances in the study of the human mind, behavior, and propaganda, these self-styled globalists are now attempting to subdue the American population through a maze of government policies, drugs, a dumbed-down education system, and a controlled corporate mass media.
Political and corporate leadership continually swap roles, creating a merger of the state and industry the very definition of fascism.
Mergers and leveraged takeovers have concentrated corporate power into fewer and fewer hands, many of those directly connected through banking and corporate ties to prewar support for the N azis.
Law enforcement personnel increasingly no longer wear the blue uniforms of police sworn ""to serve and protect,"" but black body armor with the German-style military helmets, initially dubbed the ""Fritz"" by the soldiers.
Even the fields of religion, education, and entertainment are being used to transform whole generations of formerly free Americans into cowed and subservient members of an increasingly National Socialist system.
An account of the fall of the Fourth Reich has not yet been written, for it has yet to happen.
