Drawing on evidence made available o of conferences involving both scholars of and participants newly accessible archive material, the authors of this artic about the crisis into question, highlighting very different future policy.
Theyfurther challenge the very possibility o definitive version of the events of the crisis period.
The Cuban missile crisis of October I962 has been the most studied crisis of the nuclear age.
In the last few years, however, the received wisdom in respect of the crisis has been called into question by two sets of developments.
First, a series of conferences has taken place, involving participants from all sides as well as scholars in the area, aimed at producing a 'critical oral history' of the events of October I962.
Second, previously closed archives have been opened up, both as a result of the use of the Freedom of Information Act in the United States and, more widely, as a consequence of the ending of the Cold War.
Our aim in this paper is to see if the 'facts', 'models' and 'lessons' of the cn'sis are indeed well founded.
Our central claim is that for all three interested groups (historians, political scientists and policy-makers) the commonly accepted analysis of thc crisis is in fact wrong in several crucial respects.
The limitations of established views For historians the main concern has been to write an accurate account of the crisis.
This was always problematic given the limited availability of Soviet, Cuban and European archives, but the dominant assumption of the historiography was that the more evidence became available, the more complete an account of events would be produced.
The assumption is that it is possible to arrive at answers, and that, the more evidence becomes available, the closer one gets to those answers.
We believe that in a number of key areas recent disclosures actually make the task of providing answers much more difficult.
Indeed, these disclosures challenge the very idea of historical truths, not in the straightforward sense of complex historiographical debates about 'what happened' but in the far more unsettling sense of calling into question the possibility of writing a history of the crisis.
The more we find out about the crisis, and the more we think we know, the less, not the more, clear our analysis becomes over major issues of histonrcal interpretation.
At times in Allison's study, the various models seemed to determine what counted as evidence, and the reader was left to make what resembled an ideological choice of which model was to be accepted.
Allison's book has led to a major research effort aimed both at examining the utility of his models in the Cuban missile crisis, and also at seeing how they can be applied in a wide variety of other case-studies and disciplines.
Policy-makers, especially American ones, claim that they have learnt a lot from the Cuban missile crisis.
However, it has to be said that several of the lessons are clearly incompatible.
In the United States there was a tendency to see nuclear superiority as vital in ensuring success in any future US-Soviet crisis.
The missile crisis was a perfect example of how to stand tall, be firm and achieve goals.
A parallel desire for superiority or at least parity was said to have influenced Soviet decision-makers for the 25 years after the crisis.
For critics of nuclear weapons, the crisis was a timely illustration of the dangers of a nuclear world, since October I962 was seen as the closest the world had come to nuclear war.
For many practitioners, the episode, far from exhibiting any tendencies to drift into war, showed the importance of the way in which the Kennedy administration controlled developments through calculated and rational crisis management.
Indeed, one major study of foreign policy fiascos used the missile crisis as an exemplar of how to manage crises.
Finally, many practitioners saw an obvious linkage between American military superiority and the political advantage the United States enjoyed; without mnilitary superiority, it might have had to trade the Soviet missiles on Cuba for its own missiles in Turkey.
For many, United States nuclear superiority was the key factor in the outcome; for others, United States vulnerability to even the most limited Soviet attack was what mattered most.
Some saw the effect of the crisis as being to spur on the Soviet Union to ensure that it was never in such a position of inferiority again; others concluded that the crisis marked the beginning of detente since it showed how useless nuclear superiority was.
Thus, incompatible lessons were drawn from the crisis, and it is especially notable that those on the right saw a completely different set of lessons from those on the left.
The crisis therefore became a central historical source for those who saw it as proof that superiority was of critical importance as well as for those who argued that it was irrelevant to the outcome.
This in itself shows how difficult it is to point to any one set of 'facts' concerning the crisis; while this is problematic for historians and political scientists, it is of major and direct concern for policy-makers, who proceed to base current policy on the perceived lessons of the cnrsis.
Indeed, the editors of the book arising from the third conference discussed below feel that there was not one crisis in October I962, but three, and accordingly offer three different accounts of events.
Critical oral history The first recent development is the series of conferences held to discuss the events surrounding the crisis.
There have been five major meetings, as well as others run by groups such as the Nuclear History Program.
The five conferences were important in that they brought together academics and practitioners from the three principal participant countries.
The second was in October that year, in Cambridge, Massachusetts, this time with three Soviet delegates joining the United States academics and policy-makers.
These two conferences were the subject of a book, published in I989, which included transcripts of the meetings and records of interviews with key actors.
A third conference was held in Moscow inJanuary I989, with twenty Soviet, twelve United States and six Cuban participants, many of whom had been personally involved in the crisis.
Two further conferences were held, in Antigua in I99I and Havana in I992, during which much more Cuban information was presented, with Fidel Castro himself attending the Havana conference.
Finally, a group working within the multinational Nuclear History Program held a conference on the European dimensions of the crisis in Paris in October 1992.8 These conferences, bringing together scholars with extensive knowledge of the crisis and practitioners involved in it to discuss and debate the events, have represented exercises in oral history, with all the concomitant methodological problems.
The conference was organized by the Groupe d'Etudes Francais d'Histoire de l'Armement Nucleaire.
The end result has been a fascinating set of discussions which have not only produced important historical revelations but which have also given scholars ample opportunity to question participants in the crisis over their interpretations of each other's motives and interpretations.
Nonetheless, there remain methodological problems with oral history, as Mark Kramer has consistently argued with specific reference to the Cuban missile crisis.
In our analysis of the principal changes in the interpretation of the missile crisis that follows, we refer several times to evidence gleaned through oral history; but in each case we have sought to draw also upon corroborating evidence from other sources, rather than basing our arguments exclusively on individual memory.
In our view critical oral history opens up potentially fruitful avenues of enquiry for historians; however, we do not wish to underestimate the problems of relying on oral history, especially since on several occasions faulty memories have sent scholars off on wild goose chases.
The first concerns the startling claim made by Anatoly Dobrynin (Soviet ambassador to Washington during the crisis) at the i989 Moscow conference that the issue of a trade between the Soviet missiles on Cuba and United States missiles in Turkey was raised by Robert Kennedy on Friday 26 October, and that it was this proposal to which Khrushchev replied in his 'second' letter of Saturday.
The conventional wisdom has always been that there was no such deal and that the issue was raised by the Soviets, not the Americans, on the 27th (after the letter demanding the deal), not the 26th.
Clearly, if Dobrynin were correct then a central issue of the crisis, namely whether there was a deal, who proposed it, when, and to whom, would have to be radically rewritten, with enormous implications for the 'lessons' of the crisis.
This does not affect the significance of the revelation that there was a secret trade between the United States and the Soviet Union on the issue of the missiles in Turkey and those on Cuba, but it closes off a remarkably confusing line of enquiry.
A second example concerns the assertion at the I992 Havana conference by General Gribkov (a Soviet officer involved in planning the deployment of missiles in Cuba) that the Soviets had secretly delivered the nuclear warheads for six FROG-7 short-range tactical nuclear launchers, and had pre-delegated authority to fire the missiles to the local Soviet commander, General Pliyev.
After all, Soviet commanders in Cuba had decided to shoot down an American U-2 spy plane on Saturday 27 October, thereby provoking the most tense period of the crisis as the United States ExComm debated how to respond.
His claim has been attacked by many Soviet military officials and also by those who have worked on the crisis in Soviet archives.
The fact that the claims of Dobrynin and Gribkov have been dismissed as a result of detailed investigation by historians indicates that there are powerful checks against the weaknesses of the methodology.
Crucially, the oral history approach has enabled scholars to begin to write histories of the crisis from Soviet and Cuban perspectives, by actively engaging in lengthy discussions with participants from those countries.
Only by exploring in detail the motivations and perceptions of policy-makers from those other participant countries can a less American-based history of the crisis emerge.
After all, it is not simply that the crisis has always been written about from a United States perspective, but that the very definition of the crisis and what exactly its main events were has been dictated by an American version of what happened.
Critical oral history has opened up lines of enquiry which documentary sources would never suggest, simply because they can never easily indicate the nindset or beliefsystem within which they have been written, debated and evaluated.
The effect of this flood of material has been to call into question accepted views of the crisis.
Thus the conventional wisdom on the crisis has been almost exclusively US-based, and centred on only the open political record.
To put it mildly, this is a very limited view of the events of October I962.
Indeed, we may argue that it is only with the opening up of the archives that it is possible to write an international history of the Cuban missile crisis, one that reflects the intentions, motivations, perceptions, values and politics of all the main participating countries.
For too long the historiography of the crisis has been an American historiography.
The implications of this point are absolutely profound for our understanding of what we call the Cold War.
More problematic still is the thought that the flood of new evidence will not make it easier to write a definitive account of the events of October I962.
The first is that the documents that survive may be incomplete records.
Just as the memories of policy-makers may be faulty, so archives may tell a very selective version of events.
Thus Mark Kramer's attack on the oral history of the crisis on the grounds of the lack of documents to back up the claims made reveals a touching faith in the reliability of documentary evidence.
For example, the transcripts of the ExComm meetings are very detailed, but there is now strong evidence to suggest that Kennedy did not take the committee fully into his confidence.
Thus some of his statements during ExConmm meetings can be read as political manoeuvres rather than as statements about his intentions.
As we note below, he never told ExConum about the secret trade with the Soviets over the Turkish missiles.
In short, documents can be just as problematic a source as oral histories.
There are, of course, the Soviet and Cuban views as well as the American; but there are also the British, Italian and Turkish stories, to name only those countries most directly involved in the crisis.
Nonetheless, even were all these available, it would remain a sheer act of faith to believe that there is only one story to be told.
This applies not only to so-called factual interpretation but also to the crucially important issue of how each set of decision-makers read the intentions and motivations of the other sets of decision-makers.
Historians soon become engaged in a complex exercise in double or triple hermeneutic circles, whereby they attempt to understand how one set of actors read the intentions of others, or how, say, the Soviets thought the Americans saw Soviet perceptions of the crisis.
Moreover, the story does not stop there, since what the documentary evidence does reveal about the crisis is that it is very difficult to maintain that there was any such thing as a unified national position on unfolding events.
On the contrary, the level of decentralization and a lack of coordination result in a number of actors making policy-and, critically, implementing it-in each of the main participant states.
Resolving these dilemmas requires an a priori judgement as to who was the United States, Cuba or the Soviet Union.
At one level, the archives suggest a multitude of Cuban missile crises, and documents alone do not get us very far in answering the central puzzles of the episode.
Having said this, the existence of open archives and critical oral history together put us in a very strong position when it comes to evaluating the received wisdom on the crisis.
We are now able to subject these claims to a wide set of documentary and oral evidence, with the result that the historiography of the crisis has a much broader range of sources to use.
Our main claim is that the reading of the crisis which has prevailed has been a very particular and a very political one.
We now turn to look at some of the main elements in the accepted received wisdom on the crisis to show what recent historiography tells us about what has been accepted as the history of the crisis.
In each case we sunumarize what became the conventional wisdom before showing how understanding has changed.
For example, General Gribkov's revelations concerning pre-delegated authority for the use of Soviet tactical nuclear weapons during the crisis, revealed in 1992, are now understood to be erroneous and misleading.
The list of changing perceptions is not exhaustive, nor are our judgements in any sense final.
We nevertheless contend that they demonstrate that the historiography of the crisis has until recently been based on very incomplete and political readings of the events of October I962.
The issue of why Khrushchev deployed the missiles in Cuba has preoccupied American scholars.
There is still disagreement about Khrushchev's decision and the relative importance of the different factors in Soviet policy-making.
The 'quarantine' line around Cuba was drawn closer to Cuba to give Khrushchev more time to consider his response.
This was suggested by the British ambassador and Kennedy family friend, David Ormsby-Gore, and agreed immediately by Kennedy.
McNamara implemented the quarantine change in the face of strong opposition from the United States navy.
Graham Allison suggests that the quarantine line was never moved, indicating that presidential orders were not implemented and thus supporting his organizational process model.
The President said that he 'was against a strict application of the five hundred mile rule' though he recognized it might be better to intercept the specific ship that was being monitored outside the 5oo-mile radius.
Previously the United States navy had been authorized to intercept outside the soo-mile quarantine line, and Allison appears to have confused intercepting a ship and boarding it.
On Friday 26 October the Soviet diplomat, Aleksandr Fomin, approached John Scali, an ABC News reporter known to have highlevel access to the State Department.
Over lunch Fomin outlined a possible deal to resolve the crisis involving the withdrawal of the Soviet missiles under UN supervision in return for an American pledge not to invade.
The Soviet official was known to be the KGB chief or Resident in Washington and his approach was immediately considered by Dean Rusk and John Kennedy.
Later that afternoon a letter from Premier Khrushchev arrived which inter alia appeared to make a similar proposal.
Fomin's approach, assumed to have originated in Moscow, apparently influenced the way Kennedy and Rusk read Khrushchev's letter of 26 October.
When Robert Kennedy met Dobrynin on 27 October he presented the Soviet ambassador with the American response to Khrushchev's letters.
According to Kennedy's posthumously published account,30 the Soviet official raised the issue of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
We had only a few more hours-we needed an answer immediately from the Soviet Union.
The President is thus depicted as displaying flexibility but nevertheless standing firm.
In i987 Anatoly Dobrynin began to provide his recollections and claimed that the initiative for the Turkish trade came from Robert Kennedy.
Dobrynin challenged the idea that Kennedy had presented any kind of ultimatum.
He also stated that the offer regarding the Turkish missiles was put to him on Friday 26 October, giving rise to speculation about the impact this may have had on Khrushchev's public demand for the withdrawal of the missiles in his second letter of 27 October.
Dobrynin has now, apparently, admitted that his recollection of the date was in error, and that the meeting did indeed take place on the evening of 27 October.
Lebow and Stein have reproduced Dobrynin's telegram of 27 October, which clarifies several important issues.
It should be noted that, even with Sorenson's creative editing, Kennedy's account of the 27 October meeting could be interpreted as implying some kind of deal over the Turkish Jupiters.
Second, while time was of the essence, the Attorney-General stressed that the request for a reply the next day 'is just that-a request, and not an ultimatum'.35 Nevertheless, officials in Moscow grasped that a response within 24 hours was essential.
During I962 there was a concerted programme of American actions directed against Cuba, including large-scale military manoeuvres and covert operations.
Considerable evidence has emerged concerning American military contingency planning for an invasion of Cuba during I96I and I962 and how in late September and early October McNamara himself authorized active preparations for an invasion of Cuba.
Details of American covert warfare against Cuba have also become known.
More recently evidence has emerged to challenge the denials of Kennedy administration officials that the United States did not intend to invade Cuba.
At the beginning of October, and before the discovery of the medium-range ballistic missiles , McNamara himself ordered the intensification of planning and preparations for action to 'the highest state of readiness' so that an ,s Ibid., 526.
Thus, whether or not the Kennedy administration intended to invade, the new evidence increasingly vindicates Soviet and Cuban perceptions that an American attack was imminent.
President Kennedy ordered the removal of American Jupiter missiles from Turkey on several occasions, and was angry when, in October, he discovered that his order had not been obeyed.
The failure to remove missiles, which could be seen as both provocative and vulnerable, was therefore the responsibility of the President's subordinates, particularly in the State Department, rather than the President himself New interpretation.
While President Kennedy ordered his officials to explore the possible removal of the missiles on several occasions in I96I and I962 he was made aware of Turkish opposition to the idea, and did not issue any order to have the missiles removed.
According to Dean Rusk the President accepted that it would be bad for Turkish morale if the missiles were withdrawn before Polaris submarines were deployed in the Mediterranean.
The decision to proceed with the deployment in I96I had also reflected concern that, after Khrushchev's attitude at the Vienna summit, cancellation would show weakness.
The order to withdraw the missile was not given until after the crisis.
Consequently the organizational process model does not provide an explanation for what happened, and the President should bear responsibility for the failure to remove the Jupiters from Turkey before the crisis.
Soviet strategic nuclear weapons were not placed on alert during the crisis.
Former Soviet officers with responsibilities for strategic nuclear forces have stated that the alert status of,Soviet intercontinental-ballistic missiles and long-range nuclear bombers was increased from its routine peacetime status to the intermediate level, and then, for a brief period during the crisis, to the state of combat readiness, in which the nuclear warhead were mated to the missiles.
It is not yet clear what specific event caused the Soviet leadership to respond in this way.
Thus strategic inferiority did not prevent the Soviets from making preparations for nuclear war, and this factor therefore could not have caused the political leadership to pursue a political solution that it would not otherwise have sought.
Had the United States launched an invasion, and had the missiles and their crews survived, subordinate military officials could have initiated nuclear hostilities.
American conventional attacks could thus have precipitated regional nuclear war.
Additionally, American decision-makers might well have assumed that the decision to use nuclear weapons had been taken in Moscow.
How the American government would have responded is a matter for speculation, but there would have been very considerable pressure for an American nuclear response against Cuba.
The prospect of escalation to at least a regional nuclear exchange appears to have been much higher than was understood at the time, or subsequently.
At the Havana conference in January I992, General Anatoly Gribkov (administrative head of the Soviet General Staffs main operations directorate in I962) stated that pre-delegated authority to use tactical nuclear missiles had been given to the Soviet commander in Cuba.
Subsequently, Gribkov retracted this statement about pre-delegated authority, which had been questioned by other senior Soviet officers involved in the operation, including Pliyev's deputy, General Garbuz.
None of these accounts has yet been confirmed by Soviet documentation, though Sagan quotes declassified American documents to provide some corroboration.
It may well be that the Soviet command and control arrangements were effective in preventing the risk of subordinate commanders initiating 'inadvertent' escalation.
Nevertheless, Gribkov's revelation that the Soviets had deployed tactical nuclear missiles in Cuba has not been challenged.
This was a significant intelligence failure on the part of the Americans.
It meant that had Kennedy decided to invade, Khrushchev would have possessed options for escalation that fell short of attacks on the United States or NATO territory.
The Commander in Chief of the Strategic Air Command , General Thomas S Power, at some point in the crisis gave orders that a message be broadcast en clair to ensure that the Soviet authorities were fully aware of SAC's alert posture and strength.
This move was designed to intimidate the Soviets by demonstrating United States will in mobilizing its massive nuclear superiority.
President Kennedy was unaware of this unauthorized action, which was highly provocative, and could have undermined his attempts to manage and control the crisis.
Increases in the Defense Condition alert posture of American nuclear forces were routinely transmitted in unclassified messages.
General Power did transmit a message to his bomber wings on 24 October, but sought primarily to emphasize the need for 'calm judgement' on the part of his crews, and to stress that wherever possible they should seek clarification of any orders departing from the normal in order to prevent mistakes or confusion.
Thus the previous understanding distorts General Power's intentions, and exaggerates the extent to which the move would have been provocative.
However, we still have no indication from Soviet sources about its effect on Soviet military perceptions and calculations.
The United States government did not identify any Soviet nuclear warheads in Cuba, though there was evidence that some were in transit when the American blockade/quarantine was imposed.
Without the warheads, and so long as the blockade remained effective, the United States was not under nuclear threat from Cuba.
The American government, however, felt that it had to assume that the warheads had arrived, and that the missiles would be operational.
He later revised this latter figure to 12 warheads for the 6 FROG-7s.i0 Another recent account by a senior Russian military officer, Lt-Col.
If any of these accounts is true, then there was a real Soviet threat and Khrushchev would have been able to retaliate against US territory.
The significance of the Soviet accounts for American decisionmaking, however, is limited because the Kennedy administration acted on the assumption that the MRBM warheads had arrived and could be used.
There has long been speculation concerning the shooting down of Major Rudolf Anderson's U-2 on Saturday 27 October.
It has been variously suggested that the decision to fire the surface-to-air missile was taken by subordinate Soviet military commanders, the Cuban authorities or even the Cuban Prime Minister, Fidel Castro, personally.
Each of these explanations suggests that Moscow was not in control of its own forces, and that Soviet-or, more significantly, Cuban-actors took important decisions to escalate the crisis at a critical juncture.
Soviet sources have made clear that the decision was taken and authorized by subordinate Soviet commanders in Cuba.
According to General Volkogonov, authorization was provided by General Stepan Grechko from General Pliyev's headquarters, as General Pliyev himself could not be contacted in time.
The decision was not authonrzed by Moscow, and resulted in a mild reprimand from the Soviet Defence Minister, Marshal Malinovsky.
Thus a crucial decision was taken by subordinate officials, though these were Soviet and not Cuban officers.
This is the first account to claim that there were nuclear bombs in Cuba which could be carried by the Ilyushin-28 jet bombers.
This significant intelligence failure can be explained by use of the bureaucratic politics model of decision-making.
New interpretation.There was disagreement on whether it was prudent to risk the U-2s in direct overflights of Cuba and from mid-September to early October the administration was guided by the views of Dean Rusk and McGeorge Bundy.
When John McCone returned from his honeymoon to discover that the western part of the island had not been photographed for a month he challenged this approach.
On 9 October it was decided to send a U-2 on a direct overflight, but on io, II, I2 and I3 October meteorological conditions prevented the mission.
It was also agreed on 9 October that the SAC would assume responsibility for the U-2 missions, which it did on I2 October.
No evidence has emerged to support the contention that rivalry between the CIA and SAC delayed the mission.
The United States navy succeeded in surfacing five or six Soviet diesel-attack submarines in or near the 'quarantine' zone.
One of the submarines was damaged during this action and, unable to submerge, had to return to the Soviet Union.
There is also evidence that practice depth charges were used by one of the Anti-Submarine Warfare ships involved.
American political authorities were unaware of these activities during the crisis, which could have led to subordinate officers provoking a military confrontation while the political authorities were seeking to prevent escalation.
Five Soviet submarines were positively identified and trailed in the Caribbean and the Atlantic during the crisis.
Specific 'Submarine Surfacing and Identification Procedures' were devised, including the use of practice depth charges and grenades.
It is possible that one of the submarines was damaged by a practice depth charge, though there is no firm evidence of this, and the Soviets did not issue any formal complaint concerning American ASW operations, in contrast to protests about action against merchant ships.
Secretary McNamara specifically approved the special submarine surfacing procedures on 23 October.
He and the President were concerned about Soviet submarine movements at the outset, and the Defense Secretary was made aware of ASW operations throughout the crisis during his daily briefings.
All major United States mi]itary commands were placed on DEFCON-3 on 22 October, with SAC moving to DEFCON-2 on 24 October.
Additionally the United States did not seek to raise the alert status of the Thor andJupiter Intermediate Range Ballistic Missiles deployed under dual-key arrangements in Britain, Italy and Turkey.
It now appears that the commander of United States Air Forces Europe, General Truman Landon, ordered numerous operational activities commensurate with DEFCON-3 alert status, including increasing the number of nucleararmed aircraft on Quick Reaction Alert .73 Additionally, the alert status of the IRBMs in Britain and Italy was at fifteen minutes readiness and the British V-bomber force was brought to a high state of ground alert.
Despite extensive discussion of 'defusing' the Turkish Jupiters as the crisis reached its climax on 27 October, American policy-makers were unaware that a squadron of F-ioo nuclear bombers were on QRA at Incirlik in Turkey.
The Jupiter missiles in Italy and Turkey were liquidfuelled missiles which took hours to prepare for firing and were therefore vulnerable to pre-emption and could only be considered as first-strike weapons.
Both the Jupiter and the Thor IRBMs could be held at some fifteen minutes' readiness indefinitely.
Under this procedure the warheads were mated to the rissiles, and the arming and firing sequences partially completed.
It is known that the Jupiter missiles in Italy and the Thor missiles in Britain were at this state of readiness during the crisis.
How far the Soviets, and in particular Soviet military authorities, perceived these weapons systems as particularly 'provocative' is not yet clear.
Before his arrest he was able to transmit a prearranged coded message warning that war was imminent.
Fearing that this was motivated by a desire to 'play Samson and bring down the temple on everyone else' his handlers withheld the information and the President and his advisers were not informed of what had happened.
Thus subordinate actors prevented American decision-makers from believing that the Soviets were about to attack, which could have provoked pre-emptive American action and a maj or escalation in the crisis.
The pre-arranged telephonic coded warning of 'a sudden development of a dangerous situation' was transmitted, but this was not until 2 November.
By then the immediate crisis had abated, although United States strategic forces remained on higher alert postures until 20 November.
When the coded warning was sent, news was immediately passed to the Director of the CIA, who in turn, briefed the President on 3 November.
Thus subordinate actors did not prevent what could have been a major escalation.
Implications for historians The findings we have presented above show just how difficult it is for historians to reach the 'truth' about the crisis.
We want to stress that this difficulty does not arise from a lack of evidence, for that implies that if we had all the evidence we would be able to approximate towards the truth.
This is a historical epistemology which we reject, since it implies a correspondence theory of truth.
In our view the lack of a truth reflects far more fundamental epistemological and methodological difficulties.
We believe that even if we knew every detail about the crisis that would not mean that we could write a definitive history, even if that history were to be written from the perspectives of each participant in turn.
The reason for this is that motivations and intentions are rarely revealed and are usually inconsistent across time if not at each specific moment.
Policy-makers in the crisis acted for a variety of reasons, and spoke and wrote for different purposes and audiences at different times.
In short, more and more evidence may simply make things less and less clear.
Specifically, examples I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7 and 8 above seem to illustrate clearly just how difficult it is to ascertain 'what happened', even as more and more information is obtained.
Thus, getting at 'the truth' of the crisis may simply be impossible, not because we know too little but because there is no single truth to be ascertained.
Historical truth is, in this sense, always contextual and always partial.
Crucially, we hope to have shown that the prevailing view of the crisis is in reality an American view, and one that needs to be re-read against other versions of events, and other definitions of 'the' crisis.
In this light it is possible to see that the historiographical debates about the crisis have been conducted within parameters set by the United States definition of what happened.
Yet, precisely because that definition reflects a specific political reading of events, the extant historiography has focused on the gaps and puzzles highlighted by one reading of events rather than subjecting this reading to critical analysis.
Above all, there has been little concern with the critically important issue of why it was a crisis.
The conventional accounts of events tend to start their analysis from exacdy the place that seems least secure and certain.
Historians have ignored the silences of the crisis, focusing rather on open differences between participants.
They have taken the agenda of participants as given and have not looked closely at the shared beliefs held by participants.
The new evidence may not make the crisis any more susceptible to one explanation, but it does offer the possibility of a genuinely international history of the crisis.
Implications for political scientists There are many implications of the new evidence for political scientists, one of the most important of which builds on the point just made above that beliefsystems were of considerable importance in the crisis.
Most of this work, as we noted above, has centred on Allison's analysis of events.
Our examples allow us to re-evaluate Allison's account in order to see whether or not his alternative models are supported.
The result is rather mixed, with three examples supporting his claims about the importance of bureaucratic and organizational factors, and three disproving his claims.
We think that the new evidence tends to confirm rather than undermine Allison's claims for the importance of organizational and bureaucratic factors during the crisis.
Our findings indicate that these bureaucratic foul-ups cannot simply be explained away as a result of slippage due to a lack of presidential attention.
However, the importance of the events surrounding the trade between United States missiles in Turkey and Soviet missiles on Cuba also indicates the critical role of the President's perception of the situation; in this sense, the President is far more than just another player in the bureaucratic game as the bureaucratic politics model implies.
Paradoxically, then, the very case-study chosen by Allison to indicate the weaknesses of the rational actor model actually ends up showing how important the President's choices were for the outcome of the crisis.
At first sight this may be seen as supporting the claims of the rational actor model, but this is not so.
Certainly presidential choices mattered, but the rational actor model is very weak in accounting for the values and priorities of a President.
In summary, just because the new evidence refocuses our attention on the President and on his choices this does not mean that a rational actor account, which treats values and beliefs as exogenous, is thereby vindicated.
An account that explains individual choices does not have to be a rational actor account.
This conclusion will receive further support when we look below at the question of the risk of inadvertent nuclear war during the crisis; here the overwhelming implication of the evidence is to support the influence of organizational factors in foreign and defence policy behaviour.
Having said this, we believe that the evidence also tends to support the view that Allison's alternatives need to be augmented by models that take cognitive factors into account, a point also made by David Welch in his review of Essence of decision 20 years on.
None of Allison's models can really deal with several central questions of the crisis because answers to them would require examination of the ways in which beliefs and cognitive maps are linked to bureaucratic positions and institutional power.
Such a project lies outside all three models as currently constituted, although it is most easily compatible with the bureaucratic politics framework.
Thus, although there may be a need to develop models stressing the linkage between cognitive factors and bureaucratic position, our main conclusion for political scientists is that the newly accessible archives and oral history evidence show the centrality of organizational and bureaucratic factors for any explanation of the crisis.
Implications for policy-makers There are three main implications of the new findings for policy-makers.
The first is that the conventional wisdom of how the crisis ended is very misleading.
Far from being a successful exercise in United States escalation dominance, with the US standing firm and winning a clear and unambiguous victory in the Cold War, the crisis resulted in much more of a draw than a United States victory.
More realistically, we believe that the existence of an explicit trade between the United States missiles in Turkey and the Soviet missiles on Cuba significantly alters the usually accepted view of the crisis.
President Kennedy, far from threatening to invade Cuba if the missiles were not withdrawn, had made arrangements for a trade to be proposed publicly by the Secretary General of the UN if the proposed secret deal between his brother and Dobrynin failed-the so-called Cordier ploy, revealed only in I987.
The conventional account of the crisis also requires major revision in respect of the notion that the United States 'stood firm' and exercised brinkmanship to force a Soviet climbdown.
Such an account tends to lead to conclusions about the possibility of nuclear diplomacy and of the use of nuclear superiority to obtain political advantages.
However, recent sources seem to show absolutely clearly that United States decision-makers were extremely worried about the prospect of any Soviet nuclear response, so much so that the result was to nullify the enormous nuclear superiority that the United States enjoyed at the time.
McGeorge Bundy, Special Assistant for National Security Affairs during the crisis, has argued very strongly that nuclear superiority was not important in settling the crisis, but that mutual vulnerability was.
Psychologist James Blight has supported this claim with a detailed examination of the relationship between fear and the peaceful resolution of the crisis.
This interpretation has been supported strongly by the opening up of the new archives, especially the transcripts of the ExCornm meetings, and by the opportunity to discuss the events with the participants through critical oral history.
There is a real problem in relying on what Ernest May has termed the 'lessons of the past'.86 By this May means that policy-makers use historical analogies, but do so badly.
The missile crisis, itself seen by May as an example of the good use of history by decisionmakers,87 has been viewed by policy-makers in a very partial way, one which the new evidence calls severely into doubt.
As May notes, policy-makers will often fall back on half-remembered analogies from previous crises; our worry is that the lessons learnt from the Cuban missile crisis may be dangerously misleading since they are based on both a very incomplete reading of history, and a particular political reading of events.
In our view, the lessons of the crisis are very different indeed from those so often quoted by policy-makers.
These claims were expressed particularly strongly during the Reagan and Thatcher periods, and we see them as fundamentally undermined by the evidence unearthed in more recent years.
We feel that the prospect of the wrong lessons being learnt from the Cuban missile crisis is a particularly worrying one; our reading of the evidence calls for a far more circumspect interpretation of the supposed benefits of nuclear superiority, and a far more serious appreciation of the implications of mutual vulnerability, with the threshold of that vulnerability being far lower than usually imagined.
The third and most important implication for policy-makers is paradoxical.
The new evidence shows that the most commonly held view of the crisis, that it was the nearest that the superpowers came to nuclear war, is in one sense accurate and in another sense very misleading.
The crisis has been seen as a period when Soviet and United States policy-makers were engaged in nuclear brinkmanship.
The danger of nuclear war resulting from the policy choices of the two sets of leaders was indeed enormously high; but we believe that the new evidence reveals a far more disturbing picture.
The good news is that it is now clear that neither leadership was willing to go to war over Cuba, much less run the risk of nuclear war.
In this sense the dangers of war by design have been much exaggerated by historians, political scientists and policy-makers.
Kennedy had the Cordier manoeuvre up his sleeve if the Kennedy-Dobrynin talks failed, and the new evidence shows just how firmly Soviet forces were under control.
In this sense the conventional wisdom of nuclear bargaining and crisis management is seriously misleading.
In reality, each side was anxious to avoid war at all costs, despite the public rhetoric and the subsequent politicization of events.
However, the new sources have made abundantly clear that the danger of nuclear confrontation by accident was far higher during the missile crisis than was previously thought.
The recent books by Bruce Blair and Scott Sagan show in graphic detail how the technical systems of the two superpowers were operating in ways contrary to the intentions of policy-makers.
Blair's book looks at the entire Cold War period, but draws on important new information on the Cuban missile crisis.
But the overwhelming implication of the new evidence is that the risks of accidental nuclear war have been seriously underestimated in the literature and, hence, by policy-makers.
Scott Sagan's book gives a long and more detailed list of 'close calls' during the crisis, such as the launch of an Atlas test missile from Vandenberg air base on 26 October, and problems with the control of the Minuteman force at Malmstrom air base during the crisis.
Indeed, because we have chosen only examples where the new evidence alters our understanding of the crisis, we have not mentioned some of the well-established incidents which risked accidental nuclear war-cases such as the stray U-2 overflight into Soviet airspace on 27 October, and the USAF's reactions to the shooting down of a U-2 over Cuba on the same day.
In short, there is now ample evidence that the fact that the crisis did not lead to nuclear war was due, in large part, to good luck.
In our view this is a most important finding since it undermines the claims of those who think that nuclear crises can be safely managed and that command and control systems will work as they are meant to work.
Far from the crisis being a controlled exercise in brinkmanship, we see it as extremely disorganized and as offering policy-makers considerable pause for thought.
Conclusion Our aim in this paper has been to present an overview of recent evidence on the missile crisis, and to see how far this requires historians, political scientists and policy-makers to re-examine their assumptions about the crisis.
Crucially, only then will historians be able to write a genuinely international history of the crisis.
But even that history will not be able to provide one single, definitive account of events.
However, we believe that the most important impact of the new evidence is that for policy-makers, since so much of the material we have reviewed in this short paper requires a fundamental rethinking of what went on in October I962.
Precisely because the crisis led to such important political lessons about both the need for nuclear superiority and the success of policy-makers' control over nuclear operations during the crisis, we feel that these findings should be taken very seriously indeed.
Above all, this was not a crisis in which the United States, through rational use of escalation dominance and nuclear crisis diplomacy, was able to force the Soviet Union into a humiliating submission.
Rather, it was a crisis which illustrated the importance of mutual vulnerability and of the desire by both sets of decision-makers to avoid war at all costs.
Yet, at the very same time as Kennedy was involved in a secret trade, the possibility of inadvertent nuclear war was considerable.
Of all the things we all thought we knew about the crisis, this misconception is most salient as we drift into a far more complex nuclear world.
Optimistically, we hope that policy-makers in future nuclear crises will be as frightened by nuclear vulnerability as were the participants in the Cuban missile crisis; pessimistically, their nuclear arsenals may be under even less effective command and control.
Either way, we believe that the story of the crisis is very different from that told in the American version of events that has hitherto prevailed.
