Merriweather,serif;margin:0;text-align:center}.article-body-container fbs-video .inline-video--container .inline-video--duration{display:inline-block;font:12px/2.
Work Sans,sans-serif}.promotion-shopping__description-info a{font-weight:600}a.promotion-shopping__description-title{font:600 12px/1.33 Work Sans,sans-serif;letter-spacing:.17px;margin-bottom:8px}.article-body .promotion-shopping__description{margin-bottom:16px;padding:12px 16px}} .tp-container-inner{clear:both}.tag__newsletter-headline{color:#d8361e;display:block;font:600 12px/1.
Work Sans,sans-serif;height:112px;opacity:0;padding:12px;position:absolute;text-align:left;top:45px;-webkit-transition:opacity .3s;-o-transition:opacity .3s;transition:opacity .3s;white-space:break-spaces;width:262px;z-index:1}.tooltip-text .tooltip-info{font:normal 12px/1.
Come October 15 it will be 50 years since the start of the Cuban missile crisis, when the United States and the Soviets were on the brink of nuclear annihilation for 13 days as a result of the Soviets trying to build missile bases on the island of Cuba.
The standoff ended when the two countries agreed that the Soviets would not i nstall missile bases and the United States would not invade Cuba, thus avoiding catastrophe.
The path we have chosen for the present is full of hazards, as all paths are.
It would have been the easiest thing in the world for us to build those emplacements under the guise of something totally different and they would have never been discovered.
One wonders what would have happened if the Soviets and Cuba had been better at camouflaging the bases.
President Kennedy didn't negotiate out of the Cuban missile crisis simply because he and Khrushchev got along well.
In recent years, the Pulitzer Center for Crisis Reporting has supported my reporting from Asia, which looks at sustainable fashion, global health, and technology for development.
In a past life, I worked as a travel and food writer, which is how I got the assignment in 2016 to cover the grand opening of the Trump International Hotel in Washington, D.C., just a couple miles from my home.
When Trump won the election and refused to divest his business, I stayed on the story, starting a newsletter called 1100 Pennsylvania and contributed to Vanity Fair, Politico and NBC News.
Forbes searches premium retailers to find the new products — from clothes to gadgets — and the latest deals.
Featured products are independently selected and linked to for your convenience.
My areas of specialty are wearable tech, cameras, home entertainment and mobile technology.
I also work as an actor, enjoying equally the first Mission Impossible movie, a season at Shakespeare’s Globe and a part in the latest series of The Crown.&nbsp;\n</p><p>\nI’ve written for the Daily Telegraph, the Sunday Times, the Daily Mail, the Sun, Metro, Stuff, T3, Pocket-lint, Wareable.com and Wired.
Right now most of my work away from Forbes appears in the Independent, the Evening Standard and Monocle Magazine.
As the founding editor of Verdict.co.uk I reported on how technology is changing business, political trends, and the latest culture and lifestyle.
I have covered the rise of bitcoin and cryptocurrency since 2012 and have charted its emergence as a niche technology into the greatest threat to the established financial system the world has ever seen and the most important new technology since the internet itself.
I have worked and written for CityAM, the Financial Times, and the New Statesman, amongst others.
