The most likely cause of this is a content blocker on your computer or network.
Please make sure your computer, VPN, or network allows javascript and allows content to be delivered from c950.chronicle.com and chronicle.blueconic.net.
Once javascript and access to those URLs are allowed, please refresh this page.
You may then be asked to log in or create an account if you don't already have one.
Blight and Lang, a research professor of international affairs at Waterloo, have spent almost 30 years investigating how those events almost brought the world to nuclear war.
Blight and Lang have created a companion “transmedia, multiplatform” Web site at armageddonletters.com.
The imagined conversations are in screenplay and graphic-novel form, with illustrations by Andrew Whyte, a Vancouver artist, and storyline and dialogue by Koji Masutani, who also designed the project’s Web site.
On the Armageddon Letters Web site, Blight, Lang, and Masutani plan to post 20 short films, narrated by a cartoon stylization of Blight, or by Blight himself, a striking figure with something of a hyperrealist presence.
To students he might come off as either very much not hip or, because of his enthusiasm and intense gaze, square jaw, and crew cut, ultra-hip or even post-hip.
As they recount their project and its purpose, Blight and Lang trade overlapping comments about the Web site’s components, including podcasts and blogs with what they imagine Castro, Kennedy, and Khrushchev might have posted at the time.
It’s no surprise, then, that the authors’ primary target audience is undergraduate and high-school students.
The tension began ratcheting up 50 years ago, on September 4, 1962, when Kennedy stated that the United States would not tolerate the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, some 90 miles from Florida.
Soviet leaders countered that America had missiles in Britain, Italy, and Turkey.
Blight and Lang were moved to tell the story by Robert S McNamara, United States secretary of defense during the crisis.
That first conference would be followed by several others, including two in Havana at which, Blight says, he and Castro got on like old pals because both had been pitchers, Blight in the Detroit Tigers farm system.
ADVERTISEMENT The gatherings were Blight’s first forays into what he now calls “critical oral history,” in which decision makers from key historical episodes relate their experiences while interrogated by scholars armed with declassified documents.
That remains their own conviction and the key message of their project.
McNamara “all but ordered us,” write Blight and Lang, “to learn more about the actual experience of the Cuban missile crisis” from its participants, and to convey that knowledge to young Americans.
Both trained in psychology, they came to differ with the standard account of the crisis, which attributes its resolution to rational decision-making by the leaders; instead, they see the whole period from the Bay of Pigs invasion, in 1961, to the missile crisis in psychological terms—as a process of each leader’s coming to understand the fears and defiance of the others.
Blight, who had hung an effigy of McNamara while an anti-Vietnam War activist in a chapter of Students for a Democratic Society, found himself writing two books with the former secretary of defense.
Blight and Lang’s work around the Cuban missile crisis, often with a colleague, David Welch, has produced several other books, dozens of journal articles, and two companion volumes to documentary films on which they collaborated.
Eleven Lessons From the Life of Robert S McNamara and Virtual JFK: Vietnam if Kennedy Had Lived , by the animator on their current project, Koji Masutani.
Opinion Peter Monaghan Peter Monaghan is a correspondent for The Chronicle.
