Kennedy's father, Joseph P Kennedy, served as United States ambassador to Britain at the time of the 1938 Munich conference, where the British and French agreed to let Nazi Germany take land from Czechoslovakia in exchange for a short-lived promise of peace.
The elder Kennedy's support of appeasement later was strongly criticized and may have cost him any hope of running for national office.
LeMay, like other military leaders, advocated immediate military intervention to destroy the Soviet missiles and unfinished silos that had been detected by aerial reconnaissance in Cuba.
He said blockade ships bound for Cuba, as other presidential advisers urged, would lead to war anyway.
President Kennedy, who privately called LeMay ""field marshal,"" did not respond to the remark and the meeting went on to cover other military and diplomatic issues.
The National Archives released 15 hours of tapes from the Kennedy White House, covering meetings that took place during the decision-making phase of the crisis 34 years ago this week at the climax of the Cold War.
Authorities deleted 27 minutes they said covered intelligence sources or methods still in use.
Much of the material has already been recounted in the writings of participants, and summaries of the meetings were released in 1992.
Several of Kennedy's advisers, foremost among them Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, urged an attack.
The tapes indicate that Kennedy initially appeared to agree that he would be forced to resort to military action.
But they also show that United States intelligence had vastly underestimated what is now known to have been the strength of Soviet forces in Cuba.
The Americans believed there were no more than 1,500 to 3,000 Soviet troops, while documents released after the fall of the Soviet Union showed there actually were 42,000, and they were armed with tactical nuclear weapons.
Kennedy felt painted into a corner by Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev's offer to remove the Cuban missiles if the United States removed its Jupiter nuclear missiles from Turkey.
The president said Khrushchev's offer, which he ultimately accepted, was so reasonable that it would turn world public opinion to the Soviet side.
LeMay's comment ``was an amazing thing to say to any president, but it was a particularly amazing thing to say to this president,'' said Sheldon Stern, historian at the John F Kennedy Library in Boston, where the tapes were released.
Kennedy's father, Joseph P Kennedy, was ambassador to Britain at the time of the 1938 Munich conference, where the British and French agreed to let Nazi Germany take land from Czechoslovakia in exchange for a short-lived promise of peace.
LeMay, like other military leaders, advocated immediate military intervention to destroy the Soviet missiles and unfinished silos that had been detected by aerial reconnaissance.
He said blockading ships bound for Cuba, as other presidential advisers urged, would lead to war anyway.
Kennedy, who privately called LeMay ``field marshal,'' did not respond to the remark and the meeting went on to cover other military and diplomatic issues.
The National Archives released 15 hours of tapes from the Kennedy White House, covering meetings during the decision-making phase of the crisis 34 years ago this week at the climax of the Cold War.
Authorities deleted 27 minutes they said covered intelligence sources or methods still being used.
Much of the material has already been recounted in writings of participants.
The president said Khruschev's offer, which he ultimately accepted, was so reasonable that it would turn world public opinion to the Soviet side.
They were visiting the grave of Mr Khrushchev's father Nikita, the Soviet leader of the time, during a conference of Soviet, Cuban and United States officials who played a role in the crisis.
The United States and the Soviet Union were ready at that time to go to war, to exchange nuclear weapons and in the process to destroy the entire planet.
JFK was intent on ensuring that a war that no one wanted would not happen again.
Forming a decision-making system that included the best and the brightest in the administration, led by a group of four-star generals joined by graduates of Harvard and other Ivy League institutions, who formed the Executive Committee or Ex-Com, JFK refrained from attending their deliberations so as to allow them to conduct a free-for-all debate.
Which is what happens when an enlightened president and his intelligent advisers, the embodiment of the Rational Men, are in charge.
But after studying the 1962 crisis, Prof Allison raised questions about the viability of what he labelled as the Rational Actor Model.
According to this model, the government acts as a unitary rational actor to make decisions.
Instead, Prof Allison suggested that in reality what happens has very little to do with rationality.
Things tend to be more messy, reflecting the personal, political and bureaucratic interests of the main players.
His foreign policy aides were smart, but he didn't pay too much attention to their advice, especially by those who encouraged him to risk a war with the Soviet Union.
Instead, JFK who wanted to avoid a nuclear war at almost any price relied on a relative, his brother Robert Kennedy, the attorney-general, as well as other outside players to communicate with the Soviet leaders and help fashion up a secret compromise deal and led to the de-escalation of tensions between the two superpowers.
As Prof Allison recalled, some of the ""adults in the room"" in the JFK administration had advocated military escalation while the inexperienced JFK resisted their pressure and pursued a more cautious approach.
In fact, one of America's most astute foreign policy presidents, Richard Nixon, proposed that American presidents need to embrace what he called the Madman Theory.
But we are aware that much of Mr Trump's modus operandi as a businessman and now as a politician has involved bluffing.
Just recall the main campaign pledges he had renounced after being elected as president, from moving the American embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem and revoking the nuclear deal with Iran to getting Mexico to pay for the wall on the southern border and labelling China as a currency manipulator.
Concealing one's intentions and misleading the other side about them, or bluffing, can prove to be a very effective tool in politics, including in foreign policy.
President Eisenhower's Secret Battle to Save the World, historian Evan Thomas noted that the much-admired president was a specialist in bridge.
Mr Eisenhower radiated warm sincerity and his emotions were easy to read.
Being a bluffer is a perfect personal trait if you are in the business of nuclear strategy, Mr Thomas contended.
Mr Eisenhower's basic policy throughout his presidency was known as Massive Retaliation, threatening to use nuclear weapons against aggression wherever and whenever it might occur.
His closest adviser, General Andrew Goodpaster, guessed that ""Ike"" would never use nuclear weapons, but others weren't so sure, and Mr Eisenhower wasn't going to tell them.
Mr Eisenhower managed, ""by cleverness, indirection, subtlety, and downright deviousness, and by embracing the very weapon he could never use, to safeguard his country and possibly the rest of mankind from annihilation"", Mr Thomas wrote.
Which is probably the way every American president, including the current one, would want to be remembered.
Other significant papers from national security agencies were scattered throughout the executive branch, and one cache of important records was found in a shopping cart in the basement of the State Department.
In the past five years, many of these ""hidden"" documents have come to light -largely through the persistent effort of the Washington-based National Security Archive, a private nonprofit organization.
Among the documents from 1962-63 were CIA papers on Operation Mongoose, the covert operation to destabilize the Castro government; an exchange of letters between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev; and key internal records that illuminate the aftermath of the crisis.
With the list in hand, the archive began filing a series of Freedom of Information Act requests for the files.
The government had declassified 2,000 documents in full or in part by mid-1989.
Hundreds of other classified records of the missile crisis era have been released after archive analysts and other scholars filed FOIA requests, and in the early 1970s many important internal papers were made public at the John F Kennedy Presidential Library.
Its publication last week by The New Press was timed to coincide with the missile crisis anniversary.
Meanwhile, the court battle for the rest of the documents and portions of papers that have been excised continues.
The reasons the government gives for holding them back -even after 30 years -are intriguing.
A section of a secret discussion paper on actions to increase pressure on Cuba (short of the use of force) that the State Department prepared for the National Security Council in December 1963, for example, was denied because ""despite the passage of time, these possibilities remain viable for future consideration toward Cuba . . . "" and disclosure would harm United States security interests.
It filed a request for a summary judgment for release of the remaining documents last week.
On Oct., the National Security Council briefed President John F Kennedy on that ominous development.
The organization, the predecessor of today's AF Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance Agency, had an important role before and during the crisis when the United States and Soviet Union came to the brink of war.
USAFSS became involved in airborne operations against Cuba in early 1962 and by mid-October, the command was firmly entrenched in the mission.
On Oct., as the United States began building up its land forces and the Kennedy Administration readied ""a strict naval quarantine,"" of the island, Airborne Communications Reconnaissance Program operations increased.
A second Europe-based C-130 and USAFSS crew arrived in Florida on Oct., the eve of President Kennedy's famous speech to the country.
This arrival increased the number of C-130s used in the operation to three.
The next day the third C-130 and its crew stood ready to fly ACRP missions against Cuba.
Alerted on Oct., the command sent its first contingent of 27 people and an intercept van two days later to Key West, Fla., to augment Naval Security Group operations at the site.
USAFSS personnel left Key West and opened operations at Cudjoe Key, about 15 miles east of Key West Naval Air Station.
The command dealt with many challenges in preparing and deploying its people to Key West, but still met the deployment order deadline.
Richard P Klocko, received a telephone call from Air Force Chief of Staff, Gen.
That day, a Soviet SA-2 surface-to-air missile destroyed an Air Force U-2 above the island, killing the pilot, Maj.
It appeared the United States would launch air strikes against the already launch-capable MRBM sites and execute a massive amphibious assault against Cuba.
USAFSS put its forces in place, flying invaluable ACRP missions and conducting an intercept operation on the ground.
By Oct., after conducting high-level covert diplomacy, the United States and the Soviet Union reached an agreement to avert a conflict.
Based on America's reaction, it become clear USAFSS had established itself as a primary provider of invaluable intelligence to U S. forces.
I remember I couldn't find any kids to play with on the street, and I heard about people building bomb shelters in their backyards.
I kind of liked the idea of canned foods and candles, but I knew something was wrong.
It wasn't until years later, of course, that Costner would grasp the gravity of the October 1962 crisis in which the United States and U.S.S.R. stood eyeball to eyeball in a dispute over the Soviet buildup of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
The actor now stars in ""Thirteen Days,"" an epic suspense thriller that dramatizes the events that nearly caused an apocalyptic nuclear war.
The film chronicles the crisis from Day 1, when a United States spy plane detected the Soviet missile buildup in Cuba, through Day 13, when the Communist superpower eventually blinked and agreed to discontinue its installation of nuclear missiles on the island nation.
The $80 million thriller focuses on the bitter debates within President John F Kennedy's White House as cabinet members, diplomats and top military brass offered ideas on how to resolve the crisis.
Ultimately, it came down to Kennedy, who, as the film reveals, resisted armed confrontation for as long as possible even when an American fighter pilot was either intentionally or inadvertently shot down.
Costner plays trusted presidential aide Kenneth O'Donnell, who actually served in the Kennedy administration and who serves as a conduit to the dramatization.
Drawing on historical material, including White House tapes, memoirs, oral histories, declassified CIA documents and personal interviews, screenwriter David Self has woven a tale about the crisis as seen through the eyes of a little-known White House aide.
The popular actor and director says it wasn't important to him to star in the picture.
His job, Costner explains, is to provide the star power to get audiences into movie theaters who otherwise might be reluctant to sit down and absorb a historical drama over 2 hours long whose outcome they may already know.
He knows firsthand the difficulty of producing big budget pictures that may fail to draw the large audiences needed to support them.
As the star of such blockbusters as ""Bull Durham,"" ""The Bodyguard,"" ""Field of Dreams"" and ""Dances With Wolves"" , Costner was key to getting ""Thirteen Days"" produced.
His O'Donnell character is the everyman who bears witness to the power and peril during an unraveling crisis in the White House.
Costner starred in another movie dealing with the Kennedy years, Olver Stone's 1991 ""JFK,"" a controversial drama about the Kennedy assassination in which Costner played New Orleans prosecutor Jim Garrison.
He insists that the important factor he considers when choosing a film role is the story and the writing.
Casting the Kennedy brothers was more difficult, Donaldson says, as most people have an image in their minds of what John and Robert Kennedy looked and sounded like.
For Greenwood and Culp, it was a matter of interpreting rather than imitating these beloved historical figures.
But there were differences in the way talked, and we worked on giving our characters a unique voice,"" Greenwood says.
Costner admits that doing the Boston accent in ""Thirteen Days"" was challenging.
On the positive side of the ledger, the attacks sent a message to Osama bin Laden and his cohorts that the United States is prepared to abandon a number of legal and political constraints in the fight against terrorism.
Their bases in foreign countries will no longer be treated as sanctuaries, and the United States will no longer hold itself to a rigorous legal standard of establishing their guilt before striking back.
In addition, these attacks may have meaningfully set back the bin Laden network's attempts to obtain chemical weapons.
But the bin Laden group already was planning additional attacks before this United States strike, so the vengeance motive may not matter much in this case.
A second concern is damage to the United States' relations with Pakistan, which appears to have had its airspace traversed without permission and to have borne the brunt of a wayward cruise missile.
But the United States willingness to violate Pakistani airspace, while not somethingto be done lightly, does reinforce the message that the United States is taking off its gloves in the battle against terrorists.
Unfortunately, these hits against the bin Laden infrastructure probably will have limited military impact.
Terrorist organizations like Hamas and Hezbollah in the Middle East have already shown that things like large training bases and central arms caches are not essential to their operations.
He also may view the cruise-missile strike, which put no United States troops at risk and put him at only modest risk, more as an indication of what we are not prepared to do than of what we are.
Admittedly a very risky one_a commando raid against bin Laden's headquarters south of the site we bombed.
Mohamed Farah Aidid in Somalia in 1993, there is some chance that our target would have eluded our grasp, and a very good chance we would have lost soldiers.
But unlike the Aidid case, bin Laden represents a direct threat to core United States interests.
In fact, he is a greater threat than was Panama's former president, Manuel Noriega, when President George Bush sent thousands of troops to capture him in 1989.
In this case, thousands of United States troops would not have been needed.
Several hundred, most of them flying into Afghanistan on perhaps two dozen helicopters predeployed to an aircraft carrier in the Indian Ocean, could have done the job.
A commando operation would have shared many of the military and political risks that confronted Desert One, the attempted rescue of United States hostages in Tehran, Iran, in 1980.
In that unsuccessful mission, eight American servicemen were killed_and the Carter presidency's fate effectively sealed_when a U.S. helicopter and airplane collided at an improvised staging base in the Iranian desert.
They are run by a unified command that provides them with high-quality equipment and rigorous, realistic training.
Situations such as those confronted in 1980, when Marine Corps pilots had to fly unfamiliar Navy helicopters, and coordinate operations with Air Force planes they had not properly trained with before, would not recur.
Moreover, Pakistan might have firmly resisted any use of its airspace or territory to stage the operation_even if we had offered to lift sanctions imposed on it after its nuclear weapons tests.
But bin Laden may well pose the most serious direct risk to United States territory since the Cuban missile crisis.
Next time, assuming we can again find him, we should consider going in and getting him.
Michael O'Hanlon is a fellow in foreign policy studies at the Brookings Institution in Washington.
It may not be an exaggeration to say the world was on the verge of ending.
As he received updates on the situation, he took some notes on a yellow legal pad, which was preserved for posterity.
Their fathers, President Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, were at the center of the missile crisis, a moment historians think was the closest the world has come to nuclear war.
The crisis began when President Kennedy learned Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States.
The crisis ended two weeks later, when the Soviet leader promised to remove the nuclear missiles in exchange for a promise by Kennedy not to invade Cuba.
McNamara made the statement after returning to Washington from a four-day closed-door meeting in Havana of former U.S., Soviet and Cuban officials investigating circumstances of the historic U.S.-Soviet showdown.
Anatoly Gribkov that nine short-range rockets with nuclear warheads had been placed in Cuba.
Gribkov told the Havana meeting he had visited the island with orders that, in case of a United States invasion of Cuba, the senior Soviet troop commander was authorized to use the short-range nuclear weapons without further approval from Moscow.
In contrast, the intermediate-range Soviet weapons that were the focus of the missile crisis and that could have wreaked devastation on much of the United States mainland, could have been fired only with explicit authorization of Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, Gribkov told the Havana meeting.
McNamara and other United States experts on the missile crisis said they had not known of the short-range atomic weapons until the recent Soviet statement.
Cuban President Fidel Castro said at the conference he would have approved use of the short-range nuclear weapons if the United States had attacked the island.
The Havana meeting was probably the last in a series of historical reconsiderations by participants in the missile crisis.
Bill Jackson, now retired after 22 years of teaching history and art in the Del Norte School District, had a front-row seat to the Cuban missile crisis in 1962 as a 20-year-old seaman assigned to a top-secret command post aboard the Navy's Atlantic Fleet flagship.
Russian Prime Minister Nikita Khrushchev ""was banging his shoe at the United Nations, and Castro was setting up his regime"" in Cuba.
The Northampton, nicknamed ""The Gray Ghost of the Virginia Coast,"" was President John F Kennedy's floating command center in case of nuclear war.
Emboldened by his Bay of Pigs victory, Castro imported Russian-made jets that could carry nuclear bombs and ballistic missiles that could reach the United States.
In August 1962, high-flying American U2 spy planes photographed them being unloaded from Russian ships.
A naval blockade of Cuba was ordered, and American children soon were practicing ""run, duck and cover"" drills at their schools.
The general public didn't know what was going on then, but we were that close to World War III,"" he said, holding his fingers an inch apart.
The Northampton and dozens of destroyers, cruisers and the aircraft carrier USS Forrestal surrounded Cuba.
Of course, there was concern for the folks at home if there was a nuclear war or if we had to invade Cuba.
On Oct., 1962, Kennedy accepted Khrushchev's promise to remove the missiles under U.N. inspection if the United States promised not to invade Cuba.
Castro, however, refused to allow United Nations officials to verify the withdrawal, but U-2 photos showed missiles being loaded on Russian ships.
In 1974, they moved to Del Norte, where they taught school for 22 years.
