The Americans bought sugar, Cuba’s main crop; they also controlled much of Cuba’s economy.
THE BAY OF PIGS 1961 President Kennedy tried to overthrow Castro in April 1961.
The attack was a disaster and failed dismally, the rebels were met by 20,000 Cuban troops.
The fiasco convinced Castro that the USA was enemy; he now turned to the USSR for protection.
THE IMPACT OF THE INVASION • Kennedy looked weak and was criticised for the failed attempt to defeat Communism in their own back yard.
By September 1962 it had thousands of Soviet missiles, patrol boats, tanks, radar vans and jet fighters, plus 5,000 Soviet technicians to help maintain the weapons.
Explain why the USA became concerned over events in Cuba between 1959 and 1961.
If he had missiles in Cuba he could agree to remove them if the USA removed their missiles from, Turkey.
It was the only Communist state in the Western hemisphere, and had willingly become Communist.
It was ideal to try to encourage Communist development in South America.
By putting medium range missiles in Cuba it would begin to even the gap between them.
Kennedy had already been seen to win the arms race and this damaged Khrushchev’s credibility.
Just by existing Cuba was good for the USSR, it made the USA look bad having Communist state right under their nose.
Some sites had been finished and others were still being built, but could be ready in 7 days.
They also reported that twenty Soviet ships were currently on the way to Cuba carrying missiles.
He did not let himself be overinfluenced by his advisers or by Khrushchev.
He made clear to Khrushchev what would happen in his response to the first letter.
The USA • Kennedy’s reputation-it looked like he had stood up to Khrushchev and made him back down • Kennedy had also stood up to the hardliners in his governmenthe refused to immediately invade or go straight to war On the other hand, • He did have to move the missiles from Turkey and his NATO allies were unhappy about this • Kennedy had to accept that Castro and Cuba would remain Communist and this was seen as a defeat.
The USSR • Khrushchev was able to highlight his role as a peacemaker • Cuba remained Communist and a valuable ally, the USA had not been able to change this • USA were withdrawing missiles from turkeya major threat so close to the USSR On the other hand, • Khrushchev had been forced to back down and removed the missiles from Cubathe Soviet military did not like this.
Cuba • Castro was upset by the deal the USSR made with the USAhe had to put up with it because he needed the USSR as an ally • Cuba stayed Communist and was highly armedthe nuclear missiles were removed but Cuba became an important base for Communists in the area • Castro kept control of American companies, it still remains a source of tension with the USA today, and they still refused to trade with Cuba.
