Ocala's Joyce and Mike Perdue were living in Norfolk, Va., at the time, and had just recently heard the good news.
It was a quiet day for the Perdues -Joyce was watching TV and Mike had just gotten out of the shower when the phone rang.
VINCE MURRAYAssociate Editor 1189 Words OpenURL Link OCALA -In early October 1962, life was good.
Mike couldn't tell me where he was going, what they would be doing or when he would be back.
They checked out the car thoroughly, checked our IDs and let us through.
When we got close to the ship, there was black smoke coming out of the stack, and he said, 'Someone isn't doing their job right.
The DuPont had a close encounter with a Russian submarine, playing a dangerous ""cat and mouse"" game for three days.
At school in Key West The Cuban Revolution had scattered the family of Ocala's Iris Diaz all over Miami.
My cousin got a job with Associated Press in Key West monitoring Cuban radio and one TV station in Havana.
Eventually, she went to a boarding school in Key West -Mary Immaculate High School.
The director of Civil Defense at the time told the mother superior of the convent to take us to the beach and get in the water waist high.
We had 46 students, many from South America, who came here to learn English.
On the brink of war ""In October 1962, I lived in Miami,"" said Craig Baggs, of Ocala.
He worked closely with people such as McGeorge Bundy and Robert McNamara.
His knowledge in Latin American affairs and his geographical location were key factors.
It was a realization that we were only 90 miles or so from what could of been the brink of nuclear war between two superpowers.
My father had just returned from Washington and immediately went into his study,"" Baggs recalled.
It was President Kennedy saying the Russians had backed down and the crisis was resolved.
My father looked up with open eyes and a sense of great relief and said, 'We did it.
Hendrix won the international reporting prize for ""persistent reporting which revealed, at an early stage, that the Soviet Union was installing missile launching pads in Cuba and sending in large numbers of MIG-21 aircraft,"" according to the Pulitzer Board's Web site.
Co pyrig ht 20 0 2, 20 0 4 O cala Star-Banne r Cit at ion VINCE MURRAYAssociate Editor, 'OCALA -In early October 1962, life was good.
American U-2 spyplane cameras had caught the Soviets sneaking long-range nuclear missiles into Cuba.
Curtis LeMay urged President John Kennedy to bomb and invade the communist island.
Duck-and-cover bomb drills for American schoolkids no longer seemed abstract.
On Day 10 of the 12-day standoff, at the very edge of his U-2’s 70,000-foot ceiling, Capt.
McIlmoyle was targeted by two Soviet-made SA-2 missiles, which billowed behind him in silent vapor trails.
Today’s analogue Today, with President Donald Trump and North Korean dictator Kim Jong-un slinging apocalyptic nuclear rhetoric at each other, some analysts write it off as testosterone-addled theater.
But from McIlmoyle’s angle, while Trump’s generals are restraining the chief executive, Kim lacks the equivalent of what put the brakes on Fidel Castro in 1962 — adult supervision.
More than half a century after sanity prevailed, recon technologies have improved by orders of magnitude.
Images of North Korea’s nuclear capabilities are acquired largely by spy satellites, drones, and sensing packages with such extended range they can be placed aboard aircraft without having to fly directly over their targets.
And one of those platforms — still in rotation 62 years after its first flight — is the Lockheed U-2.
Eclectic missions A jet fighter pilot from Nebraska, McIlmoyle joined the now-decommissioned 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing in 1957, back when the U-2 was the most sophisticated flying machine on the planet.
It flew at altitudes that enemy planes couldn’t and still can’t attain.
McIlmoyle’s eclectic missions ranged from monitoring weather conditions over both polar regions to sampling South Pacific winds for French atomic bomb debris.
By 1962, he had so thoroughly mastered the bird that he was the designated standardization instructor pilot, second only to Rudolf Anderson.
For political reasons, by presidential order, only civilian pilots poached from the Air Force by the CIA were permitted to fly U-2 missions over enemy territory.
But the ruse — not to mention illusions of invulnerability — collapsed in 1960, when CIA pilot Francis Gary Powers was shot down over Russia.
When the Soviets slipped nuclear weapons into Cuba, Kennedy dispensed with CIA pilots and went full military.
The U-2 has undergone numerous modifications since its Eisenhower-era inception.
And while strategists keep talking about phasing it out, the plane remains indispensable, according to Dr.
Layne Karafantis, curator of the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum’s modern military aircraft.
Carrying the ‘football’ McIlmoyle earned the Distinguished Flying Cross for his missions over Cuba and went on to enjoy a sterling military career, which culminated in retirement in 1981, when he was deputy director for operations for the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
In that capacity, he was responsible for the so-called “nuclear football,” a briefcase housing the computer-generated launch codes for the President.
And that code would be between him and the Secretary of Defense and the Defense Command duty officer.
McIlmoyle’s final stop literally ended with a bang, when Reagan was shot on March 30, 1981.
At 87, the pilot who once stewarded the nuclear codes says he hopes the wisdom of 1962 will prevail today.
After the threat ended, he remembers giving JFK a 45-minute onboard briefing of a U-2 parked at Homestead Air Force Base.
It was pretty impressive — he knew my wife’s name and my children’s names,” McIlmoyle says.
Matt Soergel 1111 Words Page: A-1 OpenURL Link Something was up at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base 50 years ago, though few there were in the know.
Ed Buker, a 39-year-old Navy commander, saw the new arrivals, saw the foxholes and bunkers going in around the Navy base.
He saw the planeloads of United States Marines landing, saw the Marines, fresh from California, squinting in the tropical sunshine.
But he resists any temptation to make grand statements about his role in it.
He was just doing his job, following orders, looking out for his family.
Especially not after he took his jet high over Cuba and saw the American destroyers and carriers and cruisers spread out over the blue Caribbean.
At Guantanamo Bay in October 1962, he was commanding officer of VU-10, a utility squadron of planes jet fighters and World War II-era bombers that helped train sailors.
But Guantanamo was good duty, even knowing that Fidel Castro had fulminated about taking back the base.
She was on the golf course, and had just hit her shot off the first tee.
Every Navy family had been told upon arrival at Guantanamo to have a emergency bag of essentials packed, to be ready for a hasty exit.
But of course those bags got unpacked within days of arrival, so there was much hurried packing everywhere, Buker said.
By late morning, he said goodbye to his wife and their two sons, Gil and Gary, and watched them get on a school bus.
They were bound for either a plane or a ship heading somewhere in the States.
He found out later that they had been put on a Coast Guard cutter bound for Norfolk, Va.
And when they got to port, there was a cold snap and the Red Cross brought winter jackets to the refugees from tropical Cuba.
At Guantanamo, the sailors left behind were told to put tape over the headlights of their vehicles, so only a thin strip of light would be seen.
And that same evening, the 22nd, everyone at the base lined up near radios to hear President John F Kennedy's speech to the world.
The Soviets had missile sites in Cuba with nuclear weapons able to reach much of the United States.
Guantanamo's civilians had been evacuated and more military men sent there.
His squadron quickly flew to Puerto Rico, to make way for the Marine reinforcements at Guantanamo.
He had already put in for retirement early the next year, so he was relieved of his command and a few days later sent back to Guantanamo as a security officer.
The rest of the crisis, he recalls, passed quietly at the Navy base as life went on just with more Marines and no women and children.
The day he got in his single-seat fighter, an F8U, to log some flying time.
Spread below him was the United States blockade of Cuba, with ships lined up to the horizon.
After that, JU hired him and he taught there for 19 years, writing several books on Florida history.
Some of his colleagues knew about his time at Guantanamo Bay, but he insists he wasn't all that impressed by it himself.
If the memories of key players from the United States, the Soviet Union and Cuba are to be trusted, the superpowers were indeed on the brink of nuclear war, that distant and receding October.
The profoundly simple message that echoes from the conference hall is that the hideous possibility sprang like a beanstalk from the seed of misinformation.
The world was even closer to nuclear war than the Kennedy administration believed at the time, concluded Pierre Salinger, who was President John F Kennedy's press secretary at the time of the U.S.-Soviet confrontation.
Jorge Risquet, a member of Cuba's Politburo, said Cuban leaders were convinced a United States invasion of their island nation was imminent.
A Soviet source, reportedly Sergei Khrushchev, son of the late Soviet leader, told Salinger at the conference that Fidel Castro urged his Soviet allies to push the buttons that would send nuclear missiles on their way to devastate the United States.
The younger Khrushchev denied being the source, but presumably someone at the conference made the assertion on good authority.
In any event, the elder Khrushchev had the wisdom in October 1962 to abstain from making a preemptive strike.
The consequences, he could be sure, would have been disastrous for his own country.
Cubans told the conferees that 270,000 Cuban and Soviet troops were ready to fight the United States.
Of that number, 40,000 were Soviets four times the number that United States intelligence had estimated, according to former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.
Ignorance, fear and misread signals provided fertile ground for the start of a terrible war.
An unflinching but measured response from the White House gave the Kremlin leaders time to take a cold shower and think things through.
Faced with a naval blockade, Khrushchev called back his missiles, after extracting from the United States a pledge that it would not undertake the invasion it apparently never intended anyway.
One way to prevent war is to keep the channels of communication freeflowing.
Gorbachev and likely to be maintained by President Bush holds promise that there will not be another fear-ridden, ignorancedriven confrontation that escalates so dangerously as the Cuban missile crisis.
Before retiring behind closed doors with his Cold War foe, former United States Defense Secretary Robert McNamara credited the Cuban leader, President John F Kennedy and Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev with saving the world from destruction.
Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen also are attending, as well as former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, who interpreted American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Castro, McNamara and other Cuban and American actors in that Cold War drama were studying newly declassified documents on the role that United States covert action played in the months leading up to the crisis.
Many of those historic papers will be released publicly during the gathering, including documents from the Cuban government, the CIA, the Pentagon, the White House, the Soviet Foreign Ministry and other governments that played a role in the crisis.
A portion of the documents, made available to The Associated Press in Washington, demonstrates that the crisis did not end on Oct. with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove the offensive weapons, as is widely believed.
Fears about Castro Weeks after the Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba, Khrushchev worried that an ""irrational"" Castro would renew tensions with the United States perhaps even provoke war.
Anastas Mikoyan, then Soviet first deputy premier, was the catalyst for the reversal of Khrushchev's order, according to the authors.
Mikoyan ""preempted Khrushchev's order to run the blockade and ordered Soviet ships to stop just short of the quarantine line,"" they wrote in the book.
But they said at a news conference yesterday that it remained unclear whether Mikoyan reversed or circumvented the decision on his own or convinced Khrushchev of its perils.
Welch said the order was reversed just hours before Soviet ships reached United States forces.
The book will serve as a backdrop for a third conference scheduled for Jan.-29 in Moscow featuring, for the first time, Soviet, American and Cuban officials who participated in the crisis, which was triggered when Soviet troops began installing missiles in Cuba capable of reaching the United States.
Secret correspondence between Kennedy and Khrushchev concerning the missile crisis is expected to be released at the conference, Harvard officials say.
Welch said participants are optimistic that 12 never-released letters exchanged between Kennedy and Khrushchev would be declassified by the United States government in time to be presented and analyzed at the Moscow meeting.
The conference is the latest manifestation of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's policy of ""glasnost,"" or openness.
Edward M Kennedy, D-Mass., and JFK's son, John F Kennedy Jr., will join McNamara; former national security adviser McGeorge Bundy; Theodore C Sorenson, former special counselor to Kennedy; JFK press secretary Pierre Salinger; Gen.
William Smith, former aide to the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff; and Graham Allison, dean of the Kennedy School and a leading missile crisis scholar.
Soviet participants will include former Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko; Anatoli Dobrynin, the former ambassador to the United States; Aleksander Alekseev, the former ambassador to Cuba; and Sergei Khrushchev, son of the former Soviet leader.
The Cubans are sending three to six senior officials who participated in the crisis.
The book said details on the Khrushchev order to ignore the blockade came from a largely unknown work by dissident Soviet historian Roy Medvedev, who said he had not been able to learn the details of the order's reversal.
The Harvard authors said much of their work had been confirmed independently by Mikoyan's son, Sergo, who was an aide to his father during the crisis.
We are therefore inclined to believe Mikoyan's confirmation all the more strongly,"" they wrote.
The authors also conclude that the missiles in Cuba probably did not have warheads.
Their theory that the warheads were blocked by the quarantine is at odds with a recent disclosure by Alekseev, the former ambassador to Cuba, who said in a recent Soviet magazine that 42 medium-range missiles were fully operational.
But the authors suggested that Alekseev and others in the Soviet diplomatic corps were not getting accurate information from Moscow about the missiles.
On this day, 50 years ago, a United States Air Force U2 spy plane captured photographic proof that the Soviet Union was installing offensive nuclear missile sites in Cuba.
Another photo revealed a surface-to-air missile assembly depot, a place to supply the offensive sites.
Eight days after the photos were taken, President John F Kennedy spoke to the nation from the Oval Office.
Unmistakable evidence has established the fact that a series of offensive missile sites is now in preparation on that imprisoned island.
Kennedy estimated after the fact that the chances of war were somewhere between one and three and even.
He's director of the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs and professor at Harvard's John F Kennedy School of Government.
So I think that as a reminder of nuclear danger and of a crisis-end period, in which countries and leaders could contemplate actions that could kill hundreds of millions of people, we can look back and be thankful that the Cold War ended; that it ended with a whimper rather than a bang, and that we have lots of problems today but none of them pose anything like the risks that we saw then.
Essentially, Kennedy was faced with a choice to accept missiles in Cuba or attack.
He, in the end, chose to avoid both of those options and crafted a third choice.
Kennedy came up with a pretty imaginative, but I'd say unique cocktail of three elements: a public deal, a private ultimatum and a secret sweetener.
So the public deal was, you, Khrushchev, withdraw the missiles and we will pledge not to invade Cuba.
The private ultimatum said, unless you tell us within 24 hours that you're withdrawing the missiles, we're going to act unilaterally to eliminate them.
And then, thirdly, as a secret sweetener, you, Khrushchev, had pointed to United States missiles in Turkey as essentially analogous to the weapons that were in Cuba.
We're not going to make a trade with you, but, he said, if the missiles are withdrawn from Cuba within six months, there will not be missiles in Turkey.
And that private sweetener allowed him at least to back down without humiliation.
That red line also prevented war and helped preserve the peace for decades.
In fact, it's the failure to place red lines that's often invited aggression.
And I would say on that core point, with respect to red lines and the ways they can constrain the competition, and therefore contribute to preventing war, he was basically correct.
In 1962, in the course of 13 days, the United States and the Soviet Union sort of rushed to the precipice.
Here, you can see, probably over the next year or let's say 13 months the United States and Iran moving seemingly, inexorably towards a confrontation in which a president is going to have a choice between attacking or acquiescing in an Iranian nuclear arsenal.
And whichever of the two of these options you've analyzed most carefully most recently, it usually leads me to conclude, well, maybe the other one is better than I thought.
It was when he looked at the two alternatives that were the only realistic choices that he became intensely inventive about an option that he would have rejected previously.
So I think we're now into a season where I would hope that after the election, whomever is elected will become intensely focused and inventive about options that are not very good I call them ugly options, very ugly options but that would nonetheless be better than attack or acquiesce.
Graham Allison is director of the Belfer Center for Science and International Affairs.
He's also a professor of government at Harvard's John F Kennedy School of Government.
Culp, who grew up in Virginia Beach, Va., and whose father, Joseph, is now retired and living in Maitland, said that he doesn't have a lot of natural Kennedy attributes.
And he had to lose quite a bit of body bulk to match the physique of the smallest Kennedy.
The accent required endless sessions of listening to tapes of Kennedy's speeches, working on the cadences, the ""ur-em-ah"" vocalized pauses that the Kennedys have been famous for.
Culp said that he wanted to know so much about Kennedy and have his speech and mannerisms down so perfect that all he had to worry about was giving a natural Kennedy reaction to every situation facing him in Thirteen Days.
In the middle of a career full of one-shot roles on TV and minor roles as ""party guest number 2"" and ""bartender"" in films from Fearless to Nurse Betty, Culp has the part of a lifetime.
Culp ""nails the younger Kennedy's uneasy awareness that the old guard doesn't respect his intelligence or savvy,"" critic Frank Grabrenya said in his review for The Columbus Dispatch.
And working on the film, studying the history that is behind the missile crisis story gave Culp an insight as to why the Kennedy brothers are still revered.
In spite of all the scandalous things that have been said about them, these guys were noble, when the chips were down.
The fate of humanity really did hang in the balance in October 1962 when the United States and the Soviet Union went right to the brink of nuclear war over the presence of Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba.
A misread signal, an overhasty action, an oversupply of belligerence on either side -and the whole world could have gone up in flames.
And in fact the crisis spawned the highly regarded made-for-TV ""Missiles of October"" back in 1974.
There is no flash in ""Thirteen Days,"" no glitzy special effects, no overt displays of emotionalism.
This is a movie populated by grim-faced men in suits and uniforms, talking earnestly, weighing their words carefully, walking on eggshells at the edge of apocalypse.
They're the men of the Kennedy White House, John and Robert Kennedy principally, and Kennedy confidant Kenneth O'Donnell.
Greenwood brings to the role a questioning intelligence and the sense of a man fully indeed, agonizingly aware of the momentous implications of his every action and word.
The story of ""Thirteen Days"" is not so much the story of JFK and the American government vs. the Russians as it is the tale of JFK, RFK and O'Donnell against the United States military and other hard-line advisers pressing the president to use air strikes and an invasion to remove the missiles from Cuba.
Curtis Le May and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, along with civilian adviser Dean Acheson , are shown arguing forcefully for an attack and expressing doubts that the young president has the spine to stand up to the Russians.
In one scene, Acheson, out of Kennedy's hearing, recalls that Joseph P Kennedy, the president's father, was an advocate of appeasement during World War II and wonders aloud whether that inclination was passed down to the father's sons.
Bobby Kennedy is shown arguing that a surprise attack by the United States on the missile bases would smack of a reverse Pearl Harbor.
O'Donnell, his role enlarged for dramatic purposes by the filmmakers, is presented as the character most aware of the military's intransigence and hostility to the commander in chief.
He, above all others, urges the president to follow his own instincts as to the best way to defuse the crisis.
The picture is essentially an ensemble piece, and Costner fits surprisingly well into the ensemble.
The most jarring aspect of his performance is his Boston accent, which is comically broad.
Narrows Plaza, Longston Place, Tall Firs, South Sound, SeaTac North, Cinema 17, Lacey.
Bruce Greenwood, Kevin Costner, Steven Culp, Kevin Conway and Michael Fairman.
Today we'll explore The Dallas Morning News of Oct., 1962, when the United States was in a standoff with the Soviet Union over ""Red"" missiles in Cuba.
Acting United Nations Secretary U Thant asked President John F Kennedy and Premier Nikita Khrushchev to give the United Nations a chance to settle things.
A Gallup Poll found that 84 percent of Americans backed JFK's blockade.
In Richardson, Fox & Jacobs' three-bedroom Accent homes were priced at $18,200.
Dallas school trustee Lee McShan Jr. wanted a Conelrad radio-alert system in each school.
Planned Parenthood Federation said more than a million American women used birth-control pills average price was $3.50 for a month's supply.
Raymond Burr starred in Perry Mason ; Shirley Booth starred in Hazel , based on Ted Key 's cartoon maid in The Saturday Evening Post . . . . 20th Century Fox president Darryl Zanuck fired Cleopatra director Joseph Mankiewicz and said he'd edit the $32 million picture himself.
