Much to their surprise the Cubans Soviet intentions regarding the weapons not explicitly covwere told that the tactical nuclear weapons were to be reered in the exchange of letters between United States President John F turned to the Soviet Union, even though they were not covKennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev, and the ered by the Kennedy-Khrushchev exchange.
In early Sepalso some indications of differences between the Soviet militember, Khrushchev augmunted the plan by adding 6 nuclear tary (who might have wanted to keep the weapons on the bombs for the Il-28 bomber and 12 short-range tactical nuclear island) and Khrushchev. missiles for the dual-use Luna complex.
The question was whether local commanders should type of weaponry had not been not explicitly covered in the have the authority to use tactical nuclear weapons if they exchange of letters between Khrushchev and Kennedy. were under attack, and if it was impossible to contact MosKhrushchev had promised Kennedy that the “the so-called cow.
Concerning the predelegation of authority to use the offensive weapons would be removed,” which referred to the weapons in the event of an invasion of Cuba during which it shortand medium-range ballistic missiles SS-4 (R-12, with a was impossible that contact with Moscow.
As General range of 1,050 miles) and SS-5 (R-14, with a range of approx.
Anatoly Gribkov, the top Soviet military official in Cuba in 2,000 miles) capable of reaching United States territory.
Exploiting the ambiguity of Khrushchev’s phrase, the Even though the directive was never signed, Malinovsky US demanded the withdrawal of the IL-28 bombers declaring apparently remained apprehensive as to whether General Issa them an offensive weapon.
After Moscow decided to withPliev, commander of the Soviet Group of Forces in Cuba, draw the bombers, Soviet Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan, understood the procedures for using tactical nuclear weap385 COLD WAR CRISES ons in a critical situation.
On 27 October he sent an urgent of the military agreement with Moscow, which was supposed telegram to Pliev “categorically confirming that you are proto be signed during Khrushchev’s visit to Cuba.
The discussions in the have been prompted by the shooting down of an American beginning of November in Moscow apparently came to no U-2 plane that day, despite the fact that Soviet commanders conclusion.
The Malinovsky-to-Pliev telegrams dated early did not have the authority to do so.
Specifically, Malin notes Khrushchev Soviet specialists trained them, and then gradually withdrawsaying “To give instructions to Pliev—to bring the troops to ing most of the Soviet specialists so that the USSR could not combat readiness.
To make every effort not to use atomic be accused of having a military base in Cuba (Soviet official the most interesting questions still remaining concerns Soviet intentions regarding the weapons not explicitly covered in the exchange of letters between United States President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev. in the early stages.
After Khrushchev’s decision to remove the strategic Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei A Gromyko responded weapons from Cuba, the available cable traffic between to Mikoyan’s telegram approving his suggestion on the part “Reed” and “Pavlov” reveals that there of the Presidium.
Between 6 November and 12 November, all was considerable ambiguity regarding the withdrawal of the available evidence indicates, tensions between the USSR and tactical nuclear warheads.
At the beginning of November, Cuba were declining, and Mikoyan’s conversations with the Malinovsky suggested that warheads for cruise missiles, Cuban leaders were quite friendly and cordial.
They visited Lunas and the Il-28 bombs should be left in Cuba because state farms and educational centers and discussed various “so far their withdrawal was not discussed.”6 issues concerning Soviet-Cuban cooperation.
The Cubans, of course, were very interested in the fate But on 12 November, the emerging fraternal bliss was of the remaining military equipment and fully expected that shattered by the confrontation over the Soviet decision to those weapons that were not a part of the Kennedywithdraw the Il-28s.
Although Mikoyan tried to be as sensiKhrushchev exchange would remain in Cuba.
In that letter he described an episode ber, Castro, while visiting his troops and without consultaduring which Fidel Castro alleged that the Soviet Union had tion with the Soviets, issued an order to shoot at any lowpromised the Americans in the Khrushchev letters to “withflying United States reconnaissance aircraft.
Archive and the Cold War InterKhrushchev’s long telegram to Mikoyan on 16 Novemnational History Project as well as the ber signified a turning point in the Soviet-Cuban story of forthcoming book by Sergo A Mikoyan. crisis resolution.
Although we will only know for sure when the Soviet Presidium minutes become available, one may hyDr.
On 20 November, Malinovsky ordered Pliev to load all tactical nuclear weapons on the ship “Atkarsk” and return them to the Soviet Union.
Gribkov stated at the October 2002 conference in Havana that the last nuclear warhead left Cuba on 20 November.
This telegram read in stark contrast mander of the Group of Soviet Forces in Cuba to his telegram of 8 November.
Mikoyan was Translated by Svetlana Savranskaya.] instructed to make sure that the Cubans stop talking about any nuclear weapons and to inform them that “these weapons belong to us, and are to be kept in our hands only, we TOP SECRET never transferred them to anyone, and we do not intend to TROSTNIK…to Comrade PAVLOV transfer them to anyone.
Director This unexpected turn of events was clearly hard for Castro to # 4/389 accept, but eventually he stopped trying to pressure Mikoyan 22 October 1962 into finding some way to keep those weapons, or even any 23.30 significant Soviet military presence on the island.
According to the available documents, the issue of tactical nuclear weapons in Cuba was never raised again after 22 November.
However, more evidence is still needed to be able to Federation, Special Declassification, April 2002. state conclusively when the final decision was made and Translated by Svetlana Savranskaya.] what the main argument was for removing the tactical nuclear weapons.
The documents below became available as a result of TOP SECRET international collaboration between the National Security TROSTNIK…to Comrade PAVLOV Archive and the Russian scholars, military veterans of the Cuban missile crisis and archivists.
