The speech launched the future president’s political career and, among conservatives, has achieved a near mythical status.
For the past year CONELRAD has been researching a comprehensive history of this famous broadcast.
And while we are not quite ready to post a completed article, we thought we would observe the occasion of this anniversary by sharing some of the reactions that the Great Communicator received in the days after his televised pitch for the Republican nominee first aired nationally.
What follows are a few selected telegrams that CONELRAD obtained from the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and Museum.
Out of what was purported to be thousands of such responses, only a few dozen were preserved.
Next is conservative icon Phyllis Schlafly’s sister-in-law, Eleanor Schlafly: Dean Burch, the Goldwater loyalist who was installed as the Chairman of the Republican National Committee after the Arizona senator won the GOP nomination, weighed in with this praise: Burch, it appears, was the only member of the so-called Arizona Mafia to thank Reagan for his speech.
Other members of the inner circle, namely Denison Kitchel and William J Baroody, actively tried to stop A Time for Choosing from airing.
The motives ascribed to them for this action vary, but most accounts cite their nervousness over Reagan’s remarks on Social Security.
The next telegram comes from F Clifton White, the architect of Goldwater’s stunning nomination victory.
White, who had wanted to become RNC Chairman, found himself inexplicably marginalized during the general election campaign.
Batz’s prophecy, but a little over a year later, on January 4, 1966, the Gipper was back on television announcing his candidacy for the Republican nomination for governor of California.
In addition to stocking the “Classified Facility” with food, water and every other imaginable accoutrement necessary for surviving a nuclear war, they recognized the need for a full compliment of clergy.
The bureaucratic language of the missive avoids reference to why clergy would be needed, but the author does note that civilian religious professionals might be otherwise occupied during an emergency.
These particular men of God would also be difficult to vet for entrance to the super-bunker.
The solution was to ask the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Manpower, Personnel and Reserve, Charles G Finucane , for “chaplains from either the Regular or Reserve Corps” of the United States military.
Evidently, Mr Hoegh’s clergy requisition went directly to the circular file, because more than two years later, the chaplain gap was still an issue of concern in Mount Weather correspondence.
We can only pray that Mount Weather now has the religious staff it needs, but it will be up to future historians to find out.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT CONELRAD would like to thank historian and author David Krugler for thinking of us when he came across this document in his research files.
The evidence that the document is referring to Mount Weather is the fact that the Classified Location’s Chief, J Leo Bourassa , is one of the co-signatories.
Nixon might have been a good president, too, but Kennedy proved that he was.
If Kennedy wasn’t killed he might have become the greatest president ever.
We may have more posts on this subject in the future but, for now, this is our fond farewell to that magical period when the end seemed so very close.
We begin with an advertisement from page G9 of the October 28, 1962 edition of the Los Angeles Times.
In Los Angeles, CD officials saw no reason to deviate from their normal schedule.
As the fears over Cuba mounted, California state CD authorities thought better of the notion of testing sirens during an international crisis and requested a moratorium.
But there were a few overzealous cities that decided to keep to their monthly schedule regardless of the world situation… In Los Angeles area supermarkets, a two-day wave of “panic buying” was touched off by a civil defense official’s call for Angelenos to stock up.
Woronovich of Baldwin Hills took heed of the advisory and spent a whopping $55.85.
Meanwhile, in Houston, Texas, a customer spent $600 on groceries and headed straight for his fallout shelter.
Miamians, arguably the ones most likely to be incinerated, were told to remain calm and treat the imminent threat of atomic attack as they would a hurricane.
One woman was so frazzled by the Cuban crisis that she evacuated her city without her children.
She realized that they were missing when a military policeman directing traffic in Key West, Florida stopped her.
During the course of their brief conversation in which the woman referenced her kids, the officer pointed out that he saw no children in her vehicle.
Fortunately, Marion Miller failed in her suicide attempt and so did the two superpowers that so depressed her.
The young officer responded with a plan to have the family members of select White House staff assemble in a fenced-in area at Washington’s Reno Reservoir for a motorcade ride out of the city to an undisclosed relocation site.
Assuming that the rest of Washington would be privy to such an alert, it is interesting to note that Captain Shepard does not include a Plan B to address the inevitable D.C. evacuation gridlock and general panic.
But, as Robert F Kennedy says of the arrangement in the film, Thirteen Days, “Of course, that’s for morale.
The White House Washington 26 October 1962 FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY MEMORANDUM FOR: Mrs.
Relocation of Dependents of Personnel Involved in the White House Emergency Plan Previously a packet has been distributed to be opened only in an emergency, which describes the location to which dependents could go at such a time.
Because during a Civil Defense emergency, transportation restrictions will be set up and movements may be difficult, a more workable plan appears to be a formation of a motorcade, to move dependents in a group to a relocation site outside of the Washington area.
This area is within the fenced portion of the Reno Reservoir, with an entrance off of Belt Road, which intersects with Wisconsin Avenue a little more than a block north of Albemarle Street.
In time of a Civil Defense alert, dependents covered by this plan are instructed to proceed to this assembly area.
Because a Civil Defense Pass will be required for each individual, only those covered by this memorandum may be included.
You are requested to keep current the information filed with the Office of the Naval Aide as to the number and ages of your dependents.
Minimal supplies of food and water will be included in the planning, so that it will not be necessary for dependents to bring any additional equipment.
Because of space limitations, they are urged not to attempt to bring personal belongings.
This memorandum shall serve as a pass for your dependents to the relocation site pending issuance of a Civil Defense Pass.
The dramatic televised speech that announced the blockade of Castro’s Cuba was hyped in advance by the media and was seen by 50 million American viewers.
People stopped at appliance store windows to witness the young commander-in-chief stand up to Khruschev in glorious black and white.
The seminal event of Kennedy’s brief presidency has been written about and analyzed endlessly and re-staged or excerpted for television dramas and major motion pictures.
Everyone who lived through those times remembers the speech and everyone else knows about it—even if it is by watching a lame miniseries like The Kennedys.
Not nearly as well known is another televised address on the “Cuban Crisis” that occurred a few days later by Kennedy’s vanquished Republican rival for the White House in 1960, Richard M Nixon.
Two years after his razor-thin defeat for the highest office in the land, the former Vice President was locked in a tight campaign to unseat Democratic incumbent Edmund G Brown as governor of California.
Nixon, of course, would famously lose this race, but at the time of his speech he undoubtedly considered it a part of his grand strategy to earn a re-match with Kennedy in 1964.
Governor Brown, meanwhile, was actually being briefed on the Cuban situation by the President in Washington as his opponent was taking to the airwaves.
Perhaps because the candidate, a private citizen, did not have the power to start a nuclear war, the story only made it to page 4 in the Los Angeles Times.
The article added that Nixon’s address would originate from San Diego and would be broadcast throughout the state.
Not exactly the stuff of stop-at-the-appliance store appointment viewing.
Nixon went up against The Roy Rogers and Dale Evans Show and something called Restless Guy to speak to the people of California.
Hitt was no doubt shocked when her candidate lost the race to Governor Brown on November 6th prompting the notorious “last press conference” the following day.
Nixon would rise from the ashes six years later and win the White House, but his Cuba speech remains nearly forgotten.
CONELRAD is still waiting to hear back from the Richard Nixon Presidential Library and Museum to see if they have a transcript or film of the television special.
Paul Weeks, “Street Crowd Here Listens to President,” Los Angeles Times, October 23, 1962, 1.
Carl Greenberg, “Nixon to Make Special TV Talk on Cuba Crisis,” Los Angeles Times, October 27, 1962, 4.
In preparing this series of posts on the recovered memories of the Cuban missile crisis, we got to wondering what was on television and radio during this panicky period.
We decided to limit our review to the Los Angeles area since it is where CONELRAD is based and it is where the microfilm of L.A.’s wonderful newspaper past resides.
