The NPS Institutional Archive DSpace Repository Theses and Dissertations 1.
Calhoun | Calhoun is the Naval Postgraduate School's public access digital repository for D U DLEY research materials and institutional publications created by the NPS community. get Calhoun is named for Professor of Mathematics Guy K Calhoun, NPS'‘s first KNOX appointed — and published — scholarly author.
Pobe Asad nee ’ tA cbs 5 Mite re . ‘ ' % nar Se ah Ue eee ae AGH an Vp Pat ob whey 8 x j tae 3 Bay ett ss “4 Bi | th #03 ’ ‘al av <p Ata Beit, ban Rian My.
Ea fos ats 4 a’ 9 cha Tek. ay ‘aaa Ae ts eecreed a cea A eee: a Yb. array { 24 vee 4.
Ty i tat | i 2 a : f ay er ey ae ey a apnea A ad Ar gS vie ened “pe age ls cae give at ’ : v ’ pat.
Prescot oe en a a is | pe ites Ears Me test. 4 tye JRO Pea heel EY te f qaers shy : 2 Boula or a a ee 8, let ek as se eee ric ; ig ie se © s0¥gek Yo Pt Bee BLA ete tA ee a 7 Fe oak 4, oe By 2 rapes “as tees aah Bical adie trae Ca) : oy Lobes em ae a © tert i ge.
GF thas nee oa ee Bi cine a oo Me atte ye Pi SAS fat ontets toh 9° ry Re a inser Pesky + ee ay ; tant to eke ek lw \ Pegs h *) 48, % ae ar ee WMA eed ately A Sop aae ee Sane oe Averys e ls Ste Sd beri SAU 5 s © 4 ¢ ee a ao t a be Sar areca iat At REIS Jee ae ate DNs tee. € gt & t Shed 6 eh ome ve See ons rc Fide Mee a e420"" ihe Nipy S4dega. a "" bates ia Sah sh7.
Niece ee tS Aaa ee Vertis | G2 eo ss ag VP ae ty aes yah ‘ ral ate) At 43) 98 an.
The bibliographic information for this thesis is contained in UMI’s Dissertation Abstracts database, the only central source for accessing almost every doctoral dissertation accepted in North America since 1861.
Thus, some thesis and dissertation copies are in typewriter face, while others may be from any type of computer printer.
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
Broken or indistinct print, colored or poor quality illustrations and photographs, print bleedthrough, substandard margins, and improper alignment can adversely affect reproduction.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send UMI a complete manuscript and there are missing pages, these will be noted.
Also, if unauthorized copyright material had to be removed, a note will indicate the deletion.
Oversize materials are reproduced by sectioning the original, beginning at the upper left-hand corner and continuing from left toright in equal sections with small overlaps.
Each original is also photographed in one exposure and is included in reduced form at the back of the book.
These are also available as one exposure on a standard 35mm slide or as a 17” x 23” black and white photographic print for an additional charge.
Photographs included in the original manuscript have been reproduced xerographically in this copy.
This fails to capture the complexity of crisis interaction and crisis stability.
Interactions at each level evolve separately and can independently influence whether or not ae Cue escalates “ war.
The objective is to develop a differentiated theory of crisis interaction cast in the form of contingent generalizations that offer discriminating explanations for the eccurrence of crisis stability problems.
The method of structured, focused comparison is used to conduct empirical research on two sets of historical cases.
Structured comparison of these cases reveals that the stratified interaction model provides an accurate description of international crises.
Tactical-level interactions normally are not under the direct direct control of national leaders, and under certain conditions can become decoupled from the political-military objectives and strategy of national leaders.
The factors that can cause decoupling of tacticallevel interactions and the factors that determine whether or not decoupled interactions escalate uncontrollably to war are identified.
Vv PREFACE The opinions expressed in this dissertation are the author's alone and are not to be construed as representing views or policies of the Department of the Navy.
Portions of this dissertation were submitted for security review in a with applicable Department of Defense and Department of the Navy instructions.
That review did not result in any changes in the substance of the dissertation, and did not in any way restrict the academic freedom of the author.
The staff of the Civilian Institutions Program provided superb support for me while I was at Stanford.
Both were marvelously patient and persevering in dealing with the unique problems of having an active duty naval officer as a graduate student.
The Naval Historical Center, Washington, D.C., provided invaluable assistance for my research.
I am particularly indebted to Bernard Cavalcanti, Westly Price, and the staff of the Operational Archives Branch.
The Ship’s History Branch and Naval Aviation History Branch and the Department of the Navy Library were also of assistance.
Commander Figueras al the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations , the staff of the Navy Command Center, Vice Admiral Jonathan T Howe at the Joint Chiefs of Staff, The Honorable William A Cockell, Jr., at the National Security Council, and Paul Stillwell and Susan Sweeney at the United States Naval Institute's Oral History Program.
Among the ante officers who dead and critiqued portions of my dissertation, Captain Robert A Doll was especially helpful.
I thank Lieutenant Commander Yarosh and the Administrative Office at Naval Air Station Moffett Field for handling the extra administrative burdens created by my graduate progran. vii 3 4 oar particularly great debt to over one hundred retired naval officers and government efi Seite that agreed to interviews or answered letters on the crises I studied.
This essential crisis management requirement has been identified as a potentially serious problem area.
Preplanned military operations and contingency plans may not be appropriate for the unique circumstances of a particular crisis, and may not support the political-diplomatic strategy adopted by national leaders to resolve a crisis.
Delegated command of military operations could allow unintended military incidents to occur, which the adversary could misperceive as a deliberate escalation of the crisis er signal of hostile intent.
Military alerts ordered to deter the adversary and increase the readiness of the armed _ forces could set in motion a chain of events exceeding the control of national leaders.
Such problems are sources of concern because they could cause national leaders to lose 1 2 control of events in a crisis, starting an escalatory spiral leading to war.
On the other hand, some scholars believe that while inadvertent military actions can contribute to crisis management problems and the occurrence of inadvertent war, attention should be focused on the political and psychological pressures on top-level decisionmakers.
This is why there is a genuine risk of major war not from “accidents” in the military machine but through a diplomatic process of commitment that is itself unpredictable.
The unpredictability is not due solely to what a destroyer commander might do at midnight when he comes across a Scviet freighter at sea, but to the psychological process by which particular things become identified with courage or appeasement or how particular things.get included in or left out of a diplomatic package.
Thus, there is disagreement among students of crisis and war over the effects of inadvertent military incidents on crisis leor examples of such concerns, see Alexander L George, David K Hall, and William E Simons, The Limits of Coercive Diplomacy , 14; John Steinbruner, “An Assessment of Nuclear Crises,"" in Franklin Griffiths and John C Polanyi, eds., The Dangers of Nuclear War , mp.
Inadvertent military incidents are viewed as Gangerous in and of themselves because they can directly trigger escalation, or, alternatively, are viewed as dangerous because of the manner in which they can influence the perceptions held by national Veditec ed This issue is of practical relevance in crisis decisionmaking, as well as being of theoretical interest in the study of international crises.
The focus of this study is on the problems that can arise when using military force as a political instrument in crises.
Inadvertent escalation--any increase in the level or scope of violence in a crisis that was not directly ordered by national leaders or anticipated by them as being the likely result of their orders-~--is a significant danoer ir these circumstances.
A distinction can be drawn between the general political requirements of crisis management, such as limiting political objectives and military means, and the operational requirements of crisis management, such as maintaining control of military operations.
In the introduction to his study of international crises, Richard N Lebow discusses the distinction long made between the underlying causes of war, the long-term sources of hostility and tension, and the imm:diate causes of war, the particular events, such as a crisis, sparking a war.
This study starts from -the premise that Lebow is correct, that immediate causes are important for understanding how and why wars occur.
The causes of war can be viewed as falling on a timespan spectrum, with long-term underlying causes working their effects over years, decades or even centuries toward the left end, and immediate causes occurring over days or weeks toward the right end.
The underlying causes toward ‘scott Sagan refers to this as the operational dimension of crisis management.
System structure has a strong influence on how “ware prone” international politics are at a given time.
Historical, cultural, economic, and ideological variables help to shape the political framework within which rivalries arise between particular nations and contribute to the intensity of the hostility and tensions between them.
Geographic factors, and the state of military technology shape the strategic relationships between nations and contribute to the level of tensions between them.
This study will be ad@ressing causes of war at the far right end of that spectrum--events occurring over hours, or even just minutes at the speed of modern warfare.
There is no intent to slight the importance of underlying causes or longer-term immediate causes, which arrange the political and strategic circumstances for war to occur.
Rather, the intent is to supplement those causes with greater understanding of how military interactions in a crisis could inadvertently trigger war.
One of the fundamental problems in international relations is to identify the necessary and sufficiert conditions for war to occur.
This study makes two assumptions on the necessary and sufficient conditions for War.
The first is that an international environment marked 6 by confrontation over national interests, hostility, and tension--all arising from the underlying causes of war--are a necessary condition for war to arise from a crisis.
The implication of this assumption is that inadvertent military incidents will not spark escalation leading to war in the absence of confrontation, hostility and tensions.
This study thus focuses on inadvertent escalation arising under conditions of acute international crises, when the necessary condition for war are present.
The second assumption is that the underlying causes of war are not sufficient conditions for war.
War can be avoided even under conditions of confrontation, hostility, and tension so long as national leaders on each side are willing to continue bargaining with the other side, are willing to sacrifice certain interests in order to protect or advance others, and perceive that the other side intends to continue bargaining rather than resort to war.
This suggests that a number of factors can provide conditions sufficient for war once the necessary conditions are present.
Examples include a belief that vital national interests cannot be protected through bargaining, an unwillingness to concede some interests to protect others (perhaps because the price would be too high or domestic political repercussions too severe), a misperception that the other side will not bargain seriously or intends to resort to war at an opportune moment, and loss of control 7 over military operations.
These factors can give rise to either deliberate decisions to go to war or to inadvertent war.
The immediate causes of war can thus provide sufficient conditions for war if the necessary conditions are present.
The remainder of this introduction will present a brief critique of the literature on crises and crisis management, an overview of the theory being proposed, the research design, the historical cases and case selection criteria, and a summary of the organization of the study.
Critigue of Crisis Theories | The existing literature on crises and crisis management has three serious weaknesses.
First, the various political and military interactions that occur betgebn thé two sides in a crisis are assessed in the context ér an implicit single interaction sequence model of crises.
Second, the frequently observed phenomenon of United States leaders exercising close control over military operations in crises, combined with a lack cf familiarity with military ‘command and control procedures, has produced an erroneous view of the manner in which military forces are controlled in crises.
Third, and derived from the two previous weaknesses, the concept of crisis stability is poorly developed and there is a poor understanding of the escalation processes that could cause a crisis to escalate to war.
The first weakness is that previous studies of international crises have implicitly viewed the various political and military interactions that occur between the two sides as a single interaction sequence.
The flow of events ina crisis is viewed as a single sequence of actions and reactions.
A consequence of this perspective is the implicit assumption that all the actions taken by a nation during a crisis either are ordered by national leaders in pursuit of their policy objectives, or should not have occurred and therefore represent a loss of control over events.
Under the single interaction sequence model of crisis interaction, a policy objective desirable for avoiding war--control of crisis military operations by toplevel political authorities--is treated as the norm against which actual crisis management efforts are compared.
The occurrence of military —o not directly controlled by national leaders is then viewed a a potentially dangerous breakdown of crisis management.
The single interaction sequence model does not accurately describe international crises.
What actually 9 occurs is multiple interaction sequences that only partially influence each other.
This apparently resulted from the frequently observed phenomenon of United States leaders exercising close control over military operations in crises, combined with a lack of familiarity with military command and control procedures.
The crisis management literature typically describes the control of crisis military operations as being highly centralized, with top-level ci¥ili aa authorities exercising direct control--in contrast to routine peacetime operations, which are described as highly decentralized and having little involvement of civilian political authorities.
This description fails to grasp the true complexity of military command and control, leading to inaccurate assessments of the crisis management problems arising from the employment of military forces in crises and how those problems can affect crisis stability.
Under certain circumstances military commanders can use conventional weapons without seeking pdemiveion from higher authorities.
The scope of their authority is spelled out in a variety of documents, which collectively will be referred to as mechanisms of indirect control.
There are even provisions for commanders to act contrary to their written instructions when circumstances dictate.
Although some scholars have recognized that these features exist in the United States military command and control system, the actual complexity of that system has not been reflected in the literature on crisis management.
The literature is founded on a simple distinction between policymaking and policy implementation, and turns to concepts such as bureaucratic politics and eniganiodttoral process to explain why actions are taken that were not ordered by mational leaders.
This fails to recognize that military commanders at all levels in the chain of command have important policy-making roles and are not simply bureaucrats executing policy decisions.
Thus, an understanding of the mechanisms through which authority to make operational decisions is delegated to militaty commanders is essential for accurately assessing the crisis management problems that arise when military forces are employed in crises.
Crisis stability is viewed as being primarily a function of weapons technology, particularly the — to which it gives an advantage to the offense.
Lacking is an appreciation of the operational factors that affect crisis stability once a decision is made to employ military forces in a crisis.
The escalation processes that could cause a crisis to escalate to war are also poorly developed.
Although there is growing concern over inadvertent or accidental war, these concepts are not well defined and the scenarios in which they could occur lack plausibility.
Crisis military operations can indeed trigger or contribute to an escalatory process leading to war, but the manner in which they do so are subtle and complex--and best understood in the context of stratified interactions.
To summarize, the weaknesses in the crisis management literature are an implicit and misleading single interaction sequence model of the political and military interactions that occur in a crisis, an erroneous view of the manner in which military forces are controlled in crises, and poor development of the concept of crisis stability and the escalation re that could cause a crisis to inadvertently escalate to war.
They are summarized here to provide an overview of the concepts presented in the research design.
The first is that both sides in a crisis seek to protect or advance vital national interests and, conversely, have vital interests at stake that they are unwilling to sacrifice for the purpose of avoiding war.
Both sides thus take military actions intended CoMaunport crisis bargaining and to counter military moves by the other side.
The second assumption is that neither side desires war as the outcome of the crisis.
National leaders on each side limit their objectives and restrain their military moves to avoid being mBisperceived by the other side as intending to launch a war.
Both sides thus seek to avoid inadvertent escalation of the crisis while deterring escalation by the other side.
When both of these conditions are met, the primary danger is of war arising from inadvertent escalation.
The first corollary to the theory is that tactical-level interactions can become decoupled from the political-military objectives of national leaders.
The term decoupled is used to mean that vertical command and control links to operational military forces at the scene of a crisis are severed or otherwise fail to ensure that tacticallevel decisionmaking supports the crisis management strategy of national leaders.
Decoupling occurs to the extent that operational decisions on the employment of military forces made at the strategic and tactical levels differ from the operational decisions political level decisionmakers would have made to coordinate those military actions with their political-diplomatic strategy for resolving the-crisis.
This is an inductive theory arrived at through empirical historical research into crisis interactions.
Crisis stability exists to the extent that neither side has an incentive to strike the first military blow.
The crisis security dilemma is that, in a crisis, many of the actions a state takes to increase its security and improve its bargaining position decrease the security of the adversary.
The stratified crisis security Gilemma is that, in a crisis, the securicy dilemma is stratified, arising from the interaction processes occurring separately at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of violence separately at each level.
An important issue is ee ten these phenomena-stratified interaction, decoupling of tactical-level interactions, and stratified crisis stability--are strictly symmetrical or can also be asymmetrical.
That is, must the conditions necessary for these phenomena to occur be present on both sides in a crisis, or can can the phenomena arise when the conditions are present on only one side.
This issue will be addressed in the empirical research on the theory, but the focus of the study will be on the United States and the role of United States forces in crisés.
The preliminary assessment is that stratified interaction tends to be symmetrical (both sides in a crisis normally experience the conditions for stratification), but that 15 decoupling and stratified crisis stability can be either symmetrical or asymmetrical.
This is probably a more likely and dangerous scenario than one in which symmetrical decoupling oo and both sides experience inadvertent ae oe Another aspect of crisis stability is the danger of misperception under conditions of stratified interaction.
The concept of the misperception dilemma describes the inadvertent results that can occur when military forces are used for signalling in a crisis.
When signalling adversaries, the dilemma is between —— on signals of hostility and inadvertent signals of acquiescence.
When “signalling an ally or friend, the misperception dilemma is between inadvertent signals of encouragement and inadvertent signals of retrenchment.
Given stratified interactions, then perceptions of the adversary can also be stratified, with different perceptions being held at different levels of interaction.
Misperceptions can arise at one level without other levels necessarily being aware of them, providing a mechanism by which ser eeneied interactions can become decoupied.
A 16 The interaction of political and military considerations when military force is employed as a political instrument in crises will be a central focus of the study.
These political-military tensions, which can give rise to difficult policy dilemmas in a crisis, are inherent in the use of force as a political instrument under conditions of stratified interaction.
The first is tension between political considerations and the needs of diplomatic bargaining, on the one hand, and military considerations and the needs of military operations, on the other.
The third is tension between a ah ceria of crisis political missions and readiness to perform wartime combat missions.
These three tensions between political and military considerations affect the degree to which stratified interactions become decoupled in a crisis, thus having a significant impact on Crisis decisionmaking and crisis stability.
Addressing the immediate causes of war gets at that element of randomness and unpredictability, allowing identification of various sets of specific circumstances in which the probability of war is increased--which is both theoretically significant and policy relevant.
This study will examine a particular subset of the immediate causes of war, those arising from the use of force as a political instrument in crises.
The type of theory this study seeks to develop is what Alexander L George describes as a “differentiated” theory, an explanatory theory cast in the form of contingent generalizations and offering discriminating explanations for the occurrence of a phenomenon.
Contingent generalizations are regularities that occur only under certain specific conditions.
Collectively they offer a differentiated typology of situations in which the phenomenon of interest manifests itself.
The objective of a differentiated theory is to identify the variety of different causal patterns that ean occur for the phenomenon, and the conditions under which each distinctive causal pattern occurs.
The value of a differentiated theory is that it has greater policy 18 relevance than theories cast in the form of probabilistic generalizations, providing policy-makers a mecns of Giagnosing the significance of specific situations.
The purpose of structured comparison of a small number of cases is to reveal the different causal patterns that can occur for the phenomena, and the conditions under which each distinctive causal pattern occurs.
The dependent variable is whether on not inadvertent escalation occurs in an international crisis.
Typaa. 19 or anticipated by them as being the likely result of their orders.
The specific phenomena to be explained in this study are the interaction of military forces in crises and the impact of such interactions on crisis stability.
The analysis will define discrete patterns of tactical-level crisis interaction, each associated with a particular causal pattern.
Because the patterns of tacticallevel interaction are arrived at empirically, the patterns identified in this study probably will not cover the universe of interaction patterns--additional patterns could well be identified through further empirical research.
The first phase will be an examination of the mechanisms of delegated command, the nature of tactical-level military interactions, and the use of United States naval forces as a political instrument. hese tepies address some of the greatest weaknesses in the crisis management literature.
The purpose of this phase of the research is to clarify 20 existing concepts and, when necessary, to present new concepts of crisis military operations before commencing the case studies.
The purpose of this phase will be to develop contingent generalizations on the theory of stratified interaction.
To develop the contingent generalizations, eight questions addressing specific aspects of the theory will be answered through structured focused comparison.
More than one of these factors can occur simultaneously, further increasing the likelihood of unexpected escalation.
The first is that one or more of the seven seven potential causes of decoupling was present, creating opportunities for decoupling to occur.
The second, and usually more difficult to establish, finding is that operational decisions made by tactical-level decisionmakers differed from the decisions that political-level decisionmakers probably would have made in order to coordinate those actions with their politicaldiplomatic strategy for resolving the crisis.
The fifth question addresses the second corollary to the theory of stratified interaction, that the security dilemma is stratified in crises.
The implication of this is that decisionmakers at the political and tactical levels can hold different perceptions of the offense-defense balance, vulnerability to preemption, and the need to strike first.
The sixth question addresses the third corollary to the theory of stratified interaction, that escalation dynamics can be stratified in acrisis.
A limitation 24 dmposed on this study by the circumstances of post-World War II history is that no crises during the period escalated to a war in which the United States was a participant.
Thus, the research design cannot address what would otherwise be the most interesting question, the circumstances under which decoupled, stratified interactions generate stratified escalation dynamics leading uncontrollably to war.
Although this question cannot be addressed directly, research will be done to identify conditions which may have inhibited ott deur sea escalation dynamics from occurring.
When tactical-level interactions do begin escalating, what factors inhibit escalation dynamics from being transmitted upward to the Sy exclude the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incident as a crisis that escalated to war because the incident did not lead to immediate and sustained United States intervention in the war.
Although the United States commenced bombing North Vietnam after the incident, the bombings were in retaliation for subsequent attacks on United States forces in the South.
Significant escalation of the United States role in the war, in the form of ground combat troops, did not occur until seven months after the Tonkin Gulf Incident.
Although the first source of CCuitton (political reus military considerations) tends to pit military men yainst their civilian superiors, these tensions are not imply issues of civil-military relations.
The second yurce of tension can merate disputes between military commanders at the ylitical, strategic, and ewererad levels.
The third source tension (crisis missions versus readiness for wartime issions) involves significant conflicts between crisis Llitary objectives and wartime military objectives, as well 3 conflicts between crisis political objectives and wartime Llitary objectives.
But all three tensions arise from the quirements of crisis management, the essence of which is Lacing political constraints on military operations.
The purpose of this phase will be to further develop and refine contingent generalizations on the theory of stratified interaction.
The focus will be on how the naval and military chain of command reacted to the attack and whether or not crisis management problems arose from that reaction.
To further develop the contingent generalizations, four of the previous eight questions will again be answered in a structured, focused comparison.
The four questions address decoupling of stratified interactions, stratified 28 pscalation dynamics, misperceptions, and political-military tensions.
Focus on Naval Forces As was noted in the research design, the cases to be examined all concern the use of United States naval forces as a political instrument in crises and peacetime attacks on United States Navy ships.
First, 30 of the branches of the United States armed fowesa:,.vie Navy is the service called upon most often to respond to crises.
Second, American leaders and many analysts perceive naval forces as having important advantages are® otner types of forces for crisis response.
Third, in spite of the frequency of use and perceived advantages of naval forces, some United States Navy officers and civilian analysts feel that the role of naval forces as a political instrument is not well understood.
Fourth, some analysts believe that ffaval forces have a greater escalatory potential than do other forces.
Naval forces have long had an important role in the foreign policies of maritime nations.
The United States Navy in particular has often been called on to serve as an instrument of national policy.
Wartime combat missions are the fundamental raison d'etre of navies, but peacetime political missions are their most common employment.
The United States Navy is the branch of the armed forces most commonly employed as a political instrument due to naval forces being perceived as having several inherent advantages for that role.
The oceans provide naval forces with wide geographic reach, only the few nations without sea coasts and beyond the reach of carier aircraft are not readily influenced by sea power.
Naval forces are readily moved to a tension area, maneuvered to signal intentions and resolve, and withdrawn when United States objectives are achieved.
Endurance, the ability to remain on station in a tension area for a prolonged period of time, is another important attribute of naval forces.
The endurance of naval forces allows national leaders to send Navy ships to a tension area and then wait and see what develops.
Although naval forces in a presence role serve primarily as a visible symbol of United States power and influence, their combat strength is a central element in their role.
The ability of naval forces to project power ashore on short notice with naval gunfire, carrier airpower, cruise missiles, and Marine troops provides national leaders with a wide range of military options for conveying carefully crafted threats in support of diplomatic bargaining.
Equally important, these combat capabilities also provide options for seeking a military soluticn tc the crisis should it become necessary.
They often require prepared bases , and may not be welcome on foreign soil.
Nationalism is a powerful emotion in many countries, particularly former colonies, and even nations desiring United States support may be hesitant to incur the domestic political strife that a foreign military presence can ignite.
Land-based forces have a long and heavy logistical tail that makes them a cumbersome political instrument--they cannot be rapidly deployed other than in small units with low endurance, and once inserted can be difficult to withdraw.
Deployment of land-based forces by air, or even use of long-range bombers for a show of force, can be precluded by reluctant allies and other nations refusing passage through their air space or refusing landing rights to refuel.
Because land-based forces imply a teeth xx degree of permanence than do naval forces, land-based forces can signal a stronger and less flexible of commitment.
Observers of naval diplomacy have concluded that changes in the structure and conduct of international politics since the end of World War iI have been the primary factors causing maritime powers, particularly the United States, to place greater emphasis on the use of naval forces as a political instrument relative to land-based air and ground forces.
The superiority of naval forces over land-based troops and @ircraft was clearly demonstrated during the 1958 Lebanon Crisis, when Marines were landed with carrier air cover exactly when the President specified with only twelve hours notice.
Severe logistical problems delayed the deployment of Air Force and Army units to the theater.
United States naval officers, in somewhat less analytic terms, had been asserting the existence of a “regulated” strategic environment for some time.
See Admiral Arleigh A Burke, ""The United States Navy's Role in General War and Conflict Short of General War,” Naval War.
Chase's description of Pax Ballistica is essentially the same as the regulated strategic environment described by Osgood and Tucker, but preceded it by a decade.
Iscable, 28. 16 -ommander Dennis R Neutze, a Navy lawyer, has suggested that the 1973 War Powers Act, which requires the President to consult with Congress when United States forces are introduced into hostilities or a situation of imminent involvement in hostilities, makes naval forces preferable to land-based forces.
Because naval forces can be deployed near the scene of a conflict without actually being introduced into hostilities, they do not activate the consultation requirement or the sixty-day limit in the War Powers Act until hostilities are actually initiated.
Although his argument has merit, Presidents have tended in practice to ignore the War Powers Act when Compliance with it would have interfered with their policy objectives--much to the displeasure of Congress. 36 the branch of the armed forces favored by United States leaders for crisis response.
The role of naval forces as a political instrument in peacetime received a great deal of attention in the United States Navy in the early 1970s.
Despite the efforts made to develop concepts and principles of ""naval presence,"" as peacetime naval employment was known, there remains dissatisfaction with our understanding of such political missions.
International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1976), 28. : to ceoffrey Till, Maritime Strategy and the Nuclear Age, Second Edition , 214. 37 and analysts alike express concern that the use of United States naval forces as a political instrument is not well understood, there are grounds for questioning how well United States leaders understand the implications of employing naval forces for crisis response.
Several observers have expressed concern over the escalatory dangers associated with the employment of naval forces.
Of particular concern to some observers is the escalatory pressure that can arise when a United States Navy ship is attacked.
There is something very magical about an attack on an American ship on the high seas.
An attack on a military base or an Army convoy doesn't stir up that kind of emotion.
An attack on an American ship on the high seas is bound to set off skyrockets and the ‘Star Spangled Banner’, qnd ‘Hail to the chief‘ and everything else.
George H Quester and Sean M Lynn-Jones have expanded upon Cooper‘s remarks.
Another view is that there is a greater risk of nuclear war erupting at sea than ashore.
The possibility of nuclear war at sea must be regarded as at least as likely as the occurrence of nuclear war in other theaters.
Indeed, there is probably a greater likelihood of accidental or unauthorized launch of sea-based nuclear weapons, and the constraints on the authorized release of nuclear weapons are possibly more relaxed than those that pertain to land-based systems.
As will be discussed in Chapter VII, no United States Navy commander in the chain of command thought that the Soviets had conducted the attack, and the commanders in the Mediterranean knew for a fact that the Soviets could not have conducted the attack. 40 that has not been adequately addressed in studies of naval diplomacy and crisis management.
The characteristics of naval forces that give them their advantages as a political instrument also generate three serious potential ecb eats for crisis management.
First, the political signals sent by naval forces are particularly prone to being misperceived, inadvertently sending the wrong signals to allies and adversaries.
Second, the nature of the maritime environment, in which forces of the two sides in a crisis routinely operate at point blank range, exacerbates problems of maintaining control of events.
Third, the nature of the naval warfare environment, which places a premium striking first in tactical engagements, exacerbates problems of crisis stability and escalation control.
Cases and Case Selection Two sets of historical cases will be used as sources of empirical data, one set of cases for each phase of the research design.
These cases will be used as sources of empirical data for deriving the contingent gcmer wil eton's Although essentially the same questions will be asked in each case, full-scale case studies will not be conducted.
The criteria for case selection in the first phase of the research were significant United States naval operations were conducted which influenced the outcome of the crisis, naval operations were conducted in the immediate proximity of adversary naval forces or land-based forces that could threaten naval forces, and there was a possibility of fighting erupting between the United States and the other side in the crisis.
Given the large number of crises in which the United States navy has played an important role, case selection was particularly difficult for this phase of the study.
Among the more prominent cases considered and rejected were the 42 1954 Quemoy-Matsu Crisis, the 1958 Lebanon Crisis, the 1970 Jordanian Crisis, and the 1971 Indo-Pakistani War.
The Navy role in the 1956 Suez Crisis was limited to evacuation of civilians, there was little tactical-level interaction, and little concern that the crisis would escalate to war.
There was little tacticallevel interaction in the 1958 Lebanon Crisis, little concern that the crisis would escalate to war with the Soviet Union, and, after the Marines were landed, little concern that the United States would be involved in a civil war.
There was minor tactical-level interaction in the 1970 Jordanian Crisis, but the Navy role was small and there was little concern that the crisis would escalate to war.
Aithough there was tactical-level interaction and concern among Navy officers over the Soviet naval threat in the 1971 Indo-Pakistani War, the Navy role was limited and there was little concern that the crisis would escalate to war.
The criteria for case selection were the attack was on a United States naval vessel, and the attack occurred during a crisis or under circumstances that could have provoked a United States military response.
The second criterion. excludes limited war situations, such as the Korean War and the Vietnam War.
The four cases that were selected are of interest because they come closest to illustrating the circumstances in which stratified interactions could become decoupled and stratified escalation dynamics occur.
Although this study will focus on the use of naval forces as a political instrument, the limitations of this approach are recognized.
Non-naval activities, particularly Giplomatic efforts, may be as important to the success of naval diplomacy as the actions of the ships at the scene of tensions.
Some Problems of Managing Naval Power,” Naval War College Review 29 : 15. 44 de usually difficult to assess the effect of Naval Presence alone on decisions which of necessity are made as the outcome of reaction to a broad range of American signals-military, economic, and political--perceived by other a Thus, caution must be exercised when attempting nations."" to assess the role of naval forces in achieving a given political outcome.
Organization of the Study This study will begin, in Chapter II with a review and critique of the literature on crises and crisis management.
Chapter III defines the theory of stratified interaction and its corollaries.
Chapter IV examines the mechanisms of indirect control, providing background on the command and Control procedures that influence the stratification of crisis interactions.
Chapter V discusses tactical-level military interaction, illustrating the range of interactions that can occur in crises.
Chapter VI explores the use of naval force as a political instrument in crises, applying the theory of stratified interaction under the particular operational circumstances surrounding the use of naval forces.
Chapter VII presents the second research, the four case studies Chapter VIII presents the third research, the four case studies ships.
Chapter IX presents the phase of the empirical on crisis naval operations. phase of the empirical On peacetime attacks on navy findings of the case studies and presents the contingent generalizations on stratified interaction.
Internal and external factors that appear to prevent stratified interactions from decoupling will also be discussed.
Chapter X presents conclusions on the theory and suggests the policy implications of the findings.
A REVIEW AND CRITIQUE Current concepts and theories on crises and crisis management have three serious weaknesses.
First, the various political and military interactions that occur between the two sides in a crisis are assessed in the context of an implicit single interaction sequence model of crises.
Second, the frequently observed phenomenon of United States leaders exercising close control over military operations in crises, combined with a lack of familiarity with military command and control procedures, has produced an erroneous view of the manner in which military forces are controlled in crises.
Third, and derived from the two previous weaknesses, the concept of crisis stability is inadequately developed and there is a poor understanding of the escalation processes that could cause a crisis to escalate to war.
This chapter will review and critique the literature on crises and crisis management, developing in detail three major weaknesses in current concepts and theories.
The first section will review basic concepts on international 46 47 crises, presenting the perspective on crises that will be used in this study.
The second section will critique the concept of crisis interaction and explain the weaknesses in the single interaction sequence model that implicitly underlies existing crisis theories.
The third section will review basic concepts of crisis management, focusing on the measures required for national leaders to maintain control of events in crises.
The fourth section will review and critique the concept of crisis stability, explaining the weaknesses in current conceptions of crisis stability and presenting a definition that more accurately reflects the mature of crisis interaction.
The final section will review @ serious problem in crisis management--misperception of i tantions and resolve--and present concepts that more accurately describe the problems decisionmakers face in trying to avoid misperceptions when using force in crises.
International Crises Through journalistic and political license the term ""crisis"" has been stretched to describe a wide range of phenomena.
Essentially any problem for which national leaders do not have a ready solution can, at the whim of pundits or politicians, be labeled a crisis.
The broad definition of crisis used in the vernacular lacks sufficient precision for this study because it covers far too wide a range of political situations.
John Wiley and Sons, 1976), 25. {cienn H Snyder and Paul Diesing, Conflict Among Nations , Pp.. 49 used in International Crisis Behavior Project headed by Michael Brecher is that: a crisis is a situation with three necessary and sufficient conditions, deriving from a change in its external or internal environment.
Thus, the essential features of acute international crises are a confrontation, short of war, between two sovereign states, and a perception by national leaders of a significantly increased danger of war breaking out, or at least greatly increased uncertainty that war can be avoided.
Shortness of duration is has been used by some observers to distinguish an acute crisis from other criseg.
Syoung, P15; Williams, 25. 50 national interests of the parties involved.
Additionally, an acute crisis can arise during a prolonged crisis if either side takes an action seriously violating the tacit norms of behavior being observed.
Although the phenomena of interest in this study are most prominent in short-duration acute crises, they also occur during the periods of acute crisis that can arise during a prolonged crisis.
Thus, while prolonged crises are not excluded from this study, when they are addressed attention will be focused on the periods of acute emiigas within then.
A feature of some crises, which can contribute to crises being of short duration, is that national leaders perceive themselves as acting under time constraints--action must be taken immediately to avert unacceptable losses to vital national interests.
The effect of a perception of time constraints is to raise the level of stress experienced by national leaders, possibly reducing the effectivenesss of their analysis and decisionmaking.
Perception of time constraints is a variable rather than a parameter in crises, and can vary widely in intensity.
In a prolonged crisis all the features of wee are present except the perception cof time constraints.
Perception of time constraints tends to be strong in the type cof crisis of interest to this study, but is not a necessary condition for an international crisis to exist.
Examples of national interests commonly perceived as important enough to warrant a crisis include the security of the nation and its allies, spheres of influence cr positions of regional political prominence, international principles such as freedom of the seas or rights of neutrals, and sources of strategic minerals or foodstuffs.
The nation's reputation as a world power and its bargaining reputation have sometimes been included as FHolsti, 9; Hermann, 13; Williams, 25; Lebow, Between Peace and War, 10. 52 dnterests which when threatened can provoke a crisis, but such interests normally become involved when a threat to one of the more concrete interests listed above arises, thus compounding the importance of the interest at stake.
Thus each side, in planning its own course of action, must take into account the objectives and 12 anticipated course of action of the other side.
In crisis 100nis definition of acute crisis omits surprise as a characteristic, which is included by Holsti, 10, and Hermann, 13.
However, a crisis need not surprise national leaders by its occurrence, and could build up gradually from a prolonged dispute, so long as it arises in such a way as to give national leaders the perception that it threatens serious damage to important national interests.
The outcome still depends of the decision by the other side whether to resist or to sacrifice its interests in order to avoid war.
Furthermore, bargaining may continue to achieve a final resolution of the dispute. $3 bargaining the two sides have common or complementary dnterests, as well as conflicting interests, otherwise one or both sides would opt for war rather than engage in crisis bargaining.
To emphasize bargaining is not to deny that crises are an intense form of strategic competition over interests perceived as being vital by national leaders on the two sides.
Rather, the focus on bargaining provides a useful means for conceptualizing how strategic competition is conducted in crises.
Bargaining of some sort is, of course, present across the entire spectrum of international intercourse, from routine peacetime negotiations to full-scale war.
But international crises stand apart from both peacetime Giplomatic disputes and wartime ilies conflict due to their unique political-military nature.
In crisis bargaining, varying combinations and sequences of persuasion, coercion and/or accommodation are applied in an effort at resolving the conflict on favorable terms.
The Conventions of Crisis , 50. 54 threat, is rarely ever totally excluded in peacetime Giplomacy, and political accommodation is rarely ever totally excluded in wartime hostilities, in crises both the political and military dimensions are prominent.
In an acute crisis the confrontation has intensified to the point that coercion~--direct, implied, or even latent, including standing deterrent threats as well as specific threats | related to the crisis--begins to dominate the relationship and the grounds for accommodation begin to shrink toward little more than a mutual desire to avoid war.
The prominence of coercion has led some observers to classify crises as an intermediate status of relations between peace and war, combining elements of both peacetime accommodation and wartime coercion.
Bargaining interactions include formal negotiations, official diplomatic communications, informal communications via intermediaries or the media, and actions taken to convey political signals.
Focusing on interaction highlights the interdependence between the two Sides.
It will thus be useful to review the typologies of crises that have been proposed in the crisis literature.
Coral Bell distinguishes between adversary crises, those between nations regarding themselves as adversaries, and intramural crises, those among allies or members of a regional organization.
A more useful approach is to distinguish among different motives for provoking a crisis.
Snyder and Diesing'’s arguments for treating a war scare as a separate category of crisis are not persuasive.
War scare crises are better viewed as a form of coercive bargaining crisis in which the security dilemma has a major impact on crisis stability.
Lebow's spinoff crisis also will not be addressed as separate category because it does not address the motives for the crisis so much as the circumstances in which it arose.
All spinoff crises fall into either the coercive bargaining or pretext to attack categories.
Accidental crises, which were excluded by Snyder and Diesing but included by Lebow, have not been adequately addressed in the crisis literature.
The role of military accidents in provoking or exacerbating crises has received attention, but as yet there are not adequate concepts for dealing with the effects of accidents.
Rather, inadvertent military incidents will be viewed as provoking or exacerbating one of the other two major categories of Crises--coercive bargaining or pretext to attack --depending on how the two sides respond to the incident.
Of these two categories, the coercive bargaining or brinkmanship crisis is the type of interest in this study.
A direct crisis is one in which the United States is in direct confrontation with 1% analytical problems can arise when trying to distinguish between ""pretext to attack"" and “coercive bargaining” crises.
That the outcome of a crisis was war is insufficient to establish that crisis as having been a pretext, it must also be shown that the nation which precipitated the crisis desired war to be the outcome regardless of the response by. the other side.
The motives of the nation precipitating the crisis can also change during the crisis.
Conmverseiy, a crisis provoked for coercion could result in war if the target nation is unwilling to accept the initiator'’s demands and the initiator then decides to use the crisis as grounds for war.
Thus, while its is useful to distinguish among crises on the basis of motives, the possibility of dual motives and changes in motives must be recognized. 59 another nation.
The seizure of the USS Pueblo in 1968 generated a direct crisis between the United States and North Korea.
The term direct Pinecaen de crisis will be used to describe a direct crisis in which the Soviet Union is the daiorsere.
An indirect crisis is one in which the United States is involved because it is supporting a friend or ally who is a direct participant.
The 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis was an indirect crisis between the United States, supporting allies on Taiwan, and China.
The term indirect superpower crisis will be used to describe an indirect crisis in which the United States and the Soviet Union are brought into confrontation by a conflict between their respective allies or clients.
The 1967 and 1973 Middle East Wars generated indirect superpower crises.
What is referred to in this study as an “indirect superpower crisis"" is described as a “limited local war"" by Yaacov Bar-Simon-Tov.
A crisis is a bargaining relationship between the two sides, and, as such, consists of a series of interactions between them.
Additional features of acute international crises are that national leaders perceive important national interests to be at stake in the conflict and tend to perceive themselves as acting under severe time constraints.
This study will be limited to adversary crises, excluding intra-alliance crises.
Of the two major categories of crises--coercive bargaining and pretext to attack --the coercive bargaining crisis is the type that is of interest in this study.
Interaction in Crises Previous studies of international crises have implicitly viewed the various political and military interactions that occur between the two sides as a single interaction sequence.
This perspective on crisis interaction will be referred to as the single interaction sequence model.
The single interaction sequence model does not accurately describe the complexity of crisis interaction.
What actually occurs in a crisis is multiple interaction a that only partially influence each other.
Ina crisis, national political leaders on the two sides are interacting through diplomatic communications and political signalling, national military leaders are interacting through the actions taken with their forces, and military forces in the field are interacting as they respond to orders from higher authorities and the actions of adversary forces.
Such multiple interaction sequences, evolving simultaneously and semi-independently, arise when national leaders do not make all operational decisions themselves, but must delegate significant decisionmaking authority to 21 young, 15; Snyder and Diesing, 6. 62 subordinates.
The single interaction sequence model views these multiple interaction sequences as a single flow of events.
The weakness of the single interaction sequence model ids that in subtle ways it leads towards a unitary actor perspective of national behavior.
In its pure form, the unitary actor model assumes that all actions taken by a nation are at least authorized, ir not specifically ordered, by national leaders.
The unitary actor model is typically used in strategic analyses of the national interests, objectives, and strategies that lead to crises.
Countries are treated as entities having ceaeiiaa ae. objectives, and strategies.
The role of organizations and individuals in the formulation and execution of policy are essentially ignored.
Accidents and the possibility of national leaders losing control of the momemtum of military actions receive scant attention.
The single interaction sequence model is compatible with the implicit, even indavertent, assumption that national leaders have authorized or are in direct control of the actions taken by their forces in a crisis.
The weaknesses in the unitary actor model are well recognized, which has lead to widespread use of the bureaucratic politics and organizational process models for analysis of international crises.
The bureaucratic politics model recognizes that pss policy perspectives held by participants in decisionmaking are shaped by the organizations 63 they represent, and that the policy recommendations made by participants will be influenced by the eee wee een of their organizations.
Although the bureaucratic politics and organizational process models provide a more accurate description of decisionmaking than does the unitary actor model, they are not without their faults.
The bureaucratic politics model tends to treat all policy recommendations made to the President and his closest advisors as having been motivated primarily by parochial bureaucratic self-interests.
There is thus an inherent bias toward interpreting evidence of policy disagreements or actions not ordered by the President as evidence of bureaucratic oe liiediee s+"" The model does not 22¢rahan Tt.
This is apparent in the “cult of the offensive” theory of the origins of World War I According to this theory, a principle cause for the outbreak of war was that the armed forces of the European powers had a bias for offensive military doctrines.
Their bias for the offensive is portrayed as being the result of parochial organizational interests--autonomy from civilian control, larger budgets, and prestige--as opposed to rational analysis of national strategic interests.
In particular, some of the European powers needed offensive strategies to fulfill alliance commitments and others had definite policies of expansion and aggrandizement.
Thus, in this example, the bureaucratic politics model resulted in explanatory factors other than parochial organizational interests being ignored and over-emphasis of the role of such interests in shaping national strategies.
Additionally, Jack S Levy criticizes the theory for its emphasis on bureaucratic routines as the causal link between crises and war.
Levy argues that while bureaucratic factors may well lead to an offensive bias, that bias does not inevitably cause crises to escalate to war~-~additional, non-bureacratic, conditions must be present for war to erupt.
It implicitly accepts the simple public administration distinction between policymaking and policy implementation.
Organizational routines serve only to explain how presidential orders are corrupted in the process of implementation.
This, in turn, leads to the implicit assumption that all actions taken by a nation during acrisis either are ordered by national leaders in pursuit of their policy objectives, or should not have occurred and therefore represent a loss of control over events.
This raises the second weakness in the crisis management literature, which is that it is based on an erroneous view of the manner in which military forces are controlled in crises.
This ee resulted from the frequently observed phenomenon of United States leaders exercising close control over military operations in crises, combined with a lack of familiarity with military command and control procedures.
The crisis management literature typically describes the control of crisis military operations as being highly centralized, with top-level civilian authorities exercising direct control--in contrast to routine peacetime operations, which are described as | highly decentralized and having little involvement of ' civilian political authorities.
This description fails to grasp the complexity of military command and control.
Even in crises, military commanders are delegated significant authority to make operational decisions on the 67 employment of their forces--including specified decisions on the use of force.
Under certain circumstances, spelled out when the delegation of authority was made, military commanders can use conventional weapons without seeking permission from higher authorities.
The scope of their authority is spelled out in a variety of documents, which collectively will be referred to as mechanisms of delegated command.
Returning to the organizational process model, its two serious flaws can now be seen.
First, it fails to recognize that many government organizations, the armed forces in particular, are delegated siginificant authority to make 29 The detailed decisions on how to carry out policies. normal state of affairs--in crises as well as in peacetime and war--is for there to be innumerable military actions taking place that the President is not directly controlling.
Second, the organizational process model fails to account for the fact that decisionmakers in many goverment organizations, particularly military commanders, often face mic aeearicee that had not been anticipated by national leaders when deciding upon a course of action.
Lower-level decisionmakers can be confronted with a requirement to make what is essentially a policy decision without specific guidance on how to make it or sufficient time to seek further guidance from higher authority.
His model recognizes only one legitimate policymaker, the President, and treats all other governmental actors as advisors or administrators without autonomous policymaking authority. 69 for the substantial legitimate decisionmaking authority routinely delegated to military commanders.
Replacement of the single interaction sequence model of crises in favor of a model recognizing the existence of multiple interaction sequences SocE beta many of these weaknesses in crisis theory.
Each interaction sequence consists ofseries of actions and reactions between specific groups of decisionmakers on each side.
Although any number of interaction sequences could be postulated, Limited only by the number of decisionmakers capable of affecting the crisis, this results in a model of excessive complexity.
Instead, a relatively simple model of three interaction sequences will be used.
Each of the three interaction sequences will be associated with a specific level in the ewan of command, leading to a depiction of crisis interaction as being stratified into three levels.
The stratified interaction model is described in detail in Chapter rr. °° 30 though this study is limited to interactions among military forces, the stratified interaction model can be applied to any organization that is sufficiently large and comples that top-level decisionmakers are incapable of exercising continuous direct control of its myriad interactions with the environment.
The model would also apply, for example, to large corporations and universities.
When constant, direct, positive control of operational forces is not being exercised, different sets of decisionMakers are delegated authority to make specified operational decisions.
Their decisionmaking authority is bounded by the existing conditions of delegated command, which could range from being tightly controlled to being essentially autonomous.
Instead, they rely on the vast organizations which are needed to manage the complex integration process.
He also demonstrates that similar conditions pervade military command and intelligence systems--conventional as well as nuclear.
The fact that different sets of decisionmakers are responsible for making different operational decisions does not in itself lead to stratified interaction.
Hypothetically, if all of those decisionmakers possessed identical beliefs, objectives, and perceptions, the operational decisions they make would be the same ones that national leaders would make if exercising positive control.
Organization theory explains why this hypothetical situation will not necessarily be the case.
Different organizations and sub-organizations possess distinct belief systems, referred to as an “organzational essences” or “bureaucratic ideologies” in organization theory, which shape the perceptions of their members.
In military organizations, organizational belief systems become formalized in the strategic and tactical doctrines formulated for employment of their forces.
Decisionmaking in organizations is bounded by cognitive limits on rationality, which generate a range of mechanisms for simplifying environmental complexity, coping with ambiguity, and dealing with value complexity.
A principle s2onis is the assumption that is made in the ""unitary actor"" model of national behavior.
Thus, there are ample theoretical grounds for expecting that military commanders will make operational decisions different from those that national leaders would have made if they had been in a position to make them.
This mutual coupling occurs because a threatening Soviet military action or alert can be detected almost immediately by American warning and intelligence systems and conveyed to force commanders.
The detected action may not have a clear meaning, but because of its possible consequences protective measures must be taken against it.
The action-reaction process does not necessarily stop after two moves, however.
It can proceed to many moves and can, and often does, extend from sea-based forces to airand land-based forces because of the effect of tight coupling.
This action-reaction process can produce what Bracken calle “a mutually reinforcing alert,” in which United States and Soviet actions prompt increasingly higher alert levels on both sides.
Two modifications to Bracken's concept are needed to derive the stratified interaction model.
Bracken makes this clear in his description of the command and control system, but includes national leaders in the action-reaction loop when describing the process of mutually reinforcing slerts.
To degree, that process can proceed without national leaders specifically having to order alerting actions as military commanders act in compliance with their standing orders.
The second modification to Bracken'’s model is that United States conventional forces are vertically integrated with warning and intelligence systems, and tightly coupled with Soviet conventional forces, in a manner similar to nuclear forces.
It is also true for the United States Navy, whose Maritime Strategy is founded on early and rapid surging of naval forces to key forward operating areas.
An action by either side to increase the readiness of major conventional force baieends is readily detected by the command on the other side responsible for dealing with that threat, which then takes actions to compensate for the changed peratente situation.
As a crisis situation emerges the tightness of coupling between the conventional forces of the two sides actually increases as surveillance efforts are stepped up and focused on those adversary forces most likely to play an immediate role in the crisis.
In some military environments, particularly in naval warfare, United States and Soviet forces are tightly coupled down to the tactical level.
Because a surprise attack by either side could be tactically decisive in an individual engagement, operational forces on both sides keep their adversary under close and constant surveillance.
An action by either side's tactical forces to 76 increase their readiness or improve their tactical situation is readily detected by the other side's tactical forces in the vicinity, which then take actions to compensate for the changed tactical situation.
Again, this is the normal state of affairs in peacetime, and the intensity of surveillance increases as the level of tensions rise in a crisis--further tightening the coupling between the forces of the two sides.
Significant information on the status of the other side's forces flows directly to military commanders at these levels from organic sensors under their control and dual reporting from intelligence sources outside their Saewariés.Military commanders are only partially dependent on the chain of command to tell them what the adversary is doing, and are delegated authority to take certain specified measures to adapt the readiness of their forces to changes in the adversary's forces.
Military commanders are obligated to immediately report such actions to their superiors, thus allowing their orders to be 37 countermanded, if necessary.
The key point is that within 37 See Chapter IV for a detailed discussion of military command and control. 77 specified limits, control of United States operational forces is delegated widely to commanders with their own sources of intelligence on Soviet forces.
In summary, interaction between the two sides in crises has been viewed in terms of an implicit single interaction sequence model that does not accurately describe the complexity of crisis interaction.
The weakness of the single interaction sequence model is that in subtle ways it leads toward an implicit assumption that national leaders are in control of the actions taken by their nation in a crisis.
The bureaucratic politics and organizational process models do not entirely correct this weakness and have serious problems of their own.
The key to correcting these weaknesses is a more accurate understanding of the complexity of the military command and control system, in which military commanders are delegated significant decisionmaking authority.
A model containing three interaction sequences--each sequence associated with a specific level in the chain of command--will be used.
Crisis interaction is stratified when the military establishment of a country is sufficiently large and complex that national leaders are incapable of exercising direct control over all operational units that could have an impact on a crisis.
Paul Bracken’s concept of ""tightly coupled forces""--modified by the observation that tight coupling is stratified, occurring separately at the 78 strategic and tactical levels--then explains how interaction sequences can arise.
Williams describes crisis management as an attempt to balance attainment of national goals in the bilateral competition against efforts to avoid the shared danger of war.
Decisionmakers commonly perceive that a crisis can develop a selfsustaining force or impetus of its own, degrading their ability to control events.
Thus, maintaining sO it1iams, 29. fle senn H Snyder, ""Crisis Bargaining,” 240.
On the other hand, Schelling's description of brinkmanship as ""manipulating the shared risk of war,” and his concept of ""the threat that leaves something to chance"" do not convey an accurate image of how national leaders manage crises, ** Snyder has observed that, while delegating control of military operations to subordinate commanders (or threatening to do so) can be used as a coercive tactic in crisis bargaining, national leaders normally emphasize maintaining direct control of military forces in order to avoid war.
A wide range of actions can be taken with military forces during a crisis in pursuit of military and political objectives.
As Bell suggests, political signalling is a primary function of military forces in crises, competing with or even overshadowing their nominal military missions.
Although attempts have been made to draw distinctions between actions taken for military purposes and actions taken for political purposes, virtually all military actions undertaken in a crisis have a dual political-military nature.
Actions taken for military purposes, such as increasing the readiness or reducing the vulnerability of military forces, can have political impact if perceived as a signal of hostile intent.
Conversely, actions taken for political purposes, such as withdrawing forces from a contested area to signal limited objectives or increasing forces in a contested area to apply ceutcive or deterrent pressure, can have military impact by shifting the local balance of forces and altering the capabilities available to local military commanders.
In a crisis, political missions such as coercion and signalling intentions are assigned to forces that must also be ready for limited combat operations and the possibility of sudden escalation to full-scale war.
Studies of crisis management have identified stringent requirements for its success.
First, political authorities must control military operations, including details of deployments and low-level actions as well as selection and timing of the moves.
Second, the tempo of military operations may have to be deliberately slowed, creating pauses for the exchange of diplomatic signals, assessment, and aeGiic ltogpiektier.
Third, military actions have to be coordinated with diplomatic actions in an integrated strategy for resolving the crisis acceptably without war.
Fourth, scivbae ean trestle taken for signalling purposes must send clear and appropriate signals consistent with diplomatic objectives.
Fifth, military options should be avoided that give the adversary the impression of an impending resort to large-scale warfare, possibly prompting him to pre-empt.
Sixth, military and diplomatic options 495011, 49. 84 should be chosen that signal a desire to negotiate a solution to the crisis rather than to seek a military solution.
Seventh, military options and diplomatic proposals should leave the adversary a way out of the crisis compatible with his fundamental interests.
This precludes military actions which the other side would perceive as leaving it no way out of the crisis other than war.
This technique places limits on military options, calling for carefully limited use of force as opposed to drastic, precipitous military actions.
Second, orchestrating actions, particularly military actions, with declarations of intent so as to use multiple channels of communication to convey the same message.
This also affects the — of military forces, requiring that their actions be coordinated with diplomatic moves for signaling purposes.
Third, making efforts to slow the pace of crisis ~Oceorge, ""Crisis Management,” 226.
This requires dampening the tempo of military operations, which typically emphasize speed of execution for tactical success.
Fourth, keeping responsible policy makers in control of the details of implementation as well as broad strategic decisions.
This raises the civil-military relations issue of who is to control execution of military operations in the field, and whether political or military considerations should govern operational decisions.
Both emphasize close control of military operations by national leaders, and tailoring of military options to support crisis bargaining and avoid escalation of the crisis.
A significant weakness in the crisis managment literature is that, with few notable exceptions, there has been scant recognition that tensions can arise in attempting to reconcile military considerations with crisis management requirements.
The nature of the tensions that can arise between political and military considerations in a crisis have been >2oucted in Bell, 2. ""3ceorge, ""Crisis Management,” 224. *4sbia., 233.
The events of October 1962 created considerable tension between military men seeking to protect those under their command, in the event of an outbreak of war, and politicians seeking to give the other side time to think and give in.
Had men in fact died as a result, had ships sunk or airplanes fallen by the score, the crisis in civil-military relations would have taken a more dramatic turn, one in which, I suspect, civilian leaders would have accommpdated commanders far more than they actually did.
Thus, the weakness in the crisis management literature is that it has not recognized that important, legitimate military considerations arise when military forces are employed as a political instrument in crises, and that tensions can arise in attempting to reconcile military requirements with crisis management requirements.
Crisis management did not replace military strategy--other than in the minds of some social scientists--it created complex challenges for effective formulation and execution of military strategy on behalf of political-diplomatic objectives.
In summary, crisis management is the exercise of detailed control of diplomatic and military activities by national leaders in order to to avoid war while attempting to advance their state's interests or protect those interests against losses during a crisis.
The essence of the crisis management is to find the optimum balance between SS e1iot A Cohen, 6. gs efforts to advance or protect national interests, and efforts to avoid war.
Political signalling is a primary function of military forces in crises.
Foremost among the requirements for the success of crisis management are imposing limits on the military means employed which are commensurate with the limited ends being sought, maintaining Close top-level control of military measures, and carefully tailoring military options to support crisis bargaining and avoid escalation.
A serious weakness of the crisis management literature is that it has not adequately addressed the tensions that can arise between these crisis management requirements and military considerations.
Crisis Stability The third weakness in the crisis management literature is that the concept of crisis stability is poorly developed and there is a poor understanding of the escalation processes that could cause a crisis to escalate to war.
Crisis stability is viewed as being primarily a function of weapons technology, particularly the degree to which it gives an advantage to the offense, and military doctrine, particularly doctrines emphasizing the superiority of the offensive.
Lacking is an appreciation of the operational 89 factors that affect crisis stubility once a decision is made to employ military forces in a crisis.
The escalation processes that could cause a crisis to escalate to war are also Weor1¥ developed.
There is growing concern over inadvertent or accidental war, but these concepts are not well defined and there is a very low probability that any of the scenarios would occur.
The definition of crisis stability generally accepted in the crisis management literature is that crisis stability exists when neither side has an incentive to strike the first military blow, launching a preemptive attack on the other side.
The concept of crisis stability has generally been used to assess the stability implications of particular weapons technologies and force postures.
Weapons that enhance crisis stability are survivable, providing an assured retaliatory capability, and do not provide first strike capabilities for use against the other side.
Weapons that degrade crisis stability are vulnerable to preemption, potentially confronting leaders with a “use them or lose them” dilemma in a crisis.
The most destabilizing weapons 90 are those which are valuable for launching a first strike-such as by providing a rapid, precise hard-target kill capability--but which are themselves vulnerable to preemption.
What is needed is a broader definition encompassing the full range of factors which could cause efforts at crisis management and escalation control to fail, resulting in war.
It is 93 The perceived impact of weapons technology on the nature of warfare exacerbates the security dilemma in crises.
When the prevailing weapons technologies in a particular area of warfare are perceived as giving an inordinate advantage to offensive action or being the first to strike, military commanders will have a strong incentive to preempt.
The perceived impact of weapons technology on the offense-defense balance is not the only factor exacerbating the security dilemma, perceptions of military strategy and doctrine are equally important.
In fact, the difficulty of distinguishing offensive from defensive weapons tends to make strategy and doctrine more important than technology.
Most weapons, including virtually all conventional weapons not emplaced in fixed fortifications, can be used with nearly equal effectiveness for offense or defense.
Arms and Influence, 234. 94 the military strategy and doctrine prescribing how those weapons will be used in war.
In assessing the threat posed by a potential enemy's forces and in making contingency plans against that threat, decisionmakers attempt to estimate the adversary's iftantions.
Thus, the security dilemma can arise from perceptions held by each side that the other side has adopted an offensive military strategy or a military doctrine emphasizing preemption or surprise attack.
In circumstances of mutual perceptions of offensive strategies, actions taken by each side to increase its security, even when motivated by defensive intentions, will be perceived by the other side as decreasing its security.
Under these circumstances each side has an incentive to strike first so as to be able to effectively execute its own strategy and preempt the enemy from executing his.
The ""cult of the offensive” 95 the security dilemma, but is subordinated to his emphasis on technology.
The third source of the security dilemma is the 64 In his operations being conducted by military forces. study of threat perception, Dean G Pruitt identifies military actions as an important source of evidence used to infer the intentions of an adveraary.
But crisis military operations also help to define whether the forces being employed have an offensive or defensive purpose.
Naval vessels, for example, may appear defensive when kept close to their homeports, far from the scene of a crisis, but appear offensive to an adversary when deployed off his coast.
This can occur regardless of the school of thought contends that this was the strategic environment in 1914, when a relatively minor incident rapidly escalated to war.
Similarly, forward deployed naval vessels can appear to have offensive purposes even when the national strategy they support is essentially defensive or deterrent.
Military operations can also reinforce perceptions of strategy and doctrine, appearing to confirm estimates or assumptions that an saveceecy holds an offensive strategy.
In a crisis, many of the actions a state takes to increase its security and improve its bargaining position decrease the security of the adversary, at least in his perception.
This is a particular case of the security dilemma as defined by Jervis.
The primary difference is that in a crisis the most important sources of the dilemma are the military strategies and doctrines of the two sides, and especially the military operations being conducted by the two sides.
Under normal peacetime conditions, the “many actions"" Jervis refers to are primarily force posture and weapons procurement decisions, in which the technological characteristics of the forces play an important role in determining the offensedefense balance.
In a crisis, decisionmakers focus on the adversary's immediate intentions and the actions he is taking with his military forces, making these factors predominant in determining the offense-defense balance.
The 97 implication is that the security dilemma can be much more gevere in a crisis, when military forces are being used for coercive and deterrent threats.
A second aspect of crisis stability that is not well developed in the existing literature is escalation from crisis to war.
Concepts that have been used to address this topic include the escalation spiral and accidental or inadvertent paths to war.
Although some of these concepts are useful, they have not been well integrated with other crisis and crisis management concepts.
Even the point at which a confrontation shifts from being a crisis to being a war is unclear in the literature.
We lack a separate term to describe the transitional state of conflict that exists during the period after violence erupts but before a limited war exists.
Some analyses implicitly limit crises to political disputes in which use of military force is only threatened, not actually carried out.
Other analyses encompass the use of force, such as to achieve a military fait accompli in a crisis.
Both approaches have merit, but for the purposes of this study the definition of crisis will include limited use of force as well as the threat of force.
The distinction between crisis and limited war will be based on the perceptions and strategies held by national leaders on the two sides.
If they perceive themselves as involved in a crisis or as attempting to prevent a conflict from erupting in war, then the conflict is a crisis even if 98 fighting has broken out.
If they perceive themselves as launching or fighting a limited war, then the conflict has transitioned to a state of war, no matter how limited.
The point at which a confrontation shifts from being a crisis to being a war could be difficult to ascertain in actual cases, and even be unclear in the minds of leaders on the two sides.
Nations can be involved in i “phony war,” in which there is a declared state of war but no fighting, as were Britain and France with Germany from September 1939 to May 1940.
Nations can also be involved in recurring episodes of intense but brief fighting. without there being a declared state of war, as were the Soviet Union and Japan along the Manchurian border from July 1938 to September 1939, and the Soviet Union and the People’s Republic of China ie 1969.
Nevertheless, basing the distinction between crisis and war on the perceptions of the participants is superior to an arbitrary definition of crisis that excludes the use of force.
Rising stakes increase the motivation of national leaders to prevail in the crisis.
In the actionreaction process an escalatory action by one side provokes an escalatory reaction by the other side in recurring 67 Although Smoke's analysis is limited to the cycles. escalation processes that occur after war has broken out, it is equally applicable to the escalation processes that can arise after fighting erupts in a crisis.
Bell has described the 1914 case as being an example of a “crisis slide,"" in which a series of crises gather irresistible momentum toward war.
Understanding the events or pressures that can trigger an escalatory spiral is at least as important as understanding the dynamics that drive the spiral after it starts.
The basic categories are premeditated attack, catalytic war, accidental war, preemption, and inadvertent war.
Catalytic war is one started by a third party, which can be either a nation or some other group, such as a terrorist organization.
The typical scenario is the launching of a nuclear weapon at one of the two superpowers, which responds by retaliating against the other superpower thinking it to be the source of the initial blow.
Accidental war is the result of either equipment malfunctions or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons by military commanders.
These three paths to war are generally regarded as much less likely than the other two.
Additionally, although these three paths to was can occur whether or not crisis is in progress, they are probably more likely to occur in crises as military forces are alerted for readiness and political signalling purposes.
Preemption is motivated by perceptions and fears that the other side is about to strike first.
Preemption can, of course, also result from correct perceptions that the other side is about to launch a premeditated attack.
There are thus two preemption paths, one generated by the crisis security Gilemma and the other generated by an actual impending premeditated attack.
This study will address the preemption path that arises from the crisis security dilemma.
Accidents and other inadvertent military actions can contribute to this process.
Such deliberate and inadvertent actions increase tensions and harden resolve (similar to the manner described by Smoke) until the process results in a war that neither side wanted or expected when the crisis first arose.
This is a useful concept, but suffers from insufficient specificity as to noe the individual actions contribute to an escalation process and omits significant factors that can also contribute to inadvertent war.
First, it does not directly address the nature of the decision for war that arises out of the escalation process.
A deliberate decision for war could result from the perception that the other.side cannot be bargained or coerced into making the concessions being demanded, leaving war as the only perceived means for avoiding severe damage to vital national objectives.
A decision for preemptive war could result from the crisis security dilemma--the escalatory process generates perceptions that the adversary is preparing to strike first.
The second weakness in the inadvertent war concept is that it does not capture the true complexity of the crisis escalation process.
In a crisis, interaction is stratified into multiple interaction sequences that can evolve semiindependently of each other.
It is theoretically possible for fighting to erupt and an escalation process to be set in motion between the forces of the two sides at the scene of a crisis without escalation occurring in other interaction sequences between the two sides.
There appear to be factors that inhibit the crisis escalation process from occurring and inhibit inadvertent war from resulting even when escalation does occur in acrisis.
Identifying those factors will make a significant contribution to our understanding of the inadvertent war path and the strengths and weaknesses of crisis management.
In summary, the crisis ee dilemma is that in a crisis, many of the actions a state takes to increase its security and improve its bargaining position decrease, or can appear to decrease, the security of the adversary.
The definition of crisis used in this study will include limited use of force as well as the threat of naeoe with the distinction between crisis and limited war based on the perceptions held by national leaders the two sides.
There is an escalation dynamic driven by rising stakes in the outcome of a conflict, which increase the motivation of national leaders to prevail, and an action-reaction process, in which an escalatory action by one side provokes an escalatory reaction by the other side in recurring cycles.
The preemption and inadvertent paths to war are particularly relevant to the study of crises.
Preemption is motivated by perceptions that the other side is about to strike first.
The preemption path to war that results from the crisis security dilemma is the path that will be addressed in this study.
Inadvertent war arises from an escalation process in which the two sides employ increasingly threatening military and Giplomatic moves in an effort at gaining leverage in crisis bargaining and improving their military positions.
The escalation process increases tensions and hardens resolve until it results in a deliberate or preemptive decision for war.
Second, they can defeat attempts to signal limited objectives and a desire to resolve the conflict without war.
The effectiveness of a deterrent threat is dependent upon its credibility.
For a variety of military, political, and cognitive reasons, the nation to be deterred may not perceive the deterrent threat as being credible, or may miscalculate the consequences of challenging a deterrent threat, leading to a failure of deterrence.
Thus, careful attention to the Clarity of signals being sent to the adversary may not suffice to prevent escalation of the conflict.
The sources of misperceptions and their general role in crises are well developed in the crisis management literature.
However, the effect that decisionmaker awareness of the danger of misperception has on decisions concerning the use of force in crises remains a weak point.
The danger of gilgnais sent by military forces being misperceived creates a dilemma for decisionmakers attempting to use force as a political instrument in a crisis.
The misperception dilemma, as this problem will be called, pervades all decisions on the use of force in a crisis.
The dilemma in signaling allies and friends is between inadvertent signals of encouragement and inadvertent signals of retrenchment.
This misperception dilemma only arises in indirect crises, in which the United States role arises from its support for an ally or friend.
Efforts to signal limited objectives and interest ina negotiated solution, and to limit the level of tension and violence in a crisis, can send an inadvertent signal of acquiescence to an adversary, and be misperceived as showing lack of resolve, lack of capability, or a willingness to sacrifice the interests at stake in the crisis in order to avoid an armed clash.
The result can be erosion of credibility, undercutting of the nation’s bargaining position, and debilitation of efforts te negotiate a solution to the crisis.
Even worse, such misperceptions could induce an adversary to preempt in an effort at seeking a military solution with low expectation of concerted resistance.
Thus, an inadvertent signal of acquiescence can trigger an inadvertent war of the type begun with a Geliberate decision during a crisis.
The result can be an appearance of bad faith which interferes with efforts to negotiate a solution to the crisis, escalation of tensions and hostility in the crisis, and, worst case, a perception by the adversary that war is inevitable leading to a decision by him to preempt rather than suffer the first blow.
This can be either the type begun with a preemption decision motivated by the crisis security dilemma--fear of imminent attack--or the type begun with a deliberate decision motivated by the perception that the crisis cannot be satisfactorily resolved short of war.
When a crisis involving the United States arises from a dispute between two other nations, one of whom is an ally or friend of the U.S., the second misperception dilemma comes into play.
Studies of naval diplomacy have noted that allies and friends as well as adversaries can misperceive the signals sent by naval forces.
These problems comprise the misperception dilemma as it affects signals to allies and friends.
Efforts to signal resolve or support for an ally, to convey coercive military threats for deterrence or compellence, and to maintain readiness for potential wartime contingencies, can send an inadvertent signal of encouragement, and be misperceived by the friend or ally as tacit consent for intensification of hostilities and escalation of political demands, or even as overt direct support for initiating fighting which previously had been viewed as infeasible.
The result can be an appearance of unlimited commitment which interferes with efforts to negotiate a solution to the crisis, escalation of tensions in the crisis, and outbreak or escalation of fighting in the crisis.
The result can be erosion of credibility with the friend or ally, thus undercutting influence on his behavior, a decision by the friend or ally to seek support from other powers or to build up his military power for autonomous action, or, worst case, a decision by the friend or ally to preempt and seek a fait accompli before his strategic situation worsens further.
Although it would appear logical that an inadvertent signal of hostility to an adversary would tend to be paired with an inadvertent signal of encouragement to an ally or friend, and that an inadvertent signal of acquiescence to an adversary would tend to be paired with an inadvertent signal of retrenchment to an ally or friend, there is no inherent reason for misperceptions to occur in these pairs.
Misperceptions result from the individual decisionmaking processes in each nation, responding to stimuli and cognitive factors which can be much different.
Thus, while there may be grounds for postulating that certain combinations of ‘perceptions and misperceptions are more likely than others, the occurrence of such combinations should be couched in probabilistic terms rather than described as inherent or inevitable.
The danger of signals sent by military forces being misperceived creates the misperception dilemma.
The dilemma in signaling adversaries is between inadvertent signals of acquiescence and inadvertent signals of hostility.
These concepts clarify the problems facing national leaders as they make decisions on employment of military force as a political instrument in crises.
Conclusion This chapter has reviewed and critiqued the crisis management literature, explaining the major weaknesses in current concepts and ePoteheing new concepts to correct those weaknesses.
It began with a review of basic crisis concepts, ereseri€ing the perspectives that will be used in the study, followed by a critique of the concept of crisis interaction, particularly the weaknesses in the single interaction sequence model that implicitly underlies existing crisis theories.
It then reviewed crisis Management concepts, focusing on measures required to maintain control of events in crises, and critiqued the concept of crisis stability. presenting a definition that more accurately reflects the nature of crisis interaction.
The following paragraphs summarize the key new concepts that were presented.
Interaction between the two sides in crises has often in the past been viewed in terms of an implicit single interaction sequence model that does not accurately describe the complexity of crisis interaction.
To correct these weaknesses a model containing three interaction sequences--each sequence associated with a specific level in the chain of command--was presented.
Paul Bracken’s concept of ""tightly coupled forces""~--modified by the observation that tight coupling is stratified, occurring separately at the strategic and tactical levels without national leaders necessarily being involved--then explains how separate interaction sequences can arise.
One of the most important requirements for the success of crisis management is maintaining close control of 1153 military operations by top-level political authorities.
A weakness in the crisis management literature is that it has not adequately addressed the tensions that can arise between crisis management requirements and military considerations.
The most important sources of the dilemma are the military doctrines and the military operations being conducted by the two sides.
Inadvertent war arises from an escalation process in which the two sides employ increasingly threatening military and diplomatic moves in an effort at gaining leverage in crisis bargaining and improving their military positions.
Accidents and other inadvertent military actions contribute to the process.
The escalation dynamic is driven by rising stakes in the outcome of a conflict, which increase the motivation of national leaders to prevail, and an action-reaction process, in which an escalatory action by one side provokes an escalatory reaction by the other side in recurring cycles.
One of the most difficult problems of crisis management is misperception of intentions.
The danger of signals sent by military forces being misperceived creates the misperception dilemma for national leaders.
The next chapter will build on these concepts to present the theory of stratified interaction and its corollaries of decoupled interactions, the stratified crisis security dilemma, and stratified escalation dynamics.
Underlying this emphasis on control is concern that interactions between the military forces of the two sides in a crisis could develop their own momentum, decoupled from the political-diplomatic objectives and strategies of national leaders.
Although this concern has often been expressed in crisis management studies, the Neato that could cause such a decoupling have not been adequately addressed in theories of crisis bargaining — escalation dynamics.
The principle contention of this study is that the single interaction sequense model is inadequate for undertanding the manner in which nations interact in crises, the complexities and difficulties of crisis decisionmaking, and the ways in which crises can get out of control and escalate to war.
This chapter will begin by describing the stratified interaction model of crisis interactions.
With the underlying model in place, the theory of stratified interaction and its first corollary, decoupled interactions, will be defined.
The theory of stratified interaction will then be applied to the concept of crisis stability, producing the concepts of the stratified crisis security dilemma and stratified escalation dynamics.
Finally, crisis management will be reexamined to show how efforts to prevent stratified interactions from becoming decoupled generate tensions between political objectives and military objectives in a crisis.
These are separate interaction sequences —— distinct groups of decisionmakers at each level on both sides in a crisis.
In the model, these interactions represent horizontal linkages between decisionmakers at the same level.
Vertical linkages connect decisionmakers at the three levels within each nation.
There are flows in both directions, downward and upward, in each channel.
In the nolicy Channel, there is a flow of orders and policy guidance downward from national leaders to strategic and tactical military commanders, and from strategic level commanders to tactical level commanders.
There is also an upward flow of requests for permission to take action, recommended courses of action, reports of intended actions that have not yet been taken, and reports of actions already intitiated that had not been ordered by higher authority.
In the information channel, there is a downward flow of intelligence on the adversary, assessments of the adversary's intentions and likely moves, and backgound information on the objectives and strategy being pursued in the crisis.
Vertical interaction between decisionmakers at the three levels in each country takes place through these policy and information channels.
Political interaction is between the top-level political authorities in each nation--the head of government and his immediate advisors, what I have been calling national leaders.
Although the term “political” is used to label this top level of interaction, military considerations will, of course, be at least as prominent as political considerations in decisionmaking.
Interactions between the two sides at the political level encompass the full range of diplomatic and military interactions under the cognizance of national leaders.
Strategic interaction is between the strategic nuclear forces and major military commands on each side, thus encompassing conventional as well as nuclear forces.
Tactical interaction occurs primarily at the scene of a crisis, but can take place anywhere the military forces of the two sides are operating in close proximity to each other.
Examples, in descending size of the units involved, would include interaction between the United States Sixth Fleet and the Soviet Mediterranean Eskadra, interaction between a United States *ybid.
Generally, the small-scale encounters are part of a larger interaction between the military commands on each side responsible for operations in the region encompassing the scene of a crisis.
Thus, in the naval realm, tactical interaction will generally be regarded as being between larger units, such as fleets or task forces.
In the stratified. interaction model, coupling between the forces of the two sides ina crisis is stratified.
Tight coupling at each of the three levels of interaction-political, strategic, and tactical--can occur because decisionmakers at each level receive direct inputs from warning and intelligence systems.
Inputs from national-level assets go to decisionmakers at the political level, but much of the intelligence also goes to appropriate lower levels in the military chain of command.
The sensitivity and content of the intelligence determine the recipients of it.
Distribution of certain intelligence can be restricted to a small group of decisionmakers (and the analysts supporting them), who then make the decision whether or not to promulgate it to lower levels.
Strategic warning systems include the distant early warning radar system, early warning satellites, Pave Paws SLBM warning radars, certain ELINT and COMINT systems.
Inputs from strategic early warning Systems initially go to appropriate decisionmakers at the strategic interaction level.
With mcedern computerized command and control and military data systems, however, certain crucial elements of the information gathered by Mitte Gila Muthang systems can be automatically transmitted to appropriate political level control centers, such as the Nad Vona2 Military Command Center and the White House situation room.
Tactical sensors include radar, sonar, visual and photographic reconnaissance, electronic support measures , and tactical ELINT and COMINT systems.
However, information from certain of the more capable tactical sensor systems is simultaneously reported directly to strategic level commanders, and, with specific prior arrangements, can be transmitted directly to Bei ie ail level control centers.
Two important features these warning and intelligence systems must be noted.
First, dual reporting--simultaneous transmission of intelligence to multiple users at various levels in the chain of command--is widely used to expedite the flow of crucial information.
Dual reporting generally involves the political and strategic levels, but can also be used with certain tactical sensors.
On the one hand, it enhances the ability of national leaders to exercise Close control of military operations in crises by keeping them better informed of events at the strategic and tactical levels.
But, on the other hand, it can ereasd the autonomy of decisionmakers at the strategic and tactical levels by reducing their dependence on higher authority 5 source of warning and intelligence.
Which of these two competing tendencies prevails in a particular crisis, or in a particular incident in a crisis, depends upon the specific circumstances in which operational decisions must be made.
For example, national-level assets and strategic warning systems can simultaneously detect some military actions.
Even tactical sensors can detect some military actions being monitored by strategic warning systems and national-level assets.
Overlapping coverage thus can either intensify or inhibit stratification of crisis interaction.
P designates political level decisionmakers, S$ designates strategic level decisionmakers, and T designates tactical level decisionmakers, with the subscripts designating the two sides.
I, is political interaction, I is strategic interaction, and I is tactical interaction.
The P,-T, arrow and the P.-T. arrow represent efforts by political level decisionmakers to exercise direct, positive control of operational forces in a crisis.
Political interaction is between the top-level political authorities in each nation.
Tactical interaction is between those operational military units of the two sides that are in direct contact.
In addition to these three horizontal interaction sequences between the two sides, there is also vertical interaction between decisionmakers at the three levels in each country.
These vertical interactions take place through the policy and information channels that link the three levels.
Given conditions of delegated command, tight coupling, and acute crisis, interactions between the two sides will have a tendancy to become stratified into separate political, strategic and tactical interactions.
The definitions of the political, strategic, and tactical levels of interaction are as given above fur the stratified interaction model.
As stated in the definition of the theory, three conditions contribute to stratified interaction.
Second, the military forces of the two sides are tightly coupled through warning and intelligence systems that are vertically integrated with major military commands and operational forces.
This condition is driven by perceptions that striking first will accrue significant strategic or tactical advantages, thus requiring warning of attack to ensure the survival of operational forces and the ability to effectively execute wartime contingency plans.
Third, stratified interaction occurs in an acute international crisis, when military forces are being used as political instrument for crisis bargaining.
This results in actions being taken with military forces that deliberately or inadvertently convey a military threat to the other side.
Strategic and tactical level interactions also occur under normal peacetime conditions and in ihesws crises that do not pose a danger of war.
In fact, under normal peacetime conditions, when national leaders are paying very little attenion to routine military operations, ees could be numerous interaction sequences taking place between forces in direct contact with the other side’s forces.
This is because the perception of an acute danger of war is not present and the interactions do not occur in the context of deliberate efforts to convey military threats to the other side.
An example of this is peacetime incidents at sea between United States and Soviet naval forces.
The United States and Soviet fleets are almost always in clos® proximity somewhere in the world and their interactions occasionally produce incidents, such as shouldering , threatening actions with weapons, and even collisions.
But such incidents have never produced more than diplomatic protests, even at the height of the cold war before the 1972 U.S.-Soviet Incidents at Sea Agreement was signed.
Another example is the dozens of American military aircraft fired on or shot down by the Soowet Union, China, and the Warsaw Pact countries during the 1950s and 1960s.
The existence of stratified interaction in a crisis is not in itself important.
The three interaction sequences are described as being parallel when the intensity of the hostilities and magnitude of threat being W4ignallied by strategic and tactical level interactions are roughly what national leaders desire to implement their politicaldiplomatic strategy for managing the crisis.
What is of analytical interest is the decoupling of interactions at the three levels, which could cause national leaders to lose control of events in a crisis and touch off an escalatory spiral.
Decoupled interactions are defined to be an interaction sequence at the strategic or tactical level in which the intensity of hostilities, level of violence, and magnitude of threat being conveyed to the other side are not under the control of national leaders.
This can occur when there is some sort of interruption or severe degradation of the vertical policy and information channels between decisionmakers at the three levels.
When interactions are decoupled, the three interaction sequences are no longer parallel.
The intensity of hostilities at the strategic or tactical levels no longer supports the political-diplomatic strategy being prusued by pica national leaders in the crisis.
In principle, decoupling can lead to the intensity of hostilities at the strategic and tactical levels being either greater or lesser than that desired by national leaders.
Although the escalation dynamics theory predicts that the tendency would normally be toward escalation of hostilities, this is a question for empirical research.
Conversely, decoupling of stratified interaction is averted to the extent that political level decisionmakers exercise constant, direct, positive control over operational military forces, or ensure that the guidance contained in mechanisms of delegated command produce operational decisions at the strategic and tactical levels that support their political-diplomatic strategy for resolving the crisis.
Inept or indiscriminate employment of military force by national leaders can defeat crisis management efforts as easily as inappropriate operational decisions by on-scene commanders.
Additionally, as will be seen in the case studies, on-scene commanders are quite able to act with prudence and caution when not under direct control by national leaders.
Military commanders are never without operational guidance of some sort.
When direct control is interrupted, for whatever reason, they will base operational decisions on the last direct guidance received until the tactical circumstances change sufficiently to make that guidance inapplicable--which can happen very quickly.
At that point they revert to the operational guidance contained in the mechanisms of delegated command.
This is an entirely rational system of command, reflecting the reality that decisionmaking at the tactical level does not cease simply because national leaders are unable to make the decisions.
Once operational forces make this de facto shift to delegated command, even though nominally still under direct command, decoupling of interactions can occur.
As these potential causes suggest, decoupling can occur even when national leaders are attempting to exercise constant, direct, positive control over operational forces.
Communications problems can sever the links from mational leaders to operational forces, leaving those forces at least temporarily under delegated command.
The problems can take many forms, including outright loss of radio contact, garbled messages, delays in message delivery due to system overload, misrouting of messages, and deliberate interference by the adversary.
Although the United States military communications system has been vastly improved over the last four decades--without which the President could not even attempt to exercise close control of military operations-~it is still not infallible.
Information flows can be interrupted by communications problems, excessive secrecy and compartmentation, or even a simple failure to realize that a particular report warrants the immediate attention of decisionmakers.
Exclusive information is a resource that confers influence on policy decisions, which can lead to hoarding or hiding of crucial facts.
Information problems such as these can prevent national leaders from exercising effective direct control over crisis military operations by leaving them unaware of the need to make certain operational decisions, denying them the capability to make those decisions, or convincing them that they should delegate the ~ decisions to lower levels.
Impairment of top-level decisionmaking under the stress of a crisis, or preoccupation with a particular. aspect of a crisis, can result in real-time guidance not being provided to operational forces even when communications channels are intact.
Selective and sequential attention to problems is a well-recognized cognitive limit on decisionmaking.
In a fast-paced tactical environment, tactical decisionmakers may not have time to describe their circumstances to national leaders and await a decision before having to take action.
To use an exaggerated example, when missiles are inbound the captain of a ship cannot wait for the National Security Council to convene and haggle over his fate.
For this reason, operational commanders always have a certain amount of decisionmaking authority delegated to them, regulated by the rules of engagement.
When urgent operational decisions must be made on the basis of delegated command rather than on consultation with national leaders, what might be called momentary decoupling occurs.
National leaders, uncertain as to the implications of their political-diplomatic strategy for tactical military operations or even uncertain as to the strategy itself, may issue orders to military forces that are ambiguous or ambivalent.
To some degreee this problem is inherent in the nature of crisis management, which consists of the dual goals of protecting vital national interests while avoiding unwanted escalation of the confrontation.
Ambiguous or ambivalent orders are particularly likely when they must be formulated under the stress and time pressures of a crisis, Thorough evaluation of alternative tactical options may not be possible before an order must be given.
A military commander faced with ambiguous or ambivalent orders may not have time to seek guidance on how to interpret them in a specific situation, forcing him to rely on his own best judgement.
If his decisions, no matter how carefully reasoned or tactically appropriate they may be, do not support the political-diplomatic initiatives being pursued to manage the crisis, then decoupling has occurred.
If toplevel control can be Sima ia eeaey re-established, the decoupling will only be momentary.
When this occurs, the guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control--the alert system, standing orders, mission orders, contingency Plans, and rules of engagement--becomes crucial to eftective crisis management.
If national leaders do not pay sufficient attention to that guidance, military actions could occur that they had not anticipated and which exceed the scope of operations they had dasizeay This could cause momentary decoupling and lead wot an interaction sequence that is decoupled from the political-diplomatic strategy being pursued by national leaders.
The final possible cause of decoupling is a deliberate unauthorized action by a military commander.
In this case the commander has specific orders for the mission he is to carry out, but Paaeriegng decides to disobey those orders and carry out an action contrary to the letter and intent of his orders.
More likely, however, would be the case in which a military commander deliberately takes an unauthorized action because he perceives his local tactical situation as being much more threatening than do national leaders, or believes that his orders are infeasible under the conditions he faces.
The military commander's assessment of the situation could be entirely correct, but the action is still unauthorized.
In summary, the theory of stratified interaction states that, given conditions of delegated command, tight coupling, and acute crisis, interactions between the two sides will become stratified into separate political, strategic and tactical interactions.
In an acute crisis, the security dilemma is stratified, arising from the interaction processes occurring Se atais at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of war separately at each level.
This corollary contends that the adversary's military intentions--whether they are essentially offensive or defensive--can be perceived differently by decisionmakers at the political, strategic, and tactical levels of crisis interaction.
Many military moves are ambiguous as to their offensive or defensive intent, and can increase capabilities in both areas.
Interactions at the strategic and tactical levels can generate circumstances in which actions taken by one side to increase the security of their forces or improve their tactical position can decrease, or appear to decrease, the security of the other side’s forces.
Actions by one side prompt countermeasures by the other side that in turn contribute to an escalatory action-reaction spiral as military commanders on both 1s seek to maintain or increase their strategic or tactical advantages.
Military commanders could have authority to preempt for self-defense under conditions specified in their standing orders or rules of engagement, er could be required to seek authority to preempt from national leaders.
The key point is that the interaction process that created the circumstances in which preemption was perceived to be necessary was not under control of national leaders.
The mutually reinforcing alert phenomenon described by Bracken is an example of the stratified security dilemma at the strategic level of inveractién.
This type of interaction occurred between United States carrier battle groups and Soviet anti-carrier forces in the Mediterranean during the 1973 Middle East War.
Soviet ships and submarines armed with anti-ship cruise missiles moved into positions where they could launch preemptive strikes against the United States Sixth Fleet on short notice.
This in turn prompted the Sixth Fleet to maneuver to evade being targeted, and to deploy ships, submarines, and armed aircraft into positions where they could strike Soviet cruise missile platforms upon indication of an attack.
If it starts at the political level, with national leaders making the escalatory decisions, it immediately encompass all — levels and thus is not stratified.
If an escalation spiral starts at the tactical or strategic level, it will not necessarily be transmitted upward to higher levels of interaction.
While this scenario is theoretically possible, it is not likely under the stress of a crisis, when a sudden outbreak of fighting at the tactical level would appear to confirm perceptions of the other side's offensive intent and fears of war being imminent.
It is even less likely that national leaders would be able to let an escalation spiral at the strategic level, even one involving only conventional forces, play itself out without a full-scale war resulting.
An escalation spiral at the tactical or strategic levels would be the loss of control over events that crisis management is intended to prevent.
First, reliance on delegation of decisionmaking authority to military commanders at the strategic and tactical levels can allow interaction sequences to gain momentum without the direct involvement of national leaders.
Second, decisionmakers at the strategic and tactical level could, for a number of reasons, base their operational decisions on their Standing orders and operational dcctrines, rather than on direct guidance from national leaders.
Both of these means of controlling escalation can be difficult to implement in practice.
As was dicussed earlier, direct control can be interrupted or degraded by a wide range of technical, operational and even psychological impediments.
Ensuring that the mechanisms of indirect control support the political-diplomatic strategy in a crisis is made exceedingly difficult by the near impossibility of anticipating every possible tactical situation that a military commander might face.
Thus, there are ample grounds for postulating that an escalation spiral beyond the control of national leaders could arise at the tactical or strategic levels.
A key point of the stratified escalation dynamics concept is that the phenomenon can exist under an assumption of rational decisionmaking.
Fully rational strategic and tactical level decisionmakers, acting strictly in accordance with approved operational guidance, could well initiate an action-reaction sequence that becomes an uncontrollable escalation spiral.
Both are highly unlikely and the record of United States and Soviet behavior in superpower crises shows a great deal of caution on the part of operational commanders, rather than excessive aggressiveness. -To contend that stratified escalation dynamics can occur under an assumption of rational decisionmaking is not to deny that the stress and confusion of a crisis can exacerbate the cognitive constraints on decisionmaking.
Misperception and miscalculation are highly likely during a crisis, and increase the possibility that crisis military operations could touch off an escalation spiral.
The ee security dilemma creates a decisionmaking environment in which misperception and miscalculation are not only more likely to occur, but are also more likely to touch off an escalation spiral.
Stratified interactions can cause misperceptions of the intentions of adversaries.
Strategic and tactical level interactions that result from military commanders acting on their own initiative, responding within the bounds of their thsvitary evasion of civilian control is a central element of Barry R Posen's definition of inadvertent escalation.
If viewed as having been ordered by national leaders, strategic and tactical level interactions are interpreted in the overall political and military context of the crisis, rather than the more limited immediate circumstances that surrounded the dnteraction.
This can result in strategic and tactical level interactions being viewed as signals of the intentions of the adversary's leaders, which may not have been the case at all.
Misperception of intentions can thus arise from interactions among forces at the strategic and tactical levels as well as from the signals being exchanged at the political level.
Inadvertent military incidents are most likely to occur under conditions of stratified interaction, when hational leaders are relying on mechanisms of delegated command for indirect control of military forces.
An inadvertent military incident could spark an action-reaction escalation sequence at the tactical or strategic level decoupled from interaction at the political level as military commanders acted in accordance with mechanism of delegated command.
Serious fighting could also erupt without escalation dynamics spreading to the political level, that is, while national leaders on the two sides were still trying to resolve the crisis without war.
An intense engagement between the forces of the two sides in direct contact in the field or at sea could spread upward to the major theater commands in charge of those forces (the strategic level) through the operation of delegated decisionmaking authority at the strategic level.
The most likely scenario lame. crisis management technique of deliberately slowing the tempo of military operations and creating pauses for exchange of diplomatic communications is intended to halt such an escalation process.
The Interaction of Political and Military Considerations,"" Survival 26 (September/October 1984): 226. : lithe mutually reinforcing alert described by Paul Bracken is an extreme example of this.
In summary, the stratified crisis security dilemma is that, in an acute crisis, the security dilemma is stratified, arising from the interaction processes occurring separately at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of war separately at each level.
Political-Military Tensions Awareness of the problems inherent in crisis management and the escalatory impact they could have on a crisis underlies the emphasis national leaders piace on maintaining close control of military forces in crises.
An irony of crisis management is that efforts to prevent interactions at the strategic and tactical levels from becoming decoupled from the political-diplomatic strategy being pursued to manage a crisis can generate tensions between political and military considerations that create further difficulties for managing the crisis.
These tensions and the manner in which they are resolved directly affect, and are directly affected by, stratified interaction.
Tensions between political and military considerations are inherent in the use of military force as a political instrument.
They would arise in a crisis even without stratified interaction, but their impact on the ability of national leaders to manage a crisis are exacerbated under conditions of stratified interaction.
Both sets of considerations are those being pursued to influence the outcome of the crisis.
Tensions between political and military considerations arise because military forces must always be prepared for the possibility of combat even when being used for political signaling.
Thus, such tensions arise well before force is actually used in a crisis.
There are two approaches to using military forces deployed to the scene of a crisis for political signaling.
In the first approach--the symbolic or iaekeaae threat-token forces are sent to signal resolve to protect vital national interests and as a symbol of the overall military power of the nation.
Token deployments are often used in conjunction with increases in the readiness of other forces in the theater or forces held in strategic reserve for rapid deployment to the scene.
The token forces at the scene convey a threat that other, more powerful forces will be used if the target nation does not respond in a satisfactory Manner to the threat being conveyed.
In some circumstances token forces serve as a tripwire, enhancing, ékeough the likelihood of their being involved in any fighting that erupts, the credibility of a deterrent threat.
The token forces typically do not have 4 mission other than to be present at the scene of the crisis, leaving them without a clear military objective other than survival, and even that may be compromised when the forces are placed im an exposed position as a tripwire.
Military moves by the adversary that are hardly worth the attention of national leaders can present an imminent threat to the token force.
It is thus to be expected that on-scene military commanders will have perceptions and priorities much different from those of national leaders in this situation.
In the second approach to using military forces for political signaling, strong forces (well beyond what would be needed for a token force) are used to convey a direct threat with their intrinsic warfighting capabilities.
Alerting strategic nuclear forces during a crisis is an example of a direct threat, intended to achieve deterrence by threat of punishment.
Deployment of substantial ground, air, or naval forces capable of engaying the adversary's forces at the scene of a crisis is another example of a direct threat, intended to achieve deterrence by threat of denial.
This is because the credibility of the threat being conveyed by the forces is a function of the adversary's perception of ie capability to carry out the military actions being threatened, as well as the credibility of the threat to use them if necessary.
The adversary's perception of the likelihood of the forces actually being used is certainly the more important consideration, but his perception of their capabilities can influence that assessment.
For example, a threat to intervene with a battalion of troops to halt an invasion by a division-sized force would probably not be credible.
Additionally, three separate groups of adversary decisionmakers--at the political, strategic, and tactical levels-are assessing the credibility of the force.
Different decisionmakers could well focus on different indicators of intent.
Military commanders, particularly those commanding forces in contact with the adversary force, are likely to be more attentive to capabilities as an janceree of intentions than are national leaders weighing a broader range of considerations.
It is a product of quantity of forces and specific types of forces and weapons weapons employed.
Readiness and tactical situation are the operational dimension of credibility.
Tactical situation refers to the impact of geographic position, relative to adversary fenses, on the the ability of the forces employed in a crisis to effectively carry out combat operations.
The degree to which a particular tactical situation is advantageous or disadvantageous is a complex calculation involving geography, the capabilities of each side's weapons, surveillance and warning capabilities, and the speed required by each side to react to threats and launch attacks.
The elements of warfighting capability (strength, readiness, and tactical situation) were described above.
The second military consideration affected by crisis management, tactical planning, requires elaboration.
In formulating tactical plans for the conduct of combat operations, military commanders seek to adhere to or exploit certain operational considerations believed to provide tactical advantages in combat, commonly referred to as the 17 principles of war.
Four of these principles are 16, orge, ""Crisis Management,” 226. 17 arouments over the value and proper formulation of the principles are irrelevent to the point being made.
Regardless of their specific wording or ranking, the principles provide a convenient describe of what military commanders try to do in battle.
The principle of the objective is that military operations must be directed toward a clearly defined, decisive, and attainable military objective.
The principle of initiative, often called the principle of the offensive, is that seizing the initiative with offensive action in almost always necessary to achieve decisive results, to maintain freedom of action (choosing when and where to engage the enemy, so as to exploit his weaknesses), and to control the pace and course of battle.
Exploitation (or pursuit)--rapidly following up initial success with further offensive action--is an element of initiative, intended to keep the enemy off balance and on the defensive.
The principle of concentration, often called the principle of mass, is that superior combat power, a function of quality as well as quantity of arms, must be concentrated at the critical time and place for a decisive purpose.
The reverse aspect--the impact of military considerations on crisis management requirements--should be obvious in each case.
Essentially, unrestrained pursuit of the military principles will usually preclude meeting the crisis management requirements.
Deliberately slowing the tempo of military operations violates the principle of initiative, particularly its component principle Satie renty exploiting initial success with further offensive action, and makes it difficult to use surprise, which depends in part on speed of execution.
Coordinating military actions with diplomatic actions can have a wide range of negative impacts.
Coordination is Geant to support an integrated strategy for resolving the crisis acceptably without war, often with the result that the military objectives of crisis operations are not well defined--violating the principle of the objective.
A principle objective of crisis management is to avoid war or unwanted escalation of a limited use of force, which is difficult for military planners to use as the basis for planning tactical operations.
Resolving the crisis acceptably is achieved through political-diplomatic bargaining, in which military forces are used primarily as a means of signaling intentions and conveying coercive threats, a political mission Gifficult for military planners to address as an objective in the military sense.
Coordinating military actions with diplomatic actions can also require limiting the size and composition of the forces employed, violating the principle of concentration and constraining the strength of the force, an element of its warfighting capability.
Limiting the actions that military forces can take in self*defense or to improve their tactical situation, normally done for escalation control purposes, can violate the principle of initiative and constrain their readiness for combat.
Using force in gradually increasing increments, a common tactic of coercive bargaining, is the military planner's second worst nightmare (second only to being the victim of strategic surprise), violating the principles of initiative , concentration, and surprise.
Avoiding military options that give the adversary the impression of an impending resort to large-scale warfare can also have a broad range of impacts on military considerations.
The principles of tactical planning essentially dictate that the military options favored by military planners will be precisely those which give the adversary the impression of an impending resort to large-scale warfare, or the appearance of an actual resort to large-scale warfare in the case of surprise attack.
An optimum battle plan calls for wotnaiing the initiative by concentration of superior force and launching a surprise attack against a strategic objective, and then rapidly exploiting that attack with further offensive action.
Such a battle plan is precluded by the requirements of crisis management.
Delegating decisionmaking authority to lower levels can deprive national leaders of the ability to control the momentum of a conflict and to coordinate military operations with diplomatic initiatives.
On the other hand, centralizing decisionmaking authority in the hands of national leaders can rob on-scene forces of | tactical flexibility, leaving them incapable of adapting to @ rapidly changing situation and vulnerable to surprise attack.
It cannot be resolved, it must be managed on an on-going basis every time a crisis occurs.
The nature of the interactions at the political and tactical levels can be quite different, and probably often are.
Given a crisis in which national leaders on the two sides are pursuing strategies of coercive diplomacy, efforts by each side to enhance the credibility of its coercive threats or to counter the adversary's coercive threats by 19 3 though operational control tensions can also arise over the control of strategic level forces, this study will concentrate on tensions arising over the control of tactical level forces.
The commanders of those forces are constantly evaluating their tactical situation relative to adversary forces--assessing the seriousness of the threat they represent and the ability of his own forces to counter that threat.
When the tactical situation is dynamic, with both sides acting to maintain or improve their tactical situation, the result is a test of capabilities at the tactical level.
The test of capabilities is no less real for no shots having been fired.
The tactical commanders are constantly calculating the likely outcome of an engagement with each new development in the tactical situation.
Thus, even though political level interaction may be marked by coercive diplomacy, tactical level interaction can become a test of capabilities.
This illustrates why the level of control issue can be @ source of tensions.
The tactical situation can appear much different to the on-scene commander, operating under the guns of the adversary, than it does to top-level political leaders, negotiating with that same adversary.
A military move by the adversary that is viewed as a political signal by national leaders can be viewed as an immediate military threat to the tactical commander.
Under the conditions of a test of capabilities, a tactical commander is going to perceive an urgent need for as much decisionmaking authority as he can get from his chain of command.
The result is tension between the tactical commander's need for flexibility and initiative, and the politcal leader's need for close control of military operations.
The first reason is that military forces do not necessarily drop their wartime contingency tasking when assigned to crisis operations.
Their wartime tasking may change to make it more compatible with their crisis tasking, for example by assigning them wartime missions in the vicinity of the crisis, but their wartime tasking is rarely dropped altogether.
Forces equipped with dual-capable weapons--aircraft and missiles capable of carrying nuclear as well as conventional warheads--are most likely to have simultaneous crisis and wartime tasking.
As an example, such differences in mission requirements would be particularly pronounced for United States forces when their crisis tasking entailed small-scale conventional operations against a much smaller nation , while wartime contingency tasking entails large-scale conventional or nuclear operations against the Soviet Union.
The second reason why tensions arise between crisis objectives and wartime objectives is that forces detached from major operational units to respond to a crisis may be replaced by other forces in order to maintain readiness for wartime missions.
For example, moving an aircraft carrier battle group out of the Western Pacific into the Arabian Sea for the possibility of operations against Iran can require that another carrier battle group be surged from its homeport in the United States to the Western Pacific in order to cover the wartime commitments of the first battle group.
The third reason why tensions arise between crisis objectives and wartime objectives is that alliance commitments can inhibit forces deployed for support of allies in wartime from being used in a crisis.
Alternatively, if forces normally committed to the defense of an ally are diverted to a crisis, other forces may have to be deployed from their home bases to avert sending an inadvertent signal of retrenchment to the ally.
For example, United States forces in Korea are not readily available to respond to crises elsewhere in Asia.
The frequent refusal of United States allies, notably NATO and Japan, to provide forces in support of United States military actions in crises--even crises affecting their interests more than American interests--further compounds crisis-wartime trade-offs for the United States.
The fourth reason why tensions arise between crisis objectives and wartime objectives is that as a crisis escalates and military forces are placed at increasingly higher levels of readiness , initial preparations to execute wartime contingency plans commence.
Certain of these preparations can be initiated by strategic level military commanders on the basis of authority delegated to them in mechanisms of delegated command, without an increase in DEFCON or other orders from political level leaders.
For conventional forces preparations for wartime operations include increased security measures to thwart enemy surveillance and deployment to wartime battle positions.
In summary, tensions between political and military considerations are inherent in the use of military force as a political instrument.
The first source of tension is conflict between political considerations and the needs of Giplomatic bargaining, on the one hand, and military considerations and the needs of military operations, on the other.
Tensions between political and military considerations arise because military forces must always be prepared for the possibility of combat even while carrying out political signaling missions.
This is a dilemma that cannot be resolved, it must be managed on an on-going basis every time a crisis eccurs.
The first corollary to the theory, decoupled interactions, was then presented.
The theory of stratified interaction was then applied to crisis stability, producing the second corollary to the theory, that of stratified crisis stability.
Extending this corollary to the problem of escalation resulted in the third corollary to the theory, stratified escalation dynamics.
Finally, stratified ' interaction was used to explore the tensions that arise between political and military considerations when military force is used as a political instrument in crises.
With the theory of stratified interaction and its corollaries defined, we can now begin to explore the use of force as a political instrument in crises.
The first task, which will be undertaken in the next chapter, is to examine the rae ecions of delegated command.
These ieatani ons are important in crisis management because the President, and even top-level military commanders, cannot possibly exercise real-time direct control over all the activities of the United States armed forces.
The mechanisms of delegated command strongly influence the degree to which crisis interactions are stratified, the likelihood of stratified interactions becoming decoupled, and the intensity of the tensions between political and military considerations.
First, and most important, there is always a danger that national leaders could lose control of events in a crisis, allowing crisis military operations to escalate uncontrollably to war.
The methods, capabilities, and limitations of military command and control are important factors in the ability of national leaders to maintain control over events.
Second, the occurrence of stratified interaction in crises is largely a function of the military command and control procedures being employed to direct crisis military operations.
Thus, greater familiarity with military command and control will enhance our understanding of escalation dangers in crises and the problems of crisis management.
The methods and problems of military command and control have received scant attention in studies of warfare and virtually no attention at all in studies of crisis aanagewent .Virtually all the attention paid to command and control has been narrowly focused on technical issues-maintaining reliable and rapid communications, improving information processing and display, and reducing vulnerability to enemy attacks and ey The recent spate of books and articles on the command and control of strategic nuclear forces has not corrected this deficiency.
Connectivity issues--ensuring that operational forces are reliably and securely linked with National Command Authority--are important, but there is much more to effective command and control.
The purposes of this chapter are to set military command and control in the context of theories on delegation and control in organizations, and to explain how delegation and control are exercised in the United States military command system.
The first section will present organization and management theories on delegation and control, and show how they apply to military command and control.
The second section will explore basic concepts of delegation and control used in the United States military command system.
The final section will examine rules of engagement--the fifth mechanism of indirect control.
First, it is based on a Marrow and critically flawed conception of delegation and control in organizations.
Second, it fails to account for the manner in which military command and control is exercised, particularly the significant delegation of decisionmaking authority and the role of mechanisms of indirect control.
The organizational process model implicitly accepts the simple public administration dine sacra owdiate Ber policymaking and implementation.
In the organizational process model, the President makes policy decisions and government organizations implement those those decisions.
Organizational processes explain why the actions taken during implementation differ from the actions the President desired or expected when he made the decision.
In their study of implementation, Jeffry L Pressman and Aaron Wildavsky note that the distinction between policymaking and implementation is an oversimplification, and that “the passage of time wreaks havoc with efforts to maintain tidy distinctions” between the two functions.
They contend that ""In the midst of action the distinction between the initial conditions and the chain of causality begins to erode.
This observation, while essentially correct, leads to an oversimplified model of governmental behavior as consisting of policy decisions by government leaders, and subsequent efforts by. those leaders to control organizational routines so &s to achieve desired results.
The model thus ignores the deliberate delegation of decisionmaking authority and the role of such delegated authority in shaping policy.
There are many contexts in which the latitude of those charged with implementing policy is so substantial that studies of implementation should be turned on their heads.
In these cases, policy is effectively ""made"" by the people who implement it.
Where considerable discretion characterizes the jobs of people who implement public agency activities, people “make” policy in hidden concert with others in similar positions through their patterned responses to the situation and circumstances in which they find themselves.
Thus, while organizational processes do have an influence on policy outcomes, the organizational process model needs to be revised to reflect the significant decisionmaking authority--authority to define objectives and design programs--delegated to certain officials in government organizations.
The necessity for delegation of discretionary powers and the coordination problems that can arise from this have long been recognized in organization and management theory.
Chester Barnard recognized that delegation of discretion results in policies being defined at all levels in an organization, rather than just at the top.
In a useful refinement of this concept, Jay R Galbraith has drawn a distinction between two methods of delegating decisions in maori Uae tiisibay.
In the first approach, rules, programs, and procedures are used to move repetitive decisions to lower levels in the organization without delegation of discretion.
According to Galbraith, ""The primary effect is an information processing one--the elimination from hierarchical channels of communications concerning routine events.
The second approach is to delegate discretionary decisionmaking authority.
The combination of rules and hierarchy, like hierarchy alone, is vulnerable to task uncertainty.
As the organization's subtasks increase in uncertainty, fewer situations can be programmed in advance and more exceptions arise which must be referred upward in the hierarchy.
As more exceptions are referred upward, the hierarchy will become overloaded.
Serious delays will develop between the transmission of information upward and a response to that information downward.
In this situation, the organization must develop new processes to supplement rules and hierarchy.
As the task uncertainty increases, the volume of information from the points of action to points of decision making overload the hierarchy.
In this situation, it becomes more efficient to bring the points of decision down to the points of action where the information exists.
This can be accomplished by increasing the amount of discretion exercised aby employees at lower levels of the organization.
Discretionary delegation of decisionmaking raises the problem of ensuring that the decisions made by lower-level officials support the goals established by top-level officials.
When this is not the case, delegated discretion results in “authority leakage,"" a divergence of goals between top-level and lower-level officials, 4 There thus arises an inherent tension between autonomy and control when discretionary delegation of decisionmaking is used to cope with uncertainty.
In practice, at least a small amount of Giscretion is allowed under rule-governed delegation--even if only discretion to determine which rules are applicable in specific situations--and at least minimal rules govern discretionary delegation.
These concepts of delegation and control have been widely used in studies of school administration.
To do this, they must neither be so tightly constrained that they cannot respond to changing conditions, nor so loosely controlled that they seek personal rather than organizational goals.
Superiors must afford the principal enough autonomy to cope with unexpected problems or variable local conditions, while still keeping schools in line.
In short, superiors seek an appropriate balance of control and autonomy that will maximize organizational effectiveness.
Although all three forms of control are used in conjunction, school principals typically are controlled largely by collegial and nonhierarchical controls, rather than by hierarchical controis.
The model would then assume that the sole function of school principles is to carry out school district policies, attributing policy differences among schools and policy disputes between principals and school district officials to organizational processes.
Allison's organizational process model leads to three serious analytical errors in this type of organizational setting.
First, his model must assume that school district officials are always ""right"" and principals always “wrong” in order for the actions of principals to be attributable to organizational processes.
Second, Allison's model must assume that the specific policy preferences expressed by school district officials when a dispute arises with a school principal were the policies that they had decided upon to begin with.
The model needs to allow for the pos-sibility that school district officials may not have known exactly what policy they preferred until after eee saw what the principal had decided upon.
Third, Allison's model excludes the effect of variation in the environment of different decisionmakers, particularly ete effect of differences in constituencies and political influences.
The model needs to allow for such variations in the external environment.
With these modifications, the organizational process model becomes applicable to an organization composed of several independent operating unit--such as a school district or operational military forces.
Studies of business management reveal patterns of delegation and control similar to those seen in public administration.
Large business sugudiioae sons face an inherent tension between the need to delegate decisionmaking and the need for centralized control, particularly when composed of diverse, autonomous operating units.
They employ combinations of management controls (the business equivalent of the term organizational controls used in organization theory), including business variants of hierarchical, collegial, and nonhierarchical controls.
The interesting point, however, is that businesses that decentralize decisionmaking authority typically perform better than do businesses that centralize decisionmaking.
They are better able to respond to diverse and rapidly changing market, resource and regulatory conditions.
Delegation of decisionmaking is driven by the limits on decisionmaking, which cause decision-making by toplevel officials to deteriorate as the size and complexity of the organization increase.
Delegation of decisionmaking can range from highly rule-governed, for standard, repetitive situations, to highly discretionary, for situations that cannot be anticipated.
Tension between autonomy and control is always present, particularly in organizations consisting of numerous independent operating units.
Studies in public administration and business management repeatedly show that optimum results are achieved with decentralized decisionmaking combined with appropriate controls. 2lone trend toward decentralization in American business management has been accompanied by scathing criticism of the highly centralized management style that Robert S McNamara adopted at Ford and brought with him to the Department of Defense in 1961.
Attention to communications and information processing is certainly ensr'om fail for the effective exercise of command and control is crucially dependent on the commander's ability to build a clear picture of the operational situation.
Even Satdee the shooting starts, it is crucial that the chain of command up to top-level national leaders have as clear a picture as possible of the situation at the scene of a crisis.
From a crisis management perspective, ensuring that the radios and computers operate properly is the lesser problem--knowing how to effectively control military operations with them is the more difficult problem.
Outside of the military training courses that train officers for leadership and command, little attention is paid to the methods, procedures, and hecifen te ns of command.
Rapid advances in communications and information processing technology are having a tremendous impact on military command and control, but the manner in which the systems are employed operationally is still primarily a function of the command and control philosophy held by the personnel using the systems.
Prior to examining command and control procedures and > mechanisms, it is necessary to understand the fundamental concepts of command and control as they are defined by the military.
Authority is the power to Girect the operations and movements of the forces under one’s command.
Responsibility is being Hela accountable for the performance and well-being of the forces and men under one's command.
A closely related principle--unity of command--states that if a commander is given responsibility for forces, he must have authority over them commensurate with that responsibility.
Military commanders and civilian authorities alike face a constant temptation to restrict the authority of subordinates even while holding them accountable for the actions of their senets + Ambiguous delegation of authority almost invariably leads to diffusion of responsibility, a phenomenon highly visible when military operations fail.
He retains responsibility for the forces, but grants the subordinate authority over them.
The subordinate commander is then responsible for the forces under his control.
For example, when a company commander sends a squad out on patrol, he delegates control of the men to the squad leader, but is still in command of them.
When military command functions in accordance with this principle, the superior commander exercises authority over the subordinate commander, not over the forces placed under the control of the subordinate commander.
The military chain of command is founded on the principle of delegating control while retaining command.
A key point that is often missed in studies of command and control is that this distinction between command and control starts with the commander in chief of the armed forces--the President.
Under the United States constitution, the President is, in principle, in command of every unit and individual member of the United States armed forces at all times.
However, while retaining that command, he delegates substantial control over the armed forces to the Secretary of Defense, who in turn delegates substantial control to subordinate commanders.
For example, the President retains tight control over release of nuclear weapons, but exercises very little control over routine peacetime military operations.
Understanding the distinction between command and control and the delegation of control to military commanders is thus essential for understanding how crisis military operations are controlled.
This section will examine four aspects of military command and control.
First, the tension between delegation and control in the military command system will be explored, presenting the arguments for and against centralized control of military operations.
Second, the methods of exercising control--direct versus delegated, and positive versus by negation--will be explained.
Third, the differences between initiatory actions and contingent responses will be defined.
Finally, the authority ise United States Navy commanding officers will be discussed and illustrated with historical examples.
Delegation and Control Tension between delegation of discretionary decisionmaking authority and maintenance of control is always present in organizations, particularly in large organizations consisting of numerous independent operating units.
There is no better example of such an organization than the United States armed forces.
Moreover, unlike any other organization in the U.S., the armed forces are charged with a mission crucial to the survival of the nation.
Organization theory would thus lead to the expectation that there would be significant tension between delegation of discretionary decisionmaking authority and Maintenance of control in the military chain of command.
In fact, centralization versus decentralization in the control of military operations had been a major issue in American civil-military relations and the design of the United States military command system since the National Security Act of 1947.
The Truman-MacArthur dispute during the Korean War and military dissatisfaction with Johnson Administration “micro-management"" of the air war against North Vietnam are only two of the most prominent examples of such tensions.
It is thus important to understand the roots of such tensions--the reasons advanced for centralized control and the opposing reasons advanced for decentralized delegation of control.
Three primary reasons or explanations for the trend toward centralized control of military operations have been advanced.
This affects almost every aspect of military operations and is widely recognized within the military.
Since World War II United States Air Force doctrine has called for centralized control of tactical air power.
The contention is that effective command and control systems in effect multiply the combat utility of available forces by allowing them to be rapidly applied where they are most needed or where they can 23.
In principle, the higher achieve the greatest results. the level in the chain of command at which control is centralized, the broader the force multiplier effect can be applied.
Of these three reasons for centralized control, escalation control and crisis management concerns are the most important factors prompting civilian control of military operations.
Two primary reasons are advanced for decentralized control of military operations.
First, the ability of toplevel decisionmakers to effectively exercise close control of military operations is severely constrained by limits on Gecisionmaking and information processing.
Top-level decisionmakers can be overwhelmed by information overload, preventing effective assessment of tactical options.
They may not have sufficient time to effectively control multiple operations, or may have their attention diverted by one aspect of the operations, neglecting others.
As Ernest R May has pointed out, there have been quantum leaps in the level of knowledge that the President must have of military forces in order to be able to employ them effectively.
Communications channels typically become overloaded with the vast amounts of information needed to exercise close control of military operations, causing excessive delays in decisionmaking and transmission of orders to operating forces.
Compounding these problems, the quality of modern communications systems can give top-level officials a false sense of having complete information and being in eeecouThat these problems should arise in centralized control of military operations is not surprising because, as was noted above, essentially the same phenomena drive decentralization in all types of large organizations.
The second set of arguments for decentralized control of military operations are based on the on-scene commander's superior ability to control the employment of his forces.
His information about the current tactical situation is normally superior that of his superiors.
In recognition of the importance of initiative and flexibility, the German army has since the eighteenth century based its tactical doctrine and command procedures on the concept of auftragstaktik, which emphasizes granting subordinate commanders the maximum possible freedom of action in carrying out assigned missions.
Only the on-scene commander can fully appreciate and adapt to the inevitable “friction” in military operations, the multitude of problems that shape the execution of military plans.
The historical trend has been for increases in the scale, speed, and complexity of warfare to exceed the ability of command and control systems 32 to keep higher level commanders fully in control.
Taken as a whole, present-day military forces, for all the imposing array of electronic gadgetry at their disposal, give no evidence whatsoever of being one whit more capable of dealing with the information needed for the command process than were their predecessors a century or even a millennium ago.
Though modern technical means undoubtedly enable present-day command systems to transmit and process more information faster than ever before, regardless of distance, movement and weather, their ability to approach certainty has not improved to any marked extent.
Nor, given the fact that this goal has proved elusive through every one of the many revolutions in organization, technology and procedure that have taken place in the past, does there appear to be much hgpe of achieving it in the foreseeable future.
There is thus little reason to expect that innovations in communications and information processing systems will sovle crisis command and control problems.
Methods of Control The military chain of command, from the President down to the lowest levels, is founded upon the principle of | delegating control of forces to subordinate commanders.
Modern naval command and control systems add to the complexity of warfare, rather than simplifying its control, by allowing a wider variety of weapons covering larger ocean areas to be brought to bear on the enemy.
This has lead to enemy command and control systems becoming a primary wartime target.
In this method, communications links with operational forces are used to control their movements and actions on a real-time basis.
If the on-scene commander wants to take an action other than that ordered by higher authority, he must request and receive permission to do so before initiating the action.
The effectiveness of positive direct control is crucially dependent on communications connectivity and having the full, undivided attention of higher authority.
This form of control is rarely used for wartime or large-scale crisis operations because it is cumbersome and incapable of keeping pace with a rapidly changing tactical situation.
Toward the center of the tightness of control spectrum is a method that will be referred to as direct control by negation.
As in positive bidet control, communications links with operational forces are used to control their movements and actions on a real-time basis.
However, the onscene commander is déVigated partial authority to control his forces.
The scope of the on-scene commander's decisionmaking authority is defined in his mission orders, and the joint commands despite efforts by the JCS to standardize it.
The key feature of this method of control is that the on-scene commander reports his proposed course of action to higher authority, and then carries it out unless it is specifically vetoed.
Like positive direct control, the effectiveness of direct control by negation is crucially dependent on communications connectivity and having the full, undivided attention of higher authority.
In the loose form, the on-scene commander initiates action before reporting it.
The loose form of direct control by negation is the method of control that military commanders typically prefer when they must be placed under direct control.
Toward the loose end of the tightness of control spectrum are the various forms of delegated control.
In this method of control the immediate commander of a force is delegated direct control over its operations.
The commander is issued orders to perform a certain mission and then allowed to carry out that mission on his own initiative.
The scope of his authority and the actions he is permitted to take in pursuit of the mission are spelled out in his mission orders, and can range from granting him wide freedom of action to restricting him to a specific plan of action.
In monitored delegated control, the on-scene commander is required to keep his superiors informed of the status of his forces, the progress of his mission, and his operational intentions through periodic si eGamdon reports and, if possible, real-time reports of crucial information.
The chain of command intervenes in the conduct of the operation only when absolutely necessary to ensure that it supports the overall strategy being pursued or to correct serious errors by the on-scene commander.
Control by negation is often employed in monitored delegated control, as well as under direct control by negation.
The difference between the two methods is that monitored Gelegated control allows the on-scene commander greater freedom of action than does direct control by negation.
Monitored delegated control is viewed by most military officers as the ideal method of control, striking an effective balance between autonomy and control.
When direct communications links are not available or not feasible, autonomous delegated control is the form of control that is employed.
In autonomous delegated control the on-scene commander is given his mission orders and is not expected to report again to higher authority until he successfully completes or aborts the mission.
This method of control is not often favored by military commanders because it lacks flexibility, and is therefore only used when absolutely necessary.
The approach the United States armed forces have taken is to rely on a eeoeloate combination of direct and delegated methods of control.
The balance between autonomy and control is based on the nature of the operations being conducted and the tactical environment--including the political environment.
In some cases, different methods of control can be used in conjunction.
For example, an onscene commander could be under monitored delegated control, but have certain tactical options placed under positive direct control.
Initiatory Actions and Contingent Responses Another concept useful for ay eee military command and control is the distinction between initiatory actions and contingent responses.
Initiatory actions are taken to initiate a new course of action intended to achieve specific objectives.
Although initiatory actions usually are taken on the basis of an assessment of the overall political-military environment and the local tactical situation, they are not the product of rules designating a particular response to a specific action.
The on-scene commander is taking the initiative, acting rather than reacting.
Contingent responses, on the other hand, are actions taken in response to specific actions.
The taking of such actions is contingent upon the prior occurrence of specified actions or the existence of specified tactical 3745 in the previous section, these terms are derived from terms used by the three services, but are not the exact terms used by any of the services.
Contingent responses are rarely ever fully automatic, they usually require a deliberate operational decision by the on-scene commander.
Decisions on the use of force governed by rules of engagement are a form of contingent response.
Other contingent responses, usually broader in scope, can be included in operations orders, eperations plans, and contingency plans.
As a general rule, the broader the scope and the greater the level of violence involved in a contingent response, the higher up the chain of command the decision to employ that response must be made.
The best-known example is the MK 16 Close-In Weapon System (the white-domed 20mm Vulcan gun installed on elmost all United States Navy warships), which in the automatic mode will detect, track, and fire on any air target that meets its engagement parameters.
The new Aegis combat system also has sophisticated automatic reaction and engagement capabilities.
For example, a retaliatory attack can be either a contingent response authorized in operational guidance , or an initiatory action ordered by national leaders--even though taken as a reprisal for a specific hostile act.
Contingent responses and initiatory actions can have the same political-military intentions and objectives.
A retaliatory attack, to continue the example, could have as its purpose the signaling of a coercive threat regardless of whether it was a contingent response or an initiatory action.
The primary difference between these two types of military actions is that operational commanders can, on their own authority, execute contingent responses under specified tactical circumstances, whereas appropriate higher authority (normally the President in peacetime) must approve initiatory actions.
An important feature of the flexible system of direct and delegated command used by the United States military.is that authority to order contingent responses can be delegated separately from authority to order initiatory actions.
Orders for a particular mission can specify positive direct control of initiatory actions, while at the same time employing monitored delegated control of contingent responses.
As always, a careful balance must be struck between direct and delegated command when using this differentiated approach.
The important point is that the decision on direct versus delegated command is not an “all or nothing” proposition--flexible combinations of the two iwethods are possible.
Authority of Commanding Officers An important aspect of United States Navy command and control philosophy, which has no equivalent in the other services, is the extremely high delegation of authority granted to the commanding officers of ships and other operational commanders.
This is a tradition in the United States Navy, one inherited from the Royal Navy and centuries-old traditions of the sea. tr ing the age of sail, when it could take longer to exchange letters with the homeland than to fight a small war, British and American naval officers often played important foreign policy roles on their own initiative.
British naval officers were under standing orders to “act in the best interests of the Queen” when deployed to distant stations, granting them freedom of action to handle situations not covered in their sailing orders.
This tradition exerts a strong influence on Navy command and control philosophy today.
Because the actions of individual commanding officers could have a major impact on the management of a crisis, it is important to understand their authority as spelled out in United States Navy Regulations.
The responsibility of the Commanding Officer for his command is absolute, except when, and to the extent, relieved therefrom by competent authority, or as provided otherwise in these regulations.
The authority of the Commanding Officer is commensurate with his responsibility, subject to the pimits proscribed by law and these regulations.
A Commanding Officer who departs from his orders or instructions, or takes official action which is not in accordance with such orders or instructions, does so upon his own responsibility and shall report immediately the circumstances to the officer from whom the prior orders or instructions were received.
It permits a commanding officer, under unanticipated extraordinary circumstances, to exercise initiative--even when contrary to his orders--so long as he immediately informs his chain of command of his action.
In practice, commanding officers are extremely cautious about taking such an action.
Their professional training and experience instill in them strong respect for the chain of command and orders issued by higher authority.
Two examples of Navy officers acting on their own initiative, in one case contrary to orders, will illustrate how the provisions of Navy Regulations are applied in practice.
The first case occurred in July 1953, two days after the end of the Korean War.
On July 29, 1953, a United States Air Force RB-50 reconnaissance plane patrolling in international airspace over the Sea of Japan was shot down by Soviet fighters about thirty miles off the coast of the Soviet Union (apparently in retaliation for the downing of a ‘lobia.
All but one of the crew were able to bail out, and several were spotted in the water by American search plawes.
By the time Vice Admiral Schindler received a response directing him to remain clear of Soviet territorial waters, he had already recovered the only survivor that could be located.
Admiral Schindler confirmed that he sent the message reproduced in Gallery's book. 44 -ield, 459; Gallery, 58; Schindler, letter to author, March 19, 1988.
Admiral Schindler informed his superiors of his intentions, allowing control by negation.
Vice Admiral Schindler had the authority to order the actions taken by his force, used a message to his superiors stating his intentions in order to clarify ambiguous orders, and, by keeping his force clear of Soviet territorial waters, acted with appropriate caution in the absence of a timely response.
The second case occurred in Zanzibar, an island nation off the eastern coast of Africa , in January 1964.
Zanzibar, a former British protectorate, had gained independence on December 10, 1963.
On January 12, 1964, African rebels overthrew the government of sultan Seyyid Jamshid Bin Abdullah in a bloody coup.
Little was known about the rebel group or its intentions, leading to grave concern for the safety of foreigers on the is.ana.
While the destroyer was en route, however, a rebel leader broadcast a warning that they would not tolerate interference by foreign powers.
In response to this development, United States authorities in Washington (the Secretary of Defense was directly involved) first ordered Manley to remain out of sight over the horizon from the island, then later cancelled Manley's orders entirely and recalled the destroyer.
The sixty-three Americans on the island, including the staff of a NASA space tracking station, had fled to the English Club on the Zanzibar city waterfront.
The American Charge d'‘Affairs, Frederick P Picard, informed the destroyer that their situation on the island was desperate and that they were in grave danger.
Manley's Commanding Officer, Commander Robert Ruxton, reported the evacuation request to his immediate superior, Rear Admiral {Crpid.
Manley sent the ship's Executive Officer, Lieutenant Commander Joseph E Murray, Jr., ashore--unarmed and in a white uniform--to organize the evacuation.
Murray and Picard negotiated with the rebel leaders, assuring them that the United States warship would not interfere in Zanzibar's internal affairs.
At one point in the talks, the rebel leader, John Okello, put a gun to Murray's head and threatened to kill him if the United States ship did not depart.
Murray and Picard persevered, gaining permission from the rebel leaders to evacuate American women and children.
When they returned to the English Club, Murray and Picard convinced the rebel guards that they had permission to evacuate all of the Americans.
Murray succeeded in ferrying all of the Americans to Manley before. the rebel leaders discovered what had happened.
Manley embarked 61 Americans and 30 other foreign nationals, and departed for Dar Es Salaam, Tanganyika (leaving behind Picard and the third secretary to handle relations with the new government). wets hanger was unable to participate because it did not have radio or cable communications with 47 shia.
United States officials in Washington were incapable of staying abreast of a rapidly changing political situation.
Knowing only that rebel leaders had broadcast a warning 48 bia; ""Four to be Hanged in Zanzibar,” Mombasa Times , January 15, 1964, 1.
Manley's Executive Officer was personally commended for his role in the evacuation.
The situation could have been much more serious with sixty-one potential hostages on the island, as the United States would learn later in Iran.
Allison's original organizational process model would seriously misconstrue both of these incidents.
The model does not account for the substantial authority delegated to Navy commanders, including authority to disregard orders when warranted by unanticipated extraordinary circumstances and lack of immediate communication with higher authority.
Admiral Schindler allowed his superiors to exercise control by negation when he sent the message stating his intention, and in the absence of a timely response acted with prudence and kept his ships clear of Soviet territorial waters.
Rear Admiral Schade disregarded orders issued by the Secretary of Defense via the military chain of command in order to respond to the evacuation request, and Manley carried out the evacuation with caution to avoid incidents in a volatile Situation.
Neither organizational routines nor evasion of civilian control was a factor in these two axdiet>> 1 ohe behavior of Navy and Marine Corps commanders during the 1958 landings in Lebanon was much different from that of Navy commanders in the Zanzibar episode.
The first request was that the Marines not be landed over the beach to seize the airport, that they be kept aboard ship and brought into the harbor.
This request was made after the first battalion of Marines was ashore and deployed, which would have reqired lengthy backloading of the men and their equipment.
Additionally, President Eisenhower had already announced the landing to the world.
The second request, made about thirty minutes after the first, was for a company of Marines to be sent from the airport to the presidential palace to guard against a possible coup.
Note that in making this request Lebanese officials and the United States ambassdor completely reversed their position from the earlier request.
This request was refused because the Marine commander thought that the small force would have been in an exposed and vulnerable position, and cut off from the main force.
Tension between delegation and control is always present in the military chain of command.
Pressures toward centralized control are driven by the complexity of modern warfare, fear of nuclear war, and efforts to exploit the force multiplier effect.
Pressures toward decentralized control are driven by severe constraints on the ability of top-level authorities to effectively control tactical operations, and by the advantages gained by granting the on-scene commander flexibility to exercise initiative.
Improvements in communications and information processing systems are unlikely to reduce the need for delegation of control.
The methods of exercising control cover a ""tightness of control” spectrum ranging from very tight to very loose control.
Toward the tight end of the spectrum are positive to secure the airport and landing area until the second battalion had deen landed.
The Marine commander's caution appears to have been warranted given that when the first column of Marines attempted to leave the airport the next day, they met Lebanese tanks and artillery massed on the road into Beirut, almost causing an armed clash.
Thus, although even the Marine commander ashore felt his orders were excessively rigid, valid political and military considerations were at least as important as organizational routines in determining the decsions that were made.
Toward the loose end of the spectrum are monitored delegated control and autonomous delegated control.
The United States armed forces rely on a flexible combination of direct and delegated control.
Certain of the methods of control can oe used in conjunction, and forces can be rapidly shifted from one method to another as the situation warrants.
A Gistinction between initiatory actions and contingent responses is used to delegate authority to take certain actions, while withholding authority to take others.
Navy command and control doctrine is unique in the scope of the authority granted to commanding officers, which even allows them to act contrary to orders when the situation warrants.
These are the basic concepts on which military command and control procedures are based.
Emphasis is on delegation of discretionary decisionmaking authority in conjunction with appropriate methods of control.
In addition to direct control via communications links, commanders can exercise indirect control of subordinates even after having delegated them substantial autonomy.
The mechanisms of indirect eontrol are the subject of the next section.
Mechanisms of Indirect Control When a military commander delegates control of operational forces, he does not relinquish all control of those forces to his subordinate.
Additionally, the commander has at his disposal various mechanisms of indirect control.
Mechanisms of indirect control are orders, instructions, or detailed guidance issued to a commander prior to the start of a mission in order to ensure that the operational decisions he makes support the objectives and intentions of his superiors.
Such instructions can range from being very detailed and specific to very general in nature.
As the eatihod of control being used moves across the ""tightness of control"" spectrum from tight to loose--that is, as the subordinate is granted increasing freedom from direct control--the importance of the mechanisms of indirect control increases.
When a subordinate is operating under autonomous delegated control, with no direct communications links at all, the mechanisms of indirect control are the only means of control available.
The DEFCON system defines the overall framework for controlling the readiness of United States forces, providing a uniform system for all operational commands.
Within this framework, following guidance from the Joint Chiefs of Staff , individual commands Peeeriasatie alert procedures and readiness postures applicable to their forces.
The system is highly flexible, allowing different major commands to be placed at different DEFCON levels as the world situation Warrants.
It is not unusual for United States forces in different parts of the world to be at different DEFCON levels.
Much of the detailed guidance for operational forces is not part of the alert system per se, it is included in standing orders and contingency plans activated as higher levels of DEFCON are declared.
A commander need not dssue detailed orders to every subordinate command specifying the measures he wants them to take.
The measures required for each level of readiness are spelled out in their standing orders, all the commander needs to do is state the level he cesires and then monitor the messages that come in reporting attainment of the specified readiness condition.
This frees the commander from having to directly manage details of implementing the alert, leaving him free to concentrate on assessing the situation and planning subsequent military operations.
They must maintain _— minimum readiness level set by JCS, but can place their forces at a higher condition of readiness if warranted by the particular threat facing their commands.
The Commanders in Chief can also select from among various readiness postures--tailored for different types of threats--within a given DEFCON level.
A Navy battle group or fleet commander can place his entire force in an increased readiness status on his own authority.
Standing Orders Standing orders are detailed guidance on operational procedures prepared on a routine basis during peacetime.
Although they are revised periodically, the intent is that they provide stable guidance, thereby minimizing uncertainty over operational procedures and facilitating the exercise of delegated control.
United States Army Field Manuals , United States Navy Naval Warfare Publications , and NATO Allied Tactical Publications 34 Doctrine serves are examples of doctrinal publications. as a mechanism of indirect control by allowing a commander to issue a very brief order directing that a particular tactic or procedure be executed without having to specify all the details of the actions every unit is to take.
Doctrine can be taught and rehearsed in peacetime, thus reducing confusion arising from unfamiliar procedures.
Certain procedures require amplifying information for coordination purposes, such as direction of movement and timing of actions, but the prior formulation of a doctrine for carrying out the action still facilitates controlling it.
Doctrine also reduces communications up the chain of command by reducing the amount of details that must be included in situation reports in order to explain the progress of an operation.
A common misconception about doctrine is that it specifies only a single tactic to be used in each situation.
In fact, doctrinal publications typically define a range of options for any given situation, and provide criteria for selecting among them.
The complexity of doctrine and the range of options it encompasses has increased in direct proportion with the complexity of warfare.
The greater the variety of sensors, platforms, and weapons at a commander’s disposal, the greater are his options in any given situation.
The easy part of tactical training is teaching standard tactical procedures, the difficult part is panera tactical decisionmakers how to select the most appropriate option, or combination of options, for a particular situation.
Most doctrinal publications explicitly recognize that not every tactical situation can be anticipated, and that the standard procedures they contain should be used as building blocks | 35 Command for constructing an appropriate plan of action. and control would not be as complex as it is if doctrine were in fact as simple as it is often incorrectly portrayed.
The term “operations order"" is a Navy term, but the other services have equivalent documents.
A standing operations order typically defines command relationships, communications channels, logistics procedures, and other such routine information.
It serves as a mechanism of indirect control by relieving a commander of having to repeatedly issue the same orders to cover repetitive routine situations.
An important function of standing operations orders is to define the scope of decisionmaking authority delegated to subordinate commanders on a routine basis.
Standing operations orders are a good example of hierarchical controls or rule-governed delegation of decisionmaking.
An operations plan is a comprehensive set of Plans for the conduct of a specific operation.
Standing operational plans are those that have been activated for execution of particular peacetime operations.
They serve a function similar to that of standing operations orders, but are limited in scope to a single operation.
The single operation could well consist of a prolonged series of | repetitive missions, such as reconnaissance flights.
An operations plan serves as a mechanism of indirect control by relieving a commander of having to exercise direct control over the routine aspects of an operation.
An important function of standing operations plans is to define the scope of decisionmaking authority delegated to subordinate commanders on a routine basis.
Standing operations orders are another good example of hierarchical controls or rule-governed delegation of decisionmaking.
Long-range schedules are prepared for such recurring activities as surveillance missions, major maintenance periods for ships and aircraft, ship deployments, and exercises.
Long-range schedules are often “nested,” with shorter-term schedules filling in the details of longerrange schedules.
Long-range schedules serve as a mechanism of indirect control by allowing a commander to approve a large number of recurring routine operations at one time, leaving the details of planning and executing each one to subordinates.
Long-range schedules are an important means of indirect presidential control of the United States armed forces.
Once a schedule is approved, the operations listed in it are authorized for execution unless specifically cancelled.
They review the schedules to ensure that the operations are still appropriate and will not interfere with United States foreign policy.
If questions arise concerning the political | implications of a particular operation, it may be cancelled or referred to the President for a final decision.
Most longrange schedules for routine evolutions are not subjected to this close scrutiny after they are approved.
Long-range schedules are subject to frequent changes due to the fickle nature of world politics, but they nonetheless serve important planning and control functions.
Mission Orders Mission orders include letters of intent , operations plans or operations orders issued for a specific short-term operation, and various other types of orders used to initiate routine and non-routine operations.
Mission orders are important when the monitored delegated control method is used, and crucial when the autonomous delegated control method is used.
They are less important when one of the direct control methods is used.
Mission orders can range from being very detailed and ip Hed Rc to being very brief and general.
But a mission order can include the same amount of detail as an operations plan.
Mission orders serve as a mechanism of indirect control by relieving a commander of having to exercise direct control over the details of an operation's execution.
An important function of mission orders is to define the scope of decisionmaking authority delegated to subordinate commanders.
Thus, mission orders provide a means of allowing a commander to focus his attention on the most important decisions that come up in the course of an operation without being distracted by routine matters.
This in turn helps to prevent communications channels and decisionmakers from becoming overloaded.
Contingency plans serve as a mechanism of indirect control by allowing a commander to rapidly issue a single order to execute an operation that he and his staff have had time to prepare in detail ahead of time.
Contingency plans are distributed in advance, eliminating the burden of having to issue a large volume of orders when a decision in made to carry out the operation.
The only direct orders that are needed are last-minute revisions to the contingency plan and the mission order directing that 1t be executed as modified.
The single most important United States contingency plan is the Single Integrated Operational Plan for the employment oo | of United States strategic nuclear forces.
An important feature of the United States alert system is that increasing the readiness condition activates preparations to execute designated contingency plans applicable to the conflict at hand.
This type of preparation is closely linked to Gye aileee system because the effectiveness of an increase in DEFCON is much greater when the forces have a specific mission that they are preparing to execute than when they simply increase their readiness without being assigned a specific mission.
Routine contingency planning takes place on a continuing basis in peacetime to prepare plans for the most likely and most dangerous situations that can be anticipated.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff and the commanders in chief of the unified commands have primary responsibility for deciding what contingency plans are written.
The National Security Council has cnly a very small role in routine contingency planning.
Crisis contingency planning consists of revising existing plans or formulating new plans for a range of military operations after a crisis has sigan The National Security Council plays a significant role in determining which contingency plans are updated or prepared during crisis contingency planning.
Normally, the Joint Staff and the unified command responsible for the area in which the crisis is located begin crisis contingency planning as soon as indications are received that a crisis is about to 53 break.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff are often described as incapable or unwilling to provide a broad range of military options for dealing with a crisis, but this does not appear to be accurate.
When asked about this, the consensus among present and former National Security Council staff members, Department of Defense officials, and Joint Staff officers is that the JCS will provide a range of options when directed to do so.
They always have a preferred option, which typically entails decisive use of superior force so as to reduce the risk of defeat and to deter escalation.
It is thus not unusual for the option preferred by the JCS to be viewed as politically infeasible by civilian authorities.
The JCS also tend to resist civilian involvement in the details of operational planning once the objectives and basic parameters of an operation have been defined.
These include activating special crisis management staffs, informing subordinate commanders of the situation, assembling personnel with specialized training and experience in the area, canceling or modifying routine operations that might exacerbate the crisis or delay a military response, increasing surveillance in the area, clearing communications channels and setting up special channels, increasing the readiness of units iden-tified in contingency plans, and even deploying certain units that might be needed on short notice.
Many such actions can be executed without prior approval of the President, though he is normally informed of them via the Secretary of Defense or the National Security Advisor as soon as possible after they are taken.
Admiral Arleigh Burke, Chief of Naval Operations 1955-1961, was particularly adept at quietly alerting Navy units and readying them for potential crises.
It was due to such actions by the CNO that the Navy was able to conduct the 1958 landing in Lebanon on short notice.
As @ general rule, authority to order retaliatory attacks is not delegated to military commanders, it is closely held by the President.
Contingency planning for such attacks makes an important contribution to the effectiveness of peacetime and crisis military operations by providing the President with military options for a prompt response to provocations.
In contingency planning for retaliation, as in all other types of routine contingency planning, preparation of a plan is not an indication of intent to execute the plan.
Opinions vary widely as to the value of routine contingency planning for crisis management.
These factors impose inherent constraints on the ability of routine contingency planning to provide plans that are ideally suited for management of particular crises.
Although the plans that are produced by routine contingency planning may not be appropriate or adequate for the specific crises that arise, the planning process itself can make an important contribution to crisis management.
They have to be modified to fit the particular circumstances at the time, and you have to do a considerable amount of improvising outside the plans.
We were as ready as any nation has ever been to win a military victory in the period of October 1962.76 The comments offered by Aatiaead 5 Wylie, Rivero and Ward reveal three reasons for the value of contingency planning.
First, contingency planning educates the staff officers that prepare the plans and the commanders that review them on the characteristics of the area in which the operations will be conducted.
Second, the operational and logistical problems 64 amiarl Horacio Rivero, Jr., letter to author, March 10, 1988.
Third, a contingency plan provides a baseline or starting point for further planning after a crisis arises.
It is almost always easier to modify an existing plan than to create a new plan from scratch, and even when a plan requires extensive modification, it usually contains much valuable information.
The disadvantage of contingency planning is that the existence of a plan can preclude other options that might be superior for dealing with the crisis.
A perception can arise that there is not sufficient time to prepare alternative plans.
Support for an existing plan can restrict the search for alternatives, or can create a bias against alternative plans that have not been staffed as well due to time constraints.
The officers who prepared the original plans sometimes resist modifications to them out of pride in authorship.
The mechanisms of indirect control relieve higher authorities of the burden of having to closely # Gl Bay the details of military operations--a burden that can quickly exceed their information processing and decisionmaking capabilities when large-scale operations are Béham, COnadetec in a fast-paced political-military environment.
The mechanisms of indirect control thus aid in striking an appropriate balance between autonomy and control in the execution of military operations, and, when used properly by national leaders, can contribute to crisis managment.
Thus far this discussion of the mechanisms of indirect control has focused on how they are supposed to work in principle.
Neither the mechanisms themselves nor the decisionmakers that use them are are perfect.
Many things can go wrong in the stress and confusion of crisis military Operations.
More importantly, there are inherent limits on the ability of these, or any, mechanisms to ensure that decisions made at one level are those that are most appropriate for the situation at another level.
For example, national leaders could give tactical orders that are disastrous for the on-scene forces, or tactical commanders could take an action that seriously disrupts the crisis management efforts of national leaders.
This problem is inherent because decisionmakers at the different levels are operating in different environments.
They can develop much different threat perceptions, priorities of objectives, and expectations as to the future course of the crisis.
How the mechanisms of indirect control perform in practice will be examined in Chapters VII and VIII, which present the case studies.
Because rules of engagement are particularly important in crisis management, they will be discussed in greater detail in the next section.
Rules of Engagement Rules of engagement are orders issued to define the circumstances in which the United States armed forces are authorized to use their weapons Soi defense against hostile forces in peacetime, and to specify the scope and level of violence of 4 Rules of engagement serve combat operations in wartime. as a mechanism of indirect control by allowing top-level authorities to specify policies on the use of force prior to situations in which direct control of the decision to use force is not possible.
In short, the purpose of rules of engagement is to provide guidance to operating forces from National Command Authorities, via the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the operational chain of command, on how to respond to threat of attack in peacetime, and on limitations on fighting in wartime.
Wartime rules of engagement place limits on military action when United States forces are engaged in an armed confiace.
Wartime rules of engagement allow military action under such circumstances only for self-defense--the adversary is forced to make the decision to escalate or expand the conflict.
Peacetime rules of engagement are founded on the right of self-defense as defined under international law and in United States Department of Defense directives.
Peacetime rules of engagement are intended to prevent unwanted military incidents and support crisis management.
As George Bunn has pointed out, rules of engagement are intended ""to restrain aggression, prevent the outbreak of hostilities, and to uT3 Thus, peacetime limit escalation if shooting starts. rules of engagement are central to the problem of coordinating military policy with political and diplomatic objectives in a crisis.
Standing rules of engagement are written for routine peacetime operations.
Special rules of engagement are issued to cover particularly sensitive situations, such as operations near a country openly hostile to the United States and operations during an international crisis.
The President, as commander in chief of the armed forces, is the ultimate source of all rules of engagement.
Navy aircraft supporting the Marines ashore in Lebanon from July to October 1958 were ordered “not to return fire"" when fired on by rebel forces.
Civilian authorities are involved in the formulation, review and approval of rules of engagement, although in practice the level of their involvement varies widely.
Civilian authorities become directly involved in the formulation and review of special rules of engagement and major revisions to standing rules of engagement.
The NSC interdepartmental group chaired by the Deputy National Security Advisor and composed of top deputies from the Department of State, Department of Defense, and JCS --currently known as the Policy Review Group--reviews proposed aes of engagement to ensure that they support overall presidential policies.
The National Security Advisor reviews important revisions to rules of engagement, and submits revisions involving relaxations of restrictions to the President for approval. ’® 76 wp 9, 5-3; Roach, 51; Cockell interview; St.
Martin interview; briefings for author at Navy Command Center, National Military Command Center, and National Security Council.
These successive additions to the rules of engagement are not dntended to modify the rules of engagement, their purpose is to tailor what is usually generalized guidance to specific circumstances.
Commanders in chief of the unified commands and subordinate commanders under them must submit proposed revisions to their rules of engagement via the chain of command to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for approval.
Thus, top-level military and civilian authorities directly involved in crisis management have ready access to all rules of engagement promulgated to United States forces.
In the second stage, the on-scene commander (the senior officer in command of the forces at the scene of a crisis) and the tactical decisionmakers under him (commanding officers of individual units and watch officers with authority to order the use of weapons) use the rules of engagement as guidance for making operational decisions on the use of force.
Rules of engagement do not require that a commander attempt to consult with higher authority before taking action in self-defense.
The rules exist specifically because commanders in the field or at sea may not have the means or sufficient time to contact higher authority.
The fundamental objective of rules of engagement is for the operational decisions made by tactical commanders to support national objectives and policies as well as ensuring the defense of United States forces.
Rules of engagement are a central element in the flexible United States system of direct and delegated control.
Restrictive rules of engagement narrow the tactical decision-making authority of the on-scene commander, in effect imposing a greater degree of direct control on him.
Permissive rules of engagement broaden his decision-making authority, in effect shifting him toward greater delegated control.
The authority to revise rules of engagement is itself an important issue in the balance between direct and delegated control.
Reserving authority to revise rules of engagement to top-level authorities can have the same negative impact as attempting direct control of operations, while delegating authority to revise rules of engagement to lower levels can raise the same problems of coordinating national policies as delegated control.
Commanders in the chain of command, including the on-scene commander, usually have limited authority to revise the rules of engagement, when such revisions do not result in a significant relaxation of the rules.
Authority to make broader revisions to the rules of engagement, particularly to issue significantly more permissive rules, is reserved for toplevel authorities.
Rules of engagement are thus atrectes by the same tension between delegation and control that affects all other aspects of command and control.
Guidance from other sources of operational guidance is often incorrectly attributed to rules of engagement.
The two categories overlap in that both address requirements for identifying unidentified contacts.
At times during the evolution of rules of Seaeement ..particulatiy during the Vietnam War (when fighter pilots were required to visually identify air targets in order to avoid firing on other United States oa measures to avoid mutual interference were included in the rules, but this has subsequently been corrected.
In some warfare environments, such as in NATO, where friendly forces from several countries may operate in the same battle area, measures to avoid mutual interference are particularly important, even overshadowing rules of engagement.
However, measures to avoid mutual interference do not have a Significant role in crisis management, so will not be discussed further.
The remainder of this discussion will focus on peacetime rules of engagement.
Although wartime rules of engagement are of great importance, particularly in the study of limited war, they raise a different set of issues than those of interest in e¥tieike management.
First, and foremost, commanders in the field or at sea may not have the means or sufficient time to contact higher authority.
The speed of modern warfare causes the tactical situation to change much faster than it can be explained to higher authority, and the destructiveness of modern weapons can make decisionmaking delays fatal.
Initiatory actions, such as retaliatory attacks or Bonis Giscussion of peacetime rules of engagement is applicable to all of the United States armed forces.
The basic principles and concepts presented in the section on peacetime naval rules of engagement are also applicable to the other services, although the focus is on how they apply to naval forces.
Rules of engagement affect the day-to-day operations of the Navy and Air Force much more than those of the Army.
This is because national borders tend to keep ground forces separated, but United States ships on the high seas and planes in international airspace are frequently in close proximity to those of potential adversaries.
Thus, rules of engagement do not require that a commander attempt to consult mit Gun diatrers authority before taking action in self-defense.
United States Navy ships and aircraft are generally authorized to take defensive action upon clear demonstration of hostile ier oe United States Navy Regulations, 1973 state that ""The right of self-defense may arise in order to counter either the use of force or an immediate threat of the use of force.
A primary function of rules of engagement is thus to define the actions and indicators that are to be used to determine that hostile intent is being demonstrated.
The third reason why rules of engagement are necessary is that not all nations that are potentially hostile to the United States present the same level of military threat to United States forces.
United States forces legitimately need great leeway toward certain openly hostile and militarily unpredictable countries, particularly when they have attacked United States forces in the past.
On the other hand, the United States has evolved fairly stable, tacit ""rules of the game” in its military relationships with other countries, particularly the Soviet 84 Union.
With such countries the threat is more predictable and greater care can be taken to avoid inadvertent incidents without unnecessarily risking United States forces.
The rules of engagement reflect this wide range in the stability and predictability potential military threats, providing more permissive rules when the danger is greater and more restrictive rules when interactions are better regulated.
The fourth reason why rules of engagement are necessary is to ensure that in responding to a hostile act or hostile intent, United States forces adhere to the international legal principles of proportional force and minimum force.
The principle of proportional force requires that the force used in self-defense be proportional to the force used in the hostile act or threatened when hostile intent was shown.
The principle of minimum force requires that the level of force used in response to a hostile act or hostile intent be limited to the minimum necessary to prevent the threat of further attack.
Rules of engagement are used to spell out when defensive action may be taken in such circumstances.
History of Rules of Engagement The United States Navy has had almost two centuries of experience with political limitations on the use cf force due to its role as an implement of foreign policy in the Nineteenth century.
A Juridical Examination of the Use of Naval Forces in Support of United States Foreign Policy,” JAG Journal 32 : 111.
The United States was far removed from potential enemies and its forces were rarely in contact with those of potential adversaries.
All this changed with the advent of long-range aircraft and the growth of American global security commitments.
As the Cold War with the Soviet Union intensified, confrontations between the superpowers became more frequent and dangerous.
This was starkly apparent in the 1948 Berlin crisis, when Soviet closing of ground access to the city and harassment of supply flights threatened to cause armed clashes.
There were two serious incidents between American and Soviet aircraft during the Korean War, both involving Soviet planes threatening United States Navy ships, as. well as several other lesser incidents.
The first incident in which a Soviet fighter attacked an American plane off the Soviet coast occurred on October 15, 1945, less than two months after Japan surrendered.
Between 1945 and 1950 there were at least nine instances of Soviet or Warsaw Pact fighters attacking American or British planes.
This initial guidance was later assessed to be overly restrictive, and was replaced by a revised interception policy in 1952.
Although the term rules of engagement per se had not yet officially entered the military vocabulary, these two presidential directives constitute the origins of Unites States rules of engagement.
The United States Air Force was the first service to begin using the term rules of engagement to a intercept and engagement policy, and in the fall of 1952 began using the term in the joint planning arena.
The unified commands shifted over to the new term at about the same time.
In fact, the term was not widely used in the fleet until the Vietnam War, when rules of engagement became a major factor in shaping combat operations.
All of the major concepts upon which United States rules of engagement are based were adopted during the 1950s.
The Air Force first proposed allowing the use of force against aircraft ""manifestly hostile in intent"" in 1953, leading to aia of the principle of anticipatory self-defense on the basis of hostile intent.
The Navy adopted this principle in 1958, allowing anticipatory selfdefense when there was “clear and present danger to the 20 Although this security of the United States or its forces."" provision was adopted in 1958, it was not a significant factor in United States Navy operations until the late 1960s, when the Soviet navy began deploying anti-ship cruise missiles in large numbers.
Under the doctrine of hot pursuit, United States forces could pursue 2 oftice of the Chief of Naval Operations, “Protective Measures to be Taken in Applying the Right of SelfPreservation in Peacetime,”"" OPNAVINST 03300.8, February 21, 1958; NWP 9, 4-4.
Under certain circumstances, hot pursuit could even be carried into the airspace of another country.
Punitive reprisals, on the other hand, could only be authorized by the President.
That these important concepts originated in the National Security Council illustrates that civilian authorities have long had a direct role in shaping rules of engagement.
The next significant changes in the rules of engagement took place ee the Vietnam War.
The rules of engagement became detailed, complex, and cumbersome, requiring positive identification of targets on the basis of features that were exceedingly difficult to discern in combat.
The rules of engagement for the air war over North Vietnam were viewed by military commanders as seriously and unnecessarily endangering the lives of American pilots.
During the 1960s and 1970s the scope and complexity of United States rules of engagement grew as more sophisticated weapons and electronic systems entered the United States and Soviet dnventories.
The complexity of rules of engagement reflect the complexity of the warfare environment--the more ways in which an adversary can threaten one's forces and the more ways in which one's forces can counter those threats, the greater the number of contingencies that have to be covered by rules of engagement.
There were two major reviews of United States rules of engagement in the 1970s.
The first was in 1973-1975, and entailed deletion of the cumbersome and confusing Vietnam War provisions from the rules as the United States withdrew from the war.
The second was in 1979-1981, and entailed standardization of the format of the rules among the major commands and expansion of the tactical options for dealing with threats.
The 1979-1981 review produced the most significant changes to United States rules of engagement since the system of rules originated in the early 1950s.
In this review serious attention was devoted to oe which the rules could better meet the needs of United States leaders without creating excessive risks for United States forces at the scene of a crisis.
Peacetime Naval Rules of Engagement United States Navy ships and aircraft have an inherent right of self-defense under international law--they may use their weapons to defend themselves if a hostile act of 95 violence is committed against them.
The use of force by United States naval personnel against a friendly foreign state, or against anyone within the territory thereof, is illegal.
The right of self-preservation, however, is a right which belongs to states as well as to individuals, and in the case of states it includes the protection of the state, its honor, and its possessions, and the lives and property of its citizens against arbitrary violence, actual or impending, whereby the state or its citizens may suffer irreparable injury.
The conditions calling for the application of the right of self-preservation cannot be defined beforehand, but must be left to the sound judgement or responsible officers, who are to perform their duties in this respect with all possible care and forbearance.
In no case shall force be exercised in time of peace otherwise than as an application of the right of self-preservation as above defined.
It must be used only as a last resort, and then only to the extent which is absolutely necessary to accomplish the end required.
It can never be exercised with a view to inflicting punishment for acts already committed.
Note that this article allows use of force to protect American citizens and their property when ""irreparable injury"" is threatened.
This was the guidance (amplified by applicable rules of engagement) governing the use of force by United States Navy commanding officers from 1948 to 1973.
The use of force in time of peace by United States naval personnel against another nation or against anyone within the territories thereof is illegal except as an act of self-defense.
The right of self-defense may arise in order to counter the use of force or an immediate threat of the use of force.
The conditions calling for the application of the right of self-defense cannot be precisely defined beforehand, but must be left to the sound judgement of naval personnel who are to perform their duties in this .respect with all possible care and forbearance. the right of self-defense must be exercised only as a last resort, and then only to the extent which is absolutely necessary to accomplish the end required.
Force must never be used with a view to 98 inflicting punishment for acts already committed.
A hostile act is actual use of force--~employment of weapons--against a Navy ship.
Use of force is always authorized for selfdefense when a hostile act is committed.
Demonstration of hostile intent activates the principle of anticipatory self-defense, which authorizes first use of weapons for self-defense when attack is clearly ‘eumamente n>” The 1981 United States Navy confrontation with Libyan forces in the Gulf of Sidra illustrate these rules of engagement provisions in action.
On August 18, 1981, a Sixth Fleet battle force built around the carriers USS Forrestal and USS Nimitz commenced a freedom of navigation exercise in the Gulf of Sidra, on orders from the President, 99 43.
Execution of these rules provided that if we were to fire at any enemy target in self-defense, we intended to hit that target.
The next day, however, during an intercept of two Libyan Su-22 Fitters by two United States Navy F-14s, one of the Libyan planes fired an air-to-air missile at the Navy jets.
At the same time the shoot-down occurred, two other intercepts were in progress.
All flight leaders were able to monitor the engagement on their radios, but no one else sought to engage the Libyans with whom they were in contact because, beyond the local F-14/Fitter incident, there had been no provocation.
The rules of engagement called only for engagement in self-defense, where firing had actually occurred.
This Libyan dncident demonstrates the superb discipline of our naval aviators, even when the adrenaline is flowing in a crisis situation, and also refutes the notion that we are “trigggt happy gunmen"" on the lookout to start an incident.
At the time of this attack, ten other Libyan fighters were in or near the exercise area.
Although his rules of engagement authorized him to fire, the task force commander elected not to do so.
Just as damage to or loss of any part of the task force would be translated into a Libyan victory, it is likely that Gadhafi would have turned the loss of a missile patrol boat and a dozen fighters into a ""victory"" by a martyred David against a bullying Goliath.
When United States units needed to use force in self-defense, they had authority to do so.
The onscene commander adhered to the spirit of the rules, which is to use the minimum amount of force necessary for selfdefense, rather than to the letter of the rules, which authorized much greater force than was actually employed.
Rules of engagement do not always function as effectively as they did in the Gulf of Sidra in 1981.
A vulnerability failure is caused by rules of engagement that are excessively restrictive, ambiguous, or complex and confusing.
In a vulnerability failure the on-scene commander is unable to take effective action in selfdefense, resulting in a successful attacks on his forces that otherwise could have been defeated.
In an escalatory failure the on-scene commander uses excessive force on grounds of self-defense, causing escalation of the scope or intensity of violence beyond that viewed as desirable by national leaders.
Both failure modes have political as well as military consequences, and both can result from rules of engagement that are excessively ambiguous, or complex and confusing.
It was a vulnerability failure caused by rules of engagement that were excessively ambiguous and restrictive.
The commission that investigated the disaster concluded that poorly written rules of engagement were a major factor in the disastrous airport bombing.
Consequently, the Marines at the airport were unprepared to counter the suicide truck bomb attack that destroyed their quarters.
In addition to the two rules of engagement provisions described above--a hostile act activating the right of selfdefense and hostile intent activating the right of | anticipatory self-defense--there is a third provision somewhat broader in scope.
Nearly three decades earlier, Colonel Hadd, initial commander of the Marine landing force in Lebanon in 1958, had pointed out the crititcal importance of staying abreast of a rapidly changing local political environment.
The criteria for declaring a force hostile are quite strict and the authority to MeGinre a force hostile is reserved for senior operational commanders.
Thus, this is not a provision that can be used to circumvent the intent of the incidentspecific rules.
Rather, it is a provision that provides additional tactical flexibility in circumstances of immediate, continuing danger to United States Navy ships.
In June 1967, the Commander of the Sixth Fleet, Vice Admiral William I Martin, used his authority to declare a force hostile in response to reports from USS Liberty that she was under attack by unidentified planes and torpedo boats.
IAW {In accordance with] CINCUSNAVEUR [Commander in Chief United States Naval Forces Europe] INST P03120.5B forces attacking Liberty are declared hostile.
You are authorized to use force including destruction as necessary to control the situation.
Do not fly between Liberty and shoreline except as required to carry out provisions para {paragraph) 2 above.
Brief fighter cover that any attacks on attack aircraft, Liberty, or they themselves is hostijg act and para (paragraph] two above applies.
In a separate message the Sixth Fleet Commander emphasized ""Ensure pilots do not repeat do ae fly over ligne This episode illustrates three points.
First, it shows a fleet commander exercising his authority to declare an unknown force attacking a United States Navy ship to be hostile.
The pilots sent to defend Liberty were not required to make further judgements concerning hostile intent or the identity of the attackers.
Second, it shows a commander exercising prudence by imposing limits on the planes--to not ei, ones land and to avoid Egyptian airspace--in order to avoid incidents that could escalate the confrontation and have political repercussions.
Third, it shows a commander upholding the distinction between self-defense and reprisals.
The planes could sngaoe any force threatening Liberty, but were not permitted to pursue attackers in retaliation.
United States Navy operational units receive training on standing rules of engagement on a routine basis and intense training in special rules of engagement before commencing operations under those rules of engagement.
This training ids scenario-based, requiring commanding officers and watch efficers be. aandne trate their ability to interpret and appiy the rules of engagement in various situations.
Additionally, the training includes exercises in which rules of engagenent situations are simulated, using United States Navy units to portray hostile forces, in order to provide a more realistic perspective on how threatening situations develop.
The training recognizes that not every possible Situation calling for a decision on the use of force can be anticipated, the purpose is to develop the skills of tactical decisicnmakers at interpreting the rules of engagement in unfamiliar circumstances.
Thus, rules of engagement are not an obscure document that must be hurriedly retrieved from a safe and dusted off when threat of attack becomes imminent.
Rather, rules of engagement are an ever-present element in Navy tactical training.
He must first determine whether or not the use of force is authorized under the specific circumstances he faces.
Having determined that use of force is authorized, he must then CGetermine the type of defensive response authorized under the circumstances.
These four factors--identity of threatening unit, identity of target, existence of hostile intent, and appropriate defensive response--are the fundamental elements of rules of engagement.
When a threatening force has committed a hostile act--firing weapons at a United States ship or plane--there is no requirement that the identity of the national attacker be established prior to using force in self~defense.
However, the situation is more complex when a determination of hostile intent must be made.
United States rules of engagement do not necessarily treat the forces of all geteutiaily hostile nations as being equally threatening.
A second, and equally important, consideration is to avoid firing on unarmed civilian vessels and aircraft operating in the vicinity of hostilities.
The intentions and behavior of Soviet ships and aircraft are well-known, and under normal peacetime conditions they are not an immediate threat to United States forces.
Pure Aerial Electronics,"" Los Angeles Times, August 13, 1987, 6; "" United States Helicopters Sink 3 Iranian Gunboats in Persian Gulf,"" Washington Post, October 9, 1987, Pp.
Thus, rules of engagement can be tailored to avoid undesirable incidents with the forces of one country while allowing early and effective defensive action against more threatening forces of another country.
Rules of engagement often specify the certainty of identification required before a determination of hostile intent may be made.
Often more than one indicator present, which can increase certainty of identification.
These indicators can be supplemented with intelligence on military vessels and planes known to be in the area.
Geography can also aid identification by allowing elimination of forces fee, eeineeied far removed from the area.
The most important distinction drawn in rules of engagement is whether or not visual identification is required prior to using force in anticipatory self-defense.
As was pointed out above, one purpose of rules of engagement is to avoid inadvertenly using force against noncombatant civilian ships and aircraft.
At the time of the incident Vincennes and another United States ship had been engaged in a gun battle with Iranian small craft that had attacked a Norwegian ship and fired on a United States Navy helicopter.
Vincennes sent repeated Warnings over international radio channels for the plane to identify itself and state its intentions, all of which were missed or ignored by the Iranian airliner as it flew directly at the United States warship.
Vincennes misidentified the plane as an Iranian Air Force F-14 jet fighter and the ship shot it down with two surface-to-air missiles.
Para are acting cautiously under rules of engagement designed to prevent such incidents.
Generally, the higher the level of identification that 4s required, the more difficult it is for Navy ships to take timely defensive measures when threatened.
In a high contact-density environment, when the need for positive identification to avoid unwanted incidents is greatest, the identification problem is exacerbated, increasing the danger to Navy ships and the possibility that neutral military forces or civilian vessels or aircraft might be engaged.
Rules of engagement vary depending upon the identity of the vessel ois aircraft being attacked or threatened with attack.
Navy units are always allowed to defend against threats to United States military forces and United States territory, and under most circumstances can defend United States civilian ships.
Allied military forces can be defended under circumstances defined by arrangements worked out under defense treaties.
Problems can also arise ina rapidly changing politicalmilitary environment, when a belligerent suddenly changes the scope of targets he is attacking and rules of engagement lag behind the expanded threat.
As noted before, a distinction is drawn between hostile acts and hostile intent.
Hostile forces conducting an actual attack, rather than harassment or a show of force, can be expected to use deception in order to achieve surprise--a highly desirable military tactic that increases the effectiveness of an 1i5 Deception tactics attack while reducing its costs. include simulating the behavior of non-hostile aircraft and ships, such as by staying within air lanes or sea lanes while in transit, and responding to radio challenges with a civilian identity.
Such tactics are particularly effective in a high contact-density environment, and create very difficult rules of engagement problems for tactical decisionmakers.
An additional, and even greater, problem is that many indicators of hostile intent can generated by routine peacetime evolutions as well as by actual hostile actions.
Spurious indicators of hostile intent can rites during training exercises, weapons testing, and combat systems maintenance.
Certain communications and electronic emissions during routine surveillance can also resemble targeting and attack indicators.
All these activities are essential for maintaining a high level of operational readiness, and by definition generate indicators of hostile intent toward the simulated enemy.
The problem is that such adeno of hostile intent may also be detected by units of another country, who may or may not know about the exercise.
Complicating the problem of ambiguous indicators of hostile intent is the Soviet penchant for conducting simulated attacks on United States naval forces--a highly dangerous practice.
United States naval forces have frequently been targets for simulated attacks by Soviet forces, and in some of these incidents only the professionalism and forbearance of the commanding officers prevented a clash.
The worst tactical situation 1166 viet simulated attacks are discussed in Chapter V Two examples will illustrate the nature of such incidents.
A Soviet simulated attack or other weapons training could be mistaken by the United States ships as an impending attack by the third party, or similar actions by the third party could be mistaken for an impending Soviet attack.
Such situations can easily arise in such perennial hot spots as the Eastern Mediterranean, Persian Gulf, and Sea of Japan.
First, suppression of valid indicators through deception can leave ships vulnerable to attack when they would have been authorized to use force in anticipatory selfdefense.
Second, detection of valid indicators generated by non-hostile activity can result in force being used when it was not, in fact, needed.
Although problems usually arise with the definition of hostile intent, even the concept of hostile act can be troublesome.
The term self-defense can encompass a wide range of defensive actions, some of which may be directed (that is, are mandatory when threatened) and others of which may be prohibited.
Measures through are not always required, but may be specified depending on the level of danger to United States Navy units and the likelihood of undesirable incidents.
Even when specified in the rules of engagement, employment of measures through can be a function of the time available to execute them before the danger of attack is acute.
This time constraint is recognized in the rules of engagement, which do not bar the use of force in self-defense when there is insufficient time to send Warnings or take other passive measures.
Authority to order the use of nuclear and chemical weapons rests with the President, and is not pre-delegated in peacetime.
The decision to launch retaliatory attacks for attacks on United States Navy units in peacetime is also a matter of national policy, not a tactical decision covered by rules of engagement.
If pursuit of attacking units is authorized under the rules of engagement, it is because they represent a further immediate threat to U.S., forces.
In effect, the on-scene commander must determine whether or not the military action he is contemplating will support the political and military objectives and intentions of the President.
This requirement is inherent in the twostage decision process of the rules of engagement system.
The political-military context of an incident includes geographic considerations, the political environment, and the overall military situation.
These variables influence the political-military intent of the rules of engagement, which could vary from strenuous efforts to avoid a military incident at almost any cost, to a hair-trigger readiness to deliver a sharp response to the slightest military provocation.
The burden on the on-scene commander is to interpret the intent of the rules of engagement in the specific circumstances at hand.
Geographic considerations include the proximity of Navy units to the scene of a conflict or crisis, the proxinity of hostile territory, and the proximity of the conflict or crisis to United States or allied territory.
Rules of engagement attempt to account for geographic factors by issuing special rules of engagement when it can be anticipated that a ship will be operating in a high-threat or politically sensitive area.
But when incidents occur while ships are operating under standing rules of engagement, or when incidents occur that do not quite fit the circumstances of special rules of engagement, the on-scene commander must take geography into account.
A demonstration of hostile intent far removed from the scene of any conflicts is likely to have much different motives than one committed in the midst of acrisis.
The same indicator could have much more serious implications in the midst of a military confrontaticn.
The political environment includes the overall climate of relations between the United States and the nation whose forces are the potential threat, the stated objectives of the potentially threatening nation, and United States diplomatic objectives in the conflict.
Other crises or on-going conflicts, whether or not they are related to the incident at hand, are also an important part of the political environment.
World opinion toward the crisis and the United States role in the crisis can be a factor depending on the apparent responsiveness of the United States government to such concerns.
Similarly, domestic political opinion--particularly the mood of Congress-~can be a factor in on-scene decision-making if emphasized in background briefings.
Normally, however, world and domestic opinion are among the least significant political influences in rules of engagement decisions.
The status cf these four factors--overall readiness, specific alerts, movements of forces, and other incidents--in the Soviet Union and other nations involved in the crisis are additional major elements the overall military situation.
The tactical situation on-scene is the final element in the overall military situation.
The tactical situation on-scene is defined by the local balance of military forces, the apparent combat readiness of potentially hostile forces, anda the movement of those forces into position for further attacks.
Assessment of the military situation is used to distinguish an isolated hostile act (perhaps inadvertent or unauthorized), best answered by a restrained response to ease tensions, from a deliberate provocation or escalation, requiring a sharp response to deter fm ihasiten attacks.
To illustrate the role of the political-military context in the making of rules of engagement decisions, Soviet reconnaissance planes overflying United States Navy ships in the open ocean under normal peacetime conditions are not fired on.
Because an accurate and comprehensive understanding of the political-military context of an incident is vital to making rules of engagement decisions that support national policy, difficult problems for United States forces on-scene can be generated by not informing them of significant military and Giplomatic moves.
This problem can be particularly acute when rules of engagement are used as a substitute for strategy, that is, when military forces are deployed to the scene of a crisis without a clear mission, only rules of engagement to govern their behavior.
For example, a higher DEFCON can be set 1195), United States rules of engagement toward Iran, see the sources in footnote 107.
If the onscene commander and the tactical decision-makers under him are not aware of such military actions, the threat to onscene forces may be perceived as either higher or lower than it actually is.
Thus, their interpretation of the rules of engagement may not support national policy--inadvertently sending conflicting signals to the target nation.
Secret communications and ""back-channel” negotiations are undoubtedly an essential part of diplomacy and statecraft, but they need to be accompanied by appropriate efforts to keep the chain of command informed of the political-military context within which operational Gecisions are made.
The Problem of Misinterpretation As has already been pointed out, the on-scene commander must interpret the intent of the rules of engagement in the specific tactical circumstances at hand.
However, the rules of engagement can still be misinterpreted, producing decisions on the use of force that do not support national policy.
These are not igeticul decisions made in deliberate violation of the rules of engagement, which is a separate-~and exceedingly rare--category of problem.
Misinterpretation of the rules of engagement occurs when a tactical decision-maker has an understanding of their intent that is different from the intent of the higher authorities who drafted the rules.
United States Navy training goes to great lengths to prevent this from happening, but the possibility of misinterpretation cannot be completely excluded.
Misinterpretation of the rules of engagement can arise from three sources.
First, verbal orders intended only to emphasize particular operational details can be misinterpreted as a modification to the rules of engagement.
For example, a warning that an unusually high number of non-hostile air contacts can be expected could be construed as a requiring greater than normal caution before engaging threatening aircraft.
Second, the operational environment can induce routinized patterns of behavior (tactical bad habits, of which complacency is the most common example) that impinge on rules of engagement.
Third, a psychological environment can develop that affects threat assessments so as to produce rules of engagement decisions Gifferent than intended by the chain of command.
The constant tension of operating near hostilities can put nerves on edge and generate an intense desire to ""do something” rather than continue to be a passive observer or the target of harassment.
On the other hand, a feeling that the Navy ships are not needed in the situation (wasting their time) or are impotent to act can lead to complacency and passivity.
Personalities can also have an impact--an overly aggressive or cautious tactical decision-maker may provide his own interpretation of the rules of engagement.
The professionalism of United States Navy officers and their high state of training gett eaeN Abie are sufficient to prevent misinterpretation of the rules of engagement, but the onscene commander and the chain of command needs to be alert for indications of these problems.
Allies and Rules of Engagement Operations with allies raise further rules of engagement problems.
Within the NATO alliance, each member has its own national rules of engagement, which are the rules in effect in peacetime.
First, national peacetime rules of engagement may differ among NATO members.
This is because threat perceptions, foreign policy objectives, and domestic political constraints can vary considerably among allies.
An unambiguous threat from the Soviet Union would undoubtedly be met with a unified response, but a wide range of lesser threats raise political difficulties.
Some observers have concluded that diversity in peacetime rules of engagement can interfere with the ability of forces from different NATO members to respond in a consistent and coordinated manner in acrisis.
Such differences could create severe difficulties coordinating NATO forces in a sudden crisis.
Rules of engagement are orders issued to define the circumstances in which the United States armed forces are authorized to use their weapons for defense against hostile forces in peacetime, and to specify the scope and level of violence of combat operations in wartime.
Peacetime rules of engagement prohibit United States military commanders from shooting first in peacetime unless absolutely necessary for self-defense.
United States Navy ships and aircraft, like all United States forces, have an inherent right of self-defense under international law--they may use their weapons to defend themselves if a hostile act of violence is committed against them.
An on-scene commander must make two determinations prior to using force in self-defense.
He must then determine the type of defensive response authorized under the circumstances.
Making these determinations can be crucially dependent on the politicalmilitary context of the operation, which includes geographic considerations, the political environment, and the overall military situation.
The on-scene commander must consider whether or not the military action he is contemplating will support the political and military objectives of the President.
This makes it critical that on-scene commanders be kept informed of the overall political military situation.
Ina vulnerability failure the on-scene commander is unable to take effective action in selfdefense, resulting in a successful attack on his forces~-an attack that might otherwise have been defeated.
An escalatory failure is caused by rules of engagement that are excessively permissive, ambiguous, or complex and confusing.
Either type of failure can result from an on-scene commander misinterpreting his rules of engagement.
Misinterpretation of the rules occurs when a tactical decision-maker has an understanding of their intent that is different from the intent of the higher authorities who drafted the rules.
Conclusion The first objective of this chapter was to explain how delegation and control are exercised in the United States military command system.
The previous three sections examined the principles, methods and mechanisms of command and control.
Certain of the methods of control can be used in conjunction, and forces can be rapidly shifted from one method to another as the situation warrants.
Commanders can exercise indirect control of subordinates even after having delegated them substantial autonomy.
The second objective of this chapter was to to set the United States military command system in the context of organization and management theories on delegation and control in organizations.
Organization and eadateceent studies show that significant delegation of decisionmaking authority is common in large organizations.
Delegation of decisionmaking is driven by the limits on decisionmaking, which cause decision-making by top-level officials to deteriorate as the size and complexity of the acacwivation increase.
These observations apply particularly well to the military chain of command, which is founded on the principle of delegating control while retaining command.
As organization theory predicts, delegation of control in the military command system is primarily due to constraints on the ability of top-level authorities to effectively control tactical operations.
As before, these findings apply particularly well to the United States military.
Pressures toward decentralized control are driven by severe constraints on the ability of top-level pdiectities to effectively control tactical operations, and by the advantages gained by granting the on-scene commander flexibility to exercise initiative.
Organization and management studies show that delegation of decisionmaking can range from being highly rulegoverned, for standard, repetitive situations, to highly discretionary, for situations that cannot be anticipated.
Toward the tight end of the spectrum are positive direct control, and direct control by negation.
In military command and control, as in public administration and business management, tighter forms of control are more appropriate for standard situations that are easily anticipated, while looser forms of control are more appropriate for an environment marked by uncertainty and ambiguity, in which specific decisionmaking situations are difficult to anticipate.
The mechanisms of indirect control--the alert system, standing orders, mission orders, contingency plans, and rules of engagement~-~-are all hierarchical controls.
They relieve higher authorities of the burden of having to closely monitor the details of military operations--a burden that can quickly exceed their information processing and decisionmaking capabilities when large~scale operations are being conducted in a fast-paced political-military environment.
Hierarchical controls serve similar functions in public and business organizations.
Collegial and nonhierarchical controls have not been discussed, but are more prominent in military organizations than in any other type of organization.
Collegial control is provided by the professionalism of the officer corps, which is highly developed and stressed in the training of officers.
They are most visible in elite military units, such as Army Special Forces and the Marine Corps.
Members of these units are indoctrinated that their elite status requires that they meet superior standards of performance--typically discipline, endurance, aggressive-ness, and fighting skill-unique to their organizations.
Similar nonhierarchical controls are used throughout the armed forces to complement and reinforce military professionalism.
On the one hand, controls such as discipline, loyalty, and respect for the chain of command are essential for delegated command and the mechanisms of indirect control to function at all.
Similarly, professional experience and judgement can be Crucial for correctly interpreting ambiguous orders and Carrying out general guidance under rapidly changing circumstances.
The ultimate test of professional experience and judgement is knowing when to disregard inappropriate orders in order to take action that better supports the national interest.
On the other hand, collegial and nonhierarchical controls can generate commitment to particular operational doctrines or procedures, and resistance to operations custom-designed for crisis management purposes.
This is the phenomenon emphasized in the organizational process and bureaucratic politics models.
A further weakness of those models, then, is that they do not address the full impact--positive as well as negative--of collegial and nonheirarchical controls.
Studies of public administration and business management repeatedly show that in large organizations comprised of numerous independent operating units, optimum performance is achieved with decentralized decisionmaking combined with appropriate--primarily collegial and nonheirarchical--controls.
The strength and weaknesses of the methods of control and mechanisms of indirect control, and the arguments for and against centralization of decisionmaking authority, were discussed, but the focus was on how military command and control function in principle.
Many things can go wrong in the stress and confusion of crisis military operations, and there are inherent limits on the ability of any methods or mechanisms of control to ensure that decisions made at one level are those that are most appropriate for the situation at another level.
The optimum degree of centralization or decentralization can vary widely depending on the nature of the military operation being conducted and the political-military context of the operation.
National leaders can exercise close control of military operations in a variety of ways.
This is the approach commonly referred to in the crisis management literature.
This style of direct control has its costs, and can even impede effective crisis management.
Unless the scope of military operations is very small and simple, direct control can quickly overload information processing and decisionmaking.
National leaders typically focus on selectec aspects of the operations, which may not be the most important or dangerous evolutions taking place.
The need for close control thus needs be weighed against the severe constraints on the ability of national leaders to. exercise effective direct control of military operations.
A second approach to maintaining close control of crisis military operations is through the mechanisms of indirect control.
As was also true with methods of control, excessive tightness in the mechanisms of indirect control can be counterproductive--denying the on-scene commander the flexibility he needs to adapt to rapidly changing circumstances.
The optimum tightness of control lies somewhere between absolute control and absolute autonomy.
Establishing precisely where the optimum balance between control and delegation lies is one of the inherent tensions in crisis management.
United States military command and control procedures allow ample opportunity for stratified interaction to occur in crises.
The United States armed forces rely on a flexible combination of direct and delegated control that emphasizes delegation of authority and providing on-scene commanders with freedom of action.
Monitored delegated control is the method of control preferred by military commanders, and when direct control is necessary, control by negation is preferred over positive control.
Primary emphasis is placed on use of mechanisms of indirect control rather cheats on the exercise of direct control.
These preferences are strongest | in the Navy, which has a long tradition of operational autonomy and which accords ""absolute"" authority to commanding officers.
Even in crises, when there is a tendency for high-level military commanders as well civilian authorities to centralize control over operations, on-scene commanders are delegated substantial decisionmaking authority.
The next chapter will explore the range of such incidents that Riie occurred in the past, and could well occur during a future crisis.
Military incidents can generate tactical level military interactions with the forces of the other side in a crisis--interactions decoupled from efforts by national leaders to manage the crisis.
Thus far, sz little has been said about exactly what types of interactions can occur at the tactical level.
It will be useful to explore the nature of tactical-lewel interactions prior to commencing the case studies so as to identify the types of military actions that are of interest.
The purposes of this chapter are to define the scope of tactical-level interactions that can occur in a crisis and to define analytical categories of crisis military actions.
In the remainder of this introduction to the chapter the military actions that can produce tactical-level interactions will be classified, based on the perspective of political-level decisionmakers, as deliberate military actions or inadvertent military incidents.
The concluding section will explain why inadvertent military incidents are relatively rare in crises.
Mgatiodl-vev~2 interactions will be categorized from the perspective of political-level decisionmakers.
Studies of international crises have observed that national leaders generally seek to maintain close control of crisis military operations.
The ideal condition that national leaders want to achieve is for no military actions to occur other than the ones they direct.
National leaders thus make an an implicit distinction between military actions they initiated deliberately and those they did not order but which occurred anyway.
Deliberate military actions are ordered by politicallevel decisionmakers.
National leaders either issue a direct command for a specific action to be executed, or anticipate the action would occur as a result of an order given previously.
Deliberate military actions can thus occur under delegated as well as direct control, and can be ordered in mechanisms of indirect control as well as directly over real-time communications links.
Inadvertent military incidents are military actions that affect the development a crisis, but which are not specifically ordered or anticipated by national leaders.
The problem is likely to be particularly acute if military forces are in close proximity to those of the opponent.
Trained specifically for warfare, military forces are not an ideal instrument in situations demanding an enormous degree of caution and restraint.
Although it is highly improbable that hostilities would be initiated without explicit orders, a clash between opposing forces resulting from the actions of an over-zealous military commander cannot be discounted entirely.
Thus, policy-makers could find themselves losing control over a crisis because of the actions of subordinates.
This may be even more of a problem when geographical distance is added to the organizational distance between those who formulate and those who execute policy.
Although the importance that national leaders typically place on maintaining close control over military operations has been recognized, the questions of how and why inadvertent military incidents occur and what effect they have on crisis management efforts have not been adequately addressed in the literature on crisis management.
Two factors mentioned by Williams--military forces operating in close proximity to those of the opponent and at great geographical distance from policymakers--are a good description of typical naval operations in crises.
In planning military operations commanders attempt to allow for mistakes, accidents, and other unforeseen circumstances.
Such problems constitute what Clausewitz described as “friction” in war--the myriad things that tend to interfere with the smooth accomplishment of military operations.
One of the principles of war-simplicity--is followed by military planners because friction tends to increase with the size and complexity of an operation.
Friction begins to arise as soon as military Operations are launched--well before the enemy is engaged.
It is reasonable to expect, therefore, that friction--things going wrong--will occur in crisis military operations as well as in wartime military operations.
Recent studies of crisis management have shown a growing awareness that inadvertent military incidents are inherent in the use of military forces as a political instrument in crises.
Cohen goes on to argue that despite this, accidents, misperceptions, and the like are not likely to cause crises to escalate to wars.
Cohen and McNamara point out the limitations and dangers of Crisis management, but do not provide an understanding of the role of inadvertent military incidents in international crises.
There is thus a need to take a closer look at such incidents and the impact they can have on crisis management.
Interestingly, ""Murphy's Law""--which states that if something can go wrong, it will--was originated by a military officer in 1949.
The next three sections of this chapter will discuss these three types of incidents.
Although attention will be focused on incidents involving United States forces, examples of accidents involving the forces of other countries will also be presented.
This will be done to illustrate that both sides in a crisis can experience inadvertent incidents involving their military forces.
Incidents at sea include various forms of harassment and other dangerous interactions between Soviet and American naval forces.
They may be initiated deliberately on direct or standing orders from national leaders (for military reasons or as a political signal), or may occur inadvertently--that is, without having been ordered by national leaders.
Such actions are taken by on-scene commanders in response to events or tactical conditions that national leaders did not anticipate, are not aware of, or do not understand.
Such actions are authorized, in that they are taken in compliance with guidance contained in one of the mechanisms of indirect control--the alert system, standing orders, mission orders, contingency plans, or rules of engagement.
But they are unanticipated, in the sense that national leaders did not directly order the specific action or anticipate that the specific action would result from guidance contained in mechanisms of delegated control.
National leaders can only react to an unanticipated authorized action and try to manage its impact on the crisis.
The most common phenomenon appears to be that national leaders order a military operation without understanding the full range of specific military actions that military commanders have aitumenite to take in order to carry out that operation.
Ambiguous orders, operations initiated without specific military objectives to guide decisionmaking by on-. scene commanders, and open-ended military operations (those that drag on without a definitive conclusion) are particularly prone to cause unanticipated authorized actions.
But such actions can also occur when tighter methods of control are being exercised.
National leaders exercising control by negation could approve a military action without understanding what that action entails.
This could also occur when positive direct control is being exercised, though in this case it is more accurate to describe the consequences of the action, rather than the action itself, as being unanticipated.
Misperceptions on the part of on-scene military commanders are another possible cause of unanticipated authorized actions.
This could occur when a military commander misperceives the political-military context of his local tactical situation.
For example, he might misperceive aggressive enemy military moves as indicating that friendly forces are in imminent danger of attack or even that war had started.
Believing that attack is imminent or that war has started, the commander Sales military actions that would be authorized if one of these situations did, in fact, exist.
The possibility of such misperceptions underscores the danger inherent in simulating attacks on an adversary’ 3 forces during a crisis--such as the Soviet Navy conducted against the United States Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean while United States forces were at DEFCON 3 in the 1973 Middle East War.
Contingency plans can be a source of unanticipated authorized actions if national leaders do not fully understand the operational implications of the plans or do not have the time or inclination to carefully review the content of a plan before ordering it executed.
Although United States military contingency plans contain a broad range of options for the employment of military forces, civilian policy-makers tend to view most predefined military options as inappropriate because the options were designed for a crisis scenario different than the one at hand, or were defined to meet purely military objectives rather than the requirements for employment of military forces in 4 crisis.
However, the possibility of a contingency plan setting in motion military operations that top-level political leaders had not anticipated cannot be excluded entirely.
The alert system can also be a source of unanticipated authorized actions.
The best example of this was the May 1960 ""unintended"" DEFCON 3 alert, which was initiated by an ambiguous message from Secretary of Defense Thomas Gates, then in France with President Eisenhower.
The message directed the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to ""quietly order a high state of command readiness,” but did not specify a DEFCON level or give sufficient detail for military commanders to determine exactly what the Secretary ~ T3ohn Steinbruner, ""An Assessment of Nuclear Crises,” in Franklyn Griffiths and John C Polanyi, eds., The Dangers of Nuclear War , 228.
The result was a much greater level of highly visible military activity than had been desired.
The most important potential source of unanticipated authorized actions is operational decisions made by tactical level military commanders on the basis of guidance contained in standing orders, mission orders, or the rules of engagement.
Even when under direct control by top-level political authorities, operational commanders usually have sufficient authority to take actions that could significantly affect the development of a crisis.
The first example concerns two instances of clashes between United States and Soviet forces during the Korean War.
Despite the stringent measures that had been imposed on air operations to prevent incidents with the Soviet Union, two serious engagements between United States Navy aircraft and Soviet aircraft took place during the war.
United States Navy jet fighters intercepted two Soviet twin-engined bombers approaching a United States carrier task force, and when one of the bombers fired on the fighters it was was shot down.
The body of one of the bomber’s crewmen was recovered, confirming that the plane had been Soviet.
The second example occurred in July 1953, when six ships under the command of Vice Admiral Walter G Schindler were dispatched to search for survivors from a United States Air Force RB-50 reconnaissance plane shot down by Soviet fighters over the Sea of Japan about thirty miles off the coast of the Soviet Union.
Vice Admiral Schindler's orders did not specify how close to the Soviet coast he was allowed to search, so he sent the following message to his superiors stating “I intend to take my ships as close to Russian territory as is necessary to recover the airmen from the crashed aircraft"" and that he would “brook no interference” 0 By the time Vice Admiral Schindler from the Soviets. received a response directing him to remain clear of Soviet territorial waters, he had already recovered the only survivor that could be located.
As it turned out, the survivor was found in international waters, none of Vice Admiral Schindler's ships entered Soviet territorial waters, and there was no harassment of his force by Soviet ships or planes.
Rear Admiral Daniel V Gallery, The Pueblo Incident , 57; Vice Admiral Walter G Schindler, letter to author, March 19, 1988.
Two days earlier Chinese fighters had shot down a British air liner en route from Singapore to Hong Kong.
China apologized for the incident, but harassed United States ships and planes engaged in the search for survivors.
In response, the United States moved a task group built around carriers USS Hornet and USS Philippine Sea into the Tonkin Gulf in a show of force.
On July 26, two Chinese fighters attempting to attack search planes were Ance down by Navy fighters flying combat air patrol for the 12 search effort.
Sixth Fleet movements on the first day of the War--a significant signal to the poade of American intentions--resulted from a decision made on-scene not related to 12.
In other circumstances, however, fleet movements unanticipated by national leaders could complicate crisis management efforts by sending unintended political signals to the adversary.
Although none of these examples of unanticipated authorized actions created crisis management problems for American leaders, similar low-level decisions could be more troublesome under other circumstances.
Military Accidents Military accidents are actions not ordered or deliberately initiated at any level in the chain of command.
Military accidents are troublesome because decision-makers may fail to realize they are unauthorized and perceive them as a deliberate provocation, signal of hostile intent, or escalation.
This problem is compounded by modern communications systems, which in theory give national leaders in many countries the capability for detailed control of military operations and the ordering 14 specific tactical actions.
Principles and Organization,” Naval Forces 7 : 50. 165, the Liberty incident, see the case study in Chapter VIII of this study.
However, when assessment of a military accident must be made in the fog of a crisis, with possibly incomplete and erroneous information coming in from the scene and decision makers attempting to sort out adversary intentions under great stress, the possibility of an accident being misperceived as a deliberate provocation or attack is heightened.
United States and Soviet leaders have used communications with each other to clarify whether incidents were accidents or provocations.
One tactic is to assume (at least for diplomatic purposes) that an isolated incident was an accident, but warn that further such incidents would be viewed as deliberate provocations or attacxs.
In the 1967 Middle East War the United States informed the Soviet Union of its military response to the attack on the Liberty, and in the 1973 Middle East War the Soviet Union protested the sinking of a Soviet merchant ship during an Israeli raid 17 on a Syrian harbor.
Communications between the United >To. the 1973 Middle East War incident, see the case study in Chapter VII of this study.
Situations could arise, however, in which national leaders or on-scene military commanders on the side that was the victim of a military accident perceive that they do not have time for communications with the other side before taking a military response to an apparent deliberate attack.
An almost infinite variety of military accidents conceivably could occur during international crises.
As will be seen in Chapter VII, military accidents rarely occur in crises.
Accidents that seetieewa under noncrisis peacetime conditions and in limited war situations will therefore be used to illustrate the range of military accidents that could possibly occur during a crisis.
The reasons why military accidents are rare in crises will be addressed in the final section of this chapter.
United States military aircraft occasionally have strayed into unfriendly airspace, provoking reactions ranging from diplomatic protests to use of force to down the planes.
The first such incident after World War II occurred on oy 9, 1946, when a United States C-47 transport that had strayed over Yugoslavia was forced to land.
On June 8, 1951, two United States Air Force F-80 jet fighters got lost over Germany and landed in Czechoslovakia.
The Czechs returned the planes and their pilots a month later. 18an6 examples of airspace violations and midair collisions that will be presented all appear to have been inadvertent.
The crashes that will be discussed also all appear to have been accidents, rather than caused.by hostile action.
It is conceivable, however, that a deliberate downing of an aircraft could be portrayed as an accident, at least by the Soviet Union. 13 0his list is based on published and unclassified sources, and therefore probably is not comprehensive.
Not all airspace violations are reported in the press or protested by the.country whose airspace was violated.
However, any additional incidents were probably very minor and would not affect the findings of this chapter.
Two United States Navy attack planes were attacked by Czech jet fighters on March 12, 1954, close to or inside Czech airspace.
On June 8 an unarmed United States Army helicopter strayed over East Germany and was forced to make an emergency landing.
East Germany seized the nine crewmen and passengers, but released them a month later.
On June 27 a United States Air Force C-118 cargo plane that strayed over Soviet Armenia was fired on but managed to crash land.
The nine crewmen and passengers were released by the Soviets twelve days later.
On September 2 a United States Air Force C-130 transport with seventeen men aboard strayed over the Soviet Union and was shot down.
On May 17, 1963, a United States Army helo patrolling the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea strayed into North Korean airspace and was shot down, but managed to make 4a crash landing.
On January 28, 1964, a United States Air Force T-39 jet trainer was shot down by Soviet fighters after straying into East German airspace, killing all three pilots aboard the plane.
On February 18, 1968, two United States Navy jets got lost in bad weather and flew over North Korean territory, prompting a Giplomatic protest.
On July 14, 1977, an unarmed United States Army CH-47 transport helicopter strayed north over the DMZ into North Korean airspace and was shot down.
Navy jets were again the culprits on April 4, 1983, when six of them accidently overflew Scviet-occupied Zeleny Island in the Kurile chain north of Japan.
The Soviets responded by placing their air defense forces in the Far East on alert, filing a diplomatic protest, and overflying the Aleutians with long-range reconnaissance bombers.
On April 20, 1984, a United States Army AH-1S helicopter on a routine patrol of the West German border strayed over Czechoslovakia and was fired on by Czech jets, but was able to return safely to West Germany.
One other incident illustrates the many ways in which such incidents can occur.
On July 28, 1966, the pilot of a United States U-2 apparently passed out while flying south over the Caribbean from Shreveport, Louisiana.
The U-2 continued southward on autopilot until it ran out of fuel and crashed in Bolivia, after flying over Panama, Columbia, Peru and Brazil.
Twelve of the incidents occurred between 1946 and 1968--the period of Soviet-American cold war tensions.
Only three incidents occurred after the advent of detente in the early 1970s.
As for geographic distribution, seven of the incidents occurred in the airspace of Eastern European countries, five occurred in Soviet airspace, and three occurred in North Korean airspace.
United States Air Force planes were involved in eight of the incidents (this includes the two U-2 incidents), United States Army helos were involved in four incidents, and United States Navy planes were involved in three incidents.
Two of the incidents (September 2, 1958, and April 4, 1983) significantly increased Soviet~American tensions, though without provoking crises.
Soviet Premier Khrushchev warned that the incident could have been viewed as prelude to an American attack.
These findings suggest that inadvertent violations of hostile airspace by United States aircraft are not a particularly great threat to crisis management, although they can exacerbate tensions.
Soviet and Warsaw Pact military aircraft have frequently violated NATO airspace in Western Europe since the 1950s.
In a sensational case, a Bulgarian Mig-17 photographic reconnaissance jet crashed in northern Italy on January 20, 1962.
The pilot requested political asylun, Claiming that he had flown to Italy in order to defect; the Bulgarian Government claimed the pilot had gotten lost and lefeenened to land in Italy; the Italian Defense Ministry suspected the plane was attempting to photograph a nearby NATO medium-range ballistic missile base.
On July 14, 1966, an armed Soviet helo entered West German airspace and forced an unarmed United States Army helo to land.
The Soviet helo was driven off when a West German border patrol fired flares at it.
The Commander in Chief of United States Forces Europe protested the incident to the Conweniice of the Group of Soviet Forces Germany.
On March 15, 1963, two Soviet Tu-95 Bear reconnaissance bombers violated United States airspace over Alaska.
However, Soviet viore diene of United States airspace have been rare since the 1960s.
On April 5, 1983, two Soviet Tu-95 reconnaissance bombers entered United States airspace over the Aleutian Islands, but Soviet planes normally avoid United States divspeee.
Soviet reconnaissance planes also frequently violate Japanese airspace.
On December 9, 1987, for the first time since the end of World war II, Japanese interceptors fired warning shots at a Soviet plane that had entered Japanese airspace.
United States Air Force officials stated in 1983, for example, that fighters scrambled about 1,750 times a year to identify commercial and private planes that inadvertently entered the United States ADIZ without prior notification.
Midair collisions are infrequent, but happen often enough to warrant attention.
At least three such incidents have occurred between Soviet and United States or NATO planes since 1970.
On March 31, 1970, a United States Navy F-4 jet fighter from USS Franklin D Roosevelt “brushed” a Soviet Tu-16 Badger reconnaissance bomber over the Mediterranean Sea, causing minor damage to both.
On September 13, 1987, a Soviet Su-27 jet fighter struck a Norwegian P-3 patrol plane over the Barents Sea, causing the Norwegian plane to lose an engine.
In all three incidents both planes involved in the collision landed safely.
In a crisis, a midair collision could well be viewed as a signal of hostile intent, a coercive threat, or an attempt to intimidate.
Even worse, if one of the aircraft involved in a midair collision crashed, the side that lost it might think that its plane had been shot down by the other side.
The United States and the Soviet Union have observed each other's aircraft crash in accidents on several occasions over the past forty years.
For example, on May 25, 1968, a Soviet Tu-16 Badger reconnaissance bomber crashed in the Norwegian Sea while conducting low altitude surveillance of the USS Essex ASW carrier group.
A Department of Defense spokesman was quick to state that United States ships and planes ""in no way interfered with, hampered, or threatened the Soviet aircraft at any time or 27 It appears that in this in any way prior to the crash."" “ease and the other cases both sides recognized that the crashes were accidents--at least no public accusations were made that the other side had caused the crash.
Ina crisis, however, the side that lost a plane in a crash at sea might think that its plane had been shot down by the other side, exacerbating tensions.
Although this study does not address civil aircraft incidents per se, they could exacerbate tensions ina crisis.
Civil aircraft have also strayed over hostile airspace and been forced to land or shot down.
On April 5, 1948 (before the Berlin Crisis erupted in June), a British airliner crashed in Berlin after a midair collision with a Soviet fighter.
On April 29, 1952, Soviet fighters fired on an Air France airliner over East Germany.
On July 23, 1954, Chinese fighters shot down a British Cathay Pacific airliner over the Pacific.
On February 21, 1973, Israeli fighters shot down a Libyan airliner over the Israeli-occupied Sinai Peninsula.
On April 20, 1978, Soviet fighters fired on a Korean Air Lines airliner over the Kola Peninsula, forcing it to crash land.
Incidents involving civilian airliners are not considered to be tactical-level military interaction for the purposes of this study, but they can have political effects similar to those of inadvertent military incidents.
Two sensational civil aircraft incidents--each involving one of the superpowers--have occurred in recent years.
Vincennes sent repeated warnings over international radio channels for the plane to identify itself and state its intentions, all of which were missed or ignored by the Iranian airliner as it flew toward the United States warship.
Vincennes misidentified the plane as an Iranian Air Force F-14 jet fighter and shot it down.
It is clear from statements made by Admiral William J Crowe, Jr., and other senior naval officers that the Commanding Officer of the Vincennes had complied with the rules of engagement issued to United States forces operating in the Persian Gulf.
But for this very reason the two incidents illustrate how Civilian aircraft, by being misidentified as military aircraft or viewed as on a military mission despite civilian markings, could inadvertently become the target of military action and exacerbate a crisis. 29uy gs.
Many, perhaps most, incidents are accidents, but others, particularly incidents between Soviet and American naval vessels, are ree eee This discussion will be limited to accidents, primarily collisions, involving naval ships and submarines.
Deliberate incidents will be discussed later, in the section on 30 There will be some overlap in the two incidents at sea. discussions because collisions can be deliberate and in some instances it is not clear if the collisions were deliberate or accidental.
Furthermore, accidental collisions can occur during deliberate harassment.
The focus of this discussion will be on apparent accidental collisions.
Soviet violations of the nautical rules of the road and near collisions with United States naval vessels became a serious problem in 1960.
Prior to then the Soviet Navy had been very small and limited its operations to coastal waters and adjacent seas.
One of first near collisions occurred on April 26, 1960, when the Soviet intelligence collection ship 30nhe term ""incidents at sea” is used by the United States Navy to cover all incidents, whether accidental or deliberate, involving United States and Soviet naval vessels and aircraft.
The Navy term is used in this study in order to provide an indication of the types of Soviet behavior to which United States Navy commanders object.
This is important because, as will be seen in Chapter VII, in past crises United States civilian authorities have not shown an awareness of what exactly is going on at sea when they order naval forces to the scene of a crisis, and have not understood the dangers that can arise from deliberate Soviet harassment.
This is a good example of an accidental collision nearly resulting from deliberate behavior--in this case an extremely aggressive intelligence collection effort.
The United States responded to this and several similar incidents over the next twelve years with numerous diplomatic protests, all of which were rejected by the Soviet Union.
Almost a year later the second and third collisions occurred, also in the Sea of Japan.
On May 10, 1967, the destroyer USS Walker (DD 517), which was participating in an anti-submarine warfare exercise, was struck by a Soviet destroyer that had been 31y ss.
The next day, May 11, a second Soviet destroyer collided with the Walker, again with only minor damage to both ships.
The United States promptly delivered strongly-worded diplomatic protests after each incident.
The Soviet Union, however, blamed the collisions on United States “provocative maneuvers” in the Sea of Japan.
Although some United States officials speculated that the two collisions had been deliberate, perhaps as a political Signal of Soviet displeasure with United States involvement in the Vietnam War, the Captain of the Walker stated that the collisions appeared to have been accidental.
The cause in each case was Soviet violations of the nautical rules of the road and dangerous maneuvers close to uinNSe naval vessels.
The Banner and Walker incidents were probably cases of accidental collisions during deliberate harassment.
The fact that some United States officials perceived the Walker incident.as deliberate harassment for purposes of political signalling illustrates the potential political impact of accidents at sea.
Although the number of incidents between United States and Soviet naval vessels declined significantly after the Incidents at Sea Agreement was signed in 1972, collisions have not been entirely eliminated.
In fact, there Hane been as many accidental collisions since the agreement was signed as there had been before the agreement.
On August 28, 1976, a Soviet Echo II nuclear-powered guided missile submarine collided with the frigate USS Voge in the Mediterranean Sea.
The collision was caused by the Soviet submarine, which had been surfaced and on a parallel course with Voge, suddenly turning into the United States ship's port side.
Voge suffered serious damage to her propeller and had to be towed into port for repairs; the Soviet submarine was damaged but left the scene under its own oeeer.
The United States filed an Incidents at Sea Agreement protest over the incident.
On March 21, 1984, the carrier USS Kittyhawk collided with a Soviet Victor-class nuclear-powered attack submarine in the Sea of Japan.
The collision, which occurred at night, apparently was caused by the Soviet submarine surfacing directly ahead of the carrier at short range.
Soviet naval vessels have also collided with the ships of other Western navies.
On November 9, 1970, a Soviet Kotlin-class destroyer that had been harassing the British aircraft Carrier Ark Royal and her escorts in the eastern Mediterranean struck the side of the carrier after a dangerous maneuver across the carrier's bow.
First, whereas before the agreement two of three collisions occurred during deliberate Soviet harassment of United States naval vessels, after the agreement only one of three collisions occurred during Soviet harassment.
Second, whereas there were no collisions between ships and submarines before the agreement, there were two such collisions after the agreement.
Both of the ship-submarine collisions apparently were caused by poor seamanship on the part of Soviet submarine captains.
Despite the agreement's merits, it has not been sufficient to prevent accidental collisions. 34) statistical analysis tells us little because of the small number of cases.
A single accidental collision in 1988 would lower the postagreement rate to equal the pre-agreement rate.
Allegations of additional undersea submarine collisions have also been natee-> Although none of these incidents can be confirmed, they suggest an addition type of naval incident that could complicate crisis management efforts.
Interactions between United States and Soviet submarines while submerged are thus regulated only by policies established by their respective navies, and by the caution and prudence of their commanding officers.
The very fact that accidental collisions are relatively rare would make one occurring during a future crisis automatically suspect, particularly if the ship that is the victim of the collision suffered much greater damage than the ship that caused the collision.
Khrushchev might well have viewed the collision as deliberate United States retaliation for the shooting down of an American U-2 that same day.
Such a hypothetical incident might not have prevented resolution of the crisis short of war ~— next day , but certainly would not have made that resolution any easier.
Collisions also occur between naval ships or submarines and civilian vessels.
On February 1, 1968, the United States destroyer USS Rowan collided with the soviet merchant ship Kapitan Vislobokov in the Sea of Japan.
On April 9, 1981, the United States submarine USS George Washington collided with the Japanese merchant ship Nissho Maru in the East China Sea, sinking the ship and killing two of its crewmen.
This was one of at least eight collisions between United States submarines and me) civilian merchant ships from 1965 to 1982, but the only one in which the merchant ship was sunk.
On September 21, 1984, a Soviet Victor-class SSN collided with a Soviet merchant ship in the Strait of Gibralter, seriously damaging the submarine and apparently sinking the merchant ship.
First, if the naval vessel sank and the cause was not immediately known, the side that lost the ship could well suspect hostile action by the adversary.
Second, if the merchant ship was sunk or seriously damaged, and had been carrying military supplies or other critical materials to an ally directly involved in fighting, the side that owned the ship could well suspect that the collision was a deliberate attempt to prevent delivery of its cargo.
There have also been two reported instances of Soviet submarines colliding with ‘Soviet surface combatants on the high seas.
Tpestroyers and frigates are relatively small vessels that can be seriously damaged by large merchant vessels.
For example, on June 6, 1971, the Soviet tanker Busharov collided with the French frigate Surcouf in the Mediterranean.
Weapons accidents can also be a collateral result of other emergencies, such as an aircraft jettisoning ordnance to lower its weight after losing power or a ship jettisoning ordnance threatened by a fire.
Jettisoned weapons normally do not cause as much damage as deliberately launched weapons, but can still cause substantial damage to ships Or aircraft.
Tactical missiles are particularly accident-prone, and on several occasions have been accidently launched or have gone astray after being deliberately launched.
On August 12, 1968, a Navy missile hit a civilian oil survey vessel off the coast of California, setting it afire and injuring three crewmen; and on July 29, 1986, a civilian tanker was hit by a Navy missile off the coast of Virginia, causing a small fire but no injuries.
On another occasion a Navy Bulpup air-to-surface missile accidently hit a Navy rescue craft off the coast of California, sinking the vessel but miraculously not injuring any of the crew Anti-ship cruise missiles have also been involved in accidents.
On July 14, 1981, the United States Navy guided missile destroyer USS Coontz accidently launched a Harpoon missile in the Caribbean Sea during routine system testing.
The missile crashed into the sea at the end of its flight without striking anything.
On December 28, 1984, an unarmed Soviet SS-N~-3 missile launched during an exercise in the Barents Sea went astray, flew over northern Norway, and attack.
The Soviet Government apologized for 40 Accidents with tactical missiles have the the incident. potential to cause an incident because both the United States and the Soviet Union routinely monitor the other side's naval exercises with ships and aircraft.
Although greater caution is shown during crises, the possibility of an incident with a tactical missile cannot be eliminated.
Strategic nuclear missiles--intercontinental ballistic missiles , submarine launched wallisetic missiles , and long-range land-attack cruise missiles--are the safest of all missiles because of their greater safeguards against accidental launch, but are not immune to accidents.
On January 4, 1967, an unarmed United States Air Force Mace land attack cruise missile being used as a target drone went astray, flew over Cuba, and crashed in the Caribbean; and on September 12, 1967, an unarmed United States Army Pershing tactical ballistic missile went off course during a test flight and crashed in Mexico.
Although an accident involving an operational strategic nuclear missile could have catastrophic consequences during an international erisis, the probability of such an incident appears to be extremely low due to the safeguards against accidental or unauthorized launch of strategic missiles.
Additionally, an accident during a strategic missile test flight probably would not be misperceived as a deliberate attack because the superpowers carefully monitor each other's test flights.
The remaining types of peacetime weapons accidents-naval gunfire accidents and torpedo accidents--rarely have consequences as serious as tactical missile accidents, but could still exacerbate tensions in a crisis.
On March 8, 1963, and February 5, 1979, shells fired by United States Navy ships during training exercises fell in the vicinity of Soviet vessels that were near or inside publicly announced training areas.
On April 23, 1958, the destroyer USS Yarnall was etruck by a torpedo fired during an exercise, and on December 19, 1983, the frigate USS Jack Williams accidently launched a torpedo that landed on the pier next to the ship but did not explode.
A more dangerous incident occurred on October 7, 1973, when a Soviet Kanin-class destroyer that had been shadowing a British aircraft carrier launched a torpedo in the midst of a NATO naval exercise.
Although it was clear in this case that the torpedo launch was not a deliberate hostile act, a naval gunfire or torpedo incident at the height of a crisis could well be misperceived as an act of War--particularly if the shells or torpedo struck a warship belonging to the other side.
Once shooting starts, the probability of serious accidents greatly increases.
During the Korean War United States planes were forbidden from flying over Chinese or Soviet territory, but occasionally strayed over both countries.
On at least two occasions United States planes accidently attacked targets in China.
The most serious incident occurred on October 8, 1950, when two United States Air Force F-80 jet fighters strayed over the border and strafed a Soviet airfiela.
There were no reported instances of United States planes attacking ground targets in China, but at least eight United States planes were shot down and one United States pilot captured by the Chinese.
Two serious cases of United States planes attacking United States and allied naval vessels occurred during the Vietnam War.
The second incident occurred on April 16, 1972, when a United States plane inadvertently fired a Shrike antiradar missile at the USS Worden , seriously damaging the ships's antennas and superstructure and killing or wounding thirty Geen2ancho” Inadvertent attacks by United States forces against other United States forces dramatically illustrate the dangers inherent in limited war situations.
On June 2, 1967, two United States Air Force F-105 fighter-bombers on a raid over North Vietnam accidently attacked the Soviet freighter Turkestan in a North Vietnamese port.
Vietnamese Navy gunboats fired on a Soviet intelligence collection ship allegedly in South Vietnamese waters near Danang.
Israel expressed regret for sinking the Soviet ship and claimed that its forces had orders not to attack civilian vessels.
The most common examples are sinkings of Soviet submarines, which are notoriously accident-prone.
For example, on October 7, 1986 a Soviet Yankee-class SSBN on patrol in the Atlantic suffered an explosion and fire in its missile compartment.
The submarine was able to surface, but sank three days later while under tow.
On August 19, 1970, a Soviet AGI that had been monitoring a NATO naval exercise in the North Sea capsized.
In September 1974, the Soviet Kashin-class guided missile destroyer Otvazhny exploded, burned, and sank in the Black 52 Sea, with the loss of almost the entire crew.
Incidents like these could cause serious tensions during a crisis if the Soviet ship or submarine sank without survivors and United States Navy units in the area were suspected by the Soviets of complicity in the unexplained loss of the vessel.
Major explosions at shore bases could also cause crisis management problems.
United States forces would attack air defense sites and operational forces before ordnance storage sites, and a single, isolated attack would be highly unlikely.
But in an acute crisis, with the two sides on the brink of war and military commanders on both sides focusing on worst-case scenarios, rational analysis could succumb to the effects of tension and stress.
Furthermore, if it is safe to assume that the probability of an accident at an etttaee storage site is directly proportional to their level of activity, and that preparations for war during an acute crisis include delivery of ammunition to operational forces as their readiness is increased, then the contention can be made that an accident like this is more likely to occur during a crisis than at any other time.
Electronic warfare measures, such as jamming of radars or communications, commonly conducted for training or maintenance, have in the past inadvertently degraded other countries’ weapons systems.
Chaff, a cloud of metal particles used to confuse radars, has on occasion drifted astray, interfering with civilian air traffic control radars and even causing power outages.
On at least one occasion Soviet Tu-95 Bear reconnaissance bombers operating off the east coast of the United States used chaff to interfere with United States air defense reaatas* Other common electromagnetic emissions, such as high-powered radio and fire control radar transmissions, can interfere with other radios and radars.
Such electromagnetic interference incidents could easily appear to be deliberate hostile acts in an acute crisis.
In summary, military accidents are actions not ordered or deliberately initiated at any level in the chain of command.
They are troublesome from a crisis management perspective because decision-makers may fail to realize that the accidents were unauthorized and perceive them as deliberate provocations or signals of hostile intent.
In practice, however, national lester guaae military commanders attempt to distinguish accidents Aeon deliberate provocations or attacks.
These types of military accidents do not often occur during crises, but happen often enough under other conditions that they merit being a concern in crises.
Unauthorized Deliberate Actions Unauthorized jewibetate actions are ordered or executed by tactical-level military commanders in violation of orders issued directly by national leaders, or in violation of operational guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control.
One way in which an unauthorized deliberate action can occur is for a military commander to stretch the limits on the actions he is authorized to take-complying with a broad interpretation of the letter of his orders rather than with what he knows to be the spirit of those orders.
This type ST \uneutlicns yea action is especially likely when the orders given to military forces are vague or ambiguous, leaving ample room for an on-scene commander to rationalize his actions.
Only a few such incidents involving United States forces have occurred since World War II, in every case during limited wars.
Not all unauthorized deliberate actions are harmful to crisis management efforts.
A constructive unauthorized action is taken in the belief that actions called for in existing orders are inappropriate under the circumstances, and that the | unauthorized action would better support the national objectives in the crisis.
Whether or not the outcome is eueecictive is a different matter, and a well-intentioned action could seriously complicate crisis management efforts.
The mark of a constructive unauthorized action is an effort to inform the chain of command as soon as possible of the action taken and the reasons for taking it.
The author knows of no cases, other than certain wartime battlefield atrocities, in which insanity caused an unauthorized deliberate action. ; 96 see Chapter IV for a complete description of this incident.
The mark of a malicious unauthorized action is an effort to conceal the action from higher authority.
The most common type of malicious unauthorized action in United States military history since World War II has been deliberate killings of non-combatant civilians by troops in the field, in violation of orders to avoid Civilian casualties.
Such battlefield incidents are a product of the stress and emotion of ground combat (which were particularly intense in the guerrilla war fought in Vietnam), thus telling us little about how military commanders behave in crises.
Three examples of malicious unauthorized actions will serve to illustrate the nature of most such incidents.
The first example arose from dissatisfaction with political constraints on the conduct of wartime air operations over hostile territory.
During the Korean War, the United States ‘placed strict limits on air operations near the Chinese and Soviet borders with North Korea in order to avoid incidents with China and the Soviet Union.
In his history of the Korean War, Joseph C Goulden reports that a requirement for bombers to fly parallel to the border while bombing the Yalu bridges was deliberately violated by an Air Force flight commander.
After concluding that the parallel approach was ineffective and unnecessarily endangered the pilots, the flight commander ordered his planes to approach perpendicular to the border.
This resulted in them penetrating b Arena miles into Chinese airspace after dropping their bombs.
These violations of the bombing restrictions were successfully kept secret until long after the yates The second example of a malicious unauthorized action arose from ill-considered thrill-seeking, but essentially involved disrespect for the chain of command.
On June 13, 1957, USS Hornet was conducting routine flight training in the South China Sea after a port visit to Hong Kong.
Their motive was simple thrill-seeking (often referred to as ""flat-hatting” or ""skylarking""”), but their actions were a clear and deliberate violation of restrictions against entering Chinese airspace.
Chinese anti-aircraft guns fired on the planes, causing minor damage to a few of them, and China protested the incident.
The responsible pilots initially tried to keep their action secret, but the bullet holes in some of their planes exposed their guilt.
The pilots were reprimanded and the Vice Admiral responsible for the Hornet task group was relieved of command of the Seventh Fleet's carrier task force.
The secret bombing of unauthorized targets in North Vietnam directed by Air Force General John D Lavelle between November 1971 and March 1972 iid fet or Gissatisfaction with rules of engagement strictly limiting the anti-aircraft sites that could be attacked.
General Lavelle directed attacks on anti-aircraft sites not authorized under the rules of engagement and submitted false reports listing authorized targets.
When the unauthorized bombings were discovered, General Lavelle was relieved of his command by General John D Ryan, Air 60 Force Chief of Staff.
In an interview with the author, Admiral Thomas H Moorer, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff at the time of the incident, insisted that the chain of command had not-tacitly or otherwise--authorized the bombings.
Admiral Moorer emphasized that General Lavelle was relieved of command for lying to his superiors about the targets he was attacking.
As an aside, the dual reporting of targets used by General Lavelle to keep the unauthorized bombings secret strongly resembles the dual reporting used to hide the bombing of Cambodia from March 1969 to June 1970--which had been conducted by planes not under General Lavelle’s command.
The bombing of Cambodia was ordered by President Nixon and kept secret for reasons of international and domestic politics.
Given the Nixon Administration's well-known obsession with secrecy and penchant for covert action, which led to its downfall, the Lavelle case is an exceedingly poor example to cite as evidence of military evasion of civilian control.
Bro conceal his actions from his superiors marks this case as a malicious unauthorized action even though he was motivated by legitimate concern over the safety of his pilots.
The pattern suggested by the malicious unauthorized actions that occurred in the Korean War and Vietnam War is that political restrictions on air operations over hostile territory tend to provoke unauthorized actions.
Unauthorized actions occur because the restrictions are perceived as unnecessarily endangering the lives of pilots flying missions over hostile territory, and are motivated primarily by a desire to accomplish the mission with as few pilots shot down as possible.
That is an understandable desire, but actions taken in violation of political restrictions are still unauthorized.
This is an example of acute tension between political and military considerations.
If political leaders and military commanders are not sensitive to each other's needs, unauthorized actions are likely to occur.
Such unauthorized actions do not represent military evasion of civilian control so much as a breakdown in communications between civilian and military leaders, and a resulting inability to find an acceptable compromise for managing the tensions between political and military considerations.
The most dangerous incidents at sea are accidental and deliberate collisions.
On June 24, 1966, the Soviet AGI Anemometer collided with the intelligence collection ship USS Banner in the Sea of Japan; on May 10 and 11, 1967, the destroyer USS Walker , was struck by two different Soviet destroyers that had been harassing a United States task group in the Sea of Japan; and on May 5, 1971, the destroyer USS Hanson and the Soviet tug Diomede collided in the Korean Strait.
The first collision resulted from aggressive intelligence collection by the Soviet AGI, the second incident occurred inadvertently during asi berave harassment, and the third was caused by carelessness on the part of the Soviet tug.
In all three incidents the Soviet vessels violated the nautical rules of the road.
Dangerous maneuvering by Soviet naval vessels and naval-associated auxiliary vessels (AGIs, supply ships, tankers, etc.) was the most common type of incident at sea prior to the Incidents at Sea Agreement.
The most common incidents were dangerous maneuvers by Soviet AGIs and warships conducting aggressive surveillance and intelligence collection against United States Navy operations.
Although some of the dangerous maneuvers may have been inadvertent, most of them fit a pattern of using such maneuvers for deliberate harassment of United States Navy ships.
In some cases such harassment appears to have had no objective other than to demonstrate Soviet contempt for the United States Navy--a pattern of behavior analogous to Khrushchev's attempts to intimidate the West with Soviet strategic weapons.
In most cases, however, Soviet harassment was specifically intended to afiestae United States naval operations, such as exercises and missile tests, launch and recovery of carrier aircraft, refueling and replenishment at . sea, trailing of Soviet submarines, and oceanographic survey operations.
In 1960 Soviet naval and merchant vessels began _harassing and maneuvering dangerously close to United States naval vessels on a regular basis.
From 1960 to 1972 there were scores of serious incidents and hundreds of instances of Minor harassment.
The first reported serious incident occurred on April i1, 1960, when a Soviet trawler made radical maneuvers extremely close to the oceanographic survey ship USS Michelson in the Norwegian Sea, fouling the United States ship’s towed survey gear.
A brief review of six of the serious incidents that occurred over the next twelve years will illustrate the nature of incidents at sea.
On April 9, 1964, the Soviet merchant ship Polostsk harassed the seaplane tender USS Duxbury Bay in the Red Sea, cutting across the bow of the United States ship at barely ten yards.
On January 10, 1965, the Soviet ship Kotelnikov interfered with underway refueling operations between the carrier USS Saratoga (CVA 60) and the oiler USS Neosho in the Mediterranean.
On June 7-8, 1967, during the Middle East War, a Soviet Kashin-class destroyer and Mirka-class corvette harassed the USS America task group in the Mediterranean, almost colliding with the destroyer USS Lawe and the America.
On March 31, 1972, a Soviet Kotlin-class destroyer harassed USS Sims (DE 1059) and USS Pratt while they were trailing a 61 Soviet submarine in the Mediterranean.
The pattern in these incidents was deliberate Soviet harassment intended to disrupt United States naval operations, deliberate Soviet violations of the nautical rules of the road, and dangerous maneuvering at close quarters frequently resulting in near collisions.
The Soviets occasionally protested alleged incidents by United States Navy ships, but were particularly sensitive about United States patrol planes making low passes over Soviet ships.
These references also describe twelve other serious incidents similar to those summarized above.
The United States responded to these protests by stating that the United States Navy ships fully complied with the rules of the road while maneuvering to identify the Soviet vessels.
The Incidents at Sea Agreement was signed May 25, 1972, during the first Nixon-Brezhnev summit.
The agreement committed both sides to respect the international rules of the road for preventing collisions at sea and provided guidance for situations unique to naval forces (such as formations of ships) that were not adequately covered by the international rules.
At the first annual review, held in May 1973, a protocol to the agreement 63 was signed that expanded its provisions.
The provisions of the agreement were strengthened by a 1972 revision to the international rules of the road that explicitly recognized vessels launching or recovering aircraft and vessels engaged in underway replenishment as “restricted in their ability to maneuver""--a privileged status requiring other vessels to Maneuver to remain clear of them.
Jr., stated in 1984 that the number of incidents in which there was a ""potential for danger” declined from over one hundred per year in the 1960s to about forty per year in 1982-1983.
On the other hand, serious incidents continue to occur at a rate sufficient to warrant concern.
On August 1976, a Soviet Echo II-class nuclearpowered guided missile submarine collided with the frigate USS Voge in the Mediterranean; on November 1983, a Soviet Krivak I-class frigate collided with the destroyer USS Fife in the Arabian Sea; and on March 1984, the carrier USS Kittyhawk collided with a Soviet Victor-class nuclear attack submarine in the Sea of Japan.
The Soviet ships carefully maneuvered to scrape the sides of the United States ships, causing only minor damage to themselves and the United States ships.
The two United States ships were exercising the right of innocent passage through Soviet territorial waters off the Crimean Peninsula in the Black Sea.
There were a total of five accidental and deliberate collisions between 1972 and 1987-compared with only three between 1960 and 1972.
The total number of collisions and the rate at which they occur have thus been greater since the Incidents at Sea Agreement than they were before the atermmenite.
C6 ucoviets Bump United States Ships in Black Sea,"" Washington Post, February 13, 1988, A23.
Thus, while Soviet behavior at sea improved after the Incidents at Sea Agreement was signed, the Soviets were still willing to engage in deliberate harassment of United States maval operations.
Threatening actions and simulated attacks have not been eliminated by the Incidents at Sea Agreement.
In fact, the most serious incident of this type occurred during the 1973 Middle East war, after the agreement was signed.
The anti-carrier exercise consisted of simulated coordinated anti-ship missile and naval gunfire attacks against the United States task groups.
United States Navy commanders were unable to Gistinguish the simulated attacks from real attacks until the Soviet ships pulled away without having launched missiles or fired guns.
Soviet ships and sub-marines armed with anti-ship cruise missiles were constantly within range of the United States carriers while they were in the eastern Mediterranean, making the carriers extremely vulnerable to 69 The Soviet exercise, an actual Soviet preemptive strike. which lasted through November 3, was probably intended as a signal that the Soviet Navy was prepared to counter the Sixth Fleet in the eastern Mediterranean.
This tense situation at sea lasted for over a week after the ArabIsraeli cease-fire took hold and tensions in the Middle East had eased.
T2mne Sixth Fleet may have had intelligence indicating that the Soviets were conducting an exercise, and the Soviets may have deliberately ensured that the United States received that intelligence in order to avoid misunderstandings.
However, an exercise can be used as cover for a preemptive attack and an inadvertent launching of an anti-ship missile could well have been misperceived as an indicator that the Soviet exercise had been operational deception.
On September 12, 1975, a Soviet Kresta II-class cruiser trained its missile launchers and fire control radars on the carrier USS John F Kennedy in the Mediterranean.
On September 30 and October 1, 1982, Soviet Backfire bombers simulated anti-ship missile strikes against the carriers USS Enterprise and USS Midway in the northern Pacific near the Aluetians.
On February 18, 1984, a Soviet jet fighter fired its cannon into the wake of USS David R Ray during a simulated attack and a Soviet helicopter passed within thirty feet of the destroyer while photographing it.
On April 2 the Soviet aircraft carrier Minsk fired eight flares at the frigate USS Harold E Holt , striking the frigate with three of the flares.
The Soviet action was extremely dangerous and prohibited under the Incidents at Sea Agreement, but the United States frigate was not without blame in the incident.
On balance, however, the Soviet Union has elected to comply with the agreement.
Incidents between aircraft and mie have also continued to occur despite the Incidents at Sea Agreement.
Such interactions occur somewhere in the world on almost a daily basis.
Normally ship surveillance and intercept operations take place without incident, but the Soviets occasionally violate the Incidents at Sea Agreement.
On September 29 and 30, 1987, the Soviet missile range instrumentation ship Chukotka illuminated United States Navy and Air Force patrol planes with a laser, causing temporary blindness in an Air Force pilot's eyes for about ten minutes.
First, a wide range of dangerous interactions can occur when United States and Soviet naval forces are operating in close proximity.
Incidents at sea have the potential to exacerbate superpower tensions during an acute crisis and certain incidents could provoke an outbreak of fighting if misperceived as indications of an imminent preemptive attack.
Second, although the Incidents at Sea Agreement has reduced the number of the most serious incidents, it has not totally eliminated incidents at sea.
The primary reason for this has been lax Soviet compliance with the agreement.
There are thus ample grounds for concern that incidents between Soviet and American naval forces could seriously complicate crisis management efforts.
Deliberate military actions are ordered by political-level Jecisionmakers.
They can occur under delegated as well as direct control, and can be ordered in mechanisms of indirect control as well as directly over real-time communications links.
Inadvertent military incidents are military actions that may affect the development of a crisis, but which are not specifically ordered or anticipated by national leaders.
Inadvertent military incidents are troublesome because decisionmakers may fail to realize they are unauthorized and perceive them as a deliberate provocation, signal of hostile intent, or escalation of a crisis.
This chapter used examples of inadvertent military incidents that occurred under conditions ranging from peacetime to wartime in order to define the range of incidents that could occur in a crisis.
As will be seen in Chapter VII, however, military accidents occur infrequently in international crises.
First, the military chain of command normally cancels most military exercises affecting forces committed to or on standby for the crisis, greatly reducing the possibility of international incidents arising from exercise-related accidents.
The primary reason why exercises are cancelled D a ds that the forces are needed for crisis operations, but exercises have also been cancelled to avoid potential political complications.
The second reason for the rarity of crisis incidents is that the military chain of command usually advises its on-scene commanders to act with caution and to avoid provocative actions.
Military prudence is occasionally violated by top-level political officials ordering naval forces into dangerous waters, but on other eccasions United States leaders have been careful to keep United States forces well clear of fighting in a local conflict.
These three factors counteract other factors--increased tempo of operations and adversary forces in close proximity--that contribute to the occurrence of inadvertent military incidents.
The final task to be accomplished before commencing the case studies is to examine the unique features of naval operations and the perspectives that the United States Navy holds on crisis naval operations.
This is necessary to understand the role of naval forces in crises and to assess the generality of the findings.
But those same characteristics can exacerbate the problems of crisis management.
The misperception dilemma can be particularly difficult to cope with when naval forces are used as a political instrument.
Tensions between political and military considerations can be exacerbated due to the nature of crisis naval operations.
The crisis security dilemma is especially acute in the naval warfare environment due to weapons technology, tactical doctrines, and the tactical Situation created by crisis naval operations.
Because naval forces have unique operational characteristics, the first step in researching the theory of stratified interaction will be to explore how the theory and related concepts presented in the previous two chapters apply to the use of naval force as a political instrument in crises.
Second, the impact of naval forces on crisis stability will be explored, focusing on their impact on the security dilemma and the misperception dilemma.
Third, the tensions between political and military considerations that arise in crises will be examined in the context of crisis naval operations.
Navy Views on Crisis Response United States Navy leaders have had much to say about the peacetime role of the Navy since the end cf World War II, particularly since the early 1970s.
Understanding the Navy‘s view of its peaie tdige missions is important for understanding the doctrinal context within which peacetime Naval missions are carried out.
This doctrinal context can be described as a particular bureaucratic perspective on the use of force, but it reflects the lessons the Navy has learned over the years on the efficient and effective operation of naval forces in peacetime, and the Navy's perception of the principles and dynamics of naval warfare that would be operative in the event that fighting erupts.
The Navy, like every large organization, has an organizational philosophy or ideology which shapes and organizes the attitudes, perceptions, and thought processes of its members.
This produces a wide range of formal guidance covering all aspects of military operations, from strategy to the smallest details of tactics.
Given that the Navy has significant missions to perform in peacetime, the formulation of standing orders for peacetime operations is to be expected.
Thus, an understanding of the Navy's views of its missions will provide insight on how forces performing those missions are employed.
Prior to the early 1970s the United States Navy did not. conceive of peacetime missions as a category separate and distinct from wartime missions.
That the Navy had peacetime roles to perform was recognized, but, with the exception of naval diplomacy, those roles were viewed as being derived from wartime missions or as preparatory to execution of Wartime missions.
Rear Admiral John D Chase in 1969 listed the functions of the Navy, in order of their historical development, as being coastal defense, commerce raiding, enforcing respect for United States interests (especially trade and shipping), being an instrument of foreign policy, commanding the sea, direct support of land operations, projecting force inland from the sea, and strategic deterrence.
Enforcing respect for United States interests entails use of force to defend against attacks on merchant shipping, diplomatic outposts, and citizens abroad.
Being an instrument of foreign policy includes ""showing the flag” in port visits to other countries and voyages abroad.
Strategic deterrence is provided primarily by submarine launched ballistic missiles and nuclear-armed sea launched cruise missiles, although carrier aircraft can also contribute to the mission.
The remaining five functions are wartime missions, their peacetime impact is that the Navy strives to maintain readiness to perform these missions in wartime.
This is important, because serious conflicts can arise between performance of the peacetime Savawveus and maintaining readiness for Cleans functions.
As will be seen later, this tension between peacetime missions and readiness for wartime missions is one of the most significant interactions between political and military factors affecting the use of naval forces as a political instrument.
The objectives of sea control are ""denying the enemy the right to use some seas at some times, and asserting our own right to use some seas at some times.
Projection of power is the use of naval force against land forces, and can take three forms, naval gunfire bombardment, strikes by carrierbased tactical aircraft or sea launched cruise missiles, and amphibious assault.
Peacetime objectives of strategic deterrence are to deter all-out attack on the United States and its allies, to deter lesser attacks with threat of unacceptable risks, and to maintain a stable political environment in which the threat of aggression or coercion against the United States or its allies is minimized.
Naval presence as defined by Admiral Turner encompasses the ""instrument of foreign policy"" function described by Admiral Chase.
The naval presence concept was the first effort by the Navy to clarify its peacetime role as a political instrument, and continues to be important in Navy thinking today.
Commander James F McNulty, then an instructor at the Naval War College, in 1974 provided a detailed analysis of the various political-military purposes served by naval presence.
Of particular interest is that the requirements emphasize employment of highly capable forces--high value, powerful, multi-mission, high endurance, high connectivity assets.
This approach to naval presence raises a host of potential tensions between performance of peacetime missions and readiness to perform warfighting missions.
From 1972 to 1978 the Navy made only minor revisions to its mission descriptions.
The primary significance of the ""two-mission”"" approach for this discussion is that it reveals an element in Navy thinking that contributes to the inherent tension between performance of peacetime missions and readiness for wartime missions.
The essential, fundamental purposes of a navy are to successfully carry out its combat missions in wartime and, by extension, to maintain readiness for wartime i 3 Historically, navies which missions during peacetime. have lost sight of this principle have turned out to be ineffective in wartime.
Treating peacetime missions as derivative of wartime missions is thus an attempt to resolve the tension between the two categories of missions in favor of readiness to perform wartime missions.
In 1979, at the initiative of CNO Admiral Thomas B Hayward, the United States Navy ceased talking in terms of. missions and began emphasizing principles of naval strategy when describing its contribution to the nation's aesende.
Admiral Hayward's shift toward strategic principles was preceded by the Navy's Sea Plan 2000 study, completed in March 1978.
Admiral Hayward initiated a renaissance in United States Navy strategic thinking.
The principles he first outlined in his 1979 posture statement to Congress became the basis for the Maritime Strategy, which was formally issued in 1982.
The Maritime Strategy is the overall strategic framework guiding United States Navy strategic and operational planning.
In the event of war with the Soviet Union, the strategy calls for offensive forward operations, seizing the initiative in the war at sea to destroy the Soviet navy and LS carry the war to the Soviet homeland.
The first phase of wartime naval operations cence WS as a Soviet-American crisis begins escalating toward war.
Aggressive forward Geployment of United States naval forces would commence on a global basis in order to be ready for wartime operations in strategic waters, to put the Soviet Navy on the defensive, selective use of force and superior naval forces on-scene, and deterrence of global war with forces capable of defending sea-lanes, reinforcing allies, and putting pressure on the Soviets.
The Maritime Strategy addresses the employment of naval forces as a political instrument with greater sophistication than any previous formulation of United States Navy missions.
The three non-wartime naval functions encompassed by the strategy are deterrence, forward presence, and crisis response.
Using Snyder's analytical scheme, emphasis in the Maritime Strategy is on deterrence by denial--altering the aggressor's estimate of the probability of gaining his objectives--though with naval strategic forces providing a threat of deterrence by punishment.
However, as will be seen later, naval forces deployed to convey denial-type deterrent threats can have an impact on perceptions much stronger than had been anticipated, and can be confronted with conflicts between immediate tasking and the demands of the warfighting operations they would have to conduct in order to deny the Soviets their objectives should deterrence fail.
Forward presence contributes to the credibility of the United States deterrent posture by demonstrating denial capabilities.
Forward presence is also intended to further international stability by demonstrating support for United States allies and other friendly countries, thus maintaining regional balances of power.
In practice, forward presence is oriented toward likely trouble spots in order to have forces readily available should fighting flare up, as well as to deter hostilities.
An additional benefit is that naval forces contribute to United States diplomatic objectives by showing the flag in port visits.
The third peacetime element of the Maritime Strategy is crisis response, defined as employment of naval forces to achieve specific objectives while limiting the scope of the conflict and terminating military action as soon as possible.
Crisis response serves primarily to control escalation of a conflict by deterring Soviet intervention and escalatory actions by other participants.
Should control of escalation not be possible, the objective of crisis response is to dominate escalation--to prevail over any threats that may arise with precise use of force, so as 2Oatkins, ""Posture Statement FY-87,"" 1095-1100.
National objectives are achieved through the political impact, and, if necessary, the direct military impact, of warfighting capabilities brought to bear at the scene of a crisis.
Although the Navy's description of its peacetime roles and missions changed significantly in the early 1970s and again in the early 1980s, there are strong continuities in the perspectives underlying these changing mission formulations.
Five views consistently expressed by Navy leaders are particularly important for this study.
First, warfighting capabilities are the foundation for performance of peacetime missions.
The ability ee forces to deter, persuade, or impress is derived from their ability to fight.
Deterrence by denial applies to deterring Soviet military intervention in crises as well as to deterring adversaries in crises from aggression or esca.ation.
Fourth, the purposes of forward presence (presence for specific or routine political signaling) are to demonstrate denial capabilities for deterrence, and to place forces where they are available to conduct warfighting missions for denial should deterrence fail.
Fifth, the two objectives of crisis response--crisis management and escalation control--are both achieved by employing forces capable of demonstrating deterrence by denial, and, should it become necessary, capable of defeating the enemy in battle to achieve denial.
Be The theme underlying these five views is that combat or warfighting capabilities are the basis for conducting peacetime political missions.
That Navy leaders should espouse this view is no surprise, the raison d'etre of navies being to win battles at sea.
This perspective is not unique to the Navy, similar views are held by all armed forces.
Beyond this, however, there is merit in military leaders focusing on readiness to perform warfighting missions, for coercive threats are by definition threats that force will be used.
The key point is that military leaders and political leaders may be using the same terms with much different meanings, and viewing the same military actions as having much different purposes, in de lacey eicns on the use of force as a political instrument.
Crisis Stability An irony of naval crisis response is that the Characteristics of naval forces that make them the preferred type of force for use as a political instrument in crises also tend to make them relatively more susceptible to crisis stability problems than other types of forces.
Second, the nature of modern naval warfare places a premium on firing didi t in tactical engagements, making the crisis security dilemma particularly acute in naval crisis response.
Third, naval warfare may be more escalation-prone than other forms of Warfare.
The first naval crisis stability problem is that the political signals sent by naval forces are especially vulnerable to misperception, making the misperception dilemma particularly acute.
Virtually every study of naval diplomacy has noted the danger of the signals sent by naval forces being misperceived by the target nation or third parties.
Admiral Turner in his article explaining the Navy's view of its presence Mission pointed out that the perceptions of the country to be influenced are a factor in selecting forces for naval presence.
First, warships, being implements of war, are inherently coercive, even when used for positive, supportive, influence-building purposes.
Thus, the signals naval forces send have coercive connotations that can serve as ""noise"" complicating reception of the intended signal.
Second, the flexibility of naval forces, which makes them so valued by national leaders for political signaling, also makes the signals they convey inherently ambiguous.
As Nathan and Oliver observe, because naval forces can he withdrawn as easily as deployed, they can signal uncertainty and ei of 24 Third, resolve, rather than firmness and commitment. naval forces send highly visible signals which can be received by a large number of countries in addition to the intended recipient.
The second naval crisis stability problem is that the Nature of modern naval warfare places a premium on firing first in tactical engagements, making the crisis security dilemma particularly acute in naval crisis response.
The hature of naval warfare is that the platforms--ships, submarines and aircraft--are fragile relative to the destructiveness of the weapons — against them.
This began during the era in which guns were the main armament of ships.
This led to emphasis on unilateral attrition--being able to fire on the enemy without suffering his return fire-achieved through longer-range guns and such tactical measures as surprise and maneuver.
Anti-ship missiles can be difficult to defend against, making destruction of the launch platform the most effective defense against them.
The technology and tactical doctrines of modern naval warfare provide conditions for crisis stability problems to arise in a crisis.
Crisis stability exists when neither side has an incentive to strike the first blow, but in modern naval warfare both sides have strong tactical incentives to strike the first blow.
When both sides employ naval forces as a political instrument in crises, creating tactical-level interaction at the scene of the crisis, the technology and tactical doctrines of modern wave warfare almost unavoidably give rise to the crisis security dilemma.
United Scates and Soviet naval tactical doctrines in particular emphasize the offensive and striking first in naval combat.
The stratified crisis security Gilemma is that, in a crisis, the security dilemma is stratified, arising from the interaction processes occurring separately at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of war separately at each level.
When Soviet and American naval forces are deployed to the scene of an acute crisis, the security dilenma is likely to arise at the tactical level of interaction regardless of the threat perceptions held by national leaders.
The third naval crisis stability problem is that escalation control may be more difficult in naval warfare that in other types of warfare.
An attack on an American ship on the high sees is bound to set off skyrockets and the ‘Star Spangled Banners,and ‘Hail to the chief' and everything else.
The possibility of nuclear war at sea must be regarded as at least as likely as the occurrence of muclear war in other theaters.
Further, there are several important factors that make it likely that any Major conflict at sea would escalate,to a strategic nuclear exchange relatively quickly.
Luttwak suggests, the tension between ae and military objectives which can arise in a crisis is a particular manifestation of an issue in civil-military relations inherent in war as well as peace.
For instance, Enterprise while in the Bay of Bengal was under the guns and missiles of two Soviet anticarrier warfare groups capable of destroying her by a barrage of surface-to-surface missiles before a plane could have been launched.
To the national decision-makers that was not an element of the political problem and, therefore, was not the point.
In this case the tension was between the self-defense needs of the naval forces on-scene, and the political objective of having those forces in a highly visible position for political signaling.
The trade-off made was to pursue Signaling at the cost of extreme vulnerability of the ships on-scene.
Another manifestation of the tension between political and military considerations is that military contingency Plans are often inappropriate for the particular crisis at hand, Meairing last-minute revision prior to being executed.
Contingency plans may be inappropriate for military as well as political reasons, but even in this case their military weaknesses are likely to be the result of the manner in which the crisis developed politically.
Operational crisis management requirements that can be imposed on the use of force include limiting the size and composition of the naval force employed, placing eid forces close to or in the midst of fighting as a visible signal, limiting the actions that naval forces can take in self-defense, informing the adversary of military operations in progress against his forces (such as tracking his submarines), deliberately slowing the tempo of military operations and creating pauses in the action, and using force in gradually increasing increments.
The second tension is between the need for top-level control of military options in a crisis, and the need for tactical flexibility and instantaneous decisionmaking at the scene of the crisis.
Studies of naval diplomacy and naval command and control have recognized that maintaining control of naval operations, particularly when naval forces are used as a political instrument in aocrisis.
Although virtually all senior military commanders recognize the need for a certain degree of direct control by top-level political authorities, there is a strong belief-particularly among naval officers--that the on-scene commander must be delegated as much authority and freedom of action as possible.
Top-level decisionmakers can be overwhelmed by information overload, have insufficient time to effectively control multiple operations, and have their attention diverted by one aspect of the operations to the neglect of others.
They generally do not understand the complexities of modern warfare, which can make even a smallscale operation impossible to effectively control from the White House.
His information about the current tactical situation is inherently superior that of his superiors.
The on-scene commander requires initiative and flexibility to effectively cope with a rapidly changing tactical situation.
Only the on-scene commander can effectively adapt to the inevitable “friction” in military operations--the multitude of problems that shape the execution of military plans.
Centralized control of military operations can stifle initiative, weaken morale, erode authority, and cause diffusion of responsibility.
These are the reasons why senior naval commanders generally favor granting the onscene commander as much freedom of action as possible.
It is important for the task force commander to know exactly what lines the opponent cannot cross and what the appropriate responses should be if the lines are crossed.
Left to themselves in a particular situation, the former might be likely to respond too strongly and at an earlier point in developing events; the latter is likely to prefer more restraint thap,a rapidly heating crisis environment may tolerate.
The tactical situation can appear much different to the onscene commander, operating under the guns of the adversary, than it does to top-level political leaders, negotiating a way out of the crisis with that same adversary.
The political-military dynamics of the two levels of interaction can also be quite different, with a non-violent test of Capabilities being played out on-scene as an element in a political strategy of coercive diplomacy.
The third tension is between performance of peacetime missions and readiness to perform wartime missions.
Martin observed that when naval presence is exercised in an area of acute military tension, political demonstration purposes blend into preparations for warfare.
Naval forces deployed to the scene of a crisis to lend credibility to a deterrent threat are also S3uccruther, 10.
Although tension between performance of peacetime missions and readiness to perform wartime missions is inherent in crises, its impact on decision-making is a function of the specific organizational perspectives of the armed forces involved in the crisis.
In all instances, our naval forces are organized and optimized toward one or more of the other three roles, and their commitment to the presence mission in any given case must frequently conflict with their readiness to perform tasks in support of what is almost inevitably perceived as their primary mission.
This perspective, that wartime missions have priority over and are the foundation for peacetime missions, was also clearly evident in the Navy's own descriptions of. its missions, reviewed in the previous section.
This view has been consistent and strongly held for over forty years, and remains central to Navy thinking today.
Should crisis response fail and a Soviet~-American crisis begin escalating toward war, the first phase of what the Maritime Strategy refers to as wartime naval operations would commence.
This phase of operations is intended to be executed (and, if possible, completed) before war erupts.
Again, the emphasis is on deterrence by denial, deterring the Soviets by making it clear to them that they cannot achieve their wartime aims.
When this prewar deployment phase of operations commences, the tension between peacetime operations and readiness for wartime operations is resolved in favor of readiness for wartime operations.
In all likelihood, though this is not stated explicitly, the two phases of the strategy would proceed simultaneously.
Crisis management and escalation control entail much more than deterrence by denial and escalation dominance, the central strategic concepts of the Maritime Strategy.
The President could well decide upon a crisis management strategy in which he is willing to accept much greater risks to United States naval forces than are envisioned in the Maritime Strategy.
This could preclude execution of the strategy in the manner preferred by the Navy.
Conversely, naval forces organized, trained, and positioned for execution of the Maritime Strategy might not be immediately responsive to unanticipated ad hoc operational requirements created by the President’s crisis management strategy.
The decision to shift from crisis response to the first phase of wartime operations would undoubtedly be a momentous and difficult one for the President.
He can be expected to put off making this decision for as long as possible while —_— a negotiated solution to the crisis.
Equally likely is the probability that the President would order the first phase of wartime operations incrementally, to use the forward deployments as further Signals of resolve and to convey increasingly strong coercive threats.
According to navy leaders, delayed or incremental execution of wartime operations could seriously threaten the ability of the Navy to achieve its wartime objectives.
Keys to the success of both the initial phase and the strategy as a whole are speed and decisiveness in national decisionmaking.
The United States must be in position to deter the Soviets' ""battle of the first salvo"" or deal with that if it comes.
Even though a substantial fraction of the fleet is forward deployed in peacetime, prompt decisions are needed to permit rapid forward deployment of additional forces in crisis.
Admiral Watkins was arguing, in effect, for the decision to commence the first phase of wartime operations to be made earlier ina crisis rather than later, and decisively (all at once) rather than incrementally.
This clearly illustrates the nature of the tension between performance of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions.
Early and decisive execution of prewar naval deployments are viewed by Navy leaders as crucial to the success of the Maritime Strategy, but could well be viewed by the President as a serious threat to crisis management.
This tension is not unique to the Maritime Strategy--it is inherent in the use of military forces in crises.
Our specific rules of engagement, although classified and dependent on the given situation, generally require us to assume a ""defensive position"" and to react to a hostile act.
This, of course, is not all bad, for a different type of rules might result in a miscalculation which could have catastrophic consequences.
Even so, our rules of engagement put us at a disadvantage because our unit commanders and individual commanding officers are forced to think defensively prior to taking offensive action.
Moreover, our present rules put us in a very unpalatable situation in that the enemy can start the war at the time and place of his choosing.
Within the context of the ""battle of the first salvo,” so important in Soviet military thinking, our rules of engagement give the Soviet Navy a tremendous advantage.
The United States Navy can ill-afford to absorb a massive, coordinated afgack prior to being able to take offensive action.
The possibility that a crisis could erupt in war exacerbates the tension between political and military considerations inherent in rules of engagement.
In a severe crisis, one in which Soviet-American hostilities have risen to the point that wartime options must start receiving consideration, the tensions between political and military objectives becomes acute.
Peacetime political missions are prone to put naval forces in locations other than where contingency plans for wartime operations would have them, and can employ forces of a bint and composition other than would be optimum for wartime operations.
First, the naval force carrying out the political mission may not be suitable or available for immediate employment in wartime operations should war break out.
It could well be sunk in the first seconds of the war, its position being well known and its presence being an aggravation.
Second, the ability of the fleets from which the units were drawn to conduct preplanned wartime operations can be degraded by the absence of the units.
Efforts to minimize the impact of these effects can entail actions which may not be compatible with the political objectives national leaders and the diplomatic initiatives being taken to resolve the crisis.
Using a naval force suitable for wartime operations for a political mission, or attempting to keep it in a location and condition of readiness suitable for wartime operations, could cause the same misperception.
On the other hand, failure to maintain the readiness of naval forces for wartime missions be misperceived as signaling a lack of resolve or a willingness to sacrifice national interests to avoid an armed clash, thus eroding credibility, undercutting the nation's bargaining position, and debilitating efforts to negotiate a solution to the crisis.
Conclusion This chapter has reviewed the United States Navy's view of its role as a political instrument, examined the impact of naval forces on crisis stability, and discussed the tensions between political and military considerations that arise in crisis naval operations.
Five views consistently expressed by United States Navy leaders are particularly important for understanding their perceptions of the role of naval forces in crises.
First, warfighting capabilities are viewed as the foundation for performance of peacetime missions.
Second, and closely related, Navy leaders strongly believe that peacetime missions must entail maintaining readiness to perform warfighting missions, particularly in crises.
Fourth, the purposes of forward presence are viewed as demonstrating denial capabilities for deterrence at placing forces where they are available to conduct warfighting missions should deterrence fail.
Fifth, the two objectives of crisis response--crisis management and escalation control--are viewed as best achieved through employing forces capable of threatening deterrence by denial, and therefore capable of defeating the enemy in battle to achieve denial.
The theme underlying these five views is that combat oer warfighting capabilities are the basis for conducting peacetime political missions.
That Navy leaders should espouse this view is not surprising, as the raison d'etre of navies being to win battles at sea.
The key point is that political leaders and military commanders may be using the same terms with much different meanings, and viewing the same military actions as having much different purposes.
Civilian leaders could authorize prewar naval deployments as a signal of resolve, while naval leaders execute the deployments to increase readiness for wartime operations.
Such differences in perspective--civilian leaders focusing on the political considerations while military leaders focus on military considerations--can give rise to tensions between political and military considerations.
These differences in perspective are not a problem so long as the deplyments succeed in acheiving their political objectives, that is, so long as the other side refrains from escalation.
Two problems could arise, however, if fighting does erupt--which could result from some sort of inadvertent incident as well as from a deliberate decision by the adversary.
First, civilian leaders may not understand that by executing military contingency plans, they are authorizing United States forces to conduct combat operations under certain circumstances~-such as in self-defense or anticipatory self-defense.
Contingency deplyments in support of allies involved in a crisis can exacerbate thsi problem if United States forces are authorized to use force in support of the ally.
Second, civilian leaders could unknowingly be limiting their future options a a narrow range of military operations once fighting erupts.
Military leaders always have such contingency responses, but, because their focus is on protecting their forces and ensuring victory in any engagement that might arise, the intensity and scope of combat operations they envision could well exceed what civilian leaders would have desired had they participated in the planning process.
Differences in perspective can thus have serious latent implications that to not become apparent until an unanticipated incident occurs.
The RiamabteE Sati cs of maval forces that make them the preferred type of force for use as a political instrument in crises also tend to make them relatively more susceptible to crisis stability problems than other types of forces.
First, political Signals sent by naval forces are especially vulnerable to misperception, making the misperception dilemma particularly acute in naval crisis response.
Second, the nature of modern naval warfare places a premium on firing first in tactical engagements, making the crisis security dilemma particularly acute in naval crisis response.
Discussion of these topics was necessary to develop specific concepts for operationalizing the theory of stratified interaction.
With that task completed, the second phase of the research design can now commence.
The second phase consists of four case studies of crisis naval operations, which are presented in the next chapter.
Ti te eH a 9° + a Bee) ® ® Jt 7 e a6 . ' : , ‘, ‘ sos e Vm el yh ‘ aes ® 3 Por A o* : ° 4 ' beep. rabeerh, GM) Savon Fah 14 0s Mod S* -P s ‘ 0.
Se “os *e Ae Lear & 5 oe 2 ae, oe ma Pumse he gatps erases at hi yy ae ee z ot Ys yo.
Wan. aR a sam. dacatiane ds ' ' oo wees Sa otaingr gt ater ig ea oo “SA, i8add € ou Oh es 0 Lae TAs eh Eis.
Ale tel & Mtn OCS & Sa Nghe ngtiann§ ‘ ’ sah % 9 ¢ 7 eth ote Sy ae By ""alee S8h ats & Neg MCMC Iisa Benth Op y Ofe4y tie 8, me Br hs a Weng 8 opis Rivvate, Tr “4 ‘se ""an oan mens te.
Mein £4 Ten’, PE Awa ter 1 koe eee kb lav tee . of, ae aes J + ftw : werd Sr nk.
LT RASS. 4 ee . es ees bag es ene bei cre eR LF, Tay 29% Rag fa MU eRe eNe Oasys PERS e mn ne hs SEPA lela Reh ET” LAS » CES Ss oC * 8 os o heya ar 2, » ie § ote YF fa Ny ats ' CP aria 6 iat A SOG GLA a oe te Phanethyr . e8ei2 7.
BAT i eS FRESCO BIW Hts ee Ad ~ Sate a a ot UR anes . ' i’ eek is lire nt ANA) BING whe.
YBa 3 ata Xt Li it Ja ri ade tO a Ce wt ie A q ’ e ry a ry RO ao Ae wr ene td a ia PR oe.
Pup ttn e, wdn 0%4 EAE se rarees oa Baty vee Gtk Fe eee eeeas el Yexe ane retie s4, Ve Fite Vt.
Sane eon gt Bs ae pb Fig ow Oh, wee i 4p seh a a Wane. ait pled ot yo guelines saute eee iF MEST AE A bare ie tag.
Fa op pes’, 2 cave th otto thpay gee uterSe a 242"" . rt bbe ae apt erie eaten bt Pia he is Piss ecese Lal ae * 3 Pape ot ef} {oes Leta grt th betas a RY 51 2, Me iain } se a3 ash) ‘ba, Ke, 4 1.
The criteria for case selection were significant United States naval operations were conducted and influenced the outcome of the crisis, the naval operations were conducted in the immediate proximity of adversary naval forces or land-based forces that could threaten naval forces, and there was a possibility of fighting erupting between the United States and the other side in the crisis.
Eight questions addressing specific aspects of the theory of stratified interaction will be addressed in each case study.
This question addresses the second corollary to the theory of stratified interaction, that the security dilemma can become stratified in crises.
This question addresses the third corollary to the theory of stratified interaction, that ‘escalation dynamics can be stratified ina crisis.
Although escalation dynamics cannot be addressed directly--none of the cases escalated to war-~research was done to identify Guedtions which may have inhibited escalation dynamics from occurring.
All three tensions arise from the requirements of crisis management, the essence of which is placing political constraints on military operations.
Each case study opens with an overview of the background crisis and its context, followed by a description objectives and strategies of each side.
After a review of the command and control methods that were used, United States naval operations during the crisis are discussed.
Each case closes with a summary of findings on the eight research questions.
The United States responded by announcing a commitment to the defense of Quemoy and assisting the Nationalists in breaking the blockade of the island.
The crisis tapered off in October 1958, after the Chinese Communists announced that they would not shell Quemoy on even days, allowing supplies to reach the island.
The United States Navy played a prominent role in the crisis, escorting Nationalist convoys to Quemoy and patrolling in the Taiwan Strait.
Clashes between Nationalist and Communist forces occurred during the war and intensified afterwards despite United States efforts at mediating between the two sides.
The Nationalists and Communists were irreconcilable because both sides claimed to be the only legitimate government of all China.
The Communists proclaimed the goal of reuniting Taiwan with the mainland under Communist rule, and the Nationalists proclaimed the goal of returning to the mainland to place it under Nationalist rule.
Thus was born the confrontation in the Taiwan Straits between the Nationalist Chinese and Communist Chinese.
The United States remained committed to the Nationalists and refused to recognize the People's Republic of China.
When North Korea invaded South Korea on June 25, 1950, one of the first actions taken by the United States was to send the Seventh Fleet to protect Taiwan against invasion.
The Nationalist-Communist confrontation became firmly embedded in the Soviet-American cold war when the PRC signed a thirtyyear friendship treaty with the Soviet Union on February 14, 1950, and the ROC signed a Mutual Defense Assistance Agreement with the United States on February 9, 1951.
The Nationalists occupied several islands off the coast of mainland China as they fled to Taiwan.
The offshore islands had little value for the defense of Taiwan, but were useful as bases for military raids and intelligence missions against the mainland.
The offshore islands also had important symbolic value to the Nationalists.
The Nationalists returned fire and four days later began launching large-scale air attacks against the mainland.
The United States responded by immediately ordering the Seventh Fleet to resume its patrol of the Taiwan Straits.
By February 1955 the Nationalist position on the Tachen Islands had become untenable, and the United States convinced the ROC to withdraw its garrison with Seventh Fleet support.
The withdrawal was conducted successfully without interference from the PRC, which declared a ceasefire in the area two days before the evacuation.
The crisis tapered off after this as the PRC adopted a less ola Cane. line toward Taiwan and the United States.
This policy, first apparent at the April 1955 Bandung Conference of African and Asian nations, called for peaceful liberation of Taiwan, and lasted until July 1958.
The United States signed a Mutual Defense Treaty with the ROC on December 2, 1954, and Congress passed the Formosa Resolution in January 1955.
The fact that in making the private commitment the Eisenhower Administration was breaking an earlier promise to make a public commitment, suggests that the the private commitment-better described as informal assurance--was intended only to resolve the immediate crisis.
President Eisenhower would later interpret the Formosa Resolution narrowly 06 mean that the United States could not defend the offshore islands unless their loss would threaten the defense of Taiwan.
Between 1954 and 1957 the Nationalists increased the Quemoy garrison from 30,00 to 86,100 troops-~almost onethird of their ground forces.
Sea Power and Global Politics in the Missile Age (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971), 170.
Chiang also had not abandoned the option of someday taking offensive action against the mainland, and may also have deployed the troops to Quemoy so as to be able to rapidly exploit political upheaval on the mainland.
Tension in the Taiwan Straits remained at a relatively low level from April 1955 to July 1958.
The Nationalists used the offshore islands for limited political and military Operations, such as infiltration of agents into the mainland and broadcasting propaganda over loudspeakers.
The Communist Chinese occasionally shelled the offshore islands or buzzed them with aircraft.
Neither side increased the intensity of such operations prior to late August 1958.
Ambassadorial talks with the United States in Poland had failed to yield any American concessions on the Taiwan issue.
On August 23, 1958, the Communist Chinese commenced an intense artillery bombardment cf Quemoy, firing over 40,000 shells in two hours according Nationalist Epokesrien.
These two studies disagree as to whether or not Nationalist military activities on the offshore islands contributed to precipitating the crisis.
Gurtov and Huang contend that, Nationalist activities during the first half of 1958 were a serious provocation.
Halperin, on the other hand, contends that the level of Nationalist activities had actually declined, and were much less provocatory in 1958 than in earlier years.
The evidence presented in the two studies supports Halperin's view, but the low level of Nationalist military operations that were being conducted from the offshore islands were probably still an annoyance to the Communist Chinese.
The first objective was to deter the Nationalists from using the offshore islands for harassment of the mainland, or as a base for a future invasion of the mainland.
This would reduce the annoyance of Nationalist military activities from the offshore islands and perhaps lead to a reduction in the Nationalist garrison on the islands.
The second objective was to force the Nationalists to withdraw form Quemoy, similar to the manner in which they had been force“ to abandon the Tachen Islands in 1955.
The blockade of Quemoy appears to have been designed to cause logistical problems similar to those that forced evacuation of the Tachens.
The third objective was to avoid war with the United States, which could well result in United States atomic attacks on the mainland.
The advantage of a blockade over an outright invasion was that it was less likely to provoke the United States into attacking the mainland in support of the Nationalists.
The fourth objective was to discredit the American commitment to the Nationalists and weaken U.S.-ROC relations.
This could have been the outcome if the United States did not intervene to break the blockade and the Nationalists were forced to evacuate Quemoy.
Weakening U.S.-ROC relations might make the Nationalists more amenable to negotiations and even weaken the defense of Taiwan.
If none of the other objectives were achieved, negotiations would offer an opportunity to gain American and Nationalist concessions in the Taiwan Strait.
As Tang Tsou has pointed out, the Chinese Communists ""shifted to the United States the decision as to whether there would be a direct encounter between American and Communist Chinese forces in Asia.
The strategy employed by the Communist Chinese in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis is an example of the approach to use of force they employed from 1950 onward.
On August 24 the Communists made an attempt to seize Tung Ting Island, a tiny Nationalistoccupied island eighteen miles southwest of Quemoy.
The eatidmabiote repelled the invasion force and there were no further Communist attempts to invade any of the islands in the Quemoy group.
It is likely that Tung Ting was the only island that the Communist Chinese intended to invade at the outset.
However, the primary reason for seizing Tung Ting would have Paw “ene psychological impact of its loss on the Nationalists.
Loss of the island might have demoralized the Nationalists and, the Communists may have hoped, led the Nationalists to believe that Quemoy was also indefensible.
Additionally, seizing a single, tiny island would be a low-level test the United States commitment to the defense of the offshore islands.
If seizing Tung Ting did not evoke a strong United States response, other small islands in the Quemoy group probably would have been seized as part of protracted campaign against Quemoy.
Strains had begun to develop in the StmG2sovilet alliance in 1956 and 1957, but as of 1958 both sides were still trying to forestall the rupture that would occur later.
In his memoirs, Khrushchev states that his government supported Chinese military aid requests for the upcoming operation.
However, once the Chinese bombardment of Quemoy began, the Soviets were circumspect in their propaganda support until the Communists had taken steps to avert a direct clash with the United States.
As long as the crisis did not result in war, the costs would be small~-some military aid, propaganda support, and deterrent threats to the United States.
The second Soviet objective was to avoid being dragged into war with the United States by the actions of Communist China.
The first objective was to prevent Guemoy from falling into Communist hands.
Analysts are divided on whether Moscow and Peking agreed or disagreed on the level and type support the Soviets would provide.
One view is that the Soviets provided much less support than they had led the Chinese to expect.
The Chinese made this accusation in a bitter 1963 denunciation of the Soviets, after the Sino-Soviet split had erupted in public acrimony.
A second view is that Mao and Khrushchev were in agreement on the level of support the Soviets would provide.
A third view is that Mao and Khrusuchev did not discuss the issue at all and the anticipated level of Soviet support was not a major factor in Chinese decisionmaking.
The second objective was to prevent the crisis from involving the United States in a war with Communist China and the Soviet Union.
This objective required that the United States restrain the actions taken by the Nationalists against the mainland and limit the role of United States forces in the conflict.
Apparently assuming that the Nationalists and Americans would not be able to break the blockade without attacks on the mainland, Peking had adopted the limited probe strategy in order to force the decision to escalate on the United States.
By adopting a strategy emphasizing a limited response--breaking the blockade without attacking the mainland--the United States passed “the onerous burden of deciding whether to accept the existing situation or to escalate” back to the Chinese Communists.
The Chinese Communists had in effect written the rules for the military contest that was to follow, and those rules were highly unfavorable for the American strategy.
If the strategy succeeds, as it did in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis, the expected outcome is reversed without escalation of the conflict.
Using the categories of crises presented in Chapter II, which distinguished between direct and indirect crises, for the United States it was an indirect crisis.
The United States was brought into the confrontation through its alliance with the Nationalists on Taiwan.
This meant that, in addition to controlling the actions or its own forces, ‘the United States also had to be concerned with the behavior of its Nationalist allies, lest they provoke a war with Communist China.
In summary, the essence of the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis was a limited probe by Communist China against the Nationalist-held offshore islands, countered by a United States strategy of engaging in a test of capabilities under restrictive ground rules.
Both sides sought to achieve limited political objectives while preventing the crisis from escalating to war.
Command and Control Prior to discussing the United States naval operations conducted in the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis, it will be useful to review the command structure that existed at the time.
The 1958 defense reorganization, which removed the Joint Chiefs of Staff from the operational chain of command, had not yet been implemented.
The JCS used a system of designating one of the service chiefs to act as the ""executive agent” for the JCS in controlling a particular Operation.
This ensured that a single commander, rather than a committee, was responsible for detailed management of the operation at the JCS level.
The JCS executive agent was responsible to the JCS, but was normally accorded substantial authority and could work directly with the Secretary of Defense so long as he kept the JCS informed.
The next level in the chain of command was the Commander in Chief Pacific , Admiral Admiral Harry D Felt, the unified commander for all United States forces in the Pacific theater.
I'd send in something and, unless otherwise directed, I'm going to do this or that.
Under CINCPACFLT were two operational commands (the First Seventh Fleets), eight administrative commands (for training and readiness of specific types of forces, such as aircraft or destroyers), and six area commands (for United States naval forces assigned to particular areas, such as Japan and the Philippines) .74 Commander Seventh Fleet as the command responsible for naval operations in the Western Pacific, including the seas around Taiwan.
During the Taiwan Strait Crisis, COMSEVENTHFLT was Vice Admiral Wallace M Beakley, relieved on October 1, 1958, by Vice Admiral Frederick N Kivette.
Task Force 72, the Formosa Patrol Force; Task Force 73, the Logistic Support Force; Task Force 76, the Amphibious Assault Force; Task Force 77, the Attack Carrier Striking Force; Task Force 79, the Fleet Marine Force; and 25 The Task Force 70.4, the ASW Hunter-Killer Group. units assigned to these task forces changed as ships and squadrons deployed from the United States for duty with the Seventh Fleet.
The Formosa Patrol Force originated during the Korean War, when President Truman ordered the Seventh Fleet to guard Taiwan against Communist attack.
The Navy ships and patrol planes assigned to patrol the Formosa Strait were designated a separate task force on August 24, 1950.
Task Force 72 became the Formosa Patrol Force in 1953, reflecting the nature of its duties, and was renamed the Taiwan Patrol Force in 1957.
Rear Admiral Paul P Blackburn, Jr., was Commander of the Taiwan Patrol Force in 1958.
During the crisis, the force consisted of a cruiser, approximately twelve destroyers , two patrol plane squadrons, and two seaplane tenders, one of which served as the force flagship.
From establishment of the command until February 1957, the Commander of the Seventh Fleet was “dual hatted"" as Commander of the Formosa Defense Command.
This upgraded the status of the command and allowed more effective planning and coordination, but the commander still did not have operational control of United States forces defending Taiwan.
On September 11, 1958, the United States Taiwan Defense Command became a true unified command with the commander having operational control of all United States forces committed to the defense of Taiwan.
Existing communications systems had been created well before the unified command system was established and thus were not designed to support it.
Washington could not establish direct radio communications with naval forces at sea, and excessive time delays precluded real-time control of forces on Taiwan.
The primary communications channels between commanders ashore were telegraph and teletype lines.
Washington did not provide detailed operational guidance to Navy operational commanders in the Far East.
Vice Admiral Alexander Heyward, Director of the PoliticoMilitary Affairs Division of the CNO's staff during the crisis, states that “civilian authorities did not attempt to exercise detailed control over those Ronee Navy commanders were delegated substantial decisionmaking authority and given relatively broad freedom of action.
COMUSTDC and COMSEVENTHFLT originated and planned virtually 32 all of the operations that were conducted.
Sluice Admiral Alexander S Heyward, Jr., letter to author, May 27, 1988.
First, the United States, including the United States Taiwan Defense Command and the Taiwan Patrol Force, did not have contingency plans for assisting the Nationalists with the resupply of Quemoy.
These commands began formulating plans for resupply and convoy escort in late August, when it became apparent that the Nationalists could not resupply Quemoy on their own, but the plans were not completed until September 3 (ten days erWer the Communist artillery barrage started) and the first convoy was not ready to sail until three days later.
Under the Eisenhower Administration's strategy of “massive retaliation,” primary emphasis in war planning had been on plans calling for use of nuclear weapons from the onset of a conflict.
Planning, training, and logistical preparations for extended conventional operations had been neglected, particularly in the Air Force.
When the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis erupted, some United States commanders in the Pacific, such as General Lawrence Kuter, Commander in Chief Pacific Air Force, expected that if a decision were made to defend Quemoy, it would be with nuclear weapons.
However, the Eisenhower Administration, which was not enthusiastic about defending the offshore islands to begin with, directed that planning proceed on the basis that only conventional weapons would initially be used.
CINCPAC, the JCS, and the Eisenhower Administration paid close attention to the authority delegated to operational commanders.
President Eisenhower states in his memoirs that he ""saw no need to delegate to any subordinates my authority as Commander-in-Chief to commit United States forces to action,” and that he therefore retained this authority himself.
Use of atomic weapons and United States air attack in support of CHINAT Air Force in 3 above [air strikes against mainland to defend offshore islands], gas necessary, only as approved by the President.
JCS thus gave careful consideration to the authority they delegated to subordinate commanders, striking a balance between delegation and control.
The rules of engagement authorized United States ships and aircraft to use force in self-defense, but prohibited them from taking offensive action against the mainland.
Commander Seventh Fleet authorized use of force to protect Nationalist ships under attack by Communist ships, aircraft, or submarines, but warned that United States forces were not to provoke fire from Communist shore batteries or engage in gunfire duels with them other than as Hegean sey for selfdefense and defense of Mut lonaliwst ships.
American fighters on Taiwan were only permitted to fire on hostile aircraft entering Taiwan’s airspace and were not permitted hot pursuit in international airspace.
United States combat air patrols were required to remain east of the “Davis Line,” which ran approximately down the center of the Taiwan Strait.
After the crisis erupted, the United States Air Force commander on Taiwan convinced CINCPAC and the JCS that these rules would cripple air defense efforts in the event of concerted Communist air strikes against Taiwan.
The distinction between hot pursuit (which was authorized in self-defense) and retaliation (which required approval of the oe had been proposed by the National Security Council and approved by President Eisenhower in May 1955.
By August 1956 this distinction had been incorporated into all rules of stiA amar ianE issued to United States forces.
The distinction between hot pursuit and retaliation was applied by the Eisenhower Administration to the rules of engagement for the air defense of Taiwan.
If Communist Chinese aircraft threatened United States forces, Nationalist forces outside of three miles from the mainland, or Taiwan and the Pescadores, those Comminst planes could be pursued by United States fighters.
If necessary, hot pursuit could continue into Communist Chinese airspace and even over the mainland.
However, attacks by United States forces against the mainland airfields from which the Communist Chinese planes operated were defined to be retaliation, and had to be approved by the President.
Heavy reliance had to be. placed on mechanisms of indirect control and the good judgement of the on-scene commanders.
The President and the JCS gave careful consideration to the authority they granted to subordinate commanders, striking a balance between delegation and control.
For operations approved by the President, such as escorting Nationalist convoys to Quemoy, Navy commanders were delegated substantial decisionmaking authority and given relatively broad freedom of action.
Washington did not provide detailed guidance on the conduct of operations to Navy commanders in the Far East.
Communist China's deploying jet fighters to previously unoccupied coastal airfields in Fukien Province was a major concern to the Nationalists.
Accordingly, the United States buildup emphasized air defense of Taiwan and the capacity to strike Communist airfields.
On August 5, the CNO directed that an attack Carrier group remain in the Taiwan area and that a twodestroyer patrol be maintained continuously in the Taiwan Strait.
On August 17 the Strategic Air Command placed five Guam-based B-47 jet bombers on alert.
The General Emergency Operations Plan was the forerunner to the Defense Condition of Readiness alert system instituted in November 1959.
Although the GEOP alert that had been declared on July 14 was partially relaxed on August 7, United States forces in the Pacific were still at a high state of readiness when the shelling of Quemoy started on August 23.
The Taiwan Patrol Force had two destroyers on patrol in the Taiwan Strait and two in port Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
Most of the Seventh Fleet's amphibious force was in Buckner Bay, Okinawa, and a four-ship amphibious group with a Marine BLT embarked was in port Singapore.
A dozen _ destroyers of Destroyer Flotilla One were scattered around 46 63-5.
On August 24 Commander Taiwan Patrol Force ordered two destroyers to proceed to Tung Ting Island , which the Nationalists had reported as being invaded.
The destroyers withdrew on finding no Communist Chinese activity in the area.
Commander Taiwan Patrol Force also ordered USS Hopewell to proceed to the assistance of a Nationalist tank landing ship under attack by Communist torpedo boats, but directed Hopewell to remain clear Se PIgWEING dnd not fire unless fired upon.
Communist FT boats circled Hopewell as she approached, but departed without firing on the American ship.
The Gaanedatng Officer of Hopewell, adhering to the rules of wnebassune in a tense and dangerous situation, refrained from firing on the PT boats.
Commander Seventh Fleet ordered Commander Taiwan Patrol Force to station three destroyers twelve miles east of Quemoy in the Straits, ordered Hancock readied to commence combat air patrols over the straits and air strikes if directed by the President, ordered Lexington and Princeton to proceed to stations northeast of Taiwan at best speed, and ordered all available minesweepers to report to the Taiwan Patrol Force for duty.
Commander Seventh Fleet also issued rules of engagement for the Taiwan Strait, authorizing Taiwan Patrol Force destroyers to fire on Chinese Communist units attacking United States or friendly ships in international waters, and directed that United States Navy aircraft remain at least twenty miles off the coast of the mainland.
This JCS directive authorized reinforcement of United States air defense forces on Taiwan, preparations to assume total responsibility for the air defense of Taiwan, preparations to escort and protect Nationalist resupply convoys to the offshore islands, augmentation of the Seventh Fleet as necessary, and preparations to assist the Nationalists in defending the offshore islands against invasion, to include air attacks on coastal air bases on the mainland.
The message stated that ""It is probable that initially only conventional weapons will be authorized, but prepare to use atomic weapons to extend deeper into Chinese Communist kesEetomy if 30 With only minor changes these were the necessary.” operations and preparations carried out by United States forces throughout the crisis.
Use of atomic weapons required specific authorization from the President.
On August 26, Commander Seventh Fleet ordered the attack carrier Shangri-La to proceed to Taiwan, and arranged for Marine Air Group Elaven , consisting of three fighter squadrons, to be transferred from Japan to Taiwan.
Midway and her escorts were to immediately depart Pearl Harbor for the Western Pacific, the heavy cruiser USS Los Angeles was to depart Long Beach for Pearl Harbor that day, and Seventh Fleet was to halt normal rotation of ships back to the United States until the reinforcements that had been ordered in arrived.
Essex joined them on September 16, allowing Hancock, which had been extended past its normal rotation date, to return to the United States.
Commander Seventh Fleet also ordered naCl calthon Yacatronens and a cruiser added to the Taiwan Patrol Force, raising its strength from four destroyers to twelve destroyers and a cruiser.
By midSeptember the Seventh Fleet included four attack carriers, one ASW carrier, three cruisers, 41 destroyers and destroyer escorts, and seven attack pitilabaaiedl.
Day and night combat air patrols over the Taiwan Strait commenced on August 25, remaining outside of twenty miles from Communist territory.
The Taiwan Patrol Force.increased the number of destroyers on patrol in the Straits from two to four, added a heavy cruiser to the patrol, armed its patrol planes with depth charges and torpedoes, and increased their patrols of the mainland coast.
On August 26 CINCPACFLT directed Commander Seventh Fleet to prepare for conventional air attacks against coastal targets and nuclear strikes against inland targets if directed by the President, and the attack carrier force prepared plans for the strikes.
The Seventh Fleet Cruiser-Destroyer Force prepared to bombard Communist artillery positions on the mainland in support of Nationalist convoys to Quemoy.
JCS authorized escort of Nationalist convoys iff the Nationalist navy could not do so, directed that freedom of the seas be protected in the Taiwan Strait by operations confined to international waters, authorized the United States Taiwan Defense Command to assume responsibility for the air defense of Taiwan so that Nationalist planes would be free to defend the offshore islands, and directed that a total of 36 landing craft be turned over to the Nationalists to assist their resupply effort.
The Commander of the United States Taiwan Defense Command was delegated authority to make the determination as to whether or not United States escort of Nationalist convoys was needed.
One Nationalist LST was sunk and second damaged on August 24 while evacuating wounded from Quemoy.
On September 2 the Nationalists denied a Communist claim that the supply line to Quemoy had been cut, but on September 4 the Nationalists admitted that they could not get sufficient supplies to the island to keep pace with consumption.
Ammunition was the critical item (particularly artillery shells), but fuel was also a serious concern.
Nationalist sources stated on September 5 that three of the last four LSTs sent to Quemoy had been forced to leave before they completed unloading supplies.
United States records indicate that all five Nationalist attempts to resupply Quemoy with LSTs between August 23 and September 3 were turned back by Communist artillery fire and PT boats.
Many United States Navy emadiiders and civilian officials, including Rear Admiral Smoot, believed that the Nationalists were not making a concerted effort to resupply Quemoy.
Chiang Kai-shek asked for United States concurrence on air’ strikes against the mainland, a request that President Eisenhower turned down.
The convoy escort option was thus a compromise between doing nothing, which might have eroded Nationalist morale and strained U.S.-ROC relations, and attacking the mainland, which risked a direct Clash between Communist and American forces.
On August 25 President Eisenhower approved a JCS directive authorizing preparations to escort and protect Nationalist resupply convoys to the offshore islands.
On August 26 CINCPACFLT directed Commander Seventh Fleet to prepare to escort and Baemact Rationalist resupply convoys to the offshore islands while they were in international waters, and on August 27 Commander Seventh Fleet directed Commander Taiwan Patrol Force to commence planning for convoy escorts.
Commander Seventh Fleet on August 30 authorized Commander Taiwan Patrol Force to commence escort operations, plans for escorting were ready on September 3, and the first Nationalist convoy was ready to sail on September T The most important issue in the decision to escort Nationalist convoys was how close United States navy ships would be allowed to go to Quemoy.
In his oral history then-CNO Admiral Arleigh Burke states that President Eisenhower initially wanted the escorts to remain twelve miles offshore, whereas Burke recommended they go in to three miles.
Chiang Kai-shek requested that the United States escort to the beach, and Rear Admiral Smoot and United States Ambassador Everett Drumright supported his request.
The arguments against going within three miles of Quemoy were that it implied an intent to directly defend the island (as opposed to assisting resupply), that escorting to three miles offshore would be sufficient to deter Communist PT boats, and that the three mile limit kept United States ships out of range of almost all Communist artillery.
The August 29 JCS directive specified that convoy escorts and fighter air cover were to remain in international waters and airspace, meaning outside of Communist China’s three-mile territorial limit and no closer than three miles to Quemoy.
Convoy escorts were further advised to avoid known Communist shore batteries that could reach them in international waters.
The Nationalist Chinese were informed on September 3 that the United States would commence escorting their convoys.
That same day the United States Taiwan Defense Command completed its plans for escort operations.
The small-scale night convoy escort operations conducted September 4-6 were not revealed to the press until after the first daylight convoy on September 7.
These night convoys delivered only a very Small amount of supplies to Quemoy.
In addition to training the Nationalist and United States navies in operating together--a crucial task in itself--the initial small-scale escort operations provided a test of the Communist reaction.
The convoy consisted of two Nationalist medium landing ships escorted by two patrol boats and two corvettes.
The United States escort consisted of four destroyers and two cruisers, including USS Helena with Commander Seventh Fleet embarked.
The Communists did not interfere wien the United States escorts or the unloading of supplies, but the Nationalist unloading effort was hampered by poor organization and training on the beach.
Also on September 7, two Nationalist merchant ships delivered supplies to Matsu without Communist interference.
Chinese Gemmuniieed artillery opened fire on the two Nationalist LSMs two hours after they reached the. beach at Quemoy, damaging one and forcing them to withdraw.
One LSM had unloaded only a small amount of supplies, while the other had not started unloading.
The next two Lightning convoys, on September 11 and 13, experienced a similar fate, coming under heavy Communist artillery fire, unloading negligible amounts of supplies, and suffering one LSM destroyed and one LSM damaged.
The fifth Lightning convoy, on September 14, sarked the first use of tracked landing vehicles launched from LSTs for carrying supplies to the beach.
In addition to being powerful conventional weapons--far superior to Communist artillery shelling Quemoy--the eightinch howitzers were capable of firing shells with atomic warheads.
Catamcount successfully delivered three more eight-inch howitzers to Quemoy the night of 20 September.
The success of this resupply method further reinforced the belief that the Communist blockade had been broken.
Great caution was exercised during the Quemoy resupply operations to avoid clashes with Communist Chinese forces.
On September 7 The CNO directed that, as long as the Communists refrained from shelling Nationalist supply ships, only one destroyer was to be positioned within view of Quemoy and the mainland while Nationalist convoys were unloading supplies, the rest of the escorts were to remain just over the horizon ready to respond in the event of a Communist PT boat attack.
This restriction was lifted on September 10 by Commander Seventh Fett in response to Communist shelling of the second convoy, but on-scene commanders remained cautious.
United States Naval Institute, Oral History Program, 1976), 527; Blackburn, letter to author, May 30,-1988.
This limit was probably set by Commander Taiwan Patrol Force to avoid Communist artillery, even though the JCS directive allowed ships to approach as close as three miles.
When JCS authorized use of United States Navy LSDs in the resupply effort, CNO specified that they remain at least three miles offshore from Quemoy.
On October 8 Commander Taiwan Patrol Force increased this distance to 12 miles.
Early Nationalist resupply efforts were largely ineffective due to their lack of experience with unloading supplies over the beach rather than in port.
United States Navy assistance led to the shift from beaching LSMs and unloading them by hand, which had proven disastrous under fire, to the method of launching LVTs from LSTs offshore.
Another United States Navy technique taught to the Nationalists was launching landing craft from an LSD offshore.
This resupply method required United States participation because the Nationalists did not have LSDs of their own.
U.S.-Nationalist amphibious landing exercise, code-named “Land Ho,” was held on Taiwan on September 8.
The exercise was publicized to make it a signal of the United States defense relationship with Taiwan.
A radar picket destroyer provided air control and navigation services for Nationalist transport aircraft dropping supplies to Quemoy by parachute.
The attack carriers around Taiwan maintained a combat air patrol over the Taiwan Strait from August 25 to September 6, when it was cancelled due to the low level of Communist air activity and the buildup of aircraft on Taiwan.
Navy fighters made highaltitude, high-speed dashes up and down the strait to ensure that Communist radar operators knew that the latest United States jets were on-scene.
The Taiwan Patrol Force kept at least four destroyers on patrol in the Straits from August 25 to October 29, and periodically had a destroyer make an appearance off Matsu to show United States interest in the Nationalist-held island.
Patrol planes of the Taiwan Patrol Force kept a close watch on the mainland coast.
Navy ships and aircraft conducted electronic intelligence collection against Communist Chinese radar sites, an important preparation in the event that air strikes had been necawwere'* These operations contributed to United States readiness in the Taiwan Strait and sent a strong deterrent signal to Communist China.
I guess we do forget to tell them each change of course for each ship at times.
My CVA [attack carrier] group commanders were a little too enthusiastic, and we had 4 bad crashes and lost 3 pilots before I got them slowed down.
I have to get some of these carriers off the line pretty soon or we'll have breakdowns in more ways than one.
I believe Taiwan has got all the forces that they need at present on the island itself, and with CVA back-up, we should relax the rest of us.
I think we could take the heart out of ChiCom air without much trouble.
I think if the ChiNats [Chinese Nationalists] would slow down now on provocative actions that the situation would quiet down.X think they know we mean business and are not going to iet Quemoy and the Matsus starve.
Third, he expresses the view that the situation would quiet down if the Nationalists would “slow down on provocative actions,” a sentiment similar to those expressed by Rear Admiral Smoot on Taiwan and Vice Admiral Riley at ctncpac.
The final step in this review of United States Navy operations is to examine the interactions with Communist Chinese forces that could have occurred and the interactions with Communist Chinese forces that did occur during the crisis.
Communist artillery fires on United States ships, pEGepting counterbattery fire; Communist planes, PT boats, or submarines attack United States ships, prompting return fire or an air battle; Communist fighters attack United States fighters or patrol planes over the Straits, prompting an air battle; or Communist planes attack Nationalist ships or threaten Taiwan, prompting an air battle.
The high level of United States Navy forces in the waters around Taiwan provides grounds for expecting that there was ample opportunity for inadvertent military incidents to occur.
And, givea the high level of tension in the Taiwan Straits, any of these incidents could have triggered a clash between the United States and Communist China.
There was, in fact, very little tactical-level interaction between United States and Communist Chinese forces, despite the intensity of United States Navy operations close to the coast of the mainland.
During convoy escort operations, Communist planes and PT boats were sometimes seen in the vicinity of Quemoy, but they never challenged United States navy units.
There were no reported instances of United States ships on patrol in the Straits encountering Chinese Communist naval vessels or submarines.
Communist fighters did not venture out over the Straits to challenge United States Navy combat air patrols, although they did engage in several air battles with the Nationalist Air Force.
According to the commanding officer of a United States radar picket destroyer in the Taiwan Straits, Communist aircraft were occasionally detected over the Straits, but they stayed to the west of the Davis Line that marked the limit of the Taiwan air defense intercept zone.
The United States Navy, for its part, was careful to keep its fighters at least twenty miles off the coast of the mainland.
The closest that the United States and Communist China came to a clash during the crisis was the standoff between the United States destroyer Hopewell and Communist PT boats on August 24, described above.
No shots were exchanged in this or any other incident during the crisis.
USS McGinty was patrolling southwest of Quemoy when a Nationalist patrol craft close to Quemoy was taken under fire by Communist shore batteries.
The Nationalist PC fled seaward at best speed and McGinty closed the PC at 24 knots to cover its withdrawal with a smoke screen.
Six rounds of Communist artillery fire landed astern of McGinty but neither the United States oe It appears that nor the Nationalist ship were damaged. the Communists ceased firing as soon as McGinty Serine the PC, the same pattern as in the Hopewell episode.
The United States Navy lost at least four jet fighters in flying accidents, but none of these incidents caused or resulted from interaction with Communist forces--they were caused by maintaining an excessively high tempo of operations.
There was one incident in which Nationalist Air Force planes attacked Nationalist Navy ships in the Taiwan Straits, but the correct identities of the attackers and victims were established before United States forces became involved.
Commander Taiwan Patrol force investigated the allegation and determined that the plane had not approached Communist territory closer that thirty miles.
On October 9 the Communist Chinese charged that two United States navy destroyers had invaded their territorial waters.
Although the ships initially denied the charge, Commander Taiwan Defense Comuand later determined that one leg of the patrol they had been on could have taken them close to Communist waters.
Commander Taiwan Patrol Force changed the patrol route to open the closest approach to Communist Reililters and no further incidents occurred.
The United States ceased escorting Nationalist convoys on October 8 and never resumed the escorts.
On October 12 Peking extended the ceasefire, but then on October 20 resumed the shelling, claiming that United States ships had escorted a Nationalist convoy on October 19.
There was a Nationalist convoy on October 19, but Taiwan Patrol Force did not escort it.
However, the evening of October 19 a United States LSD, with United States escorts, had conducted a resupply mission off of Quemoy, remaining 12 miles off the island.
There had also been LSD resupply operations the evenings of October 8, 12, and 13, all without protest from the Communists, making it doubtful that the October 19 LSD convoy was the primary reason why the Communists decided to resume shelling.
The most likely cause of the renewed shelling was the visit of United States Secretary of State John Foster Dulles to Taiwan.
Dulles arrived in Taipei on October 20 for discussions with Chiang Kai-shek.
The Communist Chinese shelling was probably intended to disrupt the Chiang-Dulles talks, perhaps increasing United States pressure on Chiang to make concessions on the offshore islands, and to signal continuing dissatisfaction with the status quo in the Taiwan Straits.
In summary, United States Navy forces in the seas around Taiwan provided the President with a wide range of military options for dealing with the Communist Chinese probe of the offshore islands.
Navy attack carriers provided a potent deterrent threat, and the Taiwan Patrol Force provided the escorts crucial for the test of capabilities strategy that the President adopted in the crisis.
Navy commanders imposed restrictions on their forces to avoid clashes with the Communists and, as shown by the performance of the destroyer Hopewell, exercised restraint when in potentially dangerous situations with Communist units.
Findings This section will review the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis to answer the eight research questions.
The Eisenhower Administration was concerned about the danger of events getting out of control in the Taiwan Straits.
The position paper approved by the President on September 4 noted that, because United States destroyers would be operating up to three miles from the mainland, ""There is thus a possibility of a deliberate or accidental hit by the Chicoms, which would have potential and unplanned reactions which might involve at least limited retaliation.
United States Navy commanders in the Pacific had significant authority to conduct operations as they saw fit--within the policy limits set by the President and the JCS--and exercised that authority to its limits.
The only detailed instructions provided by the JCS concerned rules of engagement and the limit on how close ships could approach Quemoy and the mainland.
Although there would later be pressure to allow United States ships to go right up to the beach in Quemoy, when the crisis erupted Commander Taiwan Defense Force and Commander Taiwan Patrol Force were keeping their ships twelve miles away from the mainland and the offshore islanas.
Throughout the crisis Washington was ill-informed of the status of operations currently in progress, which precluded American leaders from exercising close control of the operations.
The overall picture that emerges is of the Eisenhower Administration exploiting the flexibility of the United States command system for crisis management purposes.
Operational decisions that held the greatest risk of escalation were 8lamaiwan Patrol Force Review,” Enclosure 1, 1; Blackburn, lettér to author, May 30, 1988.
On the other hand, decisions on the details of executing operations previously approved by the President were delegated to on-scene commanders.
Both sides appeared to have good intelligence concerning the other side’s forces and operations.
The Taiwan Defense Command observed that the pattern of Communist Chinese shelling suggested that they had good intelligence on the convoys.
United States on-scene commanders had similarly good information on Communist military activities.
The Taiwan Patrol Force maintained intensive patrol and surveillance of the mainland coast.
However, detection of actions by the other side did not automatically ‘generate tactical reactions.
When United States and Communist forces came into contact, as in the Hopewell and McGinty episodes, they disengaged rather than fighting.
Thus, although the intelligence requirement for tight coupling of the two sides' forces was met, tactical reactions tended to be @ampened by measures taken to avoid clashes.
Both Communist China and the United States were using their forces for political purposes as well as military purposes.
Communist China was conducting a limited probe of an ambiguous American commitment. to the offshore islands, and exerting carefully controlled pressure on the Nationalists and the United States.
The United States responded by accepting a test of capabilities under the ground rules established by the Chinese Communists, backed by a massive concentration of maval and air power in the Straits to convey a strong deterrent threat.
Faced with a choice between escalating the confrontation or accepting an unfavorable outcome, the Chinese backed down and salvaged as much as they could politically.
Interactions occurred at the tactical level that were not directly controlled by American leaders.
For example, President Bisenhower had no control over the actions of the destroyer Hopewell on August 24.
The findings of this case suggest, however, that stratification is not an absolute concept--there can be degrees of stratification.
Measures taken by both sides to prevent confrontations between their forces can greatly reduce opportunities for tactical-level interaction to occur.
When the President suspended convoy escort operations on October 6 in response to the Communist unilateral ceasefire announcement, the order was not received by Commander Taiwan Patrol Force until after two more Nationalist convoys had been escorted on October me 83 enaiwan Patrol Force Review,” Enclosure 1, 8.
In fact, the Commander of the United States Taiwan Defense Command initially responded to the Communist ceasefire by informing his forces on October 6 that it did not change their orders.
The impact of a fast-paced tactical environment and ambiguous orders were most apparent on August 24, the first full day of the crisis.
It would be August 26 before the onscene commanders received the first JCS directive on the crisis, but they had to respond immediately to a Communist Chinese threat of unknown proportions.
In the early hours of the crisis it was not clear whether the Communists intended to attack Taiwan, invade Quemoy or neighboring islands, or just harass the offshore islands with artillery fire.
The Nationalists were appealing for assistance to repel an invasion of one of the islands.
Compounding this rapidly evolving situation was the ambiguous Eisenhower Administration policy toward defense of the offshore islands.
United States -military commanders in the Pacific had sought Clarification on the offshore islands earlier in August as tensions rose in the Straits, but the President was unwilling to state a definitive policy until September 6.
Commander Seventh Fleet and the Chief of Staff at CINCPAC would later complain about this lack of 84 Left to their own devices, the guidance from Washington. on-scene commanders took actions on August 24 and 25-sending United States destroyers to the assistance of Nationalist forces defending the offshore islands--that the President may not have authorized had he been able to make the decisions himself.
This appears not to have been a significant problem in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis.
The entire chain of command, from the eteieent down to commanding officers at sea in the Straits, appear to have been aware of the danger of incidents with Communist Chinese forces.
The emphasis in JCS operational directives was on avoiding clashes with the Communists, and ——— commanders took similar measures on their own initiative.
These steps had the effect of S4eiiey, ""Reminiscences,"" 630; Halperin, ""The 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis,"" 133.
Vice Admiral Blackburn also states that he was not kept informed of United States political objectives and diplomatic initiatives during the crisis.
Although some United States commanders in the Far East may have wanted to take more vigorous action against Communist China, they did not perceive a significantly greater threat to United States forces than did officials in Washington.
In the 1958 Taiwan ae ea, when decoupling occurred it did not produce tactical-level escalation.
Instead, interactions remained at a relatively low intensity and when United States and Communist forces did come in contact, they quickly disengaged.
First, United States on-scene commanders exercised caution in the absence of guidance from higher authority.
For example, Commander Taiwan Defense Command and Commander Taiwan Patrol Force initially ordered ships to remain twelve miles from the mainland and aircraft to remain twenty miles from the mainland--a policy more restrictive than that approved by the President later.
This tacticallevel prudence compensated for lack of operational guidance Maimticesipling occurred, preventing escalation even when actions took place that the President had not ordered.
Those ground rules included no Communist attacks on United States forces, no United States attacks on Chinese forces except in self-defense (and defense of Nationalist forces in international airspace or waters), and no United States attacks on the Chinese mainland.
As this situation generated, we sort of abided by rules of the other side, and they abided by our rules.
They were very careful never to come out to sea, beyond their own coastline.
We were careful not to go beyond their coastline, too, so that we sort.of had an unofficial agreement and nothing happened.
Kalicki arGuts that a Sino-American ""crisis system"" evolved during the 1950s.
In this system, “the life cycle of.each crisis became increasingly self-regulated” and 85y Ss.
He also argues that American and Chinese leaders improved their skills na crisis managers, orchestrating actions with words more sensibly and 88 This imaginatively, and sending more effective signals. study of tactical-level military interactions in the 1958 crisis--the last major crisis in the period studied by | Kalicki--supports his view that the United States and Communist China had evolved tacit rules of crisis behavior.
This appears not to have been a serious problem during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis.
The military moves taken by each side were carefully designed to signal their intentions.
The Eisenhower Administration attempted to resolve this dilemma with a calculated policy of ambiguity, but only prompted the Communist probe of the American commitment and subsequent efforts by the Nationalists to use the crisis as grounds for striking back at the Mainland.
The problem was not that the Communists and Nationalists misperceived United States intentions, but rather that they correctly perceived the ambivalence in United States policy.
Tension between political considerations and military considerations arose in the restrictions placed on the support that could be provided for the Quemoy resupply effort.
The most efficient way of resupplying the Nationalist garrison would have been to Carry their supplies in United States amphibious ships escorted right up to the beach by United States warships.
However, this would have been a serious provocation to the Communists, who might not have refrained from shelling the American vessels.
The political restrictions on the resupply operation were thus prudent from a crisis management perspective, even if they required the United States and Nationalist navies to improvise ways to get supplies ashore under fire.
Tension arose between the need for top-level control and the need for on-scene flexibility and initiative, but overall a workable balance appears to have been struck.
President Eisenhower implies in his memoirs that he was satisfied with command arrangements during the crisis.
Efforts by officials in Washington to manage the crisis were hampered by lack of information bt the field, prompting the CNO to increase reporting requirements and send several queries to commanders in the Far East.
Rear Admiral Smoot made several requests for authority to make decisions himself rather than having to refer them to Washington, some of which were granted.
Tensions arose between performance of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions.
The PoliticoMilitary Policy Division of the CNO's staff prepared a position paper on August 24 in which the President was warned that ""The United States must undertake operations which bring action to a halt quickly.
The CNO refused to authorize similar-actions that would have further drawn down Atlantic Fleet strength.
Of the three types of political-military tensions, this one was the most serious during the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis.
The United States responded by demanding that the missiles be withdrawn, imposing a naval quarantine of offensive arms shipments to Cuba, preparing to launch air strikes against the sites and an invasion of Cuba, and alerting its strategic nucear forces.
Vice Admiral Beakley, Commander Seventh Fleet, expressed concern in the letter quoted previously that the attack carriers off Taiwan would start breaking down if kept on the line for too long without maintenance.
The United States Navy played a prominent role in the crisis, enforcing the quarantine and carrying out a wide range of operations in support of President Kennedy's strategy.
Background Soviet-American relations had begun to improve in 1959, marked by the “spirit of Camp David"" engendered during Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev's September visit to the United States.
This tentative thaw in the cold war ended in May 1960. when Khrushchev walked out of the — Four-Power summit meeting.
Khrushchev had demanded that the United States apclogize for violating Soviet airspace with the U-2 that the Soviets had shot down on May 1, 1960.
When President Eisenhower refused, Khrushchev scuttled the summit meeting.
This came two weeks after Khrushchev had announced a Soviet commitment to support “wars of national liberation"" in the Third World.
Thus, the ideological and political confrontation between the superpowers would continue in the new Administration.
The Kennedy Administration soon discovered that there was no missile gap with the Soviet Union and that the United states in fact held a lead in strategic nuclear forces.
Secretary of Defense Robert S McNamara revealed that there was no missile gap on February 8, 1961.
Khrushchev's intercontinental ballistic missile claims had largely been a bluff--the Soviets had few ICBMs and was producing them at a low rate.
American relations with Cuba had been deteriorating since Fidel Castro overthrew the Batista dictatorship in January 1959.
As Castro imposed a Communist dictatorship on Cuba and turned to the Soviet bloc for political support and economic and military aid, pressure grew in the United States to take action against him.
This led to the CIA plan to mount an invasion by anti-Castro exiles, which was well along when Kennedy came into office.
The attempted invasion failed, with most of the exile force killed or captured, producing a propaganda triumph for Castro.
President Kennedy admitted United States complicity in the invasion accepted iiddveadibility for the disaster.
This did not, however, mark the end of United States opposition to Castro.
The CIA launched “Operation Mongoose,"" a series of guerrilla raids by Cuban exiles.
Additionally, the Joint Chiefs were directed to prepare contingency plans for air strikes and invasion of Cuba.
In response to Britain, France and the United States unifying West Germany, which the Soviets viewed as a first step toward a separate Western peace with Germany in violation of the Potsdam agreement, the Soviets cut off rail and road access to Berlin in June 1948.
The blockade was broken by the Berlin airlift and was lifted in May 1949.
In November 1958 Khrushchev had given the West six months to withdraw from Berlin and sign a German peace treaty.
The Western powers rejected the Soviet demand, which was dropped during Khrushchev's May 1959 visit to the United States.
Khrushchev took a hard line on Berlin when he met Kennedy in Vienna in June 1961 and on July 8, 1961 demanded that the Western powers withdraw from — city.
The West refused, and in August the Soviets and East Germans began erecting the Berlin Wall around the Western occupation sectors of the city.
The crisis then tapered off without resolution of the issues that had provoked it.
In January, at the Punta del Este Conference of the Organization of American States , the United States persuaded the OAS to declare its opposition to Cuban revolutionary activity in Latin America.
On February 4, 1962, President Kennedy declared an embargo on all trade with Cuba other than medical supplies.
Osmoni Cienfuegos, Cuban Minister of Public Works, visited Moscow in April, Raul Castro, Minister of Defense, visited Moscow in early July, and Che Guevara, Minister of Finance, visited Moscow in late August.
These visits produced Soviet pledges of economic and military assistance.
The Cuban Military Build-up In mid-July ships carrying arms destined for Cuba began leaving Soviet ports.
Additionally, four to six passenger ships arrived per month in July, August and September, each carrying hundreds of Soviet technicians, troops, and support personnel.
United States intelligence estimates were that the Soviets had 3,000-5,000 personnel in Cuba by the end of September.
The Soviets supplied the Cubans with Mig-21 jet fighters, tanks, radar-controlled anti-aircraft guns, Mt rane conventional tactical ballistic missiles , coastal defense anti-ship cruise missiles, Komar~-class fast attack craft armed with SS-N-2 anti-ship cruise missiles, and extensive radar and communications equipment.
On August 29 U-2 photographs confirmed SA-2 Guideline surface-to-air missile sites in Cuba.
In eariy August the United States stepped up dts surveillance of Cuba and Soviet bloc shipping to the dsland.
This included photographic reconnaissance of all Soviet bloc shipping to Cuba, frequent peripheral photographic reconnaissance flights around the island, twicemonthly U-2 flights over the island, and assignment of the intelligence collection ship USS Oxford to monitor Cuba.
The CIA and NSC prepared detailed studies of the intentions and implications of the build-up, and in late August the CIA began issuing daily intelligence reports on Soviet arms shipments to Cuba.
Offensive weapons were those that could strike United States territory from Cuba, and included surface-to-surface missiles and bombers.
All other weapons, including the surface-to-air missiles and anti-ship cruise missiles, were considered defensive.
President Kennedy made public statements on September 4 and 13 describing the buildup of defensive arms in Cuba and warning that the United States would not tolerate offensive arms there.
Khrushchev would later claim that Soviet missiles were deployed in Cuba to defend the island against the threat of United States invasion--reflecting an offense-defense distinction based on political intent rather than the capability of the weapons.
Khrushchev apparently proposed the idea of deploying offensive missiles to Cuba sometime between late April and late May of 1962.
By early July Cuba had agreed to allow the missiles on its soil, plans for the deployment had been completed, and launch sites had been ddentifiea.
The Soviets rained initially to deploy 24 launchers for S£-4 Sandal 1,100-mile range MRBMs with two missiles per launcher, for a total of 48 MRBMs, and 16 launchers for SS-5 Skean 2,200-mile range IRBMs with two missiles per launcher, for a total of 32 IRBMs.
Of this missile force, only 42 MRBMs were actually deployed to Cuba before the United States imposed the quarantine on effensive weapons.
Additionally, the Soviets deployed 42 IL104 28 Beagle twin-engine light bombers to Cuba.
These were L03nnere are a wide range of estimates as to when the decision was made.
See Nikita S Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers, translated and edited by Strobe Talbott , 493.
In late July Cuba began evacuating residents from the ports at which the missiles would arrive and in early August the Soviets began establishing their own security zones at those ports, including construction of fences and guard posts.
In mid-August equipment for construction of the launch sites began arriving in Cuba and in late August Clearing of roads and launch areas started at the Sagua la Grande MRBM sites.
In early September MRBM and IRBM associated equipment began arriving in Cuban ports.
Also in early September construction began at the Guanajay IRBM sites and Cuban residents were evicted from what would become the San Cristobal MRBM sites.
In midSeptember construction began at one of the two Remedios IRBM sites and clearing of roads and launch areas started at the San Cristobal MRBM sites.
The one serious disagreement among these accounts is that Hilsman states construction started at Sagua la Grande in late September, while the National Indications Center report states it started in late August.
S, Suspicions and Preparations The United States was slow in coming to the realization that the Soviet Union was deploying offensive missiles in Cuba.
Although a few officials, particularly CIA Director John A McCone, had concluded as early as July 1962 that the build-up of defensive forces in Cuba was for the defense of offensive weapons to be introduced later, the consensus among the President's advisors and intelligence officials in the CIA and State Department was that ene Soviets would not put offensive missiles in Cuba.
Robert Kennedy and Roger Hilsman contend McCone never expressed his concern to the President.
Robert Kennedy apparently anticipated in April 1961 and September 1962 that the Soviets might put offensive missiles in Cuba.
Robert Kennedy stares in his memoir of the crisis that “No one had expected or anticipated that the Russians would deploy surface-to-surface missiles in cuba.
Roger Hilsman contends that the United States did not have accurate and reliable intelligence on the Soviet missiles until the October 14 U-2 photographs.
The opposing argument is that there were numerous indicators of the Soviet move, but USES analysts, working under an erroneous conception of Soviet behavior and perceptions, iienewed or at eawaneied evidence contradicting their belief that the Soviets would not put offensive arms in Cuba.
The two sides agree, however, that the Kennedy Administration was taken by surprise and caught unprepared when the Soviet missiles were discovered -on October Se aa The United States may not have had accurate and reliable intelligence, but there were several pieces of evidence that should have raised suspicion that the Soviets were placing offensive missiles in Cuba.
On the other hand, contrary to the dntelligence failure argument, the Kennedy Administration did anticipate the possibility that offensive weapons might be placed in Cuba and initiated actions to prepare for that possibility.
The pattern was a gradual accumulation of ambiguous intelligence that the arms build-up in Cuba could pose an offensive threat to the United States, accompanied by a search for confirmation that offensive weapons were being deployed in Cuba and a series of low-level preparations to counter that possibility.
This pattern-gradual accumulation of intelligence, search for confirmation, and low-level preparations for action-strongly influenced the manner in which the crisis was handled after the discovery of MRBMs on October 14.
In late August 1962, the United States began receiving reports a of Cuba on construction and preparations for installation,of MRBMs.
The reports lacked details positively linking the activities with offensive missiles, so were assessed as related to the build-up of defensive arms.
Allegations have been made that reports from Cuban exiles and agents in Cuba--ignored or given little credence at the time--in fact provided significant evidence that offensive missiles were in Cuba.
To avoid the threat of an interNational incident arising from a U-2 being downed by Soviet SAMs, the President had directed on September 10 that U-2 flights not be conducted over known SAM sites in western Cuba.
By designating western Cuba highest priority for U-2 flights, COMOR was recommending that the ban on flights over SAM sites be rescinded.
On October 9 this recommendation was taken to the President, who approved flights over western Cuba.
SA. intelligence on offensive missiles that was received in August and September failed to sway the President's advisors from their belief that the Soviets would not deploy offensive weapons in Cuba, it was carefully assessed and used to focus the search for photographic confirmation of the missiles.
Intelligence analysts in the Defense Intelligence Agency and the military services appear to have concluded by the end of September that the Soviet Union ‘ would soon deploy offensive missiles in Cuba.
He contends Colonel Wright presented photographs from the September 26 and 29 U-2 flights of construction at the Sagua la Grande MRBM site and Remedios IRBM site.
But we had beautiful pictures of these sites and the stuff going in, ""tt Although, as Vice Admiral Riley suggests, forceful action was not taken immediately, McNamara and the Joint Chiefs did commence a wide range of low-level actions to increase United States readiness for military action against Cuba.
However, Arthur C Lundahl, Director of the CIA's National Photographic Intelligence Center in 1962, states that U-2 photographs taken prior to October 14 did not reveal the presence of MRBM sites. lLundahl, interview by author, April 28, 1988.
Colonel Wright probably presented to the JCS the same briefing he would give to the COMOR three days later.
In the COMOR briefing, he pointed out that the pattern of SA~2 SAM deployments in the San Cristobal area seen in U-2 photographs taken September 5 resembled the pattern seen around MRBM/IRBM sites in the Soviet Union.
Hilsman contends that “Shipping intelligence did not reveal the contents of the ships,"" and that the significance of ships with hatches large enough to accommodate MRBMs arriving in Cuba riding high in the water was not realized until after the MRBMs were discovered in Cuba.
However, there is persuasive evidence that shipping intelligence did in fact provide important clues that offensive missiles were en route to Cuba.
OPNAV (the CNO's staff] as a whole, or rather the pertinent parts (as opposed to individuals such as myself), became overtly suspicious of Russian intentions in about the middle of July 1962.
The presence of construction equipment as deck cargo indicated large-scale construction to be contemplated.
Thus, the Navy's top leadership was being appraised on a regular basis of suspicions and evidence that the Soviets were deploying offensive missiles to Cuba.
Navy suspicions were based largely on evidence gained through shipping intelligence.
Photographs by patrol planes showed large cylindrical objects on the decks of several ships en route to Cuba.
Though the objects were covered with tarpaulins, it was easy to see what they were.
I[ never did decide whether the Russians wished us to know what they were doing, or the operation had been mounted so hastily there was not time to camouflage the cargoes properly, or they did not care, assuming we would find out very soon by some means anyway.
Admiral Griffin and Vice Admiral Caldwell were convinced by the photographs, the evidence was probably viewed as ambiguous at the time.
United States Naval Institute, Oral History Program, December 1975), 553.
Admiral Alfred G Ward, Commander Second Fleet during the crisis, states that two of the Soviet ships initially designated for intercept were selected ""Because of the photographs showing the missile cases along the deck.
One Navy flag officer related how he and his Air Force counterpart spent a total of five or six hours briefing the Chiefs during weekly JCS meetings in August and September on the evidence that the Soviets were deploying offensive missiles to Cuba.
They supported their arguments with photographs of possible MRSMs or IRBMs on the decks of Soviet ships.
However, they were unable to convince JCS Chairman General Maxwell D Taylor, who did not pass their warnings on to McNamara or the 124, oe Admiral William D Houser, interview by author, February 11, 1988.
The confirmation was. probably the SAM site photographs used by Colonel Wright to brief JCS and COMOR on the possibility of MRBM sites in western Cuba.
Hughes, special assistant for photoanalysis to DIA Director Lieutenant General Joseph Carroll, testified in 1963 that Navy photographs of Soviet deck cargo did not reveal evidence of missile equipment, a conclusion shared by Hilsman.
Thus, although Navy shipping intelligence convinced many in the Navy that the Soviets were deploying offensive missiles to Cuba, outside the Navy it was not regarded as sufficiently | unambiguous to warrant taking action against the Soviets.
Signals intelligence consists of communications intelligence , on emissions from enemy radio and other telecommunications systems, anc died Grexiue intelligence , on enemy radars and other non-communications emissions.
I verified that he held the position he described, attended JCS meetings in the August-September period, and worked with the Air Force officer he named.
Admiral Moorer thus indicates that SIGINT collected by Oxford played an improtant role in discovery of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba.
Thus, it cannot be determined precisely when Oxford first gained indications of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba or exactly what it was that Oxford learned.
The last week in September was the most likely period, based on the timing of United States surveillance and military moved directed against Cuba.
SIGINT could have been used to buttress Colonel Wright's conclusion--presented to the JCS on October 1 and to the COMOR on October 4--that the Soviets were deploying offensive missiles in Cuba.
Question naturally arise as to the clarity and reliability of the intelligence collected by Oxford.
Since intelligence professionals generally place great confidence in SIGINT, the apparent lack of a significant United States reaction to intelligence on Soviet offensive missiles is puzzling.
A Clear indication of Soviet MRBM deployments in late September should have enabled the the United States to take decisive action three weeks earlier than it did.
Further confirmation--U-2 photographs of clearly identifiable missile sites--was needed.
Second, the source of the intelligence had to be protected by providing an alternative source for the knowledge--again meaning U-2 photographs.
Under these conditions SIGINT would not have led to immediate and decisive United States action against the missiles.
The most important factors determining the manner in which the Kennedy Administration reacted to intelligence on Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba were President Kennedy's determination not to take action--particularly the use of force--until he had incontrovertible evidence that offensive missiles were in fact being deployed in Cuba, and his determination not to let his policy options be narrowed by political or military pressure prior to his having that evidence.
President Kennedy set an extremely high standard of Senco indi aputabive photographic confirmation of’ offensive missiles--as the requirement for taking action against Cuba or the Soviet Union.
Further dangers of the photographic confirmation requirement were that internal distribution of intelligence on offensive weapons in Cuba could build pressure for military action and that leaks of such intelligence could build pressure in Congress and the public to take forceful action.
Such internal and external pressures could narrow the President's options, force him to take action before he was convinced it was warranted, and even provoke a crisis that might have been avoided.
On October 11, the day after Republican Senator Kenneth Keating made his sensational allegations on Soviet IRBMs in Cuba, the President directed that intelligence on offensive weapons in Cuba be strictly limited ""only to specific individuals on an eyes only basis who by virtue of their responsibilities as advisors to the President have a 3 3 need to know.
This appears to have contributed to different commands arriving at different conclusions on whether or not there were offensive missiles in Cuba.
The first actions taken, in early August 1962, were to increase surveillance of Cuba and Soviet bloc shipping to Cuba. peSindtac in late August the CIA, NSC and State Department conducted a series of studies on the Cuban military build-up and United States policy options for dealing with it.
An analysis should be prepared of the probable military, political and psychological impact of the establishment in Cuba of either surface-to-air missiles or surface-to-surface missiles which could reach the United States 6.
A study should be made of the advantages and disadvantages of making a statement that the United States would not tolerate the establishment of military forces which might launch a nuclear attack from Cuba against the United States | 7.
These tasks were assigned to specific agencies, who were directed to report the names of the action officers working on these studies.
Additionally, a meeting with the President was scheduled for September 1 to review progress on these studies.
The central conclusion of Schlei's memorandum, submitted to the Attorney General on August 29, was that “international law would permit use by the United States of relatively extreme measures, including various forms and degrees of force, for the purpose of terminating or preventing the realization of such a threat to the peace and security of the Western Hemisphere.
In September the Kennedy Administration began taking preliminary steps to respond to the Cuban military buildup.
The President made public statements on the build-up on September 4 and 13, noting its apparent defensive nature and warning against installation of offensive missiles.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk met with Latin American ambassadors on September 5 concerning Cuba and proposed that a closed Organization of American States meeting be held in early October.
That meeting was held October 2 and included a United States briefing on the Cuban military build-up.
These meetings laid groundwork for the possibility that the OAS might have to take concerted action against Cuba in the future.
On September 20 the Senate passed a Joint ResoluEPs ron Cuba authorizing the President to use force to defend against Cuban aggression and prevent the creation of an external military capability in Cuba that threatened the United States.
The House passed this resolution on | September 26 and the President signed it on October 3,139 Thus, by early October the Kennedy Administration had taken several political and diplomatic steps to prepare for the possibility of action against Cuba.
On September 7 the President requested from Congress authority to call up 150,000 reservists.
On September 18 the Air Force began extensive training exercises for air strikes against Cuba, including simulated combat missions against mock Soviet SAM sites.
On September 19 a detachment of Navy F8U Corsair jet fighters was transferred to Key West in order to bolster the base's air defense.
Throughout September the Joint Staff and CINCLANT updated Cuban contingency plans.
In response to NSAM-181, the Air Force, Navy, and Joint Staff studied air strike options for dealing with offensive missiles.
The delivery of IL-28s and the briefing by Colonel Wright, which warned that an offensive missile site was likely to be built in the San Cristobal area, had a significant impact on the Joint Chiefs and the Secretary of Defense.
McNamara directed the Chiefs to intensify contingency planning for for military action against Cuba and to increase the readiness of United States forces for Cuban contingencies, including blockade, air strikes and invasion.
During my meeting with the Joint Chiefs of Staff on October 1, 1962, the question arose as to the contingencies under which military action against Cuba may be necessary and toward which our military planMing should be oriented.
Navy patrol planes first photographed a Soviet ship carrying suspected IL-28 crates on September 16.
Over the next two weeks two additional ships carrying suspected IL-28 crates were discovered.
During early October the confirmed arrival of IL-28s in Cuba seems to have been at least as great a cause for concern as the possibility of offensive missiles.
Johns contends that during this meeting McNamara ordered execution of the preparatory phases of the Cuban contingency plans.
However, there is no evidence to support this and Admiral Anderson denies that McNamara gave such an order.
Soviet action against Western rights in Berlin calling for a Western response indicating among other actions a blockade of Communist or other shipping to Cuba.
Evidence that the Castro regime has permitted the positioning of bloc offensive weapons systems on Cuban soil or in Cuban harbors.
Ce An attack against the Guantanamo base, Or against United States planes or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters.
The operational plans considered appropriate The preparatory actions which should now and progressively in the future be taken to improve United States readiness to execute these The consequences availability of forces and deal with threats in other Southeast Asia, etc. plans. of the actions on the or our logistic posture to areas,e.
Second, McNamara emphasized planning for the worst case-forcible removal of the Castro regime.
The Chiefs were thus oriented--with McNamara's full knowledge--toward preparations for large-scale air attacks and invasion of the island, rather than toward planning for a strictly abaioea use of force, such as a quarantine on offensive weapons.
On the other hand, by making initial preparations for air strikes and invasion, the JCS increased the range of military options available to the President on short notice.
S91 October 1 memorandum was that in focusing on the overthrow of Castro it inadvertently excluded JCS attention to limited operations, such as a Sener tinal that would suffice to achieve lesser objectives.
Military preparations for action against Cuba rapidly gained momentum from October 1 onward.
On October 1 CINCLANT notified his Navy and Air Force commanders responsible for tactical air operations “to take all feasible measures necessary to assure maximum readiness” to execute the contingency plan for air Senues against Cuba on October 20.
Navy and Tactical Air Command fighters and attack planes were placed on six, twelve, and 24 hour alerts for the air strike contingency.
The October 20 deadline to complete preparations for air strikes against Cuba appears to have been set by McNamara at the October 1 JCS meeting and passed to CINCLANT that day.
McNamara mentioned the October 20 target date in the October 16 morning and evening meetings with. the President.
S34 This OPORD was for a total blockade of Cuba and included the option of mining Cuban ports.
Designated Army airborne forces, Marine landing forces, and Navy amphibious forces were directed to begin prepositioning for invasion of Cuba.
Prepositioning of bulk supplies, such as fuel and ammunition, also commenced.
Plans were made to deploy the Fifth Marine Expeditionary Brigade from Camp Pendleton, California to the Caribbean.
On October 8 a squadron of Navy F4H Phantom jet fighters was moved to Key West and placed under Continental Air Defense Command control to augment air defenses in southern Florida.
On October 10 CINCLANT suggested further preparations to JCS and recommended that cover and deception be used to hide invasion preparations.
The President was thus being kept informed of the actions being taken by the military. $55 target date for action against Cuba.
On October 16 the attack Carrier USS Independence and four escorts left port and proceeded to a contingency station northeast of Cuba in order to be within air strike range of Cuba on October 20 (a mission planned and ordered well before the 46 Thus, when the MRBMs were discovered on October sje President was informed on October 16 that offensive missiles had been discovered in Cuba, the military had already taken anumber of actions to be ready for operations against Cuba.
These were prudent policies, but the photographic confirmation requirement implicitly denigrated other intelligence and led to action not being taken until some Soviet missiles were close to being operational.
By initially focusing JCS attention on major operations to overthrow the Castro regime, McNamara inadvertently diverted attention from limited operations designed to achieve lesser objectives-operations that would later be selected by the President.
Disagreements exist over which of these motives was most important to the Soviets, but are irrelevant to this study.
Some American officials thought the Soviet venture in Cuba was related to Berlin.
Khrushchev's mention of Soviet standing among Communist nations appears to be a veiled allusion to Soviet relations with Communist China, which were strained in 1962 due to, among other things, Chinese accusations that the Soviets were overly accommodating with the imperialist camp.
The Soviet strategy at the time the decision was made to deploy offensive missiles in Cuba was to achieve a fait accompli.
The Soviets took the game approach in reaction to the December 1979 NATO decision to deploy American Pershing II MRBMs and Ground Launched Cruise Missiles in Western Europe commencing in 1983.
See Caldwell, letter to author, March 14, 1988; Pachter, 10; Quester, 235.
This view is contradicted by the efforts the Soviets made to conceal delivery of the missiles, such as convoying the missiles only at night, and by Soviet diplomatic deception efforts.
First, the Soviet deployment plan emphasized speed rather than stealth--objectives that are often mutually exclusive.
This appears to have been a deliberate decision, perhaps driven by a deadline for making the missiles operational.
Second, the operation was mounted in a rush, with minimum advance planning.
Concealment measures were included in the plan, but appear not to have covered all requirements necessary to be effective.
This would explain the easily identified. trapezoidal pattern of SAM sites at San Cristobal.
The SAMs were deployed to provide the standard interlocking field of fire around the target to be defended, without an effort to avoid a previously used pattern.
Third, the Soviets did not have a sufficient number of large hatch ships to carry all of the missiles to Cuba below decks in the desired time frame.
Some of the missiles and their bulky support. equipment had to be shipped on deck to expedite delivery.
The Soviet Union appears not to have been able to formulate an overall political-military strategy from Octoter 22 onward.
The Soviets were placed in a position of reacting to American initiatives, which effectively precitded them from pursuing a strategy of their own.
The initial Soviet response was belligerent denouncement of Bac quarantine accompanied by an effort to expedite completion of the missile sites.
However, the Soviets did not place their nuclear or conventional forces at a high state of alert in an effort to coerce the United States and ordered their ships carrying weapons to Cuba to turn back rather than contest the quarantine.
A United States invasion of Cuba would have threatened one of his primary objectives for sending the missiles to Cuba in the first place.
However, these American concessions harcly compensated for the political-military setback suffered by the Soviet Union.
In his first meeting with advisors on the Giscovery of MRBMs, held the morning of October 16, the President made clear his view that the missiles had to be eliminated, by force if necessary.
Both objectives were expressed in the President’s televised speech on October 22 announcing the Cuban quarantine.
Later in the crisis, when advisors would express support for additional objectives, such as removing Castro from power, the President remained firm that the United States objective was removing the Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Although McNamara believed that the missiles had little impact on the strategic nuclear balance, other advisors perceived a serious military threat from the missiles.
Lendete thus perceived that vital national interests were at stake and that those interests had to be protected, but they also perceived that United States objectives in the crisis had to be limited in order to avoid wat with the Soviet Union.
On the other hand, the President, Secretary McNamara, McGeorge Bundy, and others were deeply concerned that an armed clash with the Soviet Union could escalate to war.
The President's advisors were aware of this warning and apparently conSidered it in formulating a course of action.
Alexander George has described the President as following a ""try and see"" approach, in which improvisation was the key feature, from October 22 to October pci The diplomatic communications and limited military actions initiated during this period were based on certain principles in the minds of United States policymakers, which will be described below, an informal crisis management strategy.
The first consideration was that the United States had to seize the initiative by keeping United States knowledge of the Soviet missiles secret until ready to announce a course of action.
This precluded Soviet diplomatic efforts to forestall an American attempt to force removal of the missiles and enabled the United States, rather than the Soviet Union, to define the political context and significance of the crisis.
After initial success--unanimous OAS support for the quarantine and a tentative Soviet decision not to | challenge it--the United States started losing momentum.
By starting with the quarantine--the least violent and provocative of his military options--the President avoided taking action that might have irreversibly committed the United States to an armed confrontation with the Soviet Union.
The blockade option was subdivided into the initial quarantine on offensive arms, an expanded quarantine that would include POL and perhaps other strategic commodities, and a total blockade of shipping in and out of Cuba.
The air strike option was conceptually subdivided into small-scale, ""titfor-tat™ attacks on SAM sites or anti-aircraft guns that fired on United States planes, large-scale air strikes against the Cuban air defense system, and full-scale strikes against the Soviet offensive missile sites and capae defenses.
The President could execute these options incrementally in order to progessively increase coercion in support of diplomatic bargaining.
This is shown by the uncertainty over what the President's next step would have been had Khrushchev not agreed on October 28 to dismantle the missiles in Cuba.
Practical operational problems with employing some of the military options (such as the smallscale air strike option, which was hard to keep small), as well as uncertainty over the Soviet response to any of the options, were probably the major reasons for the lack of even a tentative plan for using the options.
However, at least part of the problem was that the EXCOMM was distracted by operational details.
The EXCOMM discussed military operations in great detail and certain military operations, such as the intercept and boarding of Soviet ships and lowlevel photographic reconnaissance flights, were closely controlled.
On October 23 the President gave some sort of order for the quarantine force to delay its initial boardings of Soviet ships specifically for the purpose of giving Khrushchev more time to react to the quarantine.
EXCOMM attention to military operations was uneven and focused on a few specific areas.
The President had read Barbara W Tuchman's The Guns of August and was heavily influenced by her descriptionof Europe's leaders losing control of events as the crisis in the summer of 1914 spiraled to war.
What was missing was detailed consideration of how to effectively control military operations.
No thought was given to the practical operational problems that would arise from attempting to control large-scale military operations directly from the White House.
McNamara and his assistants. did not understand the military command system and had little respect for it.
The optimism (military men called it 1725 ear Admiral Tazewell T Shepard, Jr., interview by author, February 10, 1988.
McNamara and his assistants appeared to believe that they could run a better military operation the same way they could write a better defense budget.
However, their approach to military command and control was intuitive and impulsive, rather than reasoned and planned.
They had not worked with the military prior to the crisis to develop and refine methods and procedures for direct control that both sides would understand, with the result that the military was caught off-guard by their sudden intrusion into Operational matters.
United States Naval Institute, Oral History Progran, August 1975), 421.
The lack of attention to the organizational, procedural, and operational requirements for effectively exercising direct control is discussed in detail in the following section on command and control.
This consideration derived from the objective of avoiding war with the Soviet Union, discussed above.
The implication of this consideration was that, if the Soviet Union could not be compelled to remove the missiles by coercive pressure alone, the United States would have to offer concessions in diplomatic bargaining.
President Kennedy and some of his advisors recognized from the start that concessions might have to be made.
The President seems to have been willing, as a last resort, to offer to remove United States Jupiter missiles in Turkey in exchange for removal of Soviet missiles from Cuba in order to avoid taking military action against Cuba.
However, the President did not formulate a negotiating strategy other than his insistence that no concession would be offered until after American resolve had been impressed upon the Soviets.
The obvious offers, a Turkey-Cuba deal or withdrawal of United States forces from Guantanamo, were quickly rejected.
The key concession that produced the settlement-an American pledge not to invade Cuba~-was proposed by Khrushchev in his October 26 letter.
However, when it became apparent on October 27 that the vague threat of further action at some future date was not having a sufficiently coercive effect, the President delivered an ultimatum to the Soviets via his brother Bobby--threatening that military action would be taken against Cuba unless a commitment to remove the missiles was received the next day.
Adlai Stevenson had proposed offering Guantanamo as a bargaining chip, which the President quickly rejected.
However, the command procedures actually used did not adhere to the chain of command established by that reorganization.
Under the 1958 reorganization the chain of command ran from the President, to the Secretary of Defense, and then to the appropriate unified or specified commander.
The JCS was to function as an advisory body to the President and as an executive agent for the Secretary of Defense, eather than as a separate level in the chain of command.
The National Military Command Center should have been the Secretary of Defense's operational control center.
In actuality, the chain of command was structured essentially as it had been prior to the 1958 reorganization.
It is important to note that Admiral Anderson was not just a conduit for orders from the President, he was deeply involved in planning and execution of the opera178 tions.
Sharp, Deputy CNO for Plans and Policy during the crisis, letter to author, February 24, 1988; Captain John H Carmichael, Assistant Director, Fleet Operations Division, Office of the Chief of Naval Operations , and Director of Flag Plot during the crisis, letter to author, March 8, 1988; Houser, interview by author, February 11, 1988; Shepard, interview by author, February 10, 1988; Griffin, ""Reminiscences,"" 552. a interview by author, January 25, 1988; Griffin, ""Reminiscences,"" 552.
Vice Admiral Chew states that McNamara ""paid very little attention” to the Joint Staff during the crisis.
Admiral Anderson insisted on this at the time, remarking to thenCaptain Houser that “this is a Navy show, we're going to pos show them how it's done.
United States Naval Institute, Oral History Program, 1983), 551. §56 a@ifferent than had been envisioned when the 1958 reorganization was enacted.
The JCS executive agent system presupposed that commanders in the field or at sea had substantial autonomy and need only be given an objective and overall guidelines for their operations.
It was not a system for facilitating close control of operations by the White House.
There is no evidence that McNamara attempted to modify JCS command procedures prior to the crisis.
This stands in stark contrast to the revolutionary changes he made in the Defense Department's administrative organization and management procedures-changes that emphasized centralization of decisionmaking authority.
During the crisis, McNamara's interventions in the command system were impulsive and lacked planning or prior coordination with the military, producing hurried, ad hoc changes in support of the President's desire to maintain control of events.
In effect, the President and McNamara were attempting to exercise centralized control through a command system designed for decentralized control.
The President had complete and timely information on all Navy units participating in the quarantine and all related operations in the Atlantic and Caribbean.
Man of the Sea , 96; Commander Gerry M McCabe, Assistant Naval Aide to the President and Director of the White House Situation Room during the Crisis, interview by author, February 22, 1988.
Responsibility for the Situation Room was later transferred to the National Security Council Staff.
It contained extensive communications equipment, large wall charts of the world's oceans, and separate conference and briefing rooms.
All of Flag Plot was declared a Top Secret area and additional Marine guards were posted.
Flag Plot maintained a ship locator for all United States Navy ships or any special interest ship.
As complete a picture of forces location as possible was kept and displayed,so that Admiral Anderson could exercise command.
Every evening during the crisis McNamara was briefed at 10:00m. in Flag Plot on the status of the quarantine and CINCLANT forces alerted for Cuban contingencies.
The detailed knowledge of the movements of United States and Soviet ships that McNamara showed in EXCOMM meetings and his quizzing of Admiral Anderson on the positions of Navy ships show that McNamara paid close attention to the Flag Plot briefings.
The next level in the Chain of Command was CINCLANT, Admiral Dennison, headquartered in Norfolk, Virginia.
In mid-1961 CINCLANT was tacked oe JCS to prepare contingency plans for military operations against Cuba.
Commander Second Fleet was designated Commander JTF-122; Army, Air Force, and Navy component commanders were also designated.
In response, CINCLANT on October 20 disestablished JTF-122 and assumed command of all Cuban contingency operations.
Admiral Dennison was CINCLANTFLT as well as CINCLANT, and the CINCLANTELT staff was integrated into the CINCLANT unified command staff.
Vice Admiral Wallace M Beakley, Deputy Commander in Chief Atlantic, was in charge of CINCLANTFLT functions in the CINCLANT staff.
Additionally, to facilitate CINCLANTFLT control of quarantine operations a separate Quarantine Plot headed by Rear Admiral Reynold D Hogle was established in the CINCLANT OPCON Center.
The CINCLANT Quarantine Plot maintained the tactical picture at sea for Admiral Dennison and Vice Admiral Beakley.
The Air Force component commander, Commander in Chief Air Force Atlantic , was Commander Tactical Air Command , General Walter C Sweeney, Jr., headquartered at.
The Army component commander, Commander in Chief Army Atlantic , was Commanding General Continental Army Command , General Herbert B Powell, headquartered at Fort Monroe, Virginia.
CINCARLANT and CINCAFLANT set up a Forward Command Post at Homestead Air Force Base, Florida.
Two of these (TF 81 and TF 83) were standing Task Forces operational prior to the crisis, while the others were contingency Task Forces activated for the crisis.
The Army and Air Force component commanders were designated on October 20.
The command structure for the Navy forces assigned to Cuban contingencies was thus highly complex due to the size and scope of the forces involved.
The Army and Air Force had two primary Task Forces for Cuban contingency operations.
Under the Army component commander, CINCARLANT, was the Army Task Force for the invasion of Cuba, commanded by Commanding General Eighteenth Airborne Corps.
CINCARLANT and CINCAFLANT had additional Task Forces for other operations related to Cuba.
The final Task Force under CINCLANT was the Joint Unconventional Warfare Task Force Atlantic , consisting of Army Special Forces, Navy SEALs, and Air Force Air Commando units.
United States communications capabilities had made significant advances since 1958, allowing a greater degree of direct control over naval operations than had ever been possible before.
CINCLANT, Flag Plot, NMCC, and the White House Siedation Room all had the ability to communicate directly with ships at sea over voice radio, if they so desired.
This allowed discussion of classified information without risk of Soviet interception.
HF/SSB radio allowed commanders ashore to speak directly with forces afloat, a crucial capability for exercising direct control of naval operations.
The CNO had established a Composite Fleet SSB Command Net and CINCLANT had two SSB nets of his own.
Third, the Navy had long-range HF Fleet Radioteletype Broad-casts with on-line encryption for message communications between shore stations and ships at sea.
This system greatly expedited the flow of information by eliminating slow manual encryption and transmission of messages.
In addition to these communications systems, telephone and telegraph lines were also used extensively for communications among shore commands.
The Defense Communications Agency, created only the year before, managed this overall system.
The first United States radio-relay communications satellite, Samos II, had been launched in January 1961, but satellite communications were still essentially experimental.
Modern communications equipment, especially HF/SSB voice communications with ships at sea, were perceived by civilian leaders as providing the capabilities they needed to exercise close control of naval operations during the crisis.
This attitude was a natural corollary to their desire to maintain control of events in the crisis.
In this connection, there was a steady flow of instructions from Washington to CINCLANT which required rapid dissemination to the operating forces.
Although the CW [{radioteletype and radiotelegraph] communications were generally fast and good, the requirement for expediting matters requigted extensive use of the single sideband voice radio.
Thus, the President's determination to maintain control of events in the crisis led to highly centralized control of naval operations, which in turn generated the demands placed on the communications system.
He makes no suggestion, however, that the President was ever on the radio or that any of the Presidents advisors ever issued erders to ships at sea over voice radio.
Admiral Anderson, Admiral Griffin, Admiral Rivero, Vice Admiral Hayward, Vice Admiral Stroh, Rear Admiral Wylie, and Captain Robert J Wissman (Operations Officer on the staff of Commander Carrier Division 18, commander of the USS Essex HUK Group, which was part of the quarantine force) all state that there were no such communications.
Anderson, interview by author, January 25, 1988; Griffin, letter to author, April 6, 1988; Rivero, letter to author, March 10, 1988; Vice Admiral John T Hayward, letter to author, February 17, 1988; Stroh, letter to author, February 18, 1988; Wylie, letter to author, April 13, 1988; Captain Robert J Wissman, letter to author, March 4, 1988.
Admiral Chew, Admiral Sharp, and Admiral Ward make no mention of such communications in their oral histories.
This would account for Admiral Dennison's remarks about telling Washington stations to get off his net as well as the recollection of many Navy ontieaes that the President never talked on the HF/SSB net.
If this interpretation is accurate, it means that the President voluntarily denied himself a powerful communications tool that was literally at his fingertips--perhaps because he realized the disruption and animosity it would cause in the chain of command.
Direct HF/SSB communications from ships at sea to Washington--NMCC, Flag Plot, and the White House Situation Room monitoring the net--appear to have been used only in two situations.
The second situation was during the trailing of known Soviet submarines.
Captain George L Dickey, Jr., Commanding Officer of USS Lawe (DD 763) during the crisis, states that while trailing a Soviet submarine he was directed to come up on the voice net for direct communications with Flag Plot.
Captain Robert J Wissman, Operations Officer for Commander Carrier Division Eighteen, states that USS Essex did the same thing, but carried it one step further.
Given that President Kennedy did not attempt to control other operations while they were actually in progress, it is unlikely that he would have monitored ASW operations, which can (and did) drag on for days.
On the other hand, the Situation Room staff had the capability of using reports coming over HF/SSB voice radio to keep their charts updated with the latest information on Soviet submarines.
The CINCLANT history of the crisis concludes that overall the Defense system performed well, demonstrating tremendous flexibility and rapid expansion of capability, but that it did experience problems.
Problems included lack of telephone and telegraph lines in the Southeastern United States to accommodate the build-up of forces there, insufficient portable communications equipment, lack of compatibility between the communications equipment of the three services, inet Sfiicgent secure voice and on-line encryption equipment, lack of frequency coordination, and heavily overloaded circuits with attendant aU wart vcipants could not recall specifically if this was done, but did recall that information on Soviet submarines was kept as up to date as possible.
It appears that message situation reports, rather than voice radio reports, were the principle source of information.
CINCLANT provides a similarly mixed view of how well the Navy communications system performed.
The Fleet Radioteletype Broadcast system was in the midst of converting to faster teletypes, which created traffic backlogs as messages had to be transmitted on. separate broadcasts for old and new teleypes.
There was an overwhelming number of messages-~-the number of messages per month during the crisis was more than three times greater than the pre-crisis average--and a large number of excessively long messages, which were difficult to transmit 201.
The total volume of traffic exceeded the capacity of the Fleet Radioteletype Broadcast, requiring that an additional broadcast be initiated for broadcasting to major afloat commands.
An inordinate proportion of messages were given high transmission precedence--an — to expedite timecritical orders that backfired, creating a backlog of high precedence messages.
An unusually high proportion of messages were classified Secret or Top Secret, which created backlogs due the requirement for on-line encryption of such traffic.
The incredible volume of message traffic created a shortage of radiomen that could only be partially alleviated 203) owideot abhiege by borrowing personnel from other commands. problems are generated by centralized control of large-scale naval operations.
On at least one occasion a commander afloat did not receive a crucial message.
At the start of the crisis Rear Admiral Ernest E Christiansen, Commander Carrier Division 18, was embarked in the ASW carrier USS Essex , which was conducting air operations training at sea off Guantanamo.
These problems persisted until Late November, when United States forces began standing down.
The highest priority traffic was taking up to 48 hours to go from usd These are the type of originator to addressees."" communications problems that give rise to decoupling and degrade crisis management.
Not all of the ships had received the new HF/SSB equipment when the crisis erupted.
CINCLANT reported a shortfall of 45 HF/SSB units that could not be alleviated during the crisis.
Flag Plot and the Situation Room could not monitor every merchant ship intercept and submarine prosecution “real-time” because not every Navy ship had HF/SSB equipment and a few ships suffered casualties to their HF/SSB equipment.
The three HF/SSB nets in use during the crisis were often overloaded due to too many stations attempting to use a circuit, excessively long and detailed reporting requirements, and excessively long transmissions by higher authorities.
At times USS Essex had to relay HF/SSB voice transmissions between CINCLANT and Admiral Ward due to HF propagation problems.
Admiral Ward noted that ""Communications within the line and on other circuits were not good due to poor radio frequency ANY Thus, the key propagation in the atmosphere."" technological innovation that made direct control possible-HF/SSB voice radio--was degraded by a number of factors, among them excessive use of the capability.
Military men understand this irony | through their operational experience.
Military communications procedures emphasize brevity of transmissions and military command procedures emphasize delegation of control.
Sending a brief message executing a plan already held by recipients or simply stating the objective to be achieved is much more efficient than sending detailed plans specifying every aspect of an operation.
The need for direct control oo balanced against the harmful effects of overloading. communications channels.
During the first EXCOMM meeting on October 23, the ""problem of effective communications"" was discussed and the President's Science Advisor, Jerome B Weisner, was appointed to head an inter-departmental review of the problem.
Weisner presented an initial briefing on the communicants situation at the October 24 morning EXCOMM meeting and the.
President “directed that most urgent action be taken by State, Defense and CIA to improve communications worldwide, but particularly in the Caribbean area.
As the previous discussion of communications problems revealed, that effort was unsuccessful--the problems did not abate until after the crisis peaked and United States forces began to stand down.
In some instances it took longer to transmit messages to commanders off the coast of the United States in 1962 than it took to transmit messages to commanders in the Taiwan Strait in 1958.
This demonstrates conclusively that command and control capabilities are not directly, or even primarily, a function of technology.
Variance in crisis outcomes--in terms of the degree to which national leaders maintain control of events and prevent inadvertent escalation--is not accounted for by variation in command and control technology.
In other words, better radios do not guarantee better crisis management.
There are additional variables that affect how effectively military operations are controlled in a crisis.
Emphasis on direct control was not accompanied by consideration of the implications this might have for the effective conduct of military operations.
There was a lack of appreciation for the organizational, procedural, and operational requirements for effectively éxereising direct control.
As has been shown, impulsive efforts to exercise direct control generated communications problems that degraded the effectiveness of direct control.
President Kennedy's desire to maintain control of events was implemented impulsively during the crisis, reflecting the novelty and complexity of the situation and the need for improvisation to meet the President's crisis management objectives.
No attempt was made to formulate a comprehensive command and control doctrine that designated methods of control for specific operations, what decision-~ making authority would be delegated and what would be. reserved for the President, and procedures for shifting control of operations up and down the chain of command.
These issues were addressed on an ad hoc basis in response to concerns over the implications of particular operations.
The implicit objective was to exercise direct control over all military and naval operations.
The President and his top advisors were forced by the immense scale of operations being conducted to focus their attention on particular operations.
Navy quarantine operations, particularly the intercept and boarding of Soviet bloc ships, received first priority for White House attention and control.
Whenever Navy ships trailing Soviet vessels or conducting other surveillance approached the coast of Cuba, their movements were closely monitored.
To summarize, the areas that received close attention were quarantine operations, reconnaissance flights over Cuba, the SAC DEFCON 2 alert, civil defense, invasion and air strike preparations, and operations near Cuba.
What is striking is that this focusing of attention appears to have occurred without a deliberate decision as to which military operations warranted the President's direct attention.
The President apparently desired to control the operations with greatest likelihood of involving United States forces in an incident with Soviet or Cuban forces.
Concern for incidents also should have led to close control of Navy ASW operations, which generated the most intense interactions with Soviet forces during the crisis.
However, although the President was aware of the danger of a confrontation with Soviet submarines and had the ability to monitor ASW operations “real time,” he made no effort to exercise direct control while submarines were being trailed.
The White House would pay little attention to a particular operation, tacitly delegating control of it, then suddenly intervene and attempt to exercise close control over it.
Just as suddenly, the White House would move on to other problems, leaving the chain of command in the dark as to the extent of their authority.
This inconsistency--impulsively seizing control of tactical operations--~appears to have been what annoyed military commanders the most.
A fundamental principle of military command, often called “unity of command,” is that a commander must always know from whom he is receiving orders.
The United States armed forces use formal procedures to designate commanders and transfer control or operations among them in order to avoid ambiguity and conflicts over who is authorized to give orders.
For example, the Navy uses formal “CHOP” (Change of Operational Commander) procedures to designate the precise time at which control over a unit shifts from one commander to another.
Although these procedures for transferring control are formal, they are also flexible and rapid.
Transferring control of a unit or operation can be done by written message or instantaneously over voice radio.
But even in this situation, military standing orders specify procedures to avoid ambiguity of control.
Thus, the military had concepts and procedures for shifting operational control that could have been adapted to meet the needs of the President.
The White House did not implement formal procedures for for designating which operations the President wished to control or for transferring control of specific operations up and down the chain of command.
Navy commanders never knew when the White House might suddenly intervene in their operations or botnenenmed orders they had given.
Simple, rapid procedures for designating when the White House was exercising direct control would have enhanced the President's ability to control military operations while avoiding ambiguity of command.
There is no evidence that the need for such procedures was even considered.
This hits a failure not only cf the President's civilian advisors, who had the excuse of having virtually no experience with military operations, but also of the Joint Chiefs--particularly the Chairman.
During the crisis General Taylor was the only JCS member who routinely met with the President, attended EXCOMM meetings, and received orders from the Secretary of Defense.
He was in the perfect position to address the command and control implications of the President's approach to managing the crisis, but apparently never made an effort to do so.
Second, that there was to be a firm impediment by the higher authorities of the Navy for any direct control or interference by our civilian authorities to our operating forces.
Anderson and Dennison reacted as they did not _ because direct White House control of operations affronted their professional sensibilities, but siilac because of the manner in which the White House sought to exercise direct control.
Rather than work with the military to devise command procedures appropriate for the President's desire to control events, McNamara implemented on an ad hoc basis what was in effect a major change in United States command and control doctrine.
The objective was to exercise positive direct control, in which communications links with operational forces are used to control their movements and actions on a real-time basis.
The White House was not able to effectively exercise positive direct control over all military operations due to limitations in communications systems and the vast scale of the operations being conducted.
The President and his advisors focused their attention on specific operations and made de facto delegations of authority in other operational areas, tacitly relying on methods of delegated control.
Employing a combination of direct and delegated control is not unusual, the Eisenhower Administration did the same thing in the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis.
What was unusual was the Kennedy Administration’s reluctance to admit that it could not possibly exercise positive direct control over all the military operations in progress and its reliance on de facto rather than formal delegation of authority.
As part of their effort to maintain control over Military operations, the President and his advisors paid close attention to the mechanisms of indirect control.
The procedures contained in the mission orders were changed very little from those contained in Navy standing orders, but the President had ascertained that the quarantine would be conducted in a manner that supported his political objectives.
The manner in which contingency plans were used during the crisis is particularly interesting.
In mid-1961, not long after the Bay of Pigs affair, the President directed the Joint Chiefs to commence contingency planning for 214nne eriginal plans for a limited blockade were drawn up by Admiral Dennison and Vice Admiral -Ward on October 20.
The CNO briefed the President on Navy quarantine plans the afternoon of October 21 and McNamara approved the quarantine orders that evening.
Admiral Anderson and Admiral Griffin state the procedures were basically the same as those in Navy tactical publications.
Anderson, interview by author, January 25, 1988; Griffin, letter to author, April 6, 1988.
Vice Admiral Caldwell, who drafted the instructions for the quarantine, states that the only change made to them was to delete POL from the initial list of prohibited items.
JCS assigned responsibility for these plans to CINCLANT because Cuba was in his area of responsibility.
Later in the year JCS directed CINCLANT to prepare an alternative invasion contingency plan, which was ready by ate 1962 and designated OPLAN 31662.
All three CINCLANT OPLANs were reviewed and updated continuously through October 1962.
As the Soviets modernized and expanded Cuba's air defenses it became apparent that this plan would not be adequate.
On September 7, 1962, the Tactical Air Command began woniiine on an entirely — plan.
It provided the option of smallscale air strikes for retaliatory or demonstrative purposes.
The third option, code named ""Scabbards 312,"" provided for destruction of all Cuban defenses in preparation for invasion.
The Navy role was limited to defense of Guantanamo and pre-landing air strikes in amphibious. objective areas.
On October 23 JCS directed that the code name ""“Scabbards"" be used to cover all operations related to Soviet deployment of offensive weapons in Cuba, thus covering the quarantine as well.
The Joint Task Force, JTF-122, consisted of the Eighteenth Airborne Corps, Nineteenth Air Force, Second Marine Expeditionary Force, Serious Force Atlantic, Joint Unconventional Warfare Task Force Atlantic, and other units.
The plan contained an option, designated ""314 Golf,"" for execution of the invasion on four days notice.
The Navy had two attack carrier air groups afloat (about fourteen fighter and attack squadrons), one attack carrier air group ashore , and about six Navy and Marine squadrons ashore in Guantanamo and Puerto Rico designated for air strikes against Cuba.
The Tactical Air Command was assigned two attack carrier air groups ashore (about twelve squadrons) and a Marine air group for air strikes against Cuba.
The remainder of the invasion force was to be landed no later than eighteen days after the order was given.
On October 17 the interval from decision to initial assault was increased to seven days, which allowed more forces to be landed in the initial assault and reduced the time between initial assault and landing of reinforcements.
The Fifth Marine Expeditionary Brigade from Camp Pendleton was added to the initial assault and the Army's First Armored Division was added to the forces to be landed later.
Total Marine Corps forces included a total of nine battalion landing teams, roughly 28,000 troops.
Follow-on Army forces included the Second Infantry Division, the First Armored Division, three artillery battalions and two artillery groups, two tank battalions, and an array of support forces.
Army tactical nuclear weapon units-equipped with Honest John, Long John, and Davy Crockett rockets--were alerted, but placed in an “on-call” status in the United States rather than included in the invasion force.
In addition to these three contingency plans, the Navy had two additional contingency plans.
The evacuation and reinforcement portions of this OPORD were carried out during the crisis, but no Cuban threat to the base developed, so the combat operations contained in the OPORD were not executed.
This OPORD was used to conduct the quarantine, with minor revisions (primarily renaming the blockade a quarantine) issued on Getowee 22 and 23.
It was supplemented by Commander Second Fleet OPORD 1-62, issued by Admiral Ward on October 22.724 Recollections vary as to how much the President and McNamara knew about the CINCLANT contingency plans prior to October.
Vice Admiral —e states that while Deputy Secretary of Defense Galiipewedte probably was aware of the plans, he probably was not briefed on them “until it was needed,"" which would have been in early October.
Vice Admiral Blouin, Secretary to the Joint Chiefs immediately prior to the crisis, suggested that Robert Kennedy probably reviewed the contingency ase sWhat is clear, however, is that McNamara and the President paid close attention to the Cuban contingency plans after October 1, when McNamara directed the Chiefs to commence general preparations to execute them.
On October 4 McNamara sent the President a memorandum primarily assessing the Soviet SAM sites in Cuba, but also responding to a Presidential inquiry as to the impact of the SAMs on the Cuban contingency plans.
The President was aware of the need to commence preparations for an invasion of Cuba, and during the first meeting of the crisis on October 16 directed that such preparations proceed.
Instead, the President approved specific invasion and air strike preparations individually, which required that Operational commanders write separate orders for those actions, rather than simply implementing the guidance contained in the contingency plans.
He appears to have been deeply concerned that he would become trapped by execution of the contingency plans, just as Europe's leaders had been trapped by execution of their war plans in 1914.
Serious logistical problems were encountered during the invasion preparations, particularly by the Army, but they were primarily the result of inadequate transportation resources.
There were not sufficient numbers of transport planes, amphibious ships, or railroad cars to move all the men and equipment called for in the plan in the @ allotted time.
The decks of one ship designated to carry the First Armored Division to Cuba were not far enough apart to carry tanks.
The most severe crisis management problem encountered during the crisis-| overloading of communications channels--was thus generated by the manner in which the President elected to manage the crisis.
The President's objective of maintaining control of events was sound, but the means he employed to pursue that objective degraded his ability to control events.
This is an example of a tension between political and military considerations in crisis management, one that was not anticipated by the President or his civilian advisors.
When special rules of engagement were issued, they generally reiterated the guidance contained in standing peacetime rules.
Captain Caldwell commenced ae detailed blockade procedures, including rules of engagement, on Friday, October 19, after McNamara directed the CNO to prepare plans for a limited blockade on offensive arms to Cuba.
Captain Caldwell completed them the next day and the CNO presented them to McNamara that afternoon.
The CNO briefed the President and his advisors on oo for the quarantine on Sunday, October 21, and McNamara approved the final plans--including the rules of engagement--that evening.
It included the rules of engagement | drafted by Captain Caldwell, with virtually no changes.°> 232nhe one exception to this was protection of reconnaissance flights over Cuba.
According to Vice Admiral Caldwell, the only change made to his rules for the quarantine was deletion of POL (petroleum, oil and lubricants) from the list of prohibited items.
In stopping ships to be visited, use all/any available communications to signify intent, including such means as international code signals, flashing light, radio, or loud speakers.
If these means fail, warning shots shall be fired across the bow, or, in the case of submarines, equivalent warning action.
Attempt, if possible, to damage only non-vital parts, such as the rudder, and attempt to avoid injuries or loss of life.
Assistance to maximum extent permitted by operational conditions should be furnished.
This was essentially the same as guidance contained in Navy tactical publications.
According to Vice Admiral Caldwell, ""The chief difference was stress on caution.
Any ships, including surface warships, armed merchant ships or submarines, or any aircraft, which take actions which can reasonably be considered as threatening a United States ship engaged in visit and search may be subjected to attack to the extent required to terminate the threat.
These rules are not a change from standing peacetime naval rules of engagement, which always allow a ship to use force in self defense.
The quarantine rules of engagement thus served to reiterate the guidance contained in standing peacetime rules.
The CNO, the CNO'’s deputy for fleet operations, both of the attack Carrier group commanders, and two ASW HUK group commanders all stated that the rules of engagement were basically similar to standing peacetime rules.
Gayler, Commander Carrier Division Twenty during the crisis, letter to author, March 22, 1988.
Several ship commanding officers made similar comments, and no one offered comments to the contrary.
The interesting point about the quarantine rules of engagement is that they specifically authorized use of force against submarines in self-defense or anticipatory selfdefense.
It cannot be demonstrated conclusively that the President fully understood the implications of the quarantine rules of engagement.
However, the fact that McNamara and the President authorized these rules strongly suggests that they appreciated the Navy's concern for the Soviet submarine threat and did not want to unnecessarily endanger Navy ships.
He may have been concerned not imminent on October 24. only because he did not know what a Soviet submarine captain or a United States destroyer captain might do, but also because he knew that United States ships were authorized to use force against Soviet submarines in self-defense.
Rules of engagement were also issued for encounters with Cuban air and naval forces.
Captain Donald L Lassell, Deputy Commander of the Key West Force and Commander of the Florida Strait Protection of Shipping Patrol, states that ""my ships had orders to return fire if fired upon, but not to initiate an action without clearing it first with me.
Captain Lassell could do this effectively because he was near the scene of action and in direct communications with his ships.
Anticipatory self defense was authorized because Cuba had recently received Soviet-built Komar-class fast attack craft armed with SS-N-2 anti-ship cruise missiles.
Captain Robert E Brady, Commanding 241) assell, letter to author, May 11, 1988.
The rules of engagement were basically those of selfpreservation--fire if fired upon.
The exception was that we were to fire if it became obvious that we were about to be fired upon.
This was apparently a concession to the missile threat, but it was not really carte blanche, because we were in constant communication with COMKWESTFOR, and CINCLANT or CINCLANTFLT would jump in quickly if there was any hint of trouble.
Thus, although United States Navy ships were authorized to use force in anticipatory self-defense due to the Cuban Komar threat, operational commanders closely monitored the tactical situation in order to maintain control over engagments.
It is not known if President Kennedy personally approved anticipatory self-defense against Cuban Komar missile boats.
The principle of anticipatory self-defense had been approved by the JCS and the President in 1953 and adopted by the the Navy in 1958, so Navy commanders could authorize anticipatory self-defense on their own authority.
The President would have had to specifically deny this option to the Navy.
The President may have been briefed on the threat from Cuban Komars and the proposed rules of engagement for dealing with them--this would be consistent with the detailed briefings he received on other military operations--but it is also possible that the issue was never raised at his level.
They (the rules of engagement] were not significantly different (from peacetime rules], but I was prepared to engage any threat as I perceived it to the Task Force and instructed all hands to that effect.
In that respect I guess they were different from the normal rules in existence at that time.
I would have fired on any Cuban planes approaching the Task force and so instructed my people.
I can assure you we would have fired and intercepted any plane inbound for the Task Force.
The Komar patrol boats were the biggest danger at night and I couldn’t let anyone get into missile range because of this.
If a Komar had a Styx missile aboard, I certainly wasn't going to delay destoying it.
Vice Admiral Hayward had ample authority under Navy peacetime rules of engagement to take all of the actions he describes.
The primary difference from peacetime rules that he identifies is the emphasis on anticipatory self defense-firing before being fired on.
Prior to that they had never been opposed by anti-ship cruise missiles.
Vice Admiral Hayward'‘s concern over the threat from Cuban Komar missile boats was typical of the concerns felt by Navy officers--concerns which generated the emphasis on anticipatory self defense.
As it had done with other aspects of the rules of engagement, the United States revealed the essence of its rules of engagement for Cuban forces.
In addition to reviewing and authorizing the rules of engagement for the quarantine, the Kennedy Administration also launched a study of the rules of engagement that would be appropriate should fighting erupt at sea.
The key point is that the EXCOMM was trying to anticipate the rules of engagement that would be needed for expanded hostilities.
The rules of engagement over which the White House exercised the closest control were those for engaging Cuban air defenses.
The basic question was in what manner United States forces would respond to Soviet SA-2 SAMs firing on high altitude photographic reconnaissance flights, or cuban antiaircraft guns or Mig fighters firing on low altitude phetographic reconnaissance flights.
The U-2s that flew the high altitude flights and the Navy F8U-1P Corsairs and Air Force RF-101 Voodoos that flew the low altitude flights were all unarmed.
Their only defense was evasive maneuvering and, for the Corsairs and Voodoos, speed.
The President will be informed through SAC/DOD channels, and it is expected that if there is clear indication that the incident is the result of hostile action, the recommendation will be for immediate retaliation upon the most likely surface-to-air site involved in the action.
It was, in effect, an order not to return fire when fired upon until the President, or at least the Secretary of Defense, ordered return fire.
He and McNamara were clearly aware of the danger that this could result in more United States planes being shot down and more United States pilots being killed.
The President's rationale in not ordering retaliation was to give Khrushchev an opportunity to respond to the letter the United States sent that day proposing a aa If Khrushchev's response was not solution to the crisis. satisfactory and if there were further attacks on United States reconnaissance planes, the President probably would have ordered limited air strikes on Cuban air defenses.
In retrospect, the President's decision was a wise one-probably one of the most important of the entire crisis.
However, if his account of the conversation is correct, he did not necessarily mean to imply that the United States would attack the offensive missile sites on Monday.
Robert Kennedy had attended the EXCOMM meeting at which the President and McNamara had discussed retaliation against Cuban air defenses, so knew that this was imminent if there were further attacks on United States planes.
Robert Kennedy also would have known that the President had not yet decided whether the next United States move would be a blockade of POL shipments to Cuba or full-scale air strikes against Soviet offensive missiles.
Rules of engagement are intended to serve as a mechanism of indirect control, providing on-scene commanders with decisionmaking guidance for situations in which direct control is not feasible.
Issuing rules of engagement presupposes that military pe have been delegated ‘authority to make tactical decisions based on those rules.
If the President or other high-level commanders do not wish to delegate certain operational decisions, that should be spelled out in the guidance issued to on-scene commanders.
This was only done formally in the case of retaliatory strikes on Cuban air defenses.
In every other area of operations, mechanisms of indirect control were used in parallel with direct control over telephone lines and HF/SSB voice radio.
Using mechanisms of indirect control in parallel with methods direct control was not novel.
The military chain of command does this routinely when it delegates certain operational decisions to subordinates while retaining other decisions for superiors.
When the military chain of command does this, however, it is careful to specify exactly what authority has been delegated and what has not.
These principles avoid confusion over delegation of authority, but were not applied in the Cuban crisis.
On-scene commanders may have believed that they had authority that the President and McNamara did not intend to delegate to them.
On the other hand, the President and McNamara may have believed that they had control over decisions that would not have been referred up the chain of command to them.
Although the President and McNamara attempted to exercise direct control over certain naval operations, they still had to rely heavily on the prudence and judgement of on-scene commanders.
As the military build-up on Cuba gained momentum in the summer of 1962, Navy planners on the CNO's staff and at CINCLANTFLT began preparing plans for a total blockade of Cuba that were not contingent on prior Soviet action against Berlin.
In late August Justice Department Counsel Norbert A Schlei submitted a memorandum to the Attorney General suggesting that either a total blockade or a “visit and search” blockade, similar to that imposed by the United States on the eve of World War II, — be an appropriate response to Soviet introduction of offensive missiles in Cuba.
On Thursday, October 18, opinion in the EXCOMM bagan shifting in favor of a limited blockade.
On the morning of October 20, the EXCOMM slightly favored the blockade option over the air strike option, but the Joint Chiefs still advocated large-scale air strikes.
Navy planning for a limited blockade of Cuba began Thursday evening, October 18, in response to a memorandum from Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric to the JCS requesting information on the blockade option.
Friday afternoon, 19 October, the JCS met with Gilpatric with the answers to his questions and designated Admiral Anderson its executive agent for CINCLANT operations against Cuba.
That evening Secretary of Defense McNamara directed the CNO to prepare plans for a limited blockade on offensive arms to Cuba.
The operational planning was delegated to Admiral Dennison and his staff in Norfolk, but certain policy issues, such as detailed intercept and boarding procedures and the rules of engagement, were handled by the CNO's staff.
Saturday morning, October 20, McNamara directed the CNO to prepare ""position and policy papers, scenario, and implementing instructions” for a limited blockade.
Taylor took the plans to the White House for the Saturday afternoon meeting in which the President initially approved the limited blockade option.
The CNO briefed the President and his advisors on Navy plans for the limited blockade on Sunday, October 21, and McNamara approved the final plans that evening.
The only major change mete ap the Navy's plan for the limited blockade was to ae He POL from the list of prohibited items.
TG 136. consisted of two ensures escorted by four destroyers, and chelve destroyers on the quarantine line.
TG 136. originally consisted of USS Essex and six escorting destroyers.
Spears, Commanding Officer of USS Elokomin (AO 55), and consisted of three oilers and an ammunition ship, with four destroyers as escorts.
As the quarantine progressed, other units relieved these ships so that they could be rotated into port for repairs and crew rest.
This provided enough ships on station as of Monday, October 22, to guard the shipping lanes to Cuba.
The rationale for placing the blockade line that far out was to keen Navy ships outside the range of Cuban aircraft.
The blockade line distance was discussed at length during the evening October 20 JCS meeting.
The others were operating independently of the quarantine line and one was not even in TF 136.
Second, ship's locations prior to about 9:00 A.M. on October 24 are irrelevant because the ships were still en route to their stations from United States ports.
Third, the positions from October 24 onward are suspect because quarantine line ships were routinely out of station for refueling, trailing Soviet ships, and other tasking.
The first possibility is that the President gave McNamara a clear and specific order to immediately move the quarantine line closer to Cuba, as recounted by Robert Kennedy, but the CNO refused to carry out the order.
It is inconceivable, however, that McNamara or the President would have tolerated such insubordination.
Allison incorrectly contends that the Soviet . tanker Vinnitsa and other Soviet ships were allowed through the quarantine line.
However, the daily CIA report for October 25 states ""Thus far no Soviet ships have entered the zone since it was established.
The positions of the Navy ships were plotted on the charts in the White House Situation Room and closely monitored by the President.
Additionally, McNamara visited Flag Plot at least once a day, sometimes morning and evening, for briefings on Navy operations and Soviet shipping.
Charts in Flag Plot showed the locations of all Navy ships involved in Cuban operations.
That would have greatly complicated Navy logistics, particularly refueling the ships, and required a greater number of ships to cover a larger ocean area.
However, there are grounds for suspecting that Robert Kennedy was wrong when he stated that the President gave an order to move the quarantine line in.
Given that he erred on the distance of the quarantine line, Robert Kennedy also may not have understood exactly what the President wanted seni with the quarantine line.
Robert Kennedy made similar errors concerning other orders the President allegedly gave /*’* The President may not have given McNamara an order, but rather a suggestion that the quarantine line be moved in or a request that McNamara investigate the feasibility of moving it in.° 274, opert Kennedy erroneously claims elsewhere in his memoir of the crisis that the President gave an order when he had not.
Robert Kennedy states that the President gave an order for the Jupiter missiles in Turkey to be removed.
In fact, however, the President had only directed that the issue be studied.
There are thus grounds for suspecting that Robert Kennedy misinterpreted a Presidential request or suggestion as an order.
The President probably requested that McNamara find some way of delaying the initial boardings of Soviet ships~-perhaps suggesting that moving the quarantine line as a way of doing it.
President Kennedy did not specifically order the quarantine line moved in, but directed McNamara to delay the initial boardings of Soviet ships and suggested that moving the quarantine line closer to Cuba would be a means of achieving that objective.
Also see ""CINCLANT Historical Account,” 104; anerson, ""Reminiscences,"" 546.
Also see “CINCLANT Historical Account,"" 104; Anderson, ""Reminiscences,"" 546. 27875 his October 22 background briefing, McNamara stated that there was not a boundary line drawn where the Navy would start patrolling in the Atlantic, which suggests that intercepts could occur outside the quarantine line.
This probably would have happended if he had not directed McNamara to delay the first boardings.
The one modification that must be made to Sagan's interpretation is to draw a distinction intercept and boarding.
When so specified by COMSECONDFLT, intercept also included hailing the Soviet ship and asking its cargo and destination.
This was probably unclear to the President when he called McNamara the evening of October 23.
If this had been Admiral Ward's intention to begin with, no further orders would have been required.
This explanation supports Sagan's interpretation of the overall effect of the President's October 23 order.
It also complements the previous explanation-~-that the President approved a CNO recommendation not to move the quarantine line in until the Cuban air threat could be assessed.
Given the President's concern with avoiding incidents with Soviet and Cuban forces, he was probably responsive to arguments for keeping the quarantine ships away from Cuba.
This met the President's objective of providing Khrushchev more time to react and the CNO's objective of keeping the quarantine ships beyond the range of Cuban planes.
The Navy had mounted intensive surveillance of Soviet bloc shipping to Cuba since early August.
When the -President announced the quarantine on October 22, the Navy already had a complete list of the Soviet bloc ships en route to Cuba, including those suspected of carrying offensive missiles.
On October 23 there were tenty-five | in” Soviet and two other Soviet bloc ships en route to Cuba, a a a ne including nineteen Soviet freighters and six Soviet tankers.
The Soviet freighter Leninsky Komsomol, carrying IL~28 bombers, arrived in Cuba October 24.
It was one of the two Soviet ships, along with the tanker Vinnitsa, that was well inside the quarantine line when it went into effect.
The Soviet freighter Belovodsk stopped, transferred probable military cargo at night to a ship returning to the Soviet Union, then proceeded on to Cuba.
The Soviet freighter Emelyan Pugachev, in the Pacific when the quarantine was announced, was boarded and searched by a United States Navy officer as it transited the Panama Canal on November 3 and allowed to proceeded to Cuba.
CIA, Memorandun, “Soviet Bloc Shipping To Cuba,"" October 23, 1962, 1 (Declassified.
Navy patrol planes searching for Soviet ships were armed with five-inch rockets and ASW torpedoes.
Although CINCLANT had made an effort to provide Russian language interpreters for all the ships on the quarantine line, not every ship had oneec As dawn broke on Wednesday morning, October 24, the Navy ships moved into position to halt the flow of offensive arms to Cuba.
On patrol plane weapons, see Captain Sidney Edelman, Commanding Officer of VP-24, letter to author, March 25, 1988.
Two Commanding Officers of ships on the quarantine line stated they did not have interpreters embarked.
Dickey, letter to author, April 20, 1988; Foust, letter to author, March 10, 1988.
The Commanding Officer of USS Canberra stated that seven Russian interpreters reported aboard his ship on October 22 for distribution to the rest of the quarantine force.
Ships which after being intercepted signal their intention to proceed to non-Cuban ports may be released without visit or search.
The Commander of the intercepting ship may prescribe courses for the intercepted ship to follow.
Any ship which fails to proceed as elected or directed, or which attempts to proceed to a Cuban port, will be stopped and boarded.
If a satisfactory explanation is mot forthcoming, the ship will be diverted to Ft.
Any ship which is determined by the Commander of the intercepting ship to be carrying no prohibited material shall be permitted to proceed to Cuba.
Visit and search of a stopped ship shall consist of examining the manifest and inspecting the cargo.
Forceful boarding and control of the ship's Operation may be necessary.
If boarding meets with organized resistance, the ship will be destroyed.
Ships believed to be carrying prohibited material shall be directed to proceed to such non-Cuban port as her owners or master may elect.
The commander of the intercepting ship may designate courses to be followed.
Any ship which fails to proceed to @ non-Cuban port will be handled IAW para 2 above.
If a ship is visited but search is refused, the Commander of the intercepting ship will take the intercepted ship into custody if he has reasonable grounds for suspecting that it is carrying prohibited material.
USS Essex was assigned to stop and board Gagarin, a suspected arms carrier.
USS Newport News and her escorts were assigned to intercept Poltava, a large hatch ship suspected of carrying missiles.
Kimovsk, another suspected arms carrier, was also targeted for intercept and boarding.
CINCLANT had recommended, and the White House had approved, that these ships be boarded because they would be the first suspected arms carriers to reach the quarantine line.
But the three Soviet ships did not reach the quarantine line at their estimated arrival times and as of early afternoon none of them had been intercepted.
Robert Kennedy's account of the situation at sea that Wednesday morning is erroneous.
There was no Soviet ship named Komiles, he is probably referring to Kimovsk.
Rear Admiral Christiansen has stated USS Essex was not informed of or tasked to prosecute any Soviet submarines in the vicinity of Gagarin.
The President apparently knew that the first Soviet ships were to be boarded as soon as the quarantine went into effect Wednesday morning-~he had, in fact, personally authorized the initial boardings.
By Wednesday morning, however, all of the Soviet ships en route to Cuba, including tankers and freighters carrying non-military cargoes, had already either stopped or turned back.
Moscow had HF radio links with its merchant fleet and used them to control the ships en route to Cuba.
There appears to have been a pattern to the movements of the Soviet ships.
All of the freighters that the United States suspected of carrying weapons or equipment on the prohibited list were ordered to immediately reverse course and return to the Soviet Union.
The ships turned around well before President Kennedy signed the proclamation establishing a quarantine zone around Cuba.8® The Soviets had thus made a decision not to challenge the quarantine even while publicly declaring their refusal to recognize it.
The Welch and Blight interpretation of the Soviet decision not to challenge the quarantine is misleading in this regard.
It is clear, however, that by October 23--two days before U Thant's request-~-Khrushchev had already ordered his ships not to enter the quarantine zone.
This delay resulted in no Soviet ships passing through the quarantine line until October 25.
By mid-morning Wednesday the information was solid enough to pass on to the President.
Initial estimates of how many Soviet ships had halted or turned back varied widely.
During the day Navy and Air Force reconnaissance planes were able to verify that the Soviet ships had halted or turned back.
By midafternoon the President could clearly see that Khrushchev was not going to challenge the quarantine.
Prior to midday Wednesday, the President had approved a list of ships to be boarded, specified when the | boardings would commence , and waited for the boardings to take place.
From midday Wednesday onward, the White House closely controlled which ships were to be stopped and boarded.
Lengthy discussions were held on the merits and dangers of boarding every Soviet bloc ship that approached the quarantine line.
Foust, letter to author, March 10, 1988; Dickey, letter to author, April 20, 1988.
Neither the President nor the Secretary of Defense ever gave orders directly to Navy commanders at sea.
Presidential orders were relayed via McNamara to General Taylor or Admiral Anderson, then from the CNO to CINCLANT, and finally from CINCLANT to Admiral Warda.
None of the quarantine force participants contacted by the author, including the Commanding Officers of the two destroyers that boarded Marucla, could recall hearing the President, Secretary of Defense, or CNO on the HF/SSB radio circuit.
Admiral Dennison and Vice Admiral Ward controlled the intercept and trailing of Soviet bloc ships and all routine movements of the quarantine force.
Commanding Officers of quarantine force ships report that their operations were not closely controlled and that they had adequate authority to operate their ships as they felt best.
Captain Edelman, Commanding Officer of VP-24, a Navy patrol plane squadron, states that he had adequate authority to conduct ocean surveillance operations as he saw fit.
Although the President personally controlled which ships would be boarded, neither he nor his advisors controlled how the boardings were to be conducted.
CINCLANTFLT specified that the boarding procedures contained in the Navy publication Law of Naval Warfare would be usea.
This would have been the publication that Admiral Anderson was trying to show McNamara during their infamous encounter in Flag Plot the evening of October 24.
Accounts that have the CNO waving the ""Manual of Naval Regulations” are nonsensical.
United States Navy Regulations, 1948 contained no guidance at all on blockades, and mentions quarantines only in the sense.
United States navy ships complying with routine customs or medical quarantine.
The interesting point about the October 23 McNamara-Anderson argument is that it was not over substantial policy issues.
The two men were at odds primarily because each felt he was being treated contemptuously by the other.
The Quarantine Force thus used standard Nevy boarding procedures, modified for peacetime application, rather than special procedures drafted in the White House.
The boarding of the Soviet-chartered Lebanese freighter Marucla on October 26 shows how boarding operations were conducted.
USS John R Pierce provided real-time reports on the progress of the boarding to Admiral Ward and CINCLANT on the EHF/SSB voice radio net, which was also being monitored in Flag Plot and the White House Situation Room.
Captain Foust states he received no guidance from higher authority on how to conduct the boarding while it was in progress.
The remainder of the operations conducted during the quarantine were uneventful.
Several ships were intercepted and trailed, but no other ships were stopped and boarded at sea.
When Khrushchev on October 28 agreed to remove Soviet offensive missiles from Cuba, the President suspended the boarding of Soviet ships.
Direct no rpt no forceful action against any shipping including boarding until further orders.
If any difficulties encountered report to me immediately info [notify for information purposes] JCS/CNO prior taking any further action.
On October 30, after it was determined that there was little threat of Cuban air attack, the quarantine line was moved closer to Cuba.
The Chestnut line contained eight stations clustered at the sealanes through and around the Bahamas.
Ships were frequently detached from the Chestnut line to trail Soviet ships removing missiles om Cum. but the line remained in effect until the quarantine was lifted on November pO Although the boarding of Soviet bloc ships en route to Cuba had been suspended, intercept and trailing continued in November.
CINCLANTFLT used the aaa name ""Scotch Tape"" to designate high-interest Soviet bloc shipping.
The mee important operation was the inspection of Soviet ships removing MRBMs from Cuba.
The United States had insisted upon inspections to verify removal of the missiles, but Castro refused to allow inspections on Cuban soil.
A compromise was reached on November 7 when the United States agreed to inspect the missiles on the decks of Soviet ships.
However, the Soviet ships did not adhere to this plan--taking different courses and not carrying the designated number of missiles~-requiring an intensive Navy search effort to locate them and count the missiles.
The nine Soviet ships carrying the missiles from Cuba were inspected between November 8 and 11, and all 42 missiles known to be in Cuba were counted.
Finally, in early December Navy ships and planes verified the removal of Soviet IL-28 bombers from Cuba, counting all 42 bombers on the decks of three Soviet ships.
Relations at sea between the superpowers were proper--Soviet and American ship captains behaved as professional seamen--and esuatny amicable.
Some Soviet ship captains were reluctant to comply with the procedures for the MRBM inspections, but they all complied eventually.
Senior Navy officers would later stress the scope and intensity of the ASW operations conducted during the crisis.
The Navy investigated the charges against USS Blandy and conciuded that the ship had not made any threats.
The Navy began detecting signs of increased Soviet submarine activity in the Atlantic as early as October 13 and began increasing the readiness of its ASW forces accordingly.
On October 17 the Soviet submarine replenishment ship Terek was spotted in the.
On October 22 a Sovict Zulu-class diesel-electric attack submarine (armed with only with torpedoes, no missiles), designated contact B-28 oe Navy ASW tracking system, was photographed on the surface refueling from Terek near the Azores.
This Zulu submarine was at the end of its patrol and returned to the Soviet Union after refueling, thus playing no role in the crisis.
On October 24 CINCLANTFLT advised Admiral Ward that at least three known Soviet submarines were operating in the Atlantic and could reach the quarantine zone ina few days.
Task Force 83 consisted of four ASW HUK Groups and approximately 24 destroyers and destroyer escorts in Atlantic and Caribbean picket stations.
On October 24 seventeen ASW patrol planes and ten submarines were tasked to establish the ""Argentia Sub-Air Barrier"" in the North Altantic.
This ASW barrier, which went into effect October 27 on a southeasterly bearing from Argentia, Newfoundland, remained in operation Sere § enna 13.
No Soviet submarines were detectea attempting to penetrate the barrier.
The Navy also considered activating the Greenland-IcelandUnited Kingdom ASW Barrier, but did not do so.
For contact to be evaluated as confirmed, it either had ta be photographed or sighted by several observers well-trained on in submarine recognition.
All but one or two of the probable contacts can be dismissed as additional detections of the confirmed submarines or very realistic false contacts.
Only the five confirmed contacts will be discussed further, °28 President Kennedy and his advisors were concerned about Soviet submarines from their first meetings after Soviet offensive missiles were discovered in Cuba.
First, they were concerned that submarines would be used to bring nuclear warheads into Cuba for the Soviet missiles.
President Kennedy raised this issue during the October 16 morning meeting with his advisors.
For sources that state there were six Soviet submarines, see “CINCLANT Historical Account,” 11; Abel, 155; Robert Kennedy, 77; Anderson, ""Cuban Crisis,"" 85; and Dennison, “Reminiscences,” 435.
After almost a year of careful analysis, the Navy's ASW experts determined that C-20 and C-26 were the same submarine.
During the crisis not all of these contacts were accepted as confirmed.
One of them, C-21, was never photographed, and originally was Classified as only being a ""possible"" Soviet submarine.
There had been concerns about this well before the crisis, particularly that a fishing port being built by the Soviets at Mariel would be used as a submarine base.
Khrushchev exacerbated these concerns on October 24 when he warned American businessman William Knox that Soviet submarines would sink any American ship that forced a Soviet ship to stop.
In response to concerns that Soviet submarines would bring nuclear warheads into Cuba and that they would start operating out of Cuban bases, the Kennedy Administration included Soviet submarines in the quarantine.
Although the President did not state this explicitly in his October 22 speech, he did state that the quarantine covered “all ships of any kind™ and would be extended, if needed, to other types of carriers--implying aircraft and submarines.
Similarly, the Quarantine Proclamation signed by the President October 23 stated that ""any vessel or craft"" could be stopped and séarched.
Concerns of Task Force commanders were expressed to the author in Rivero, letter to author, March 10, 1988; Stroh, letter to author, February 18, 1988; Hayward, letter to author, February 17, 1988.
Thus, Soviet submarines were an explicit target of the quarantine, and could be stopped and searched if proceeding to Cuba.
The greatest difficulty in enforcing a quarantine against submarines is signalling them to surface for identification and search.
Admiral Anderson was in a JCS meeting, but his Deputy for fleet operations, Vice Admiral Griffin (one of three Admirals deputized by the CNO to act in his absence during the crisis), was available.
McNamara asked Vice Admiral Griffin how Navy ships could signal a Soviet submarine to surface.
McNamara knew from previous ASW briefings that this was not anormal peacetime procedure for the Navy.
Pursuant to Proclamation of the President of Oct 23rd, 1962 on the ""Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba"" the Secretary of Defense has today issued the following submarine surfacing and identification procedures when in contact with United States quarantine forces in the general vicinity of Cuba.
This sonar signal is normally made on underwater communications equipment in the 8 ke frequency range.
These special signals may have been provided to Moscow on October 24, the day before the Notice to Mariners was broadcast.
These are the signals described by Robert Kennedy, although he misconstrued how they were used.
The sonar and explosive charge signals could be used interchangeably, rather than sequentially as described by Kennedy.
First, these procedures were not a normal part of peacetime Navy ASW procedures, they were created specifically for the quarantine of Cuba.
The Navy had procedures for signaling unidentified submerged submarines, but their only purpose was to determine if a contact was a United States submarine.
McNamara thus tailored Navy ASW procedures to meet the President's political objectives.
The Soviet Union thus had to make a deliberate decision whether or not to inform its submarines of the signals.
The code mentioned in the Notice to Mariners is the international Morse code, vice the maritime signal code.
Thus, by October 25 the Kennedy Administration had publicly warned the Soviets that the quarantine applied to their submarines as well as their merchant ships, and had tailored United States Navy ASW procedures to support that policy.
There are indications--far from conclusive--that President Kennedy may have used Navy ASW operations as an additional means of demonstrating American resolve and applying coercive pressure on the Soviets.
In 1973 he stated that ASW operations were ""of immense psychological significance to emphasize to the USSR that any confrontation with the United States 32lay.
Rather, ASW operations were used to reinforce political signals being sent primarily by the quarantine, Strategic Air Command alert, and invasion preparations.
ASW was not one of President Kennedy's top priorities during the crisis.
Available EXCOMM records do not reveal Navy ASW operations to be a frequent topic of conversation and Vice Admiral Houser indicates that ASW was primarily 324, nderson, “Cuban Crisis,” 85. 70> wnderson, ""As I Recall,” 45.
In fact, the special surfacing signal was a more aggressive measure than Navy ships were normally allowed to take in peacetime.
It is not known if the President ordered | ASW aircraft to carry live ASW eaapence, or even knew that ne ee ea j they were ioing so.
Navy eins Sea wiae had the authority to we take this action on their own initiative, so there was no need for the President to have ordered it.
The White House did not attempt to exercise direct control over ASW operations.
In his oral history Admiral Ward describes a reporting a submarine contact to the White House, and being told not to take offensive action against Meee Thus, the CNO, Secretary of Defense, or President could have intervened if prosecution of a Soviet submarine started getting out of hand.
The special ""Submarine Surfacing and Identification Procedures” were used several times during the crisis.
Available information is incomplete, but the special signals apparently were used on at least two of the five confirmed Soviet submarines , and may have been used on two others .-°2 Both the Morse code signal and the explosive charge signal (four or five charges) were used.
PDC€s were small explosive charges routinely used by the Navy in peacetime for an echo $31 yard, ""Reminiscences,"" 194.
Captain Dickey gGescribed an ASW prosecution being monitored by Flag Plot on the HF/SSB net.
Captain Wissman recalled the Navy chain of command paying Close attention to ASW prosecution.
Wissman, letter to author, March 4, 1988. 33254e1man, letter to author, March 25, 1988; Wissman, letter to author, March 4, 1988; Dinwiddie, letter to author, April 28, 1988; Dickey, letter to author, April 20, 1988.
Every time that the explosive charge signal was sent by surface ships, they dropped hand eee ida ae Thus, contrary to what the organizational process model would predict, the Navy readily adapted to a civilian-inspired modification to its ASW procedures.
The type of PDCs used by ASW aircraft are shown in a photograph in Gallagher, 103.
The fact that MK 64 PDCs were routinely used in exercises with United States submarines | indicates that the Navy believed they were a safe signaling | method (MK 64 charges were phased out in about 1980 and replaced by MK 84 electronic signalling devices). $34) inwiddie, letter to author, April 28, 1988; Rozier, interview by author, January 30, 1988.
Hand grenades had about the same explosive charge as MK 64 PDCs. 33>, though this observation illustrates a weakness in the organizational process model, it does not disprove the model.
There were no reported instances of a Soviet submarine immediately surfacing upon hearing the signals--the Navy did not literally “force” any Soviet submarines to surface.
Soviet submarines surfaced because they needed to replenish air and batteries, or because they had some kind of mechanical problem that had to be repaired on the surface.
The Navy can claim, however, that it forced Soviet submarines to surface in the presence of United States ships-a humiliation for a submarine captain.
On the other hand, the Soviet submarines did not react to the signals with Other than thelr normal efforts at evasion.
The Soviet submarines attempted to evade being tracked, sometimes successfully, but their efforts were sporadic.
At least three of the contacts surfaced on an easterly heading, as specified in the United States Notice to Mariners.
There are no clear cases of Soviet submarines making a large course change specifically to surface on an easterly heading.
Normally, a submarine need only expose its snorkel to recharge its batteries and replenish it air.
It was unusual, and striking to experienced ASW operators, that all five of the Soviet submarines fully surfaced, sometimes repeatedly, rather than just snorkeling.
This led some Navy Officers to conclude that submarines were ordered to surface and identify themselves if challenged by the United States Navy.
Thus, although the evidence is not conclusive, the Soviet Government does appear to have directed its submarines to comply with the United States Svarructions.
These two Soviet submarines appear to have been on routine Caribbean patrols.
One of them was operating near Guantanamo in the Windward Passage--a strategic location for monitoring United States Navy movements~-when first detected.
The other three confirmed Soviet submarines (C-18, C-19, and C-20/26) operated in the Atlantic east and northeast of the Bahamas.
They were detected moving toward the quarantine zone shortly before the quarantine went into effect.
Some accounts have described these three submarines . as escorting the Soviet merchant ships carrying offensive arms to Cuba.
In fact, their locations and movements were unrelated to those of the merchant ships.
The Soviet freighters were scattered across the Atlantic, rather than being in a convoy or following a common track toward Cuba.
Additionally, the Soviet submarines were scattered over a large area, rather than concentrated around a particular ship or group of snips.
If this is correct, the Soviets could well have decided to recall their submarines as early as October 23--the same day they ordered their merchant ships to halt or return home.
Greater time delays would have been experienced in getting the recall order out to submerged submarines, which had to expose a radio mast above the surface in order to receive N@asageae--The most likely scenario is that Soviets decided to recall their submarines on October 25, after the United States revealed its ""Submarine Surfacing and Identification Procedures"" and warned that force would be used against submarines that failed to comply.
However, the possibility cannot be dismissed that the Soviets may have decided to recall their submarines in the Atlantic.
Ot rvonicat iy, aggressive Navy ASW operations may have inadvertently delayed receipt of the recall order by one or two of the Soviet submarines.
There were no near collisions with submerged or surfaced Soviet submarines.
Navy ships and planes practiced ASW tactics while tracking submerged Soviet aubmarines.
It is extremely unlikely that the Soviets would have ignored and not protested a serious incident involving one of their submarines.
Christiansen , interview by author, February 3, 1988; Morrison , interview by author, February 3, 1988; Morgan , letter to author, April 7, 1988; Rozier , interview by author, January 30, 1988; Edelman , letter to author, March 25, 1988.
The fifth confirmed contact was prosecuted by ASW aircraft from VP-56 and VS-26.
The commanders of those two squadrons could not be located, but Navy records indicate that no weapons were used in the’ prosecution of contact C-23.
As Sagan suggests, the charges undoubtedly were hand grenades or PDCs, which were authorized, and were dropped in order to send the special signals approved by McNamara.
Although weapons were never employed against Soviet submarines, there was a remote possibility that the explosive charge signals could damage a submarine.
In both cases, crewmen were observed on deck apparently making repairs to hatches or the hul1.
However, the Soviets never filed a protest and Admiral pentiaen attributed the casualty to some sort of machinery failure (a 23 The problems PDC could not damage internal machinery) .° experienced by C-18 probably were not caused by PDCs.
In summary, the Kennedy emiaweeeanden included Soviet submarines in the quarantine of Cuba.
Standard Navy peacetime ASW | procedures were modified specifically to support the President's political objectives.
Secretary of Defense McNamara approved special signals devised by the Navy for signalling submarines to surface for identification.
The rules of engagement issued for the quarantine specifically addressed when force coule Be used against submarines.
When informed that Soviet submarines were moving into the quarantine area, the President directed the Navy to launch a maximum ASW effort.
The Soviet Union was informed of the ""Submarine Surfacing and Identification precedecos” and was warned that force would be used against submarines that failed to comply.
ASW was viewed in ae ; oe. ee online mammal “ the EXCOMM as a supporting operation, rather than as one of en NR TOES the central operations in the crisis.
ASW operations thus do not appear to have received as much attention as other areas, BtsGité the fact that ASW operations genereate the most intense interactions with Soviet forces.
The President may not have fully understood the operational implications of Navy ASW operations--such as the fact that Navy ASW planes and helicopters were carrying live ordnance while they trailed Soviet submarines.
The President and McNamara chose not to exercise direct control over ASW operations, but were kept abreast of the operations.
The Situation Room displayed all but the most sensitive information on the tactical situation at sea and McNamara was briefed in detail at least once daily in Flag Plot.
Although the President apparently chose not to monitor ASW operations over voice radio, he or ticNeiara could have intervened if they felt that things were getting out of hand.
United States Navy ASW forces complied with their rules of engagement and the ASW procedures specified for the quarantine.
They used the special signals and did not fire any weapons against Soviet submarines.
Other than this, there were no incidents between United States ASW forces and Soviet submarines despite the intense ASW operations that were conducted Guring the crisis.
First, the President had been informed the previous day that Soviet submarines were moving into the area end had directed the Navy to launch a maximum ASW effort.
Second, the President was told during the Wednesday morning EXCOMM meeting that USS Essex had been tasked to > prosecute the Soviet submarine.
Third, the first positive contact between Navy ASW units and a Soviet submarine did not occur until 3:29m.
Nathan asserts, with no apparent evidence, that the President was ""horrified"" when he found out that the Navy intended to surface Soviet submarines.
Nathan's interpretation seriously distorts Robert Kennedy's account, and is proven false by the evidence in this study.
Fourth, the Navy was not just following standard operating procedures--Soviet submarines had explicitly been included in the quarantine by guidance reviewed by the President and approved by McNamara.
What he learned during that visit was that a specific destroyer from the Essex HUK Group was trailing a Soviet submarine (contact C-18)--an action that McNamara authorized.
Allison's interpretation of ASW operations during the crisis thus has no validity.
Until well into the crisis, however, it escaped their attention that the United States Navy would pursue Soviet submarines in the North Atlantic as a normal operational measure in support of the large United States naval deployment establishing the blockade.
In fact, the naval commanders, with ample operational authority to do so , chose to pursue this mission very aggressively from the outset.
The only accurate statement in this analysis is that Navy commanders had ample operational authority (unless it was \ , specifically denied) to conduct ASW in the North Atlantic. wae The rest is erroneous.
First, the President and McNamara knew by at least October 21 that the Navy would be pursuing Soviet submarines in support of the quarantine.
McNamara had explicitly included submarines among the vessels that the Navy was permitted to stop and board.
The President and McNamara appear to have shared Navy concern that Soviet submarines might attack Navy quarantine ships and were generally supportive of Navy ASW objectives.
Second, McNamara undoubtedly and the President probably knew about Navy ASW operations in the Atlantic outside the quarantine area.
The Argentia ASW barrier, ordered on October 24 and established on October 27, was displayed _ the charts in Flag Plot and thus would have been seen by McNamara during his daily briefings.
The CNO would have had to make an extraordinary effort to prevent McNamara from learning about the barrier.
Atlantic during the crisis were the three Foxtrot-class torpedo-~armed attack submarines that entered the quarantine area.
The only Soviet submarine-launched cruise missile credited with a land attack Capability in 1962 was the size of a jet fighter and had to be carried in very large tubes outside the hull.
The Soviets had no cruise missiles that could be launched from torpedo tubes, excluding the Foxtrots from the strategic nuclear deterrence role.
Thus, Navy ASW operations did not constitute ""extremely strong coercion,” at least not for the reason given by Steinbruner.
Fourth, the Navy conducted its ASW operations essentially in the manner that the President desired.
This list is not comprehensive, but does provide an indication of the many ways in which violent incidents could have occurred during the crisis.
Additionally, a wide range of accidents could have occurred, including United States Navy ships or planes accidently firing a weapon near a Soviet submarine or merchant ship, a Soviet submarine accidently firing a torpedo near a United States warship, collisions between United States warships and Soviet submarines or merchant ships, aircraft crashing over or near Cuba , and Cuban Komar missile boats or coastal defense missile sites accidently firing an anti-ship cruise missile during testing or training.
Given the high level of tensions between the United States and Soviet Union, any of these incidents could have triggered a clash between United States forces and Soviet or Cuban forces.
There were, in fact, significant tactical-level interactions during the crisis.
Most important were the bg asiiions between the United States Quarantine Force and Soviet merchant ships, and between United States ASW forces SeaMcousIe submarines.
There were also low-intensity interactions between United States low altitude reconnaissance planes and Cuban air defenses, in the form of Cuban anti-aircraft guns firing on the United States planes, and interactions between Cuban naval units and United States Navy ships and patrol planes in the Florida Strait.
Cuban Komar missile boats were active in Cuban waters during the crisis and occasionally ventured out into the Florida Strait at night.
They did not, however, take any threatening actions toward United States vessels and retreated to Cuban waters when illuminated by Navy patrol planes.
Navy ships and patrol planes frequently spotted Cuban naval vessels and planes, but there were no close encounters even though United States Navy ships operated as close as three nautical miles from the Cuban coast on several occasions.
Interactions with Soviet merchant ships and submarines were limited by Khrushchev's decision to recall the freighters carrying arms and the three submarines operating in the Atlantic.
The only Soviet ships that entered the quarantine zone were those that the United States would have no reason to take into custody.
The three Soviet submarines that were of greatest concern had all reversed course and were headed home by the time United States Navy ASW forces were able to locate and prosecute them.
Had Khrushchev directed the freighters and submarines to continue toward Cuba, the intensity of tactical-level interactions at sea would have been much more severe.
Interactions with Cuban forces were constrained by an apparent decision by Castro not to provoke a confrontation with the United States.
The Cuban Captain William C Magee, Commanding Officer of USS Claud Jones , letter to author, May 12, 1988.
Navy lowlevel photographic reconnaissance planes were fired on by Cuban anti-aircraft guns on October 27, but were not hit.
Captain William B Ecker, Commanding Officer of VFP-62, letter to author, March 19, 1988.
The anti-aircraft fire on October 27 was the only exception to this pattern of caution, but appears to have been an isolated incident--there was no further anti-aircraft fire against United States planes.
If Castro had decided to demonstrate defiance of the United States--to back up his inflammatory rhetoric with military actions--there probably would have been a Caribbean version of the Tonkin Gulf Incident.
Once an initial Cuban attack had taken place, United States forces would have been at hair trigger readiness for further attacks.
Eiebeted Cuban provocations, particularly a successful Cuban attack on a United States ship, probably would have led the President to order destruction of the Cuban navy and air force.
Khrushchev's early decision not to challenge the United States quarantine meant that President Kennedy and the Navy commanders at sea were never confronted with a situation in which they had to decide whether or not to use force against Soviet ships or submarines.
At the time, however, this was not clear to the President or the chain of command.
Khrushchev did not announce his actions, the United States had to infer them from the movements of Soviet ships and submarines.
As late as Saturday, October 27, it still was not clear to United States leaders that Khrushchev would refrain from challenging the quarantine, even though several Soviet ships suspected of carrying arms had turned back.
The danger of an armed confrontation with Soviet or Cuban forces thus appeared to be much greater at the time than it does in retrospect.
The USS Holder collided with USS Wasp while refueling at sea on November 14, but damage to the ships was slight.
The USS William C Lawe was forced aground by heavy seas in the mouth of San Juan harbor, Puerto Kivco, on November 17, suffering damage sufficient to keep it oe of further quarantine operations.
The Navy lost an F8U that crashed during a catapult launch and an A4D that caught fire in flight.
USS Essex lost two new SH-3 ASW-helicopters due to an electrical malfunction, which prompted the Navy to ground all of its SH-3s until the problem was corrected.
An ASW torpedo was dropped on the flight deck of USS Essex while being loaded onto an aircraft, but did not explode.
One of the Navy F8U-1P photographic reconnaissance planes was damaged when it struck an Albatross in flight.
Navy F4H Phantoms intercepted an Air Force U-2 as it approached the USS Enterprise (CVAN 65) carrier group after flying over Cuba.
Four Marines at Guantanamo were injured, two when they accidently entered a United States minefield and two who were wounded when they failed to respond properly to a sentry'’s challenge.
The accident that created the greatest danger of a confrontation with Cuban forces occurred on November 6, when two Marines accidently crashed a pickup truck through the Guantanamo security fence and twenty feet into Cuban territory.
The operations that had the most immediate impact on resolution of the crisis were the quarantine and ASW operations.
Both of these operations were conducted largely in accordance with standard Navy procedures, but with certain key modifications to ensure that the supported the President's political objectives.
The White House and the chain of command closely monitored quarantine and ASW operations when they involved encounters with Soviet ships or submarines, but did not attempt to exercise direct real-time control over operations at sea.
The Navy conducted these operations in the manner prescribed by the President and there were no incidents with Soviet ships or submarines.
The Kennedy Administration was clearly concerned about the danger of an incident with Soviet ships or submarines.
The President and McNamara exercised a greater degree of control over United States Navy operations than had ever been attempted in the past.
However, they primarily controlled naval Operations through mechanisms of indirect control, particularly mission orders and rules of engagement, rather than through direct control.
The President and McNamara retained authority certain crucial decisions, particularly retaliation against Cuban air defenses and the boarding of ships.
The President could monitor operations at sea on HF/SSB radio in the White House Situation Room, therefore could intervene if he felt an encounter was getting out of hand.
The EXCOMM was an only an advisory body for the President--it was not in the chain of command.
The EXCOMM and its study groups discussed military and naval Operations in numbing detail, but the President and McNamara did not attempt to control all of those details in the actual conduct of operations.
The overall answer is yes, but the coupling was not as tight as might be expected given the seriousness of the crisis.
The tightest coupling was between United States Navy ASW forces and Soviet submarines, followed closely by coupling between the Quarantine force and Soviet merchant ships.
The Soviet submarines were not attempting to force their way through United States naval forces to get to Cuba, they were attempting to return home unmolested.
The only Soviet ships — approached the quarantine line were those that the United States would have no reason to take into custody.
As Admiral Dennison relates in his oral history, the quarantine was a success without ever having been tested.
President Kennedy clearly was using the United States armed forces to convey political signals to Khrushchev during the crisis.
The President and McNamara actively sought ae ways to reinforce the signals being sent to the Soviets, such as by modifying Navy ASW procedures to support the political objectives of the quarantine.
Khrushchev, on the other hand, may have used military forces for political signalling, but did not do so as clearly as President Kennedy.
Khrushchev was probably avoiding ae have of hostile intent by not placing Soviet forces at full alert, recalling freighters carrying arms, and recalling the three submarines in the Atlantic.
However, there is insufficient evidence to establish this conclusively.
Shooting down an American U~2 over Cuba on October 27 certainly sent the wrong signal to the United States, but this action may not have been authorized in the Fremlin.
Cuba placed its armed forces on alert, but avoided provocatory actions during the crisis.
This was probably intended to avoid giving the United States a pretext for invading the island.
Thus, all three of the participants in the crisis used their military forces for political signalling.
Although the President sought to maintain close control of military operations he relied heavily on methods of delegated control and communications problems constrained his ability to effectively exercise direct control.
In certain operations there was tight coupling between the forces of the two sides.
Both sides used their forces as a political instrument under conditions of acute crisis.
Navy forces encountered Cuban alr and naval forces on several occasions without the President or McNamara controlling the interactions.
The President's attention was focused on a very small portion of the overall operations that were in progress.
The potential cause of decoupling that was most prominent in the crisis was communications problems.
Despite the advances that had been made in communications technology, the effort to exercise close control over largescale operations seriously overloaded and degraded United States communications systems.
These communications problems did not cause serious decoupling because only a very small portion of United States forces were in contact with adversary forces and because attention had been paid to the guidance contained mechanisms of indirect control, so that United States forces would act as the President desired when he could not control their actions.
An Air Force U-2 strayed over the Soviet Union on October 27, prompting the Soviets and Americans to scramble fighters--an incident decoupled from Presidential control.
If, as has been alleged, the | Strategic Air Command transmitted its readiness reports for the DEFCON 2 alert in the clear without the President and McNamara knowing what they were doing, that would have been another instance of decoupling.
ASW operations--the most dangerous Soviet-American tactical interactions during the crisis--are particularly slow and tedious, providing ample opportunity for disengagement.
Similarly, the intercept and boarding of merchant ships takes place at a leisurely pace and is relatively easy to control.
Fast-paced engagements, such as air combat and sea battles fought with tactical aircraft and cruise missiles, never arose.
In retrospect this appears to have been a key factor in the success of the President's crisis management efforts--opening with operations that were inherently slowpaced.
The President probably knew intuitively that this Was an advantage of a blockade, but it was not an explicit consideration in the decision.
This is a striking contrast with the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis, when the Navy did not have Clear guidance on whether or not it could defend the offshore islands when the crisis erupted.
By tailoring certain key guidance contained in mission orders and rules of engagement to support the President's political objectives, the President and McNamara avoided the problem of inappropriate guidance in mechanisms of indirect control.
The most important innovation, the special submarine surfacing signals, were devised in conjunction with the Navy.
By not attempting to exercise positive direct control of operations while they were in progress, the President and McNamara largely avoided the problem of tactically inappropriate orders.
The method of control they used--control by negation--only required that orders be given if a Navy commander embarked on a course of action that éley opposed.
The final potential cause of decoupling, unauthorized actions by military commanders, did not occur during the crisis.
Contrary to the prevailing myth, Navy ASW operations were not conducted without the President's knowledge and authority, and did not violate the spirit of EXCOMM policy.
The fact that no unauthorized actions occurred is even somewhat surprising.
As will be discussed below, there was resentment among many Navy Officers to the close attention that the President and McNamara paid to military operations.
Thus, in summary, the various potential causes of decoupling either were not present during the crisis or did not have a serious adverse effect on the President's ability to manage the crisis.
Although the JCS remained committed to the air strike option as its preferred course of action until Khrushchev agreed on October 28 to remove Soviet offensive missiles from Cuba, this does not reflect differences in threat perceptions.
Rather, it reflects differences of opinion over whether or not the quarantine would be sufficient to compel Khrushchev to remove the missiles that were already in Cuba.
Even President Kennedy was skeptical that it would work, but decided to give it a try before resorting to force.
Navy commanders at sea were more concerned about the Soviet submarine threat than were senior military and civilian leaders in Washington.
However, the differences were not extreme and the President and McNamara were also concerned about the Soviet submarine threat. °°® 366) smiral Griffin, Vice Admiral Houser, Vice Admiral Caldwell, and Rear Admiral Shepard stated that there was not great concern for the Soviet submarine threat in Washington.
However, Admiral Anderson, Admiral Sharp, and rear Admiral Wylie state that there were such concerns.
Griffin, letter to author, April 6, 1988; Houser, interview by author, February 11, 1988; Shepard, interview by author, February 10, 1988; Anderson, interview by author, January 25, 1988; Sharp, letter to author, February 24, 1988; Wylie, letter to author, April 13, 1988.
The one other area in which threat perceptions were stratified was the Cuban air and naval threat to United States Navy ships.
Perceptions of the threat from Cuban aircraft were mixed, not following any pattern.
Admiral Anderson and Admiral Dennison appear to have been most concerned about the Cuban air threat, Admiral Ward was not overly concerned about it.
According to Admiral Ward, however, the CNO was flexible on this point during the October 20 JCS eee Among concerned about the Soviet submarine threat.
Admiral Rivero, Vice Admiral Houser, Vice Admiral Caldwell, Vice Admiral Hayward, Vice Admiral Stroh and the CINCLANT report on the crisis state that Task Force and Task Group Commanders at sea were concerned about the Soviet submarine threat.
Thus, while perceptions of the Cuban air and naval threat were mixed, they were not stratified.
The decoupling that did occur was minor and did not generate sustained interaction sequences beyond Presidential control.
President Kennedy's decision to open with relatively slow-paced naval operations, Khrushchev's early decision not to enaiiengs the quarantine, and Castro's decision not to provoke the United States were the factors that determined the nature of the tactical-level interactions.
When Cuban anti-aircraft guns fired at Navy reconnaissance jets on October 27, the unarmed Navy planes simply left the area.
Navy ASW forces trailed Soviet submarines for days without escalation by either side.
In effect, then, escalation was avoided by the tactical environment having been structured in such a manner as to prevent clashes from occurring in the first place.
Although the Soviet Government filed protests over these incidents, it did not interpret them as deliberate indications of hostile intentions on the part of the United States.
This apparently annoyed Khrushchev, who complained about the incident to President Kennedy, but otherwise did not have a major impact on the crisis.
There were no serious inadvertent military incidents involving naval forces.
There is a remote possibility that a Navy PDC might have contributed to the problems that kept two of the Soviet submarines on the surface, but the Soviets never filed a protest claiming that such an incident had occurred.
The lack of incidents is somewhat surprising, given the tremendous scope of United States military operations during the crisis, and may not be a reliable indicator of what to expect in future crises.
This was an important incident that caused apprehensions concerning Khrushchev's motives and willingness to resolve the crisis peacefully.
The incident probably would have had a greater impact on United States policy than it did were it not for Khrushchev's October 28 letter accepting President Kennedy's terms for ending the crisis.
Nevertheless, the availability of formal and informal communications channels between the two superpowers appears to have moderated the use of military forces for political signaling by allowing diplomatic rather than military responses to military incidents.
Tensions between political considerations and military considerations primarily arose from the fundamental decision to impose a quarantine on offensive arms rather than immediately launch an air strike against the Soviet missiles sites or invade Cuba.
Had men in fact died as a result, had ships sunk or airplanes fallen by the score, the crisis in civil-military relations would have taken a more dramatic turn, one in which, I suspect, civilian leaders would have accommodated commanders far more than they actually gid.
This captures the essence of the problem, but must be qualified by three observations.
The rules of engagement issued for the quarantine were not significantly different from normal peacetime rules and did not infringe upon a commander's right of self-defense.
The only operational area in which the President deliberately denied the military any authority to take action in self defense was in the case of Cuban air defenses firing on United States reconnaissance aircraft.
The distinction between self defense and retaliation was well-established in United States rules of engagement.
President Kennedy simply defined attacks on Cuban air defenses to be an act of retaliation that he would control, rather than an act of self defense that the Military could caus on its own authority.
President Eisenhower had done the same thing in the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis, allowing hot pursuit of Communist Chinese aircraft but not attacks on their mainland bases.
Third, records of EXCOMM meetings reveal that President Kennedy and Secretary McNamara were sympathetic to the military's concern with protecting its men.
After a U-2 was shot down on October 27, the danger of further attacks and the loss of additional pilots was discussed.
The President and McNamara tried to understand the implications of their interventions in military operations and attempted to weigh potential military costs against the political objectives they sought.
Preclude simultaneous, , reinforcement of either CINCEUR (Commander in Chief United States Forces Europe] or CINCPAC using troop carrier or MATS (Military Air Transport Service] aircraft.
Preparations for invasion of Cuba degraded the ability of the United States to respond to Soviet moves in Europe, particularly against Berlin.
The only reason that this did not generate severe tensions was that the political-military situation in other theaters, including Europe was relatively quiet.
During World War II and the Korean War there was military command only, no control.
McNamara wanted to know in detail how each function was to be accomplished.
For example, wanting ships to be at certain places at a time when their max speed would not permit.
The second half of this assessment reflects a widespread attitude toward McNamara, that he was incompetent at controlling military operations.
McNamara, the admirals felt, was trying to run naval operations the way he would manage a Ford assembly line, but without the experience necessary to do so and with no respect for those who did have the requisite experience.
Navy admirals commonly referred to them as “Junior Field Marshals"" and a variety of less polite expressions.
Even General Taylor was suspect because he had been brought out of retirement to serve as JCS Chairman.
One admiral who worked closely with General Taylor described him as a “boot licking sycophant"" and a “yes man"" for the Kennedy Administration.
The records of the EXCOMM meetings reveal that this is not a fair assessment, but it was their perceptions that mattered.
The Admiral's only complaint was about officials in Washington attempting to use his already overloaded radio circuits.
Everything that we did we reported directly by voice telephone , sometimes through a scrambler, to the Pentagon, which was monitored also in the White House war room.
For the first time we asked instructions on whether or not we should stop a Soviet ship known to be headed our way and the decision was made at the political level because it Wag . political decision rather than a military one.
But this was an exceptional situation, more political than military in abicemee The fact that Navy commanders who did not have to work directly with McNamara felt less resentment and better understood the aaa atndson.
This largely explains the infamous argument between McNamara and Admiral Anderson the evening of October 24.
Admiral Anderson had thrown down the gauntlet the previous day with his memorandum to McNamara stating there would be no more interference with the commanders at sea.
McNamara had spent the day in a tense EXCOMM meeting, and had been tasked by the President to closely monitor the quarantine operations.
However, their argument reveals much more about personalities clashing under the stress of a crisis than it does about organizational processes.
Admiral Anderson did not disobey or attempt ta circumvent any orders from the President or McNamara during the crisis.
The CNO objected strongly to some of tHeir decisions and to what he viewed as unwarranted intrusion into naval matters, but did not defy their authority.
That was so tightly held--maybe they gave it to Taylor and he didn't pass it on down.
But there was a inadequacy, in BY opinion, in that flow of information 3 to the chiefs.
The important point is that by not informing the JCS of political-diplomatic efforts at resolving the crisis, the President risked defeating his efforts to ensure that military operations supported his political objectives.
The 07 \idetson, ""Reminiscences,"" 549. 3906 i ffin, “Reminiscences,” 555.
Vice Admiral Houser and Captain Carmichael both stated that the Chiefs did not appear to understand the President's political strategy or the escalation concerns of civilian leaders.
Such an understanding might have helped them to anticipate operational problems that could have interfered with the President's crisis management strategy.
Despite the scale of United States military and naval operations and the intensity of tactical-level interactions at sea, there were no serious instances of decoupled interactions involving naval forces.
There were no serious incidents between United States naval forces and Soviet or Cuban forces.
The most serious political-military tension was over centralized control of naval operations. ol ouser, interview by author, February 11, 1988; Carmichael, letter to author, March 8, 1988.
The United States sought to remain officially neutral in the conflict and to avert Soviet intervention on behalf of the Arab nations.
The war was over in only six days after a string of successful Israeli offensives.
The United States Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean Sea was used to deter Soviet intervention in the conflict.
Background Midviicgds) b¥ireen Israel and neighboring Arab countries had been rising for years due to the Syrian-Jordanian effort to divert Jordan river water away from Israel, Beieedinian terrorist attacks on Israel, Israeli reprisal raids into Jordan and Syria, and artillery duels along the IsraeliSyrian border.
These moves appeared to confirm Israeli fears of imminent attack and Israel decided to ore-dnder Israel struck early on 5 June with devastating air strikes on Egyptian air fields, followed later in the day by attacks on Syrian, Jordanian and Iraqi air fields.
Israeli army units invaded the Sinai the morning of 5 June, reaching the Suez canal three days later.
Israel attacked Jordan on § June, occupying all of Jerusalem and the West Bank in two days.
Although action on the Syrian front was limited to artillery duels and three small Syrian probes, Israel decided late on 7 June to attack the Golan Heights but then delayed the assault due to Arab acceptance of the United Nations ceasefire.
By the morning of 8 June Egyptian defenses in the Sinai had collapsed and Jordan had been knocked out of the war.
There had been only sporadic fighting on the Syrian front during the first four days of the war, primarily two Syrian probes that were easily repulsed by the Israelis.
United States Bbitecenks in the crisis were to limit the scope the fighting in the Middle East and quickly bring it to a halt, prevent the Soviet Union from intervening militarily on behalf of the Arab nations, and avoid alienating the Arab rem, oot The United States strategy during the Six Day War was to act through the United Nations Security Council to achieve an early cease-~ fire, pressure Israel to accept the ceasefire and limit its . military objectives, and prevent Soviet military oe tion through deterrent military moves and diplomacy.
The United States attempted to portray a neutral stance without officially declaring itself to be neutral.
This failed to placate the Arab nations, which declared an embargo on oil shipments to the United States.
United States diplomatic efforts favored Israel, but were not a grant of unlimited support.
The United States supported the United Nations ceasefire Times, June 1, 1967, 1.
President Johnson used the Soviet-American ""hot line” to communicate with Soviet leaders during the crisis, the first use of the system for its intended purpose.
Soviet objectives in the crisis were to prevent its clients in the Middle East from suffering catastrophic defeats and to expand its influence among Arab nations at the expense of the United States.
As it became apparent that Israel was scoring a major triumph, the Soviet objective shifted to limiting the extent of Arab defeats and the reducing the potential erosion of Soviet prestige and influence in the Middle East.
There are indications that the Soviets may even have helped provoke the war-by spreading rumors of imminent Israeli attacks.
The Soviet strategy during the war was to provide strong diplomatic support for the Arab nations.
When war broke out the Soviet Government immediately condemned Israeli ""aggression"" and demanded that Israeli forces withdraw from Arab territory as a condition for a ceasefire.
As the extent of the Arab losses became apparent, however, the Soviets dropped the weneeeyammasnind and supported an unconditional immediate ceasefire in order to forestall further Arab defeats.
The Soviets also sent a blunt warning to Israel, which Saat revealed in the United Nations Security Council.
In summary, the United States and the Soviet Union had limited objectives in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, and both superpowers limited their roles primarily to political and diplomatic activities.
However, both superpowers used their naval forces in the Mediterranean for political signalling, as Will be discussed below.
In a direct superpower crisis the primary confrontation is between the United States and the Soviet Union.
In an indirect superpower crisis the primary confrontation is between allies or clients of the United States and the Soviet Union.
Command and Control By 1967 the defense reorganization of 1958 had taken firm hold and the military chain of command ran from the President, to the Secretary of Defense, to the unified and specified commanders.
USCINCEUR was <a Pseuaone Allied Commander Europe , commanding all NATO forces in and immediately around Europe.
The Navy component commander under USCINCEUR was Commander in Chief United States Naval Forces Europe , Admiral John S McCain, Jr., headquartered in London.
The other two commands were Commander Naval Forces Southern Europe , headquartered in Naples, Italy, responsible for ASW operations in the Mediterranean, and Commander Middle East Force, responsible for United States naval forces in the Persian Gulf.
Of these commands, the Sixth Fleet played the most important role in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War.
Initially, this force was small, consisting aRryor two destroyer squadrons and some amphibious and support ships.
In August 1946 the force was expanded and included the nearly constant presence of at least one attack carrier group.
In the spring of 1967 TF 60 was commanded by Rear Admiral Laurence R Geis, embarked in USS America (CVA 66), and consisted of two Task Groups.
Task Group 60. consisted of the USS America and six escorting destroyers.
Task Group 60. consisted of the USS Saratoga , the cruiser USS Galveston , and four destroyers.
The other Sixth Fleet Task Force that had a role in the crisis was the Amphibious Force , consisting of an amphibious ready group with an embarked Marine battalion landing team , some 1,800 troops.
United States communications capabilities in 1967 had _improved over 1962, but still did not enable the President to directly control ships at sea.
The primary communications links to the Sixth Fleet were the fleet HF radioteletype broadcast and other HF channels from communications stations around the Mediterranean.
Satellite communications had been introduced into the fleet on an gi eeeimengal basis in 1963 and various prototype systems were being tested Sincluding limited operational use in the Vietnam war), but the Sixth Fleet was still relying on HF communications.
The Sixth Fleet had HF/SSB voice radio communications with local communications stations and shore-based headquarters in southern Europe, but had no capability to speak directly with the Pentagon or the White House.
President Johnson and McNamara did not attempt to give orders directly to ships at sea.
The White House Situation Room was unable to monitor Sixth Fleet operations real-time.
Wylie, Deputy Commander in Chief United States Naval Forces Europe during the crisis, letter to author, March 28, 1988. so Nanical Thomas H Moorer, Commander in Chief Atlantic during the crisis, interview by author, February 9, 1988.
Admiral Horacio Rivero, Vice CNO during the crisis, states there was close control ""to the extent of the JCS ihe. overall effort to signal the United States intention to stay out of the conflict, Sixth Fleet movements were used on at least three occasions to send specific political signals to the Soviet Union.
However, Sixth Fleet movements geanerally were not under positive direct control.
Rather, general geographic limits were placed on on the fleet's movements and control by negation was exercised--Vice Admiral Martin reported his actions up the chain of command, allowing the White House to alter politically inappropriate fleet —ikitse ° There appear to have been no instances in which the President countermanded an order given by Vice Admiral Martin.
The President and Secretary of Defense did not use the mechanisms of indirect control to issue detailed operational guidance to the Sixth Fleet.
According to Vice Admiral Donald D Engen, Commanding Officer of USS America during the crisis, the movements and operations of the carriers were not closely controlled from Washington, other than a requirement that the carriers operate in the vicinity of specific points rather than being allowed to roam at will.
This. restriction appears to have been imposed by the Navy chain of command in order to facilitate control of the carriers' movements in response to White House signalling efforts.
The rules of engagement guidance refers to the standing CINCUSNAVEUR rules issued prior to the crisis.
See COMSIXTHFLT 0813202 JUN 67, naval message, June 6, 1967 (Unclassified.
Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center, Washington, DC); COMSIXTHFLT 081339Z JUN 67, naval message, June 6, 1967 (Declassified 1988.
As Anthony Wells observed, ""The 1967 June War was a watershed in the evolution of Soviet naval diplomacy.
From mid-1964 onward the Soviet navy maintained a continuous presence in the Mediterranean.
The average daily force level rose from five ships in 1964 to fifteen ships in 1966.
The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron was not unusually active, spending much time at anchor or in small-scale training exercises.
However, the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron conducted close surveillance and aggressive intelligence collection against the Sixth Fleet, particularly its attack eaibiceian, and conducted ASW exercises in which simulated United States Polaris submarines were hunted down.
The Soviets also began using their navy more frequently for political purposes, making port visits to friendly countries and moving ships to the vicinity of hot spots.
In early May 1967 the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron was conducting routine operations and was at a normal 4125 Mm.
This was probably a routine deployment, perhaps a training cruise for cadets or recruits.
By May 22, however, Turkey had received notification from the Soviet Union that an additional ten ships would be passing through the Turkish Straits into the Mediterranean.
Two or three Soviet attack submarines were also thought to be in the Mediterranean.
There is no information available on Soviet submarine deployments during the crisis.
Dismukes argues that it is reasonable to assume that the number of Soviet submarines in the Mediterranean would have increased proportional to the increase in surface combatants, but there is no evidence that this in fact occurred.
The central Mediterranean extends from the Strait of Sicily to the southern tip of Greece, including the Ionian and Adriatic Seas.
The Sixth Fleet was directed to remain west of a line drawn from eastern Libya to the eastern end of Crete--over two hundred miles from western Egypt, over four hundred miles from the Suez Canal, and over six hundred miles from Syria.
On May 25 the Sixth Fleet amphibious group was sailed from Naples to Malta for a port visit.
The amphibious group was standing by primarily to evacuate United States citizens from the Middle East if the need arose, but was also capable of landing the Marines it carried.
On May 27 the JCS directed the Sixth Fleet readied for a non-combat deterrence role in the event of war in the Middle East.
The Navy's Middle East Force normally consisted of two destroyers and the flagship, a seaplane tender.
In mid-May the Navy had used the normal rotation of ships to reinforce the Middle East Force by delaying the departure of the destroyer being replaced.
On May 23 Commander Middle East Force was directed to move his four ships into the Red Sea.
Mediterranean extends from the southern tip of Greece eastward, including the Sea of Crete and the Aegean Sea.
Hurewitz, ed., Soviet-American Rivalry in the Middle East , 58; Wylie, letter to author, March 28, 1988.
On June 3 the destroyer USS Dyess transited the Suez canal into the Red Sea.
This was a routine rotation of ships, but resulted in further reinforcement of the Middle East Force.
There were no interactions between United States and Soviet naval units in the Red Sea during the Six Day war.
The Soviet navy closely monitored Sixth Fleet move-~ ments on the eve of the crisis.
On about May 23 a Soviet intelligence collection ship began shadowing Saratoga.
On May 28 a Riga-class frigate began trailing America as she moved into the eastern Mediterranean.
On June 4 a Kashin-class DDG took over trailing America and remained with the carrier through the start of the war.
Two Soviet minesweepers were monitoring the British carrier HMS Victorious at Malta.
That night America, accompanied by Little Rock, moved to a position south of Crete, leaving Saratoga north of the island.
These were the dispositions of United States and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean when war erupted on June 5.
When war broke out on June 5 the two United States carriers were operating in the vicinity of Crete.
The Sixth Fleet remained in the Eastern Mediterranean to deter Soviet intervention, but was kept readily discerned.
The United States press reported on May 31 that Intrepid had been ordered to remain in the Mediterranean to reinforce the Sixth Fleet.
The United States Navy unit closest to the fighting on June 5 was a lone Navy carrier-based reconnaissance plane on a routine flight one hundred nautical miles off the coast of Egypt.
The Sixth Fleet initially was ordered to remain at least one hundred nautical miles from the Syrian coast, but in fact did not approach closer than about four hundred nautical miles.
Carrier aircraft were ordered to remain at least two hundred nautical miles from the Egyptian and Israeli coasts.
The United States carriers were placed at an increased condition of readiness, which included doubling the number of aircraft ready for immediate launch and arming strike aircraft with conventional bombs and missiles.
The ships of the Sixth Fleet were ordered to readiness condition three, an internal Navy readiness designation unrelated to the JCS worldwide DEFCON system.
Navy ships were normally at ""Condition IV,"" defined as normal peacetime steaming.
Vice Admiral Engen, Commanding Officer of America during the crisis, stated that ""We used the embarked press corps to provide safety from misrepresentation.
That was a United States tactic, ""427 Thus, the emphasis in Sixth Fleet operations was on demonstrating the United States intention to avoid involvement in the fighting.
On June 5 and 6 the two United States carrier groups steamed to the southeast.
The only exception to the policy of continuing routine ports visits was that the JCS on May 27 cancelled all port visits for the two United States aircraft carriers.
As a result of this action, America remained at sea from May 22 to June 21--the longest the carrier had been at sea continuously since commissioning.
The White House took advantage of the repositioning as a means of showing the Russians, who were tailing the task forces, that the United States would not be intjoidated although it earnestly sought a United Nations solution.
This episode illustrates that the White House was not exercising positive direct control over the movements of the carriers.
Instead, because the movement supported the President's political objectives, it was publicized and allowed to continue.
On June 6 Egypt claimed that United States and British carrier aircraft had assisted Israel in its initial air strikes on Egyptian airfields.
Egyptian President Nasser would later admit that no United States planes had attacked Egypt.
The United States carriers continued moving westward through June 8, reaching a position southwest of Crete.
On June 7 a suspected Soviet submarine was detected in the vicinity of the America task group and was tracked by United States destroyers, ASW helicopters, and patrol planes.
This incident could well have been sparked by the United States prosecution of a suspected Soviet submarine near the America task group.
In response to the incident, Vice Admiral Martin sent a message to the Soviet destroyer, warning it to clear the United States formation.
On June g the America task group experienced the most severe Soviet harassment of the crisis.
The Kashinclass DDG and a Mirka-class corvette maneuvered dangerously Close to America, attempting to force the carrier to change course while it was conducting flight operations.
The Soviets have been known to harass United States ships prosecuting their submarines on other occasions as well.
There had also been two serious incidents in the Sea of Japan on May 10 and il, when two Soviet destroyers collided with the destroyer USS Walker while maneuvering in the midst of an ASW Carrier formation.
This incident received front page headlines in the United States and was on the minds of Navy commanders in the Mediterranean.
Soviet harassment thus was more than an annoyance, it could well have led to a serious collision with an American warship.
On June 8 the United States amphibious group with its embarked Marines departed Malta and steamed eastward toward the war zone.
Also on dune 8, America and Little Rock moved eastward to provide assistance to USS Liberty, under attack off the Sinai coast.
On June 9, when America rendezvoused with Liberty, the carriers made their closest approach to the fighting, reaching a position about one hundred nautical miles Posith of Alexandria, Egypt.
The President also reduced the fleet's minimum distance to the Syrian coast $36 In his memoir from one hundred to fifty nautical miles.
We knew that Soviet intelligence ships were electronically monitoring the fleet's every movement.
We all knew the Russians would get the message as soon as their monitors observed the change in the fleet's pattern.
That message, which no translator would need to interpret to the Kremlin leadership, was that the United States was prepared to resist Soviet intrusion into the Middle East.
This was the most important instance of the Sixth Fleet being used to send a specific political signal.
Israel apparently had no intention of seizing Damascus and soon stopped its advance into Syria, and the Soviets made no military overt moves to carry out the threat.
The most important Soviet naval activity during the crisis was trailing the United States carriers in the Mediterranean.
Saratoga was probably trailed by a Soviet intelligence ship from May 23 to June 13.
The Soviet navy also kept a Kotlin-class destroyer and two type T-43 minesweepers off Malta throughout the jaipeees Although this close surveillance of the Sixth Fleet was conducted primarily for military purposes, it helped to avert misperceptions of the fleet's role in the crisis (such as the claim that United States carrier planes had attacked Egypt) and greatly increased the value of the United States fleet as a political instrument by ensuring that Soviet leaders would quickly detect changes in its operations.
Armed surface warships were frequently used as tattletales during the crisis because they had a higher top speed than the intelligence ships and therefore were better able to keep up with United States carriers.
The Soviet destroyers and frigates that were used as tattletales were not heavily armed, so they did not present a serious immediate threat to the carriers.
On the other hand, as Anthony Wells points out, use of. combatants rather than AGIs as tattletales “expresses increaseu Soviet interest, both military and political, in the force being shadowed.
Although the two Soviet cruise missile-armed ships occasionally moved to within missile range of the United States carriers, it is clear that they did not make a concerted effort to keep the carriers in their sights.
The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron carried out operations at a very low tempo.
Saratoga departed on June 13, America departed on June 14, and the amphibious group departed on June 15.
In summary, tactical-level interactions between United States and Soviet naval forces were intense during the crisis.
Tensions at sea were acute on June 7 and 8 during United States prosecution of a Soviet submarine and Soviet harassment of the America carrier group.
Because United States and Soviet naval forces were in close proximity throughout the crisis, there were ample opportunities for inadvertent military incidents to occur between them.
The Soviets also conducted an airlift of supplies to Syria and Egypt from June 8 te July 2.
Despite the intense tactical-level jneee tl eeton between United States and Soviet Naval forces, there were no incidents like those described above.
No Soviet aircraft were encountered during the crisis, which is unusual for the Mediterranean.
No Egyptian or Syrian vessels or aircraft were encountered during the crisis because the sixth Fleet was kept well clear of their coasts, #2"" There were very few accidents involving United States naval forces, and none serious enough to have an impact on Washington's ability to manage the crisis.
Thus, ironically, the only mishap of the crisis was perpetrated by the nation that the United States supported in the war.
The Johnson Administration did not attempt to exercise direct control over the operations of the Sixth Fleet other than its movements in the Mediterranean.
Nor did the President or McNamara make an effort to provide specialized guidance in mechanisms of indirect control, other than limitations on how close the fleet and its aircraft could approach the coasts of the belligerents.
When the America carrier group experienced severe Soviet harassment on June 8 the Ox-idene commanders were guided by standing Navy policies for handling such situations, rather than by special instructions from the White House.
There was thus significant delegation of authority to on-scene commanders and the guidance contained in Navy standing orders and standing rules of engagement played a crucial role in determining the nature of the tactical-level interactions that occurred.
Thus, Soviet and American naval forces were tightly coupled during the crisis.
The Johnson Administration used the Sixth Fleet to signal the United States intention not to intervene in the crisis, but also used the fleet to warn the Soviets against direct military intervention in the conflict.
The Soviet Union also conveyed political signals by rapidly building up its Mediterranean squadron, shadowing the Sixth Fleet, and keeping the bulk of the squadron well clear of the fighting and the Sixth Fleet.
The 1967 Arab-Israeli War was the first crisis in which both superpowers actively used their mavies for political signalling.
For example, President Johnson had no control over whether or not the Soviet harassment of America on June 8 would produce a clash between the United States and Soviet navies.
The stratified interaction model of international crises, in which interactions evolve in separate, semi-independent sequences at the political, strategic, and tactical levels, offers a good description of Soviet-American interactions in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War.
President Johnson had to rely more on command by negation and delegated command than did President Kennedy.
The Sixth Fleet reacted to the attack on Liberty hours before it received instructions from the Washington.
Similarly, the President could not tell Rear Admiral Geis or Captain Engen how to handle the Soviet ships harassing America and her escorts.
The other potential causes of decoupling--impairment of political decisionmaking, ambiguous or ambivalent orders, tactically inappropriate orders, inappropriate guidance in ee of indirect control, and deliberate unauthorized actions by military commanders--did not have an observable impact on the crisis.
The second requirement for establishing that interactions became decoupled during a crisis is that the operational decisions made by tactical-level decisionmakers differed from the decisions that political-level decision-~ makers would have made in order to coordinate military operations with their political-diplomatic strategy for resolving the crisis.
Divergence between tactical-level military operations and political-level objectives was not a eeinieks problem during the crisis.
Although on-scene commanders were often making operational decisions on their own authority, their decisions generally supported the President's political objectives.
For example, Sixth Fleet uniiebhte on June 6, taken on the initiative of Rear Admiral Geis, sent the political signal the President wanted to send at that moment even though he had not ordered the movement.
Navy commanders were determined not to be intimidated by the dangerous maneuvering of the Soviet ships, even at the risk of a collision.
The stern warning Vice Admiral Martin sent to the Soviet destroyer and the ensuing game of chicken may not have been the types of actions President Johnson desired for managing tensions with the Soviet Union.
However, there is no evidence that he disapproved of how the the Navy commanders handled the situation--there were no collisions or shots fired--so even this incident is not a clear case of decoupling.
Threat perceptions were not acute at any level of the chain of command and there is evidence that officials in Washington were more concerned about the Soviet Navy than were the onscene commanders.
If anything, Navy on-scene commanders perceived the Soviet threat to the Sixth Fleet to be less dangerous than did civilian officials in Washington.
Threat perceptions and the security dilemma thus were not stratified during the crisis.
Although there were intense tactical-level interactions during the crisis, there were no cases of such interactions generating an escalation sequence the President could not control.
The most dangerous interactions took Place on June 7 and 8 during Soviet harassment of America and her escorts.
This interaction sequence did escalate, in the sense that a second Soviet ship joined the harassment on the second day, but did not escalate to violence.
Navy commanders knew that there were no Soviet tactical aircraft or torpedo boats in the Mediterranean and therefore did not suspect the Soviets of the attack.
Rivero, letter to author, March 10, 1988; Wylie, letter to author, March 28, 1988; Engen, letter to author, March 21, 1988.
Although naval commanders on both sides were determined not to be intimidated, they were cautious to avoid collisions.
Their caution arose not so much from concern over the political repercussions of an incident, but from the prudence any good seaman would show under the circumstances.
Collisions at sea are extremely dangerous, so that even deliberate collisions for signaling purposes are performed with great caution.
Thus, the first factor inhibiting escalation was caution on the part of United States leaders in the restrictions they placed on Sixth Fleet movements and caution on the part of United States naval commanders in the Mediterranean when potentially serious incidents did occur.
The June 7-8 harassment incident stands out because it Was entirely different from the behavior of the Soviet navy during the rest of the crisis.
Both this frigate and a Soviet AGI following Saratoga frequently maneeetad inside the United States formations, a dangerous practice when the carrier groups maneuver to conduct flight operations.
In fact, the two Soviet destroyers armed with anti-ship cruise missiles rarely were in the vicinity of the United States carriers.
Soviet submarines also appear to have maintained a low profile, Sather than aggressively pursuing the United States carriers, and no Soviet long-range strike aircraft were detected during the crisis.
This Soviet caution was an important factor in the lack of escalation during particularly intense interactions at sea.
United States Navy commanders could tolerate a certain —— of indiscretion by individual Soviet ships because it Clearly was not part of a pattern of harassment and did not appear to presage a Soviet pre-emptive attack.
The third factor inhibiting escalation was the tight coupling between United States and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean.
Sixth Fleet carrier aircraft and patrol planes kept Vice Admiral Martin and the chain of command up to the President informed of the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron's operations and movements.
Soviet tattletales probably kept Moscow informed of Sixth Fleet operations and movements on a near real-time basis.
Overall, this was beneficial for crisis management because the signal the United States and Soviets were sending with their fleets was one of non-involvement in the hostilities.
When Soviet ships harassed America, Vice Admiral Martin knew it was an isolated act and that the rest of the Soviet squadron was Operating normally.
When Israel attacked Liberty, Vice Admiral Martin knew that the Soviets probably were not responsible because he knew where their ships were and that they did not have any tactical aircraft over the Mediterranean.
Thus, although tight coupling is generally perceived as increasing the danger of escalation in crises, it can also reduce the likelihood of escalation when both sides are attempting to avoid involvement in a local conflict.
The fourth factor inhibiting escalation was use of the Soviet-American hot line.
Of particular importance was President Johnson's use of the hot line to warn the Soviets of the United States response to the attack on Liberty, which ensured that Soviet leaders would not misperceive the purpose of the sudden launch of carrier aircraft and America's sprint toward the Sinai.
The hot line was thus used to dampen the potential negative effects of tight coupling between United States and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean.
Ironically, while tight coupling of the naval forces in the Mediterranean increased the need for the hot line, it also increased the aii areaiigen eT of the hot line as a means for conveying political messages.
Soviet and American leaders could verify the veracity of statements made by the other side by comparing them with reports on the other side's naval operations.
The essential requirement for this synergistic relationship to exist was careful coordination of naval operations with political objectives and diplomatic initiatives.
The United States and the Soviet Union were largely successful in achieving such coordination.
American policy was designed to use a military show of force to convince Nasser that he should reopen the Strait of Tiran and defuse the mounting tension in the area.
This was to be accomplished by a series of careful moves and ""signals"" to the Egyptian Government.
The moves were indeed observed by the Arab governments, but the signals were misinterpreted in the atmosphere of tension and distrust.
As shown by the Syrian statement early in the crisis (May 15] and by President Nasser's reference to the 6th Fleet (May 29], the Arabs strongly suspected an attack by United States forces and tended to disregard relatively subtle evidence to the contrary.
Thus, the American policy did not succeed and, in fact, provided the grounds for. making the United States the scapegoat, for a situation it had tried desperately to prevent.
In mid-May a third destroyer was added to the force, on May 23 the force was ordered into the Red Sea, and on June 3 a fourth destroyer was added to the force in the Red Sea.
The credibility of these United States naval moves can be questioned, given President Johnson's reluctance to act unilaterally in the Strait of Tiran, but 4t is certainly plausible that Egyptian President Nasser and other Arab leaders would view the moves as threatening.
Given such Egyptian and Syrian suspicions of United States intentions on the eve of the war, it is not surprising that Egypt would later claim--either thinking it was true or knowing it was false--that United States carrier aircraft had attacked Egypt.
Sixth Fleet and Middle East Force movements in May, intended to support the President's efforts to pressure Nasser into reopening the Strait of Tiran, thus sent an inadvertent signal of hostility to the Arab Nations.
The inadvertent hostile signal would lead Arab leaders to assume United States hostility after war broke out.
It thus complicated United States efforts to manage the crisis by lending credibility to Arab claims of American complicity in the Israeli attacks--claims that contributed to serious deterioration in United States relations with the Arab — There were no inadvertent military incidents that seriously affected United States afferts to manage the crisis.
The second most serious incident of the crisis was the harassment of America by two Soviet ships on June 7 and 8.
The absence of serious inadvertent incidents was largely due to the cautious manner in which the two superpowers conducted naval operations in the Mediterranean.
Although there were relatively intense interactions between the two sides, the interactions could have been much more intense and dangerous than they actually were.
The most important factor in avoiding incidents that could complicate crisis management, then, was decisions made by national leaders on the two sides that structured the tactical environment in such a manner as to moderate the intensity of tactical-level interactions and limit the tensions that would arise from those interactions.
There was moderate tension between political considerations and the needs of diplomatic bargaining, on the one hand, and military considerations and the needs of military operations, on the Aieiteres This arose primarily from the restrictions placed on movements of the Sixth Fleet carriers and the efforts to use their movements for political signalling.
On the other hand, the restrictions on the carriers did not impose unreasonable limitations on their ability to carry out their immediate mission.
Further, the restrictions were disregarded by the on-scene commander when it was necessary to respond to the attack on the Liberty.
Vice Admiral Martin, on his own authority, launched aircraft to defend the ship and ordered America to close the scene at best speed.
Both actions required violation of the geographic restrictions placed on the Sixth Fleet.
However, the President soon authorized the actions Vice Admiral Martin had already initiated.
Thus, the tension between political and military considerations was not serious.
There was also only moderate tension between the need for top-level control of military operations and the need for tactical flexibility and initiative at the scene of the crisis.
The carrier force commanders were not happy about this control of their operations, but it did not seriously interfere with their ability to carry out their mission.
There was very little tension between performance of crisis political missions and readiness to perform wartime combat missions.
Sixth Fleet operations during the crisis Gid not seriously detract from the fleet's readiness for wartime contingencies.
The carrier force commanders would have preferred to make Soviet efforts to track and target the carriers as difficult as possible.
This is a crucial consideration in wartime operations, but one that directly conflicts with political crisis management considerations.
Although there were intense interactions between United States and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean, there were few instances of decoupled interactions.
The overall pattern was one of parallel stratified interactions with occasional momentary decoupling.
The only aspect of naval operations that was closely controlled was the movement of the Sixth fleet in the Mediterranean.
Control by negation was exercised over other aspects of Sixth Fleet operations, but there were no instances of orders issued by the on-scene commander being countermanded by the White House.
United States and Soviet naval forces were tightly coupled during the crisis, but there were no serious incidents between them.
The 1973 Arab-Israeli War The Fourth Arab-Israeli War erupted in October 1973 when Egypt launched a surprise attack on Israeli positions on the east bank of the Suez Canal and Syria attacked Israeli positions on the Golan Heuent ss After initial setbacks, Israel launched devastating counterattacks, ultimately crossing the Suez Canal and trapping the Egyptian Third Army.
This precipitated a Soviet threat to intervene in the war, backed by mobilization of airborne forces.
The Sixth Fleet played an important role in United States foreign policy, supporting the airlift and countering Soviet military threats.
The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron also played an active role in the crisis, demonstrating Soviet concerns and politically countering the Sixth Fleet.
Background The 1973 Arab-Israeli War was the first major crisis in the era of Soviet-American detente.
Detente had been inaugurated ceremonially at the May 1972 Nixon-Brezhnev summit in Moscow.
During that summit the two leaders signed the ABM Treaty, the Interim Agreement on Limitation of Strategic Arms , and the Basic Principles Agreement.
American involvement in the Indochina War, long a source of tension in Soviet-American relations, began winding down early the next year.
On January 27, 1973 the U.S.-North Vietnamese peace treaty was signed and in February 1973 the last United States troops left South Vietnam.
The second Nixon-Brezhnev summit was held in Washington and San Clemente in June 1973.
During that summit the two leaders signed the Agreement on Prevention of Nuclear War, which, among other provisions, called for consultations between the superpowers in the event of nuclear accidents or third party nuclear threats.
Soviet-American relations in 1973 were thus much better than they had been in the three previous crises examined in this study.
This agree—— committed both sides to respect the international rules of the road for preventing collisions at sea and provided guidance for situations unique to naval forces (such as formations of ships) that were not adequately covered by the international rules.
Beginning in 1960, there had been a long series of incidents between United States and Soviet naval vessels, including several collisions.
The Incidents ae Sea Agreement was intended to prevent such incidents in the future.
At the first annual review, held May 1973, a protocol to the agreement was signed that expanded its provisions.
As of October 1973, there had been no high-intensity superpower naval operations that seriously tested the Incidents at Sea Agreement.
From 1969 to late 1970, Egypt engaged Israel in a war of attrition along the Suez Canal.
Egyptian President Nasser's death in September 1970 did not lessen tensions with Israel.
His successor, Anwar Sadat, committed himself to war with Israel if there was no progress toward a political solution.
Sadat expelled almost all Soviet military advisors from Egypt in July 1972, a move apparently prompted by Soviet efforts to restrain Egypt from resorting to force against Israel and increasing Soviet domination of the Egyptian military.
In October 1972 Sadat replaced the top military leadership and ordered the army to begin planning an offensive to seize the east bank of the Suez Canal.
In early 1973, frustrated over lack of progress in the diplomatic arena, Sadat asked the Soviet Union to resume arms shipments to Egypt.
United States policy in 1972 and 1973 was designed to maintain a prolonged stalemate between Israel and her Arab neighbors, which Henry Kissinger believed would erode Soviet influence and perhaps move the Arab nations to seek improved relations with the united States.
Initial heavy attrition of Israeli forces and a quick United Nations ceasefire backed by the superpowers were expected to move the conflict to the bargaining table before Israel would be able to dislodge Egyptian and Syrian forces.
Success in achieving these limited objectives would destroy Israel's image of military invulnerability, restore Arab confidence and pride, and increase Arab credibility and influence with the superpowers.
These psychological and political victories, and possession of strategic positions in the Sinai and Golan Heights, would allow Egypt and Syria to negotiate from strength and force Israel. to withdraw from the occupied territories on Arab terms.
They succeeded in achieving surprise and gaining ground on both fronts, inflicting heavy losses on Israeli ground and air forces.
Beginning October 8 Israel peanter sttactns on both fronts, driving Syrian forces from the Golan Heights by October 10, but suffering a defeat in the Sinai.
Israeli forces met stiff resistance from Syrian forces (reinforced with Iraqi and Jordanian units), and on October 13 halted the offensive and consolidated defensive positions.
There was only sporadic fighting on the Syrian front thereafter and on October 23 Syria agreed to the United Nations ceasefire.
On October 14, Egypt launched a major offensive in the Sinai in order to iciicioats Israeli pressure on Syria.
Israel quickly halted the Egyptian offensive and launched a counteroffensive on October 15.
Israeli armored units crossed the Suez Canal in small numbers on October 15 and 16, and in strength on October 17, threatening to cutoff Egyptian forces on the east bank of the canal.
October 22, but the fighting did not stop and Israeli forces continued advancing in Egypt.
A second UN-sponsored ceasefire was set for 7:00 A.M. on October 24, but again the fighting failed to stop and Israel continued its offensive, surrounding the Egyptian Third Army.
Each side blamed the other for the initial failure of these two ceasefires to take hold.
On October 25 Israeli-Egyptian fighting tapered off and a fragile cease-fire he1a.
The United States was brought’ into the confrontation through its support of Israel and the Soviet Union was brought into the confrontation through its support of Egypt and Syria.
This meant that, in addition to controlling the actions of their own forces, the superpowers had to be concerned about the behavior of their emtenes The period of greatest superpower tension in the crisis (October 2425), resulted from actions taken by the local participants that éont Brant arrangements made by the superpowers to resolve the crisis.
The priorities of these objectives shifted during the crisis as circumstances in the Middle East changed.
President Nixon and Secretary Kissinger believed this would create the most conducive circumstances for post-war Giplomacy.
The other major aspect of the United States strategy was to avoid a confrontation with the Soviet Union and to work in conjunction with the Soviets to resolve the crisis--at least to appear to be working with the Soviets while attempting to limit their role in the Middle East.
This strategy remained consistent throughout the crisis, although the tactics used to pursue it changed significantly as United States perceptions of Israel's military situation changed.
Some observers also claim that United States leaders were concerned that Israel would use its nuclear weapons capability if threatened with a catastrophic defeat, and that the United States therefore had the objective of averting this possibility.
Additional Soviet objectives, derived from those listed above, were to be able to take credit for Arab victories or for averting catastrophic defeat of Syria and Egypt, and to terminate the war under circumstances that would give the Soviet Union a central (or at lest a more important) role in post-war negotiations.
The Soviet Union, like the United States, had complex and contradictory objectives.
Attempting to maintain detente within the United States while increasing Soviet — in the Middle East at the expense of the United States was a particularly G@ifficult combination of objectives.
It does not appear that the Soviet leaders believed, Tt . to the outbreak of the war, that another Arab-Israeli war would necessarily serve their interests in the Middle East.
Rather, the Soviets appear to have sought what gains they could accrue from a conflict they could not avert without serious erosion of their influence among Arab nations.
At this point the Arab nations would have their greatest bargaining leverege against Israel.
To curry favor with the Arab nations, the initial Soviet ceasefire proposal called for Israel to return to pre-1967 boundaries.
The third element was to resupply Egypt and Syria with sufficient military equipment to maintain an image of solidarity with the Arab cause and to forestall a decisive Israeli victory.
An additional, minor element in the Soviet strategy was to encourage other Arab nations to assist Egypt and Syria in the war against Israel.
Jordan and Iraq sent troops to the Syrian front during the war, demonstrating at least some Arab solidarity.
Kissinger warned the Israelis not to pre-empt and attempted to forestall the Arab attack.
Initially, the United States was slow in pursuing a ceasefire in the UN Security Council, believing that Israel would soon turn the tide of battle.
The United States maintained a low profile, evenhanded approach so as not to alienate the Arab nations.
The United States also sought to act in conjunction with the Soviet Union, rather than unilaterally, in the UN Security Council.
The initial United States proposal was to be for a ceasefire based on the status quo ante, timed to go into effect after Israel had repulsed the invading armies.
The Soviets reportedly sought Egyptian agreement for a ceasefire in place as early as October 6, a proposal the Egyptians ei aki dal On October 7 the United States and the Soviet Union agreed in principle to a a fire and the Soviets reassured the United States that they would not unilaterally introduce a ceasefire resolution in the Security Council.
Through October 8 United States leaders believed, based on Israeli reports, that Israel would soon prevail over Egypt and Syria and that low-profile resupply of Israel and evenhanded diplomacy were all the actions the United States needed to take.
Soviet-American tensions started rising during the October 9-12 period.
Israel's resupply requests became more urgent on October 9 and Israel revealed that it had suffered massive losses of tanks and aircraft in. the first three days of battle.
On October 9 President Nixon approved Israel's requests for increased immediate resupply and post-war replacement of all Israeli battlefield losses, but for the next three days United States supplies were carried only in Israeli Planes.
The Soviet Union, which had been delivering military supplies to Syria by sealift from the start of the war, commenced an airlift to Syria on October 10 and Gmegced an airlift to Egypt the next day.
The United States rejected this proposal and sought to delay UN action on a ceasefire until Israel gained the upper hand on the battlefield.
On October 10 or 11, in response to Israeli advances into Syrian territory, the Soviet Union placed three airborne divisions on alert.
That same day Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin warned Kissinger that the Soviet Union might intervene if Israel continued advancing on Damascus.
Kissinger, in turn, warned Dobrynin that the United States would resist Soviet intervention with force.
Israel informed the United States on October 12 that it would accept a ceasefire in place, but preferred that the UN resolution not-.be voted on for another day.
The United States also proposed to the Soviet Union a ceasefire in place linked to reaffirmation of UN Security Council Resolution 242, rather to Israeli withdrawal from all occupied territories.
On October 14 Egypt launched a major offensive in the Sinai in order to relieve pressure on Syria.
Israel quickly halted the offensive, launched a counter-offensive on October 15, ania sent troops across the Suez Canal in small numbers on October 16.
Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin visited Egypt October 16 and urged Sadat to agree to a ceasefire in place.
The next day the Soviet Union expressed to the United States its support for a ceasefire in place.
The Arab oil exporting nations announced on October 17 a production cutback and price increase, to be followed by additional cutbacks until Israel withdrew from the occupied territories.
Israeli armored units crossed the Suez Canal in strength on October 17.
In response, the Soviet Union on October 18 began pressing for a ceasefire in place.
Thus, as of October 18 the conditions that the United States had originally thought appropriate for a ceasefire were emerging.
Kissinger flew to Moscow early the next morning and held initial discussions with Brezhnev late on October 20.
Meanwhile, the Nixon Administration on October 19 submitted a $2. billion dollar aid package for Israel to Congress.
In response, Saudi Arabia announced on October 20 that it was joining the embargo on oil shipments to the United States--a serious setback for United States foreign policy.
On October 21 Kissinger reached a ceasefire agreement with the Soviets, which was to presented to the UN Security Council that evening.
The Soviet-~American ceasefire proposal, Resolution 338, was passed by the Security Council at 12:50 A.M. on October 22.
Kissinger left Moscow that morning for Israel to explain the Soviet-American agreement to Israeli leaders.
The ceasefire was supposed to go into effect at 6:50 P.M. on October 22, but Israeli forces in Egypt continued advancing, allegedly after Egyptian violations of the ceasefire.
On October 23 Israeli forces cut the final supply line to the Egyptian Third Army, totally surrounding it.
Egypt requested United States and Soviet troops to enforce the ceasefire on October 24 after Israel surrounded the Egyptian Third Army.
In response, Brezhnev sent a letter to Nixon threatening unilateral intervention if the United States refused to participate and the Soviet Union began assembling its seven alerted airborne divisions at airfields for immediate deployment.
The United States rejected the Egyptian proposal and warned the Soviets against unilateral intervention.
At 12:25 A.M. on October 25, the United States set DEFCON 3 worldwide and readied the 82nd Airborne Division for immediate deployment to the Middle East.
Within hours the United States alert had been detected. by the American press, which speculated on whether the move was warranted or motivated by domestic politics.
Meanwhile, as of October 31 it appeared that the Soviet airborne divisions had also returned to normal peacetime readiness, thus greatly reducing the poseibility of a superpower confrontation.
Admiral Thomas H Moorer was Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Admiral Elmo R Zumwalt, Jr., was Chief of Naval Operations, Admiral Worth H Bagley was CINCUSNAVEUR, and Vice Admiral Daniel J Murphy was Commander Sixth Fleet.
The principle advisory body during the crisis was the Washington Special Action Group , a panel created by Kissinger within the National Security Council framework.
Kissinger was the principle link to the President, directly and through White House Chief of Staff Alexander Haig.
United States communications capabilities had improved significantly since 1967.
The two major developments were automated message processing at communications centers ashore and satellite communications.
Manual message processing, rather than radio propagation problems, typically caused the bulk of message transmission delays.
Automated message processing and routing was being achieved through integration of Navy communications stations into the Naval Communications Processing and Routing System and installation of the Common User Digital Information Exchange System at NAVCOMPARS master stations, which provided an automatic on-line interface with the Department of Defense's Automatic Digital Network message communications system.
Quandt, Decade of Decisions, 173. 7177 installed in only a small number of key ships.
In October 1973 the Sixth Fleet flagship, USS Little Rock , the aircraft carriers USS Franklin D Roosevelt , USS Independence , and USS John F Kennedy , and the amphibious command ship USS Mount Whitney had satellite communications terminals.
Satellite communications provided rapid, reliable encrypted teletype and secure © voice channels to Navy NAVCOMPARS stations ashore and to the Department of Defense AUTODIN message system and Automatic Secure Voice Communications system.
If he shose to do so, the President in the White House had the capability to speak directly with Navy commanders embarked in ships equipped with satellite communications terminals.
The remainder of the ships in the Sixth Fleet still se4ee on high frequency communications for longrange voice and radioteletype eGainitdiedtiona.
The only aspect of Sixth Fleet operations that was were under positive direct control by the White House was the location of the fleet in the Mediterranean.
In addition to the overall effort to 471) amiral Thomas H Moorer, interview by author, February 9, 1988. 472, amiral Elmo R Zumwalt, interview by author, February 16, 1988.
A Memoir , 436. 8735 ce Admiral Donald D Engen, letter to author, April 25, 1988.
Other than movements of the fleet in the Mediterranean, control of Sixth Fleet operations was delegated to the chain of command.
Nixon and Schlesinger did not attempt to give orders directly to CINCUSNAVEUR, COMSIXTHFLT, or ships at sea.
Nixon, Schlesinger, and Kissinger paid little attention to the guidance contained in mechanisms of delegated control, and did not use eae ee mechanisms to issue detailed operational guidance to the Sixth Fleet.
General rules of engagement were spelled out in the JCS, with overall approval coming from Kissinger.
Similarly, it does not appear that any special mis-sion orders were issued for the crisis, other ‘than for support of the United States airlift to Israel.
Contingency plans did not play a major role in the execution of United States naval operations during the crisis.
This plan was never executed because the Soviets backed down from a confrontation later that day.
The United States also had contingency plans for various types of military operations in the Middle East, such as evacuation of American citizens, but none were executed.
The most important mechanism of delegated control during the crisis was the United States alert system.
Schlesinger states that the decision on “enhanced readiness status” was made at 11:30 P.M. on October 24 during a WSAG meeting.
Admiral Moorer states that he arrived at the White House at about midnight and DEFCON 3 was set shortly thereafter.
Admiral Zumwalt states that DEFCON 3 was set worldwide at 12:25 A.M. on October 25.
Quandt states that the first orders for the alert were issued at about midnight and that the scope of the alert was widened at 1:30 A.M. on October 25.
The most likely sequence of events was that the decision to set DEFCON 3 was made at about 11:30 P.M. on October 24 during the WSAG meeting.
Setting DEFCON 3 had little effect on the Sixth Fleet, which was already at a high condition of readiness.
The threat of Soviet military intervention soon subsided and United States forces quickly returned to normal peacetime readiness.
Schlesinger then waited until he could consult with Admiral Moorer before issuing alert orders.
The message order setting DEFCON 3 worldwide was sent at 12:25m. on October 25.
At 1:25 A.M., specific orders were issued to the Sixth Fleet and the 82nd airborne division was alerted for immediate deployment to the Middle East.
The Soviets routinely deployed their most modern vessels to the Mediterranean Squadron, making it — most capable Soviet naval force outside Soviet home waters.
Most of the Soviet squadron was kept in the eastern Mediterranean, with surveillance patrols monitoring the Strait of Gibralter (including the United States naval base at Rota, Spain) and the Strait of Sicily.
Soviet ships began using the Egyptian port of Alexandria as a base in October 1967 and Soviet naval aircraft began using Egyptian airfields in May 1968.
In 1969 the Soviet navy began developing a naval base at Mersa Matruh, Egypt, and by 1970 was using a total of six Egyptian airfields for its naval aircraft.
The Soviet navy began routinely using the Syrian ports of Latakia and Tartus in March 1968, and in May 1972 the Syrians agreed to Soviet construction of naval facilities in those ports.
Beginning in March 1970 Soviet naval aircraft flying out of Egypt were allowed to refuel in Algeria, extending their range to the western Mediterranean.
Egyptian expulsion of Soviet military advisors in July 1972 had no effect on Soviet use of Egyptian ports, but caused Soviet naval aircraft to be transferred from Egypt to Syria.
Most important were the Kithira anchorage off the southern tip of Greece, an anchorage off the eastern tip of Crete, and the Sollum anchorage off the coast of Egypt.
Dangerous Soviet maneuvers near United States warships and formations had been a growing problem since 1960, reaching severe intensity in the Mediterranean and the Sea of Japan in 1967.
The Soviet navy policy of harassing United States naval \Aeewettous continued to be a serious problem through 1969.
From 1970 onward, reflecting the improvement in SovietAmerican relations under the Nixon Administration, the frequency and severity of naval incidents at sea declined somewhat.
During the Jordanian crisis in September 1970, the Soviet navy slightly reinforced its Mediterranean Squadron and closely monitored United States naval operations, but did not provoke any incidents with United States ships.
There was none of the nonsense of their ships running in and around our menoT Nevertheless, incidents at sea of-war at close range.” continued to occur and remained a cause for concern in the United States Navy.
Although incidents were not entirely eliminated, both navies largely complied with the agreement and there was a significant drop in the most dangerous Soviet maneuvering practices.
By 1973, according to Vice Admiral Engen, the United States and Soviet navies had grown accustomed to operating close to one another.
It looked as though they were taking some care not to cause an incident.
On the whole, their overt posture athe This improvement in was restrained and considerate.
Soviet-American relations at sea was an important reason for the lack of naval incidents in October 1973.
Soviet naval involvement in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War began with sealifts of Moroccan troops to Syria in April and July.
Two Soviet tank landing ships and a freighter arrived in Oran, Morocco, on April 13.
The LSTs departed on April 15 escorted by a hadndnconlwes guided missile destroyer, and the freighter departed April 18.
Two more LSTs arrived in Oran on July 7, loaded Moroccan troops and tanks, departed on July 9, and arrived in Tartus on July 15,474 These two sealifts were symbolic Soviet support for pan-Arab unity against Israel.
Two intelligence collection ships and two minesweepers were moved into the eastern Mediterranean to augment the single AGI on patrol there.
Five Foxtrot-class conventional attack submarines arrived in the Mediterranean for routine rotation of the submarines on patrol, but the five submarines that were supposed to return home were kept on station to augment the submarine force.
Most of the Soviet ships were conducting werner. peacetime operations, with the majority of them anchored at normal Soviet anchorages in the vicinity of Crete or in Egyptian ports.
Task Group 60.2, the USS Franklin D Roosevelt attack carrier group, was in various Spanish ports.
Most of Task Force 61, an amphibious task force consisting of the helicopter carrier USS Guadalcanal and nine other amphibious ships, was in various Greek ports.
A Marine battalion landing tean, augmented with additional troops for an exercise (a total of about 3,000 Marines), was embarked in the amphibious group.
Four nuclear-powered attack submarines were on patrol in the Mediterranean.
In the Atlantic, the attack carrier USS John F Kennedy and her escorts were visiting Edinburgh, Scotland, after participating in a NATO exercise in the Norwegian sea.
Egypt and Syria declared substantial areas of the eastern Mediterranean off their coasts to be war zones on October 6.
The United States kept the Sixth Fleet well Clear of these war zones throughout the war.
The Soviet Union, on the other hand, conducted significant naval operations in these war zones.
The only significant Soviet naval activity during the first two days of the war was the evacuation of seuaret personnel from Egypt and Syria.
A Soviet Polnocny-class LSM evacuated civilians from Port Said on October 6, proceeded to Alexandria, and left there with more Soviet citizens on October 7.
Meanwhile, the Soviet LSM and frigate that departed Port Said on October 5 visited the Syrian port of Latakia on October 6, probably to pick up Soviets evacuating Syria.
Interestingly, Soviet Navy auxiliary vessels remained in Alexandria throughout the war.
Soviet Tu-16 Badger reconnaissance bombers Closely monitored the Sixth Fleet.
At 9:00 A.M. on October 6, Kissinger asked Scowcroft to obtain a plan to move the United States Sixth Fleet into the eastern Mediterranean and plans to reinforce the Sixth Fleet if necessary.
The decision to move a carrier into the eastern Mediterranean was made during an evening WSAG meeting and at 9:46 P.M. the JCS ordered Independence and her escorts to get underway from Athens and proceed to an operating area south of Crete.
Independence and her three escorts got underway from Athens on October 7 and proceeded to an area south of Crete.
On October 8 Task Force 61, the Sixth Fleet amphibious force, was ordered to proceed to Souda Bay Crete and anchor there.
Independence arrived in the operating area south of Crete on October 8, joining Little Rock, the Sixth Fleet flagship.
The designated holding area south of Crete was ""a position that the Soviets would read as indicating that the United States was preparing for any contingency--close enough for us to act in an emergency, far enough to bespeak no aggressive intent.
The rest of our fleet lay farther west; we would be able te indicate $99 The low heightened concern by moving it off Cyprus.” key, evenhanded approach being pursued by the Nixon Administration, was reflected in the operational guidance provided to the Sixth Fleet.
The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron generally continued normal peacetime operations during the October 6-13 period.
Also see Weinland, 72; Quandt, Decade of Decisions, 171. 300, oted in Zumwalt, On Watch, 435.
Most Soviet surface combatants were at anchorages near Crete and most Soviet attack submarines remained in the western Mediterranean.
Task Group holding area south of Crete during the period neither represented a severe threat nor gave indications of an increased state of readiness.
One conventional attack submarine and two cruise missile firing submarines were in the general area but coordination with Soviet surface units was infrequent and sporadic.
Soviet-American tactical-level naval interaction in the Mediterranean began increasing on October 9.
That day a Soviet Kynda-class cruiser and an Ugra-class submarine tender, serving as the flagship for the commander of the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron, joined the Kashin trailing the Independence and Little Rock, forming an anti-carrier group.
Also on October 9 a Soviet AGI began monitoring the United States amphibious group at Souda Bay, remaining with it through October 25.
The presence of a Soviet tattletale warns a United States Navy commander that his ships are constantly targeted for preemptive attack should the Soviets elect to launch one.
Soviet fSetlevules are even more dangerous when they are themselves armed with anti-ship missiles.
This provides the Soviets with the option of a preemptive strike that provides virtually no warning time for the United States fleet to defend itself.
In the 1970 crisis Soviet ships armed with anti-ship missiles trailed the three United States carriers in the Mediterranean around the clock.
To counter this threat, the Sixth Fleet assigned ships armed with rapid fire guns to trail Soviet warships armed with anti-ship missiles.
A carrier outside the range of the cruise missiles on Soviet ships can clearly sink them easily with her aircraft.
Therefore, the Russians trail us closely in order to be able to destroy most of a carrier's planes or disable the Carrier herself before aircraft can take off.
We adopted the retaliatory technique of trailing the trailer so as to prevent them from preventing us from launching our planes by knocking out most of their cruise missiles before many of them took off.
Each of the United States carriers would assign a destroyer or cruiser (what were then called frigates} to each of the Soviet tattletales that had weapons capable of threatening the carrier.
To cover Soviet ships armed with long range anti-ship missiles, which usually trailed at greater ranges, the United States carriers used the “anti-surface combat air patrol” tactic.
The United States carriers launched aircraft armed with conventional airto-surface bombs and missiles to monitor the Soviet warships.
The objective of the United States ships and planes shadowing Soviet warships was to prevent them from launching their anti-ship missiles against the United States carriers, which obviously would have required taking the Soviet ships under fire before they had launched their weapons.
The Roosevelt carrier task group got underway from Barcelona on October 10 and remained at sea in the western Mediterranean.
Very little information is available on United States and Soviet submarine operations during the 1973 crisis, but it is safe to assume that tactical maneuvering similar ‘to that on the surface was also taking place under the seas.
Interestingly, these three Soviet ships apparently did not participate in Soviet naval activities directed against the Sixth Fleet until after their port visit.
On October 10 the Soviet Union commenced an airlift to Syria and the next day commenced an airlift to Egypt.
Meanwhile, Soviet cargo ships had been carrying supplies to Syria and Egypt from the beginning of the war.
Five Soviet cargo ships delivered supplies during the October 7-12 period.
The total tonnage delivered by the Soviet sealift between October 7 and October 23 is estimated to have been about 63,000 tons.
Although the Soviet sealift tapered off after October 23, it continued through about November 1.229 On October 11 the JCS ordered the Kennedy group to depart Scotland on October 13 and proceed to a point in the Atlantic west of Gibralter to support the United States airlift to Israel.
The same day, the JCS ordered the helicopter carrier USS Iwo Jima , with Battalion Landing Team 3/8. embarked (approximately 2,000 troops), deployed to the Mediterranean.
On October 12 Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin delivered a note from the Soviet Government protesting the deployment of the Sixth Fleet to the eastern Mediterranean.
Later that day Kissinger told the Israeli ambassador that the United States would move a third carrier into the Mediterranean, probably referring to the Kennedy.
The Soviet protest note and ita anieetis promise of a third United States carrier both illustrate the political role of naval forces in the crisis.
Israeli Saar-class fast patrol boats fired Gabriel anti-ship missiles at Syrian missile boats naererine among civilian merchant ships, sinking a Japanese freighter and a Greek freighter as well as twe Syrian missile boats.
Two more Syrian missile boats were sunk, but so was the Soviet merchant ship Ilya Mechnikov.
Israel's survival depended on persuading the United States to replace the Israeli losses of equipment and consumables, perhaps even by independent action against the Soviet supply line, which would threaten to precipitate a major clash between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Egyptian submarines allegedly sank two Greek freighters in the Mediterranean.
Israel also destroyed several Soviet transport aircraft on Syrian airfields during raids on October 10 and 11.
Although the destruction of the Soviet transport planes and the sinking of the Soviet merchant ship could well have been accidents, the attacks on the Syrian airfields and ports being used for the Soviet airlift and sealift were certainly deliberate.
One of the LSMs remained there through 17 October, the other through 25 October.
On October 13, probably in response to Israeli attacks on Soviet merchant ships, the Soviets placed a Kashin-class DDG off the Syrian coast.
Two Soviet LSTs entered the Mediterranean from the Black Sea on October 14 and proceeded to Syria on a resupply mission.
Moorer, letter to author, April 18, 1988; Dixon, letter to author, April 18, 1988; Zumwalt, On Watch, 436; Weinland, 70.
On October 14 the Sixth Fleet was ordered to provide assistance for the airlift.
First, the fleet provided navigation, surveillance, air defense, and standby search and rescue support for the United States Air Force C-§ and C~-141 transports flying to Israel.
Second, the Sixth Fleet carriers provided refueling services for F-4 and A~4 jets being ferried to Israel.
The F-4s landed at the Azores to refuel and were refueled again in flight over the Mediterranean by Air Force KC-135 tankers.
The A-4s landed at the Azores to refuel, were refueled a second time in flight by tankers from the Kennedy, then landed on ROWS cama Tit in the central Mediterranean and remained overnight for refueling, servicing and pilot rest.
The next day the A-4s were refueled in flight by tankers from the Independence during the final leg of their flight to Israel.
The two carriers in the Mediterranean were forced to operate without some of their most valuable escorts at a time when they needed them to counter the Soviet anti-ship missile threat.
Sixth Fleet support for the airlift thus may have sent an inadvertent political signal to the Soviets.
On October 15 The Roosevelt began moving eastward to the central Mediterranean to support the United States airlift.
A Soviet Petya-class corvette patrolling the Strait of Sicily began shadowing Roosevelt as it passed through the strait on October 16.
Roosevelt arrived on station east of Malta on October 17 and remained there until October 25,279 On October 16 a Sverdlov-class cruiser and KotlinClass destroyer joined the Kynda, Ugra, and Kashin trailing the Independence group and Little Rock south of crete.
As it turned out, the Sverdlov and Kotlin replaced the Kynda and Kashin trailing Independence.
S24noberts speculates that this may have been “reciprocity” for the detachment of two of Independence's escorts to support the United States airlift to Israel.
In all likelihood, however, the rotation of ships on October 16 was not motivated by political or strategic concerns, but by logistics.
Soviet Navy underway replenishment techniques were not well developed in 1973.
USS Iwo Jima with 2,000 Marines embarked departed Moorehead, North Carolina, on October 16, for the Mediterranean, arriving October 25.
While west of Gibralter Kennedy remained a part of the Second Fleet, rather than a the Sixth Fleet.
It was not replaced it departed, probably because Kennedy remained in the Atlantic rather than entering the Mediterranean.
From October 18 to resupplying their ships while they trailed the fast United States carrier groups.
A Mod Kildin-class destroyer armed with SS-N-2 anti-ship cruise missiles and a Kashin-class DDG entered the Mediterranean from the Black Sea on October 19, further reinforcing the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron.
On October 20 a Soviet Kashin joined the Kotlin and Kashin already off Syria (for a total of 3 DDGs), increasing the defenses for Soviet ships and aircraft resupplying Syria.
The three Soviet DDGs remained on station until the ceasefire went into effect, departing between October 24 and ag 74” The Mediterranean was relatively quiet on October 22 and 23.
After passage of the United Nations ceasefire resolution on October 22, the Sixth Fleet was directed to begin planning to return to normal peacetime operations.
Through October 24 Vice Admiral Murphy expected that the Sixth Fleet would return to al Operations in the near future.
The only noteworthy United States naval operation took place on earouer 22, when fighters from Independence escorted Kissinger's plane into and out of Israel.
Surveillance of Mediterranean chokepoints and trailing of Independence and Roosevelt continued.
The Kashin-class DDG trailing Roosevelt was repiaced by a Petya-class frigate on October 22 in a routine rotation.
Most of the Soviet combatants were concentrated in the vicinity of Crete, with a smaller concentration off Syria.
Soviet ships armed with anti-ship missiles remained within range of the Independence task group south of Crete.
Soviet Tu-16 Badgers continued flying surveillance missions over the Mediterranean, but did not harass the Sixth Fleet.
The White House received a report on this event on October 25, well after the decision to set DEFCON 3.
Detection of vaaiacion created suspicions that the Soviets had sent nuclear warheads to Egypt for the Sovietmanned SCUD tactical rockets delivered to Egypt before the war--perhaps as a political signal to the United States of the Soviet commitment to enforce the ceasefire.
However, the evidence for this was sketchy and United States officials later expressed doubts that the Soviets had deployed nuclear warheads in Egypt.
The surface combatants included three cruisers, twelve destroyers, about mine frigates and corvettes, three amphibious ships, and two minesweepers.
At least five of the Soviet ‘iin ed seen attack submarines were in the eastern Mediterranean on October 24.
Additionally, five more Soviet submarines were known to be en route to the Mediterranean.
That the Soviet ship carried warheads for the fleet is possible, but unlikely.
At the time, the Soviet nuclear-capable units in the Mediterranean consisted of two Kynda-class cruisers and four or five guided missile submarines.
The submarines could not change the warheads on their missiles, which were mounted outside the pressure hull.
The Kyndas had internal magazines, but probably could not rebuild missiles with nuclear warheads.
The submarines and Kyndas would have had to tie up alongside a pier or tender to reload entire missiles.
This was a formidable threat to the Sixth Fleet Garriezs.>"" The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron began moving into position on October 24 to support the possibility of Soviet military intervention on behalf of Egypt.
Galia Golan states that a Moskva-class helicopter cruiser, rather than a Kynda-class cruiser joined Independence on October 24.
Rubinstein states that both of the Soviet Moskva-class helicopter cruisers were in the Mediterranean during the crisis.
Independence was sitting astride Soviet air routes to Egypt, and the Soviets had every reason to expect that the Sixth Fleet would attempt to counter Soviet military intervention.
Placing the Kynda group eile to Independence sent a clear warning that the Sixth Fleet would not be permitted to interfere in Soviet military operations.
The Soviet amphibious ships could carry a maximum of about 1,800 troops, and probably carried much less than that--a force inadequate to seriously threaten Israel or effectively defend Egypt without the Soviet airborne divisions that had been placed on alert.
When DEFCON 3 was set, the Sixth Fleet was allowed to Carry out the measures that Vice Admiral Murphy had been requesting since early in the crisis to improve the fleet's readiness for action.
Kissinger makes it dade. however, that Sixth Fleet movements were being used to send a political signal to the Soviet Union, one the Soviets would id At 1:25 detect long before they detected the United States alert.
The three attack carriers were concentrating astride Soviet sealanes and airlanes to Egypt, in position to forcibly prevent the Soviet Union from intervening militarily in the conflict.
An hour later the JCS suspended the heavy Navy support for the airlift we Israel and allowed all but two of the escorts to return to the Independence and Roosevelt groups.
This left USS Harry E Yarnell in the western Mediterranean and USS Belknap in the eastern Mediterranean as picket ships for the airlift.
At 3:00 P.M. on October 25, the JCS ordered four United States Navy ddetrovers in the Baltic (previously detached from the Kennedy group) to proceed to the | Mediterranean to reinforce the Sixth Fleet.
Meanwhile, the helicopter carrier Iwo Jima and its embarked Marines entered the Mediterranean, for a total of over 5,000 Marines assigned to the Sixth Fleet.
Late on October 25 these three ships and two other Kashin-class DDGs proceeded toward Egypt, joining the five-ship amphibious group already there on October 26.
Fe Conander Sixth Fleet, “Command History 1973,"" VI-8; Zumwalt, On Watch, 447; Roberts, 206.
A Sverdlov-class cruiser and a Kashin-class DDG began shadowing the Roosevelt group on October 26, and goon joined the anti-carrier exercise.
The Soviet anticarrier exercise was probably intended as a signal that the Soviet navy was prepared to counter the Sixth Fleet in the eastern Mediterranean.
As Charles Petersen notes, the Soviets routinely carry out anticarrier exercises in full view of United States Navy observers--often using United States carriers themselves as simulated targets.
Through this exercise activity, the Soviet Navy has made the United States aware of some of the tactics its ACW [fanticarrier warfare] forces might be expected to employ.
In effect, therefore, the Soviets have transmitted to the United States an “action language” vocabulary that can beae and has been--employed for signaling during crises.
It is not clear how quickly the Navy Giscerned that the Soviet anti-carrier activities were an exercise rather than an actual attack.
The navy could well have had warning of the exercise from intelligence sources, although there is no evidence of this.
Since Sixth Fleet ; ships and planes were closely monitoring all the major Soviet warships, final preparations for missile launch--such as fire control radar lock-on and opening of missile tube doors-~or actual missile launches would have been detected immediately.
The United States Sixth FPleet and the Soviet Mediterranean Fleet were, in effect, sitting in a pond in close proximity and the stage for the hitherto unlikely ""war at sea” scenario was set.
Both fleets were obviously ina high readiness posture for whatever might come next, although it appegped that neither fleet knew exactly what to expect.
On October 27 a Sverdlov-class cruiser, Mod-Kildin Class destroyer (armed with SS-N-2 anti-ship cruise missiles), and Kotlin-class DDG began trailing the United States amphibious group.
The three Soviet combatants represented a formidable threat to the lightly armed United States amphibious ships.
As Soviet combatants rendezvoused with the United States task groups, they joined the war at sea exercises that started on October 26.
A Soviet Kresta II-class ASW cruiser entered the Mediterranean from the Atlantic on October 27--the only Soviet surface combatant to do so during the crisis.
This Kresta II remained in the western Mediterranean, well clear of the action to the east.
As Robert Weinland notes, “This gave the Soviets yet another clear-350 bia, 446.
The Soviet anticarrier group that had entered the Mediterranean on October 29 began trailing the Kennedy carrier group on October 31 and joined in the anti-carrier exercise.
The Soviet navy now had an anti-carrier group trailing each of the three United States carrier task groups, and additional combatants trailing the United States amphibious group.
Also on October 31 two Nanuchkaclass corvettes armed with anti-ship cruise missiles and a Skoryy-class destroyer entered the Mediterranean from the Black Sea.
As of October 31 there were 95 Soviet naval vessels in the Mediterranean, including 40 surface combatants (five armed with anti-ship cruise missiles), 23 submarines (about seven armed with antiship cruise missiles), four AGIs, and 28 auxiliaries.
The 40 Soviet surface combatants consisted of five cruisers, fifteen destroyers, six frigates and corvettes, two guided missile corvettes, eight amphibious bi he and four minesweepers.
On November 3 Independence and her escorts were ordered to Athens for a port visit and the amphibious group was ordered to proceed to Souda Bay and anchor.
Also on November 3, Soviet surveillance of the Sixth Fleet began to decline and Soviet combatants ceased trailing Roosevelt and the United States amphibious groups.
Over the next few days Soviet combatants ceased trailing other United States Navy units as they left the eastern Mediterranean.
The Soviet Mediterranean Squadron began reducing its strength to peacetime levels on November 7 when three combatants entered the Black Sea.
The three United States carriers interrupted their cycle of port Fisies and remained at sea November 9-14 while Kissinger was in the Middle East conducting negotiations.
This was the final United States naval activity in the Mediterranean related to the crisis.
The Soviet first salvo total of 88 anti-ship missiles included eight SS-N-14s carried by the Kresta II-class cruiser, but since 1973 that missile has been determined to be an ASW weapon.
As of November 19 the number of Soviet ships in the Mediterranean had declined from 95 to 70 and Soviet naval operations had essentially returned to normal.
During the crisis, the United States Middle East Force consisted of a flagship and two destroyers.
The Soviet Indian Ocean Squadron consisted of about twenty ships, including a destroyer, a Foxtrot-class attack submarine, two corvettes, two minesweepers, an LST, and various auxiliaries.
The CNO had recommended on October 25, the day DEFCON 3 was set, that an attack carrier task group. be moved into the Indian Ocean from the Pacific.
On October 29, as part of United States actions to increase its readiness for military operations in the Middle East, the attack carrier USS John Hancock , with five escorts and an oiler, were ordered into the Indian Ocean.
At the time, there was no unusual Soviet naval activity in the Indian Ocean.
On November 12 a SverdlovClass cruiser (the one commonly used as the Pacific Fleet flagship) and a Kashin-class DDG transited the Straits of Malacca, but remained in the eastern Indian Ocean rather than joining Hancock in the Arabian Sea.
United States and Soviet naval activity in the Indian Ocean remained at unusually high levels for several months, for reasons largely unrelated to the situation in the Middle East.
Soviet tattletales and aircraft closely monitored the Sixth Fleet, and United States ships and aircraft Closely monitored the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron.
Soviet ships and submarines armed with anti-ship cruise missiles were constantly within range of United States the carriers while they were in the eastern Mediterranean.
The increased United States presence in the Indian Ocean was related to the Middle East crisis only in the sense that the carrier task group was available in the event that Arab nations attempted to close the sea lanes out of the Persian Gulf by force.
The 1973 Arab-Israeli War marked several records and new developments in Soviet naval operations.
This demonstrated a depth and flexibility that had not been seen SE wetEon, 103.
On the basis of the information now available, it appears that the Soviets were prepared to accept significantly higher risks in this crisis than before.
They committed naval forces that, in the situation, appeared to be quite formidable, and they behaved at the peak of the crisis (with the threat to _dntervene unilaterally on Egypt's behalf) as though they considered the Sixth Fleet effectively neutralized.
The Soviet Navy can thus be viewed as having become a fullfledged superpower navy in 1973.
Several specific aspects of Soviet naval operations were also noteworthy.
First, the Soviet Navy conducted extensive and sustained operations within a combat zone for the first time.
In previous crises, Soviet ships had withdrawn from war zones, entering only as necessary to monitor the fighting ashore and to keep tabs on the Sixth Fleet.
The October 1973 crisis was the first Soviet-American confrontation in which the Soviet Navy posed a significant immediate threat to the United States Navy.
Early on October 25, Schlesinger and Admiral Moorer briefed the Joint Chiefs on the events leading up to the worldwide DEFCON 3:alert.
Thus, for the first time in the post-World War II era, the United States Navy had been effectively denied complete control of the seas.
Throughout the entire period from 1957 through 1980, the Soviet Navy never posed a greater threat against United States naval forces operating on the high seas, nor was the navy’'s effect ever more relevant in the U.S.-Soviet nonstrategic balance of power.
The final noteworthy point about Soviet naval operations in the October 1973 crisis is that the Soviets did not deploy as many ships to the Mediterranean as they could have sent.
At the height of the Soviet buildup, only 20 of the 42 cruisers and destroyers in the Black Sea Fleet had been sent to the Mediterranean.
No modern ASW ships were sent because the primary threat was United States surface ships, not United States submarines.
The Soviets appeared to send their Older ships to the Mediterranean simply because the ships wo Robetts, ps 195% Weindend, 72. oT 0 Di snuken, 503.
Additionally, the Soviets sent two relatively new Nanuchka-~class corvettes armed with antiship missiles to the Mediterranean.
The one possible implication of this pattern is that the Soviets probably did not expect the crisis to escalate to war with the United States.
Had they — expected war, they probably would have surged every available ship and submarine into the Mediterranean.
A remote possibility was that Soviet Mig-25s in Egypt might try to intercept United States SR-71 reconnaissance planes flying over the Suez canal.
Despite the intense tactical-level interaction between United States and Soviet Naval forces, there were no collisions at sea or other dangerous incidents.
Unlike 1967, there were no instances of Soviet close quarters maneuvering to harass the Sixth Fleet.
Soviet Tu-16 Badger reconnaissance bombers were active over the Mediterranean, but did not harass the Sixth Fleet.
There were minor incidents, such as training S720 Egyptian navy established a distant blockade of Israel south and southwest of Crete with destroyers (beyond the range of Israeli missile boats) and southeast of Crete with submarines.
There was one minor incident between United States and Soviet forces outside the Mediterranean about the time war broke out in the Middle East.
While Kennedy was participating in a NATO exercise in the Norwegian Sea, there was a minor mid-air collision between a Soviet Tu-16 ""Badger” reconnaissance bomber and a United States F-4 Phantom jet fighter from Kennedy that had been sent up to intercept and trail the Soviet plane.
The Nixon Administration did not attempt to exercise direct control over the operations of the Sixth Fleet other than its movements in the Mediterranean.
Sixth Fleet movements, however, were closely controlled--much closer than in the 1967 Middle East War.
On the other hand, the President and Schlesinger did not attempt to communicate directly with any level in the chain >) 5 Roberts, 196.
Nor did they made an effort to provide specialized guidance in mechanisms of delegated control.
As a result, the ships of the Sixth Fleet acted in accordance with Navy standing orders in responding to Soviet naval operations.
Soviet tattletales and aircraft closely monitored the Sixth Fleet, and United States ships _ aircraft alae ly monitored the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron.
The Soviets quickly responded to changes in Sixth Fleet operations, keeping every United States carrier in the eastern Mediterranean targeted with anti-ship missiles.
Similarly, the Sixth Fleet quickly reacted to changes in Soviet naval operations, keeping Soviet ships that were an immediate threat to the carriers in the sights of United States ships or planes.
It is clear that the United States used the Sixth Fleet for political tiguldecle.
The Soviet naval actions that sent the strongest signals were reinforcement of the Mediterranean Squadron, which almost doubled in numbers of ships and quadrupled in firepower, trailing of Sixth Fleet task groups, keeping the bulk of the Squadron well clear of the fighting ashore, and conducting an anti-carrier exercise from October 26 to November 3.
As will be discussed below, United States leaders also read political signals into Soviet naval actions that may not have been intended as signals--an example of inadvertent signaling.
The United States relied on methods of delegated control, United States and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean were tightly coupled, and both sides used their forces as political instruments under conditions of acute crisis.
The United States communications system provided much faster communications in 1973 than it had in 1967, but still did not permit the President to exercise real-time direct control over the Sixth Fleet.
This did not cause problems because the White House did not attempt to exercise such Close control.
Impairment of political-level decisionmaking was at least a minor factor in the crisis.
Although President Nixon reportedly made key decisions himself and was kept informed of major developments in the crisis, he clearly did not exercise close, detailed control over United States actions in the oa The President's political travails appear not to crisis.° have had a direct impact on United States actions in the crisis, but undoubtedly complicated top-level decisionmaking.
As has already been noted, there was intense tactical-level interaction between the United States and Soviet navies in the Mediterranean.
The White House was not directly controlling the actions of the Sixth Fleet in that interaction, and available accounts of the crisis suggest that Nixon and Kissinger were unaware that it was occurring.
Sixth Fleet efforts to counter the Soviet anti-ship missile threat required frequent tactical decisions as Soviet ships maneuvered to keep the United States carriers targeted.
This intense maneuvering for tactical advantage was too fast-paced for the White House to be able to effectively control it.
In his memoirs, Nixon intersperses descriptions of the Middle East crisis with descriptions of the Watergate scandal, providing a good illustration of the impact that the scandal had on his attention.
The same situation could well have existed for the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron, which was constantly targeted at point blank range by United States warships and attack aircraft.
Tactically inappropriate orders were a major factor in the crisis and led to decoupling.
To ensure that the Sixth Fleet sent only the desired political signals, the White House ordered the fleet to remain in small, fixed operating areas.
This made the United States fleet extremely vulnerable to "" Soviet preemptive strike.
The on-scene commanders--acting on their own initiative and well within their delegated authority--sought to reduce their vulnerability by countertargeting the most threatening Soviet naval units.
Tight direct control of Sixth Fleet movements by the White House thus generated tactically inappropriate orders.
The second requirement for establishing that decoupling occurred is that the oueiat onal decisions made by tactical-level decisionmakers differed from those that political-level decisionmakers would have made in order to coordinate those actions with their strategy for managing the crisis.
As was discussed earlier, the Sixth Fleet was moved to south of Crete in order to demonstrate to the Soviet Union that the United States was prepared for any contingency, but had no aggressive intent and was not preparing to take an active part in the conflict.
Given these political signalling objectives, it is not clear that the White House would have viewed Sixth Fleet preparations for preemptive strikes against the Soviet navy--~preparations the Soviets were well aware of--as supporting the United States strategy for managing the crisis or as sending the political signals it wanted sent to the Soviet Union.
During the first week of the crisis, United States Navy on-scene commanders were relatively unconcerned about the Soviet naval threat because the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron essentially continued normal peacetime operations.
United States Navy on-scene commanders in the Mediterranean were highly concerned about the threat of a Soviet preemptive attack due to the untenable tactical position in which the Sixth Fleet had peen placed by White House restrictions on the fleet's movements.
Soviet ships and submarines armed with antiship missiles were constantly within range of the United States carriers while they were in the eastern Mediterranean.
One of the most difficult situations for Sixth FPleet forces to deal with is a Soviet anticarrier warfare exercise.
When a United States ship is used as the simulated target, Soviet ships maneuver so realistically that it is virtually impossible to distinguish between exercise activity and a real attack on a carrier.
All that is needed to transform the exercise into a shooting war is the order to fire.
The period of this Soviet exercise could well have been the Closest that the Soviet Union and the United States have ever been to “hair trigger” readiness for war--at least at the tactical level.
Not surprisingly, senior United States Navy officers appear to have had a good grasp of the concerns felt by the on-scene commanders in the Mediterranean.
Kissinger, in particular, Gid not perceive a threat from the Soviet Navy during the crisis.
Kissinger also was either unaware of the Soviet anti-carrier exercise or did not understand the threat it represented to the Sixth Fleet.
Thus, stratified threat perceptions did arise at the very top of the chain of command, between civilian and military officials.
It is not surprising, therefore, that Soviet naval operations in the Mediterranean. appeared much more -threatening to the Navy chain of command than they did to Kissinger. 9332 umwalt, interview by author, February 16, 1988. 5394 engen, letter to author, April 25, 1988. 3957 umwalt, On Watch, 436.
Most recent communication with Soviets contains request that United States join them in more forceful enforcement of Israel/Arab ceasefire by introduction of both US/Soviet forces.
Soviets further state intentions to consider unilateral action if United States declines.
Our reply not final at this point but, as you have noted, United States response includes signal of elevation in force readiness,e., DEFCON Three world wide, alerting of 82nd Airborne, more eastward movement of carriers in Med , and redeployment of SAC forces from Pacific.
This message and similar verbal communications were important for ensuring that key military commanders understood the purpose of the alert, which is described as a “signal” to the Soviets.
Commander Seventh Fleet was as much in the dark on United States policy during the 1958 Taiwan Strait Crisis as Commander Sixth Fleet was in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
Although this is certainly a legitimate concern, it can create problems in coordinating military operations with political objectives if the military chain of command is totally excluded from being kept informed on political matters.
Failure to provide the military chain of command with sufficient information to be able to understand the political context of a crisis is thus a major source of stratified threat perceptions.
The security dilemma can be stratified in a crisis; that is, decisionmakers at the political and tactical levels of interaction can hold much different threat perceptions.
At the political level of interaction, neither the United States nor the Soviet Union had an incentive to launch a ehicshalrive first strike against the other.
Military and naval moves, including the United States DEFCON 3 alert, were taken primarily for aah ecsd purposes, rather than to achieve military advantages.
At the tactical level of interaction, however, United States and Soviet naval forces had strong incentives to strike first and were actively targeting each other.
Soviet Navy onscene commanders must have shared similar concerns due to United States counter-targeting of their major combatants.
The security dilemma was thus aseneitiddooniid at the political level, but acute at the tactical level.
Although there were intense tactical-level interactions during the crisis, there were no cases of such interactions generating an escalation sequence.
Although each side was constantly targeting the other and both sides were ready to instantly launch preemptive attacks, no a oeieiaa were fired during the crisis.
First, neither the United States nor the Soviet Union wanted to intervene militarily in the war if they could possible avoid it, largely out of concern for an armed clash with the other Aerials ast Therefore they both acted cautiously with their military and naval forces, avoiding situations that could inadvertently involve them in the fighting and, with one exception, avoiding actions that were unnecessarily provocative.
If that exercise had commenced late on October 24 or early on October 25, at the peak of superpower tensions, it might easily have been misperceived by ‘the United States as a further indication of imminent Soviet military intervention in the Middle East.
It would be tempting to speculate that the Soviets deliberately waited until after tensions had peaked in the Middle East before starting the exercise, but the available evidence argues against that interpretation.
The Soviets started the exercise in response to United States concentration of the Sixth Fleet in the eastern Mediterranean.
The implication of this is that the Soviet anti-carrier exercise could well have started at any time in the crisis if the Sixth Fleet had been concentrated in the eastern Mediterranean.
Therefore, while the overall pattern of Soviet military and naval behavior was one of restraint, the Soviets were willing to engage in certain highly provocative activities.
The second factor inhibiting escalation was that the United States and the Soviet Union communicated with each other frequently during the crisis.
This helped to prevent the problem of ambiguous political signals, which can cause intentions and objectives to be misperceived.
Soviet &46 warnings to the United States on October 24 that it was prepared to intervene unilaterally in the Middle East if Israel did not respect the United Nations ceesefire were particularly dmportant for avoiding a clash between the superpowers.
Although that warning prompted the most intense superpower tensions of the crisis, including the United States worldwide DEFCON 3 alert, the situation probably would have been much worse if the United States and the Soviet Union had not been in direct communication at that point.
The two superpowers probably would have had great difficulty interpreting the political significance of each other's military moves on October 24 and 25 had they not been able to express their interests and concerns to each other.
The third factor inhibiting escalation was estan bas prudence on the part of United States Navy commanders in the Mediterranean.
This was particularly important due to Soviet targeting of the Sixth Fleet with anti-ship missile platforms.
On-scene commanders had to carefully balance the need to maintain a tactically viable situation against the danger of incidents with the Soviet Navy.
This task was not made easier by White House orders prohibiting the carriers from maneuvering to evade Soviet targeting.
Caution and prudence were particularly important for the United States ships and aircraft assigned to monitor high-threat Soviet ships and Gestroy them if they attempted to launch anti-ship missiles.
A single misjudgement could have produced a Soviet-American sea battle in the Mediterranean.
That no incidents occurred ids testimony to the caution and prudence shown by the onscene commanders.
There were no inadvertent military incidents serious enough to affect the crisis, but there were instances of United States leaders misperceiving the political signals being sent by Soviet naval movements.
The actual pattern of Soviet naval Sseeetcnd suggests a higher degree of Soviet commitment to Syria and Egypt than Kissinger perceived.
Second, the Soviet ships that Kissinger describes as moving west actually went to Soviet anchorages off Crete.
The practical reason for that was that Soviet replenishment and supply ships were located at the anchorages.
The Crete anchorages occupy a strategic position in the eastern Mediterranean, ideal for covering the Sixth Fleet when it moves into the area.
Thus, the actual signal being sent by Soviet ships moving west was that of Soviet intent to neutralize the Sixth Fleet.
The Soviets probably were not signaling intentions parallel to those of the United States when they concentrated the Mediterranean Squadron off Crete.
Kissinger misperceived the intent of the Soviet naval moves, giving them a political interpretation reflecting his view at the start of the crisis that Soviet intentions were benign.
In every case the naval actions can be accounted for by motives or considerations other than political signalling, such as logistic requirements or improving tactical readiness.
There was serious tension between political considerations and the needs of diplomatic bargaining, on the one hand, and military considerations and the needs of military operations, on the other.
The most serious tension was between Washington's need to control Sixth Fleet movements for political purposes and the on-scene commander's need for freedom to maneuver the fleet in order to reduce its vulnerability.
As was discussed earlier, the White House insisted on restricting the movements of the Sixth Fleet lest the | fleet's movements send a misleading signal of United States intentions to the Soviet Union.
Several times during the next few days Dan asked permission of the JCS .. . to move these ships er those toward the east in order to make his gsurveillance of the battle scene more effective and evacuation of Americans from the Middle East, if it came to that, more rapid.
Each request was turned down by Admiral Moorer, acting, he told me, on instructions from the White House, which almost certainly meant Henry Kissinger.
To explain the nature of the Sixth Fleet's vulnerability requires a brief review of modern naval warfare.
The Soviet tactic of keeping ships and submarines armed with anti-ship cruise missiles within striking range of the United States carriers created serious operational problems for the Sixth Fleet.
Modern anti-ship missiles, particularly the very large missiles favored by the Soviet navy, allow a single weapon to destroy or seriously damage a ship.
Soviet naval writings emphasize the importance of 1605 ""the battle of the first salvo.
United States Navy tactical dcctrine for the defense of surface ship battle groups thus emphasizes destruction of launch platforms before they can launch their missiles.
Requiring that a task group operate at a fixed location with little freedom to maneuver (known in the Navy as a ""ModLoc"") increases its vulnerability to a Soviet preemptive strike.
A force in ModLoc is trapped ina set-piece battle in which an enemy with superior numbers can organize an overwhelming coordinated attack.
This is exactly the situation in which the White House placed the Sixth Fleet.
The fleet was not granted the freedom to maneuver it needed in order to outrun slower Soviet tattletales and to prevent the Soviets from keeping the carriers constantly targeted.
United States warships, their guns manned and ready, and United States attack aircraft, armed with conventional bombs and missiles, kept every Soviet ship that could threaten the carriers constantly in their sights.
Both sides thus had strong incentives to strike first if they believed that war was imminent.
This was a tense and dangerous situation that would have been at least partially alleviated if the Sixth Fleet had been granted freedom to maneuver at will.
Thus, a restriction imposed on the fleet for political purposes patrenaiters misperceptions of United States intentions) exacerbated the risks of a military confrontation and the danger that a minor incident could touch off an armed Clash at sea between the superpowers.
President Nixon and Schlesinger respected the military chain of command, using it to send orders to the Sixth Pleet rather than attempting to communicate directly with the fleet.
Although the Navy chain of command was irritated by White House control of Sixth 611, unwalt, interview by author, February 16, 1988; Engen, letter to author, April 25, 1988. unwalt, On Watch, 436; Engen, letter to author, April 25, 1988.
There was moderate tension between performance of crisis political missions and readiness to 5 ean wartime combat missions.
The commanding officers of the carriers Kennedy and Roosevelt state that they did not experience a degradation of their readiness to perform wartime missions during the crisis.
This was a cause for concern on the part of Vice Admiral Murphy and Vice Admiral Engen.
This depleted United States war-reserve stocks and left some operational units without sufficient equipment and a Thus, although supplies to carry out wartime missions.
Sixth Pleet operations in the crisis did not degrade the fleet's readiness for wartime operations, United States resupply of Israel degraded the overall combat readiness of United States forces.
In summary, the stratified interaction model accurately describes Soviet~-American interaction during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
There was intense tactical-level interaction between United States and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean, and significant decoupling of tactical-level interactions from political-level crisis management efforts.
The overall pattern was one of parallel stratified interactions with frequent momentary decoupling.
United States and Soviet naval forces were very tightly coupled during the crisis, but there were no serious incidents between then.
There were serious political~-military tensions arising from 6l6Engen, letter to author, April 25, 1988.
Eight research questions addressing the theory of stratified interaction and its corollaries were answered in each case study.
The the Rolie case studies showed that the stratified interaction model provides an accurate description of international interaction in crises.
The next chapter will examine four cases of peacetime attacks on United States Navy ships in order to take a closer look at how the military chain of command reacts to such incidents.
Chapter IX will then use the findings from all eight of the case studies in a structured, focused comparison in order to derive contingent generalizations on crisis interaction and crisis stability.
Cade oO iy a eras ae Th t ,, as 3 ; é . pot & Ly ‘ ' ’ a ‘ ’ « ad hk *, & »@ a % eo.
R PLY he eee ° , r a sath soak. o> Joe 3 t ‘ a ""es E SP 8 OFS, ahi te ‘ t F ' € TEWree® Teas 3 rai 4 ae ‘ se we ‘ Po8IBeW TE 2.
Ya RIES ve ‘gtate2utavie toe eure ceceepea ret tee f~ oe . 4 *” sy a5. se , A el “es 2 St ed eC meete rey Pe . > a fctee.
Lid had tool te Save $8 e a rates, tig awa ag f° * PT he wee gt Vy 7 x ty 0 ROL oy Gh ae PM hat.
Col gaa tase ates gw ep ede as Re ad PEPE ER oS ‘ piwtgte a ia 4 0t¥, oa zea wate Taya) si¥i AYES 0 2 Ti ad Dae foe TET taoncr yy HE OKIE Batten Lae gg ged Sah 8 ot AIC ehh aN . a isy tata riererpre Piacoa es jeceae epg ts bts, {ip ratory: as awe a dein.
The political importance and potential dangers of such missions are generally recognized.
Not as well understood, however, is that routine naval missions viewed as non-political or ordered for peacetime military objectives rather than for political purposes almost always have important political undertones and can generate significant international political repercussions if an unanticipated incident were to occur during the mission.
For this reason certain “non-political” missions, such as intelligence collection or surveillance near a potentially hostile country Or the scene of fighting, need to be viewed as political in mature even though not ordered for political purposes.
This chapter presents the third phase of the research design, a structured focused comparison of four cases in which a United States Navy ship was attacked during peacetime or crisis operations.
The focus will be on how the military and naval chain of command reacted to the attacks.
Four of the eight questions asked in the previous chapter will again be asked in these cases.
The four questions address decoupling of stratified interactions, stratified escalation dynamics, misperceptions, and political-military tensions.
The previous chapter showed that the conditions necessary for stratified interactions are usually present in crises.
Decoupling simply means that national leaders lose control over tactical-level military interaction.
The focus will be on identifying escalation-inhibiting features and the conditions that can cause the escalation-inhibiting factors to break down.
Armament consisted of three 5~-inch/38 calibre twin mounts controlled by a MK 37 director, two 3inch/50 calibre twin mounts controlled by a MK 56 director, two MK 32 ASW torpedo tube mounts, and two fixed Hedgehog ASW launchers.
Although an old ship, Maddox was a good pvelities for intelligence collection duties off the coast of a potentially hostile nation due to its weapons, speed and maneuverability.
The North Vietnamese-backed Viet Cong guerilla war against the South Vietnamese Government and the Communist insurgencies in Cambodia and Laos dominated the international situation in Southeast Asia in August 1964.
The political and military situation in the Republic of Vietnam had been deteriorating for years due to chronically unstable and ineffective governments.
Seeking to exploit the deterioration in the South, the Democratic Republic of Vietnam in December 1963 ordered the Viet Cong to take the offensive and in 1964 sharply increased the infiltration of regular army troops into South Vietnam.
The Cold War had not yet been thawed by detente and the Communist insurgencies in Indochina were viewed by the Johnson Administration as a crucial battle in a global struggle between East and West.
Military and economic aid to South Vietnam increased significantly during the first half of 1964 as the United States sought to shore up the faltering Saigon regime.
As part of OPLAN 34A the United States Navy provided South Vietnam with eight fast patrol boats and other small craft, and trained their crews and naval commandoes for raids on North Vietnam.
Contingency plans were drawn up and target lists prepared by June 1964.
The desirability of a Congressional resolution authorizing the President to take military action in Indochina was also recognized and a proposed resolution was drafted in May 1964.
In April 1962 the United States Navy had initiated a series of patrols by destroyers in international waters off the coasts of China, the Soviet Union and North Korea.
The first Desoto patrol off the coast of North Vietnam was conducted in December 1962.
DRV Navy vessels shadowed subsequent patrols, but did not interfere with them.
There were no joint operations involving RVN OPLAN 34A forces and United States Navy Desoto destroyers.
Although the value of intelligence collected by the Desoto patrols to the South Vietnamese operations was recognized, coordination between the two programs sought to prevent Desoto patrols from interfering with OPLAN 34A missions.
In 1964 minimum distances of the Desoto patrols from North Vietnam were eight miles from the mainland and four miles from islands, reflecting the assumption that only a three mile territorial limit was Claimed by North Vietnam.
Maddox arrived off the coast of North Vietnam the afternoon of July 31 and the next afternoon was operating in the vicinity of two islands attacked thirty-six hours earlier by RVN Navy boats on an OPLAN 34A mission.
Early in the morning of August 2 DRY Navy headquarters ordered preparations for battle that night.
At 3:00 P.M. on August 2 Maddox detected three DRV P-4 Class torpedo boats on radar closing at high speed.
Maddox, which was about twenty-eight miles off the coast, increased speed to twenty-five knots and set a course to the south-east to move away from the coast.
Maddox set general quarters, reported the approaching contacts, and requested air support.
Four F-8 Crusaders and the destroyer | USS Turner Joy were immediately dispatched to assist Maddox.
The first shots of the engagement were fired by Maddox, invoking the principle of anticipatory selfdefense against forces showing hostile intent.
At 4:28 P.M. the F-8s from Ticonderoga attacked the DRV boats, scoring hits one one of them.
Commander Seventh Fleet ordered a halt to the action after the air attack.
One DRV torpedo boat was sunk, a second heavily damaged and the third slightly damaged.
Maddox was struck by one machine gun bullet that caused minor damage and no casualties.
Although intelligence assessments concluded that the attack on Maddox reflected growing North Vietnamese sensitivity to ieeusstSae and readiness to take aggressive action when threatened, United States leaders concluded that the attack may have been an unauthorized action by a local commander.
The President ruled out reprisals against North Vietnam, but in a public statement warned that United States Navy ships and aircraft would “attack any force that attacks them.
He 13 Admiral Sharp approved didn't want that to happen again."" a recommendation from Admiral Moorer to resume the patrol, and an order was sent to COMSEVENTHFLT for Maddox to do so-an action that Vice Admiral Johnson had already taken.
The manner in which the decision was made in Washington to continue the patrol illustrates the mood among top civilian officials at the time.
When Johnson asked for his recommendation, Cornelius showed him the message, which Johnson immediately approved.
After leaving the White House, Cornelius finally was able to talk with the Navy's duty captain, and informed him of the president's decision.
The message was sent to the Commander in Chief of the Pacific Fleet, who ordered the Maddox, agcompanied by the Turner Joy, to return to the Gulf.
The President's action did not raise any opposition because the Navy chain of command agreed with the decision and had already ordered Maddox to resume the patrol.
The minimum distance from the North Vietnamese mainland was increased to twelve miles and at night the ships were to move out into the Gulf for safety.
Maddox and Turner Joy resumed the Tonkin Gulf Desoto patrol the morning of August 3.
The night of August 3-4 the RVN Navy conducted two OPLAN 34A missions, attacking DRV shore defenses.
Maddox and Turner Joy were over sixty miles from the coast of North Vietnam that night when they gained high-speed radar contacts at short range, locked on with fire control radars, and opened fire.
For the next four hours the two ships engaged at least five possible contacts at close range while evading several torpedoes detected on sonar.
Numerous radar and visual indications of hits on patrol boats were reported.
Sixteen United States Navy aircraft participated in the engagement, attempting to locate and attack contacts reported by the Geatccuans 4 Doubts soon arose over what exactly happened in the Tonkin Gulf the night of August 4.
It had been a dark and evercast night, with unusual radar propagation conditions that easily could have generated numerous false contacts.
Only two pilots reported sighting possible contacts, and their reports were uncertain.
Review of action makes many reported contacts and torpedoes fired appear doubtful.
Freak weather effects on radar and overeager sonarmen may have accounted for many reports.
About half an hour later Captain Herrick sent a second message summarizing the immediately available evidence of an attack, but warned that the “entire action leaves many doubts except for apparent ambush at beginning.
Based on my professional judgement (twelve years experience in destroyers; a month at sea in Maddox in 1974, and operational experience.in the Tonkin Gulf), this is the best assessment of the incident.
There. appear to have been two North Vietnamese patrol boats in the vicinity of Maddox and Turner Joy at the start of the incident, but they did | not pursue the United States ships after they opened fire.
Although President Johnson and his advisors were predisposed to retaliate, they wisely insisted on confirmation that there had been a North Vietnamese attack.
President LBJ wanted a decision so he could announce it on prime time TV news.
Well, I was on the phone both with General Wheeler and with Secretary McNamara.
McNamara was trying to confirm in his own mind that an attack occurred.
My staff was working to try and correlate all the reports that would come in and CINCPACFLT staff was doing the same thing.
Admiral Moorer, CINCPACFLT, and I decided that there was enough information available to indicate that an attack had occurred.
I told Secretary McNamara that, but we also asked the Maddox to confirm absolutely that the ships were attacked and told them to get word to us as quickly as possible.
We also had some radio intercept intelligence which tended to confirm the attack.
So we had various conversations back and forth with Admiral Moorer and I in Honolulu and General Wheeler dn Washington, Secretary McNamara in Washington, and finally we received an order to attack the next day, attack North Vietnamese patrol craft bases.
In the meantime we were still receiving amplifying messages from the Maddox, Turner Joy, and Captain Herrick.
Generally speaking, they seemed to still indicate that the attack occurred.
Turner Joy said that crew members saw torpedoes and that a target burned when hit, and her men saw black smoke.
So while we were getting the planes ready aboard the Ticonderoga and the Constellation, we were still goi g back and forth about the attack in the Tonkin Gulf.
You have to validate the fact that you were actually under attack because this is the thing that will decide whether a retaliatory attack is ordered.
Apparently Moorer and Sharp decided on their own that there had been an attack and that's what they told McNamara, and that’s when Byesident Johnson ordered the retaliatory attack.
The statements by Vice Admiral Blouin, Admiral Sharp, and Vice Admiral Johnson reveal intense pressure from the President and the Secretary of Defense for the Navy chain of command to make an instant assessment as to whether or not an attack had occurred.
Furthermore, their comments suggest that the decision to retaliate against North Vietnam was based on a hurried and tentative evaluation of incomplete and ambiguous information.
Not even the on-scene commander was certain what actually had happened, but tentative indications that there may have been an attack were viewed as sufficient cause for ordering retaliation.
As early as 3:10 P.M., Eastern Daylight Time--well before the Navy chain of command had reached a firm conClusion about whether or not there had been an attack on the destroyers--President Johnson gave McNamara tentative authorization to conduct retaliatory air strikes against North Vietnam.
At 5:19 P.M., about five hours after the incident ended, President Johnson approved plans for air strikes against DRV naval vessels in or near five North Vietnamese ports, and against a fuel depot ashore.
They destroyed seven DRV vessels, heavily damaged ten, and slightly damaged sixteen others--almost all of the major vessels in the DRV Navy at the time.
Maddox and Turner Joy resumed the Desoto patrol off North Vietnam from August § to August &, with no further incidente.
The stage was thus set for the 1965 escalation of the United States role in the Vietnam War.
North Vietnam and the Viet Cong were not cowed by the United States resolution or the retaliatory air strikes and conducted further attacks on Americans in South Vietnam.
The second point is that there was a similar incident in the Tonkin Gulf a month after the August 4 incident.
USS Morton and USS Richard S Edwards commenced a Desoto patrol off the coast of North Vietnam on September 13, 1964, remaining at least twenty miles from the coast.
At 7:29 P.M. on September 18 the two destroyers detected two radar contacts closing them at high speed, set general quarters, and requested air support.
At 8:16 P.M. they fired warning shots and at 8:22 P.M. opened fire on the contacts.
A Navy investigation later concluded that a North Vietnamese patrol boat probably was in the vicinity of the ships at the beginning of the incident, but there were no attacks on the destroyers.
First, it suggests that essentially the same thing may have happened in the August 4 incident--North Vietnamese patrol craft were detected at the beginning of the incident, but there were no attacks on the United States destroyers and the targets they engaged were all false.
Second, in contrast to the August 4 incident, the chain of command reacted to the September 18 incident with restraint and skepticism.
On August 4 the chain of command from the President to CINCPACFLT was predisposed to believe that there had been a North Vietnamese attack and paid little heed to the on-scene commander's doubts.
On September 18 the JCS initially recommended retaliatory air strikes, but reversed itself due to lack of evidence that there had been an attack on the destroyers.
Officials in Washington spent hours bombarding Navy commanders in the Pacific with demands for more information on the second incident before they felt they had sufficient information on which to base the decision to retaliate.
The President and the Secretary of Defense were thus unable to control United States Navy operations in the Tonkin Gulf while the incidents were in progress.
Although conditions for decoupling were present, the operational decisions made by tactical-level commanders did not diverge from the political-military objectives of political-level leaders.
Military commanders and political leaders were in agreement that North Vietnamese attacks on United States ships warranted retaliatory air strikes, and that the Desoto patrol should be resumed after the incidents in order to assert freedom of the seas.
Interestingly, the on-scene commander, Captain Herrick, had the greatest doubt that there had been a North Vietnamese attack on August 4 and cautioned against a hasty reaction.
Thus, although national leaders temporarily lost control over events in the Tonkin Gulf during the incidents, this did not result in uncontrollable escalation of the confrontations.
The pattern in the two incidents is one of momentary decoupling followed by immediate disengagement.
On-scene commanders, acting on their own authority under guidance contained in the rules of engagement, used limited force in response to apparent imminent attacks.
They were not required to request--and did not seek--permission from higher authority to use force in self-defense.
Once the immediate threat had been countered ua the destroyers were out of danger, the on-scene commanders halted the engagements--again on their own authority and without guidance from higher in the chain of command.
The first might be called military prudence: on-scene commanders did not want to fight under tactically unfavorable circumstances.
Air support arrived after the PT boats were driven off by Maddox in the first incident, and was ineffective due to darkness and low cloud cover in the second incident.
It may well be the case that when United States forces are the victim of an unanticipated attack, tactical military considerations lead military commanders toward the same general course of action that political considerations lead national leaders toward.
In the Tonkin Gulf incidents, military considerations tended to make tactical-level commanders more cautious than political-level leaders.
The second escalation-inhibiting factor was compliance by on-scene commanders with the guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control.
Hot pursuit of the attacking force in international waters was authorized and was used on August 2 when Navy planes attacked the PT boats after they had disengaged.
These provisions specifically approved by the President. allowed force to be used without further permission from higher authority, but also resulted in the engagements halting quickly rather than escalating.
The third escalation-inhibiting factor was the emphasis that the President and — of Defense McNamara Placed on confirming that there actually had been a North Vietnamese attack the night of August 4.
They did not accept initial reports from the Tonkin Gulf at face value; they insisted on knowing the basis for the conclusion that there had been an attack on the destroyers.
The August 4 incident in the Tonkin Gulf suggests three conditions that can cause the escalation-inhibiting factors to break down.
The first condition is tongseeck frustration and animosity toward the other side in a crisis or incident.
United States leaders had for years been growing increasingly belligerent toward North Vietnam due to its support for the Viet Cong, and had been preparing contingency plans for direct military action against the North.
This created an atmosphere in which an apparent North Vietnamese attack on United States forces would be likely to provoke a strong United States response.
The second condition is the immediate reiterate of a confirmed provocation by the other side, particularly when the United States response to the prior incident was retrained and the other side was warned against further incidents.
The United States reacted with notable restraint to the confirmed August 2 North Vietnamese attack on Maddox, merely warning against further attacks.
The third condition is for all levels in the military chain of command, from the President to the on-scene commander, to hold similar views toward the adversary and toward the need for immediate retaliation.
A strong unity of views can suppress the skepticism that normally greets ambiguous initial reports of a military incident, or lead to hasty assessment of the incident in the rush to launch retaliatory attacks.
This appears to have occurred in the United States decision to retaliate after the August 4 incident-McNamara sought confirmation that there had been an attack, but the President decided to retaliate before a complete assessment of the evidence had been made.
The United States responses ta the incidents did not send any serious inadvertent political signals or result in any serious inadvertent military incidents.
However, the-Desoto patrols apparently were misperceived by wor th Vietnam.
Some United States intelligence analysts and military officers, including Captain Herrick, suspected that the North Vietnamese misperceived the Desoto patrol destroyers as participating in or directly supporting OPLAN 34A attacks on North Vietnam.
None of the three tensions was serious because the United States responses were limited and all levels of the chain of command held generally similar views toward the need to retaliate.
The only aspect of the incidents that generated tension was the demand for confirmation that there had been a North Vietnamese attack in the second incident.
McNamara’s efforts to confirm that there had been an attack somewhat annoyed Admirals Sharp and Moorer, both of whom had immediately recommended retaliation.
Confirmation was necessary so that retaliation could be justified politically.
Liberty's mission was collection of electronic and communications intelligence, though for important reasons the Navy cloaked this mission under the cover of electromagnetic propagation research.
Armament was four .50-caliber machine guns-leaving the ship defenseless against any attack with weapons heavier than small arms.
Although a superb platform for peacetime intelligence collection, Liberty was extremely vulnerable when operating in close proximity to hostilities.
Liberty was ordered to the Eastern Mediterranean as Arab-Israeli tensions reached the crisis point in late May.
Specific forces were not designated to defend Liberty because the gl a Chapter VII for a description of the background to the 1967 war, United States policy during the crisis, and Sixth Fleet operations during the crisis.
Just before Liberty | commenced its patrol, at least five messages were sent | increasing the ship's standoff range from the coasts of the belligerents--apparently in response to Arab claims that the United States Navy was aiding Israel, and warnings from Egypt and Israel that the seas off their coasts were war zones.
Due to misrouting of the messages to communications stations that were not handling cra fic to Liberty, the ship did not receive these crucial ieomwages.
Commander Sixth Fleet gained operational control of Liberty shortly before the ship commenced its mission, but did not have ships or aircraft alerted to provide support for Liberty in the event of an attack on the ship.
At 2:00 P.M. two Israeli Mirage jet fighters attacked Liberty with rockets and cannon fire, followed by Mystere jet fighters attacking with rockets, Napalm, and cannon fire.
At 2:35 P.M. three Israeli torpedo boats attacked, launching at least five torpedoes, one of which struck Liberty in its intelligence space.
An hour later the torpedo boats returned to offer assistance, which was refused by Liberty.
Except during periods when her radios were out of commission due to Israeli attacks, Liberty was able to report that she was under stustie Stradey to the Sixth Fleet's carriers.
Liberty apparently was unable to communicate with the Sixth Fleet during the first half hour of the attack due to power outages and damage to radio antennas and transmitters.
Ennes has Claimed that the Israelis jammed Liberty's radios, but this cannot be substantiated and could well have been electroMagnetic interference rather than deliberate jamming.
There were no reports from Sixth Fleet units of communications jamming during the attack on Liberty.
What Liberty's radiomen detected was probably Israeli electronic countermeasures intended to jam air search and fire control radars, which would have been normal if the Israeli pilots thought they were attacking an armed warship.
About five minutes later Saratoga received and immediately relayed a second voice report from Liberty, stating ""Three unidentified gunboats approaching, vessels now... nf3 Liberty did not finish the transmission, probably due to the Israeli attack.
Saratoga received and relayed a fourth voice report from Liberty, stating ""Hit by torpedo starboard side.
Need assistance ineteadvatary en” These are $2uS5 Saratoga message, USS SARATOGA 0812352 JUN 67, June 8, 1967 (Unclassified.
Saratoo was relaying over radioteletype a report received over HF/SSB voice radio.
Saratoga probably preceded the radioteletype message with a voice radio report to CTF 60 or COMSIXTHFLT. *3uss Saratoga message, USS SARATOGA 081237Z JUN 67, June 8, 1967 (Unclassified.
Liberty incident file, Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center, Washington, DC). * huss Saratoga message, USS SARATOGA 081245Z JUN 67, June 8, 1967 (Unclassified.
An important point is that none of these reports give the identity of the attackers.
COMSIXTHFLT did not know the identity of the attackers until after he had ordered initial actions in support of Liberty.
Vice Admiral Martin, COMSIXTHFLT, acting on his own authority, responded to Liberty's reports that she was under attack by immediately ordering Saratoga and USS America (CVA 66) to launch aircraft to defend Liberty against further 6 attacks.
Saratoga launch fouy armed A-1's ASAP same Mission. Commander Task Force 60 , the Carrier Strike Force, 46 pear Admiral Wylie, letter to author, March 28, 1988.
There was no question that Vice Admiral Martin had authority to use force to defend Liberty.
Admiral Horacio Rivero, Vice Chief of Naval Operations in 1967, has stated, in reference to the Liberty incident, that “No commander needs permission to defend himself, his forces, or other United States forces under attack when he can assist.
Admiral Horacio Rivero, Jr., letter to author, March 10, 1988. *) commander Sixth Fleet message, COMSIXTHFLT 081250Z JUN 67, June 8, 1967 (Declassified 1979.
Because the carriers did not have planes on alert to support Liberty, the A-4s and A-l1s had to be fueled and armed and their pilots briefed, which would take about an hour.
The estimated launch times were 3:45 P.M. for America's A-4s and 4:00 P.M. for Saratoga's A-ls.
Vice Admiral Martin also ordered Task Force 60 to close Liberty's position, and ordered the destroyers USS George F Davis (DD 937) and USS Massey to rendezvous with Liberty at 48 best speed.
COMSIXTHFLT told Liberty over voice radio $0 -oemander Sixth Fleet message, COMSIXTHFLT 0813202 JUN 67, June 8, 1967 (Unclassified.
The planes launched at 3:45 P.M. and 4:00 P.M. were the first launched specifically to defend Liberty.
Ennes Claims that prior to this America launched nuclear-armed alert aircraft to defend Liberty, but that they were recalled when higher authorities learned of it.
America was conducting routine flight operations for training at the time Liberty was attacked, so the earlier launches described by Ennes were probably training missions.
It would have been routine for the carriers to have armed fighters on alert for air defense in the event of a surprise air attack.
Additionally, it would have been routine in 1967 for the carriers to have nuclear-armed strike aircraft on alert for general war contingencies.
The actions that Vice Admiral Martin did not take were as important as those he did take.
He did not order attacks on Soviet forces in the Mediterranean or retaliation against Egyptian forces or airfields.
The actions he ordered were strictly limited to the defense of Liberty.
The rules of engagement he issued were carefully crafted to avoid further incidents.
The restraint and prudence shown by Vice Admiral Martin made a substantial contribution to preventing the Liberty incident from escalating to a superpower confrontation.
COMSIXTHFLT made an initial voice report to CINCUSNAVEUR and Commander in Chief United States Forces Europe stating that Liberty was under attack and that he was taking action to defend her.
COMSIXTHFLT sent a message situation report Gescribing in greater detail the actions he had ordered and informing USCINCEUR that he had declared the forces 50 attacking Liberty hostile.
This illustrates the exercise 49 commander Sixth Fleet message, COMSIXTHFLT 0813052 JUN 67, June 8, 1967 (Unclassified.
COMSIXTHFLT informed USCINCEUR of his actions before the planes were launched, allowing USCINCEUR to exercise control by negation should it have been necessary.
None of Vice Admiral Martin's orders were countermanded by higher authorities.
Vice Admiral martin used his authority to declare a threatening force hostile in response to reports from Liberty that she was under attack.
IAW (In accordance with] CINCUSNAVEUR INST {Instruction] P03120.5B forces attacking Liberty are declared hostile.
In addition brief pilots that Egyptian territorial limit {is] only 12 miles and Liberty right on edge.
Do not fly between Liberty and shoreline except as required to carry out provisions para ~2 above.
At 4:14 P.M. the United States Defense Attache Office in Tel Aviv sent a message to COMSIXTHFLT and the chain of command reporting that Israel had informed the United States Naval Attache of an accidental attack on a United States ship off the Sinai.
This was the first indication received as to the identity of the attackers.
Shortly thereafter, at 4:22 P.M., Liberty reported that she had identified the attackers as Israeli.
In response to these reports and a report from Liberty that the attacks had ended, COMSIXTHFLT at abut 4:30 P.M. ordered the attack aircraft fecalled.
COMSIXTHFLT reported to CINCUSNAVEUR and USCINCEUR at 4:39 P.M. that he had recalled the aircraft 33 Thus, by about 4:30 P.M. the sent to defend Liberty. immediate crisis was over and there was little likelihood of further armed clashes involving United States forces.
Guidance from Washington lagged far behind the pace of events in the eastern Mediterranean.
It was not until 4:16 2 commander Sixth Fleet message, COMSIXTHFLT 0813362Z JUN 67, June 8, 1967 (Unclassified.
Both of these messages apparently were sent before Washington learned that Israel was responsible for the attack.
Neither of the messages had any impact on actions taken by the Sixth Fleet.
The JCS message would have been received by Vice Admiral martin about the same time he received the DAO Tel Aviv message reporting Israeli responsibility for the attack.
Secretary of Defense authorization to use force would have been received by Vice Admiral martin about fifteen minutes after he ordered recall 34 At 5:29 PeM., of the planes sent to defend Liberty. almost an Pedi ae ter Vice Admiral Martin had recalled his planes, JCS sent a message rescinding authorization to use force to defend Liberty.
Vice Admiral Martin acted entirely on his own authority, basing his decisions on CINCUSNAVEUR standing peacetime rules of engagement. *4under Other tactical circumstances late arrival of such messages could seriously complicate crisis management efforts, prompting new fighting after initial disengagement. vice Admiral martin may have received verbal orders to recall his planes before the JCS message rescinding authorization to use force was sent, but the author could find no evidence of this.
The destroyers rendezvoused with Liberty early on June 9, and later that morning helicopters from America began evacuating Liberty's wounded.
In the case of the Liberty in the Mediterranean in June as an example, I thought the Liberty had been attacked by Soviet forces.
Thank goodness, our carrier commanders did not launch immediately against the Soviet forces who were operating in the Mediterranean at the time.
Thank goodness, we did not launch against the Egyptians We took time to find out it was the Israelis.
Jonathan T Howe, Multicrises: Sea Power and Global Politics in the Missile Age (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1971), 102.
COMSIXTHFLT and CTF 60 took no actions against Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean.
Vice Admiral Donald D Engen, Commanding Officer of America in 1967, states that the Sixth Fleet knew the Soviets could not have conducted the attack because there were no Soviet aircraft or naval vessels in the vicinity of Liberty.
Rear Admiral Wylie states that there was no concern at CINCUSNAVEUR that the Soviets had conducted the attack, and Admiral Horacio Rivero states that there was no concern on the CNO's staff that the Soviets had conducted the attack.
In retrospect, given McNamara's inaccurate suspicions as to who had attacked Liberty, it is perhaps fortunate that the Secretary of Defense was not able to directly control Sixth Fleet actions during the incident.
Officials in Washington made an important contribution to preventing the Liberty incident from escalating to a superpower confrontation by notifying the Soviet Union of the attack and the United States response to it.
In his memoirs, 8 vice Admiral Donald D Engen, letter to author, March 21, 1988; Rear Admiral Wylie, letter to author, March 28, 1988; Admiral Rivero, letter to author, March 10, 1988.
There was a possibility that the incident might lead to even greater misfortune, and it was precisely to avoid further confusion and tragedy that I sent a message to Chairman Kosygin on the hot line.
I told him exactly what had happened and advised him that carrier aircraft were on their way to the scene to investigate.
I wanted him to know, I said, that investigation was the sole purpose of these flights, and I hoped he would inform the proper parties.
Kosygin replied that our message had been received and the informafion had been relayed immediately to the Egyptians.
President Johnson somewhat distorted the mission of the planes that had been sent to assist Liberty--they were fully armed and had been ordered to defend her, rather than just investigate.
Portraying their mission as investigation was probably intended to allay Soviet and Egyptian concerns.
The President's use of the hot line was important because Sixth Fleet actions in support of Liberty--flying attack Planes and fighters into a war zone, close to Egyptian territory--could have been misperceived as imminent United States intervention in the war.
Israel officially claimed that it had “erroneously” attacked Liberty believing that it was an Egyptian vessel, and apologized for the attack.
In June 1968 Israel paid $3. million to the families of those killed, in April 1969 paid $3. million to the men wounded in the attack, and in December 1980 agreed to pay $6 million for damage to the Ship.
Although these factors prevented political-level leaders from exercising direct control over Sixth Fleet actions, decoupling did not occur.
The actions ordered by Vice Admiral Martin were restrained and anticipated the desires of top-level officials in Washington.
Thus, although interactions were stratified during the incident--evolving independently at the political and tactical levels--they were not decoupled.
Although tactical-level interaction did not become decoupled in the Liberty incident, the case does shed light on three escalation-inhibiting factors.
First, by fully complying with with the standing rules of engagement and limiting his actions to those necessary to defend Liberty, the on-scene commander contributed to avoiding an unnecessary clash with Soviet or Egyptian forces.
The last two factors emphasize the importance of communications among the parties to a crisis for avoiding misperception and escalation.
Vice Admiral Martin carefully limited the Sixth Fleet response to the attack and the President used the hot line to prevent misperceptions from arising.
The Israeli attack on Liberty was itself an inadvertent military incident, momentarily complicating United States crisis management efforts in the Middle East War, but no further incidents occurred durins the Sixth Fleet's wageocka to the attack.
There was little tension between political and nahi Cung ""Coan Tadeo tices because the incident was over before significant diplomatic activity--other than hot line messages--could begin.
The limitations that Vice Admiral Martin placed on his forces supported United States political objectives in the crisis.
There was no tension between performance of crisis missions and maintaining readiness to perform wartime missions because the Sixth Fleet response to the attack was small-scale and of short duration.
The 1968 Seizure of the Pueblo USS Pueblo was launched in 1944 as FP-344, a light cargo ship in service with the Army Transportation Corps, and was mothballed in 1954.
The ship was delivered to the Navy in 1966, renamed Pueblo, underwent extensive conversion for its new duties, and was commissioned on May Tet 1967.
Pueblo's primary mission, like that of Liberty, was collection of electronic and communications intelligence, although it was designated an environmental research ship with the cover of conducting oceanographic and communications research.
The crew consisted of six officers, seventy-five enlisted men, and two civilian oceanographers.
Armament was two .50calibre machine guns--installed in the wake of the Liberty incident--which had little value for self-defense.
In 1968 detente had not yet lessened Soviet-American Cold War tensions, the United States was deeply involved in the Vietnam War, and the protest movement against the war was rapidly gaining momentum.
The international setting on the Korean Peninsula was dominated by North Korean hostility to the governments of South Korea and the United States.
Although an uneasy truce had been in effect on the Peninsula since the armistice of July 1953, numerous armed clashes had occurred near the demilitarized zone and in South Korean waters due to North Korean efforts to infiltrate agents into the South.
Political and military tensions had mitvoniasienttoant— ly on the Korean Peninsula in the two weeks before Pueblo arrived on station as the North Koreans renewed talk of uniting the Peninsula militarily.
North Korea also stepped up its propaganda claims of South Korean and American provocations against the North, and warned that military action would be taken against incursions into its territorial waters.
This incident further increased tensions on the Peninsula, bringing North and South Korea to the brink of a military confrontation.
CINCPAC then forwarded the proposal to the Joint Reconnaissance Center.
The Joint Reconnaissance Center served JCS as the central coordination center for peacetime reconnaissance and surveillance missions.
JRC passed the proposal to the Defense Intelligence Agency for a final evaluation of the proposal and threat assessment.
JRC added Pueblo's mission proposal to hundreds of others in the ""Monthly Reconnaissance Schedule, January 1968,” which was reviewed by the military services, Central Intelligence Agency , National Security Agency , and the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research.
After this review, which generated no objections to the minimal risk assessment, the Monthly Reconnaissance Schedule was submitted to the Joint oneeise.
On this eccasion the boceatitesis Deputies, acting on behalf of the Chiefs, actually approved the schedule.
On December 29, 1967, Nitze approved the Monthly Reconnaissance Schedule, including Pueblo's apparently routine mission.
Similar surveillance missions conducted off the coasts of the Soviet Union and China were often subjected to harassment, but had never been attacked.
North Korea had not reacted to previous surveillance missions and had a very small navy, so the danger to Pueblo was assessed as minimal.
United States military and intelligence officials believed that North Korea would not attack a United States vessel in international waters.
A mission off the coast of North Korea was selected for Pueblo's first operation because it appeared to be a relatively safe way to train an inexperienced crew for more demanding and dangerous missions off China and the Soviet Union.
Admiral John J Hyland, then CINCPACFLT, has aptly described Pueblo'’s first mission as a “shakedown"" voyage.
Additionally, there were no contingency plans for support of Pueblo in an emergency.
The patrol boat was soon joined by three P-4 torpedo boats and Pueblo was overflown by North Korean Mig jet fighters.
Pueblo started heading for sea, but at 1:27 P.M. was fired on by the SO-1 and the P-4's.
In response to a signal to ""Follow me"" from the SO-1, Pueblo started into Wonsan harbor.
After once attempting to stop, which drew a barrage of fire that caused the only death in the incident, Pueblo was ordered to halt and at 2:32 P.M. was boarded and seized by the North Koreans.
Pueblo entered Wonsan, and at 8:30 P.M. moored to a pier in the Haebore°’ Pueblo was in communications with the United States Naval Communications Station at Kamiseya, Japan over high frequency encrypted radioteletype at the time of the attack.
At the time of the attack, however, Pueblo was unable to use this circuit due to a frequency shift that was in progress, degrading the net.
These operational reports, designated ""OPREP-3"" reports in Sia"" joint operational reporting system, were both sent by Pueblo in the “PINNACLE"" category--reserved for emergencies and other serious matters of “national level"" interest.
OPREP-3 PINNACLE reports were automatically sent to every level ina unit's operational chain of command, including the National Military Command Center, JCS, and the White House.
Additionally, Pueblo's radiomen sent informal real-time status reports to Kamiseya over radioteletype until the ship was boarded.
Such informal messages were known as ""operator chatter” and had to be put into official messages by Kamiseya before commands not listening to Pueblo directly could receive them.
The message was relayed by Kamiseya and received by the COMNAVFORJAPAN duty officer twenty-three minutes after it was sent.
In this message Pueblo reported that the North Koreans had ordered the ship to follow them and were preparing to board Pueblo.
Kamiseya immediately relayed this message to COMNAVFORJAPAN, where the duty officer received it only four minutes after itewas sent by Pueblo.
This was the message that served as a trigger--alerting the chain of command that there was a genuine emergency in the Sea of Japan.
The COMNAVFORJAPAN staff began notifying other commands of the emergency.
At:1:45 P.M., twenty-seven Minutes after Pueblo sent the second OPREP-3 PINNACLE, Rear Admiral Frank L Johnson, Commander United States Naval Forces Japan, was notified in Tokyo by telephone of the emergency.
At 1:53 P.M., thirty-five minutes after Pueblo sent the second OPREP-3 PINNACLE, the duty officer at Fifth Air Force headquarters was notified via secure telephone of the. emergency. /° 69 rhid. rpid.
Additionally, COMNAVFORJAPAN sent several “CRITIC” messages containing Pueblo's operator chatter describing the North Korean attack.
At the time, CRITIC was the highest priority of message, reserved for strategic warning and the alerting of National Command Authority of attacks on United States forces.
As this chronology shows, the Navy communications system was able to maintain connectivity between Pueblo and the radio station at Kamiseya, but experienced serious delays in relaying time-critical Messages to the commanders that needed them.
This is certainly plausible, and means that he would have received Pueblo’s reports of the attack real-time.
Admiral Bringle, then in the Tonkin Gulf on USS Kitty Hawk , has stated that his radiomen also monitored Pueblo’s operator ~ ‘chatter, and that he ordered Enterprise into the Sea of Japan in response to Pueblo'’s operator chatter.
Admiral Bringle was probably receiving COMNAVFORJAPAN's CRITIC messages relaying the Operator chatter.
Admiral Sharp, who was visiting Admiral Bringle on Kitty Hawk, has stated that shortly after 5:00 P.M. he and Admiral Bringle received the CRITIC messages forwarding Pueblo's operator chatter.
Second, about eighteen minutes after it was sent by Pueblo, Kaniseya retransmitted the second OPREP-3 PINNACLE as a CRITIC message to DIA, NSA, JCS and other commands.
JCS Chairman General Earle G Wheeler was notified of the message at 12:03 A.M., and Secretary of Defense McNamara was notified about twenty minutes later. the White House received the CRITIC at 11:43 P.M. (earlier than JCS), and Situation Room watch officers began notifying National Security Advisor Walt W Rostow and other top officials of the emergency.
Meanwhile, Pueblo had been boarded and seized by the North Koreans at 11:35 P.M. , and would enter Wonsan at 2:45 A.M. the significance of this chronology is that by the time top-level officials had been notified of the emergency, it was too late to take action to prevent seizure of the ship.
United States forces in the Far East did not respond to Pueblo's calls for assistance in time to prevent the ship from being captured by North Korea.
The Fifth Air Force had seven F-d fighter-bombers on alert in South Korea, but were configured for nuclear weapons.
Commander Fifth Air Force also ordered planes dispatched from Okinawa, where there were eighteen fighter-bombers.
Two F-105s, armed only with 20 millimeter cannon to save time, were launched at 4:11 P.M., but could not reach Pueblo before dark because they had to land and refuel in South Korea.
Enterprise carried a total of fifty-nine fighter and attack aircraft , thirty-five of which were operational on January 23.
Epes, Commander Task Group 77. , received Pueblo's first OPREP-3 PINNACLE at 2:30 P.M., and received Pueblo's second OPREP-3 PINNACLE and the initial CRITIC messages eight minutes later.
That is almost three hours after Pueblo was boarded and twenty-five minutes after it reached the mouth of Wonsan Harbor.
If COMNAVFORJAPAN had requested support from Enterprise as soon as Pueblo'‘s first OPREP-3 PINNACLE was received at 1:21 P.M., Enterprise probably would have been able to place attack aircraft over Pueblo before the ship entered Wonsan.
Enterprise and Truxton received and executed this message at 3:50 P.M., Vice Admiral Lee, interview by author, February 5, 1988.
A United States navy destroyer was also ordered to the scene, but could not arrive until the next day, well after Pueblo was tied up in Wonsan.
First, there were no contingency plans to support Pueblo in the event of an attack, and no air or naval forces were designated to provide such support.
United States forces were unprepared to provide quick-reaction support to Pueblo when she was attacked.
Aircraft that were not ready for a strike mission would have required one to two hours for fueling and arming and pilot briefings before they could even take off.
The nearest United States warships would have required at. least eighteen hours to reach Pueblo.
The second reason for the lack of an effective response was that Air Force and navy commanders in the Far East concluded that they would not be able to provide adequate forces to support Pueblo prior to the ship entering Wonsan Harbor, or prior to darkness, when providing air 84 support would be extremely difficult.
When these factors were assessed against actual times of events associated with the incident, time of receipt of the information that the ship was under attack, and force response time, it was apparent to all levels of command that the Pueblo could not be retrieved by any action prior to the time that the ship entered Wonsan Harbor.
The third factor that inhibited an immediate response was the presence of large numbers of North Korean air force Mig fighters and the close proximity of North Korean surfaceto-air missile sites around Wonsan.
The ship had reported Migs overhead before being captured, indicating that the North Korean air force had been alerted to provide air cover.
It might also have been necessary to strike North Korean surface-to-air missile sites in order to protect the attack aircraft and their fighter escort.
Similarly, any Navy warships sent to rescue Pueblo would have required substantial air cover.
United States military commanders thus believed that once Pueblo had been seized, any response would have to be relatively largescale and include a strong fighter escort for the strike force.
Their judgement was that the North Koreans would not be cowed by only a few attack aircraft, which would be relatively easy to shoot aoa l The perception that a large-scale response was called for further increased the time required to mount a response, which in turn reinforced the view that there was not sufficient time to respond before Pueblo was tied up in Wonsan.
Rules of engagement and standing orders did not inhibit United States commanders from providing support to Pueblo prior to the ship entering Wonsan.
At the time of the attack by the North Korean naval units, the United States had the historic right-codified internationally by Article 51 of the United Nations Charter~--to take any action in self-defense proportionate to the attack and necessary to protect the ship.
Whatever military steps the United States could have taken within these limits from the air or on the sea to prevent the capture of the USS Pueblo would have been fully justified.
There were no rules eof engagement limiting going to the aid of Pueblo during this time.
In 1955 President Eisenhower had approved a national Security Council staff proposal that a distinction be drawn between self-defense (including hot pursuit for self-defense) and reprisals.
Military commanders were authorized to use force in self-defense, including hot pursuit into the airspace or territorial waters of other nations under certain circumstances.
But only the President could order reprisals, generally considered to be any retaliatory attacks against the 94 territory of another country.
An effective rescue mission probably could not have been carried out without suppressing North Korean air and coastal defenses, and there would have been a high risk of weapons directed against North Korean haval vessels inadvertently impacting ashore.
Moorer, Navy commanders had to get authorization from higher authority before taking military M The Navy report to the action against North Korea.
Special Siam tees that investigated the incident states that ""Combat action after Pueblo arrived in the harbor could be viewed as retaliatory in nature, requiring approval of 99 Evidently, this was precisely the view higher authority."" held by Navy commanders in the Pacific.
General Wheeler testified that on the morning of January 23, he received a “hold” order from “higher authority,” which could only be the Secretary of Defense and the President.
Washington time (12:25 A.M. the next morning in the Sea of Japan, four hours ee, tied up in Wonsan), and reiterated the verbal order with a message that evening.
Since higher authority in Washington had apparently not established a hold order on our forces until 0025 on the 24th of January, Korea time (10:25 Washington time on the 23rd), our operational commanders were apparently not precluded from exercising their own judgement in respect to providing some assistance to the Pueblo.
Thus, it would appear that these operational commanders had both the authority and the opportunity fg act 1f they had been able to do so immediately.
The two qualifications that must be placed in this assessment are, first, that United States forces were not authorized to engage North Korean forces inside North Korean territorial waters, and, second, that military actions taken after Pueblo was inside the North Korean port of Wonsan would have constituted reprisals, thus requiring approval of the President.
These restrictions essentially halted United States military action in support of Pueblo from 4:45 P.M. onward.
President Johnson and his advisors considered a wide range of military options, but quickly decided that none of them were feasible.
McNamara’s excuse was ‘We've already got one Ree The President decided against war, we don’t need two'.” presenting an ultimatum to North Korea.
President Johnson's primary concern was for the safe return of the crew, and he was also reluctant to become | involved in a second conflict while deeply engaged in Vietnam.
As a political gesture President Johnson ordered twenty-two Air Force reserve squadrons and six Navy reserve squadrons called up to active duty.
At the height of the buildup, the Navy had over eighteen warships in the Sea of Japan, including three aircraft carriers, two cruisers, and fourteen destroyers.
This show of force had no apparent effect on the North Koreans, who kept their air and naval forces close to shore--well clear of the United States Seventh Fleet.
The Soviet Union, on the other hand, reacted to the United States naval presence with vitriolic anti-American propaganda and harassment of the carrier task groups.
Initially, five Soviet ships, including three destroyers, an intelligence collection ship , and an naval research ship, trailed the United States carriers.
On February 4, Soviet Tu-16 Badger bombers began intense surveillance of the United States carriers and repeatedly buzzed them at low altitude.
This was the first instance of Soviet missile-armed aircraft conducting simulated strikes against United States warships during a period of international tension.
On February 6 a Soviet anti-carrier group, consisting of two Kynda-class cruisers, and four destroyers, took station in the Sea of Japan just north of the DMZ off the coast of North Korea-~a clear signal that the Soviet Union would oppose United States military action against North Korea.
On February 17 a Soviet destroyer and the research ship harassed the United States formation by conducting dangerous maneuvers violating the rules of the roaa.
Soviet simulated anti-carrier strikes and harassment significantly increased tensions in the Sea of Japan.
Interestingly, Soviet harassment of United States naval forces in the Sea of Japan commenced after the United States began discussion with North Korea in Panmunjon on Pueblo.
Admiral Hyland and Admiral Bringle state that there were no serious incidents between United States and Soviet naval forces in the Sea of Japan during this period.
Admiral Hyland, letter to author, March 24, 1988; Admiral Bringle, letter to author, March 23, 1988.
It is not clear, however, exactly what the Soviets were attempting to signal.
The most likely Soviet intentions in 1968 were to deter the United States from taking military action against North Korea, to. neutralize United States coercive threats during the talks with North Korea, and to demonstrate opposition to the United States naval presence close to the Soviet Union in the Sea of Japan.
That in 1968 and 1973 the Soviets did not commence simulated anti-carrier attacks until after tensions had started to ease does not mean that such Soviet behavior is not dangerous from a crisis management perspective.
A tense and dangerous situation can thus Spisicn at sea even while United States leaders perceive that the crisis has peaked and the danger of an armed clash has eased.
Other than the symbolic military actions described above, the United states limited its response to protests and negotiations for the release of Pueblo's crew.
The crew was imprisoned near Pyongyang, where for eleven months they were exploited for anti-American propaganda and subjected to torture and brutal treatment.
On December 23, 1968 the United States signed a confession that the Pueblo had intruded into North Korean waters--a confession it immediately repudiated verbally--and the crew of the Pueblo was released in Panmunjom.
North Korea continued its harassment of the South Korean fishing fleet, seizing at least sixteen South Korean fishing boats in 1968.
Emergency messages from Pueblo required over an hour to reach Washington and United States military commanders in the Pacific.
On the other hand, although United States military commanders had authority to take military action in support of Pueblo, they decided not to do so.
President Johnson was not confronted with having to halt combat operations or approve them after ne none eon initiated.
Therefore, although the President did not have direct control over the initial response to the North Korean attack on Pueblo, United States forces acted essentially as he would have wanted them to act under the circumstances.
United States military commanders were reluctant to mount a response that would have been excessively vulnerable to North Korean attacks.
Loss of United States aircraft sent to defend Pueblo almost certainly would have generated escalatory pressures, so in this instance military prudence led to tactical decisions that supported crisis management objectives.
United States military commanders complied with the restrictions imposed on military operations by the standing peacetime rules of engagement, barring their forces from attacking North Korean forces inside North Korean territorial waters and airspace, and not ordering actions that would have constituted reprisals against North Rowers.
The guidance contained in the peacetime rules of engagement may or may not have been appropriate to the specific circumstances, but United States military commanders were careful to comply with that guidance.
Neither problem appears to have been arisen in the Pueblo incident, probably due to the relatively passive United States response to the North Korean provocation.
North Korea succeeded in achieving a fait accompli, effectively limiting United States options to settling on North Korean terms. the passive United States response annoyed the South Koreans, but this arose from correct perceptions rather than from misperceptions.
It apparently had little impact on long-term United States relations with South Korea.
There were essentially no tensions between political and military considerations.
All levels in the chain of command agreed that effective military action could not be taken before Pueblo entered Wonsan.
There was disagreement between military and civilian officials over whether or not reprisals should be taken against North Korea, and over whether or not if an effort should be made to recover the ship by force.
United States military commanders in the Far East had ample authority to take military action without having to seek permission from higher authorities so long as Pueblo remained in international waters.
The “hold” order issued to the military came well after commanders in the Far East had decided against taking immediate military action, and served only to avoid further incidents with North Korean forces while Washington weighed reprisal options.
There was some tension between performance of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions.
The limited time available for taking action meant that the initial response to the North Korean attack on Pueblo had to be made with United States forces in and around Japan and segeh Korea.
Commander Fifth Air Force did not hesitate to order these planes reconfigured for conventional ordnance.
The heavy commitment of United States forces in Vietnam limited the options available to United States military commanders and made the President and Secretary of Defense reluctant to take action against North Korea that could result in another military conflict.
The 1987 Attack on the Stark USS Stark was launched in 1980 and commissioned in 1982.
Antiaircraft armament consists of Standard SM-1 25-mile range missiles fired from a MK 13 launcher, a 76 millimeter MK 75 gun, and a 20 millimeter MK 16 close-in weapon system for defense against anti-ship missiles.
With these weapons and the SPS-49 air search radar, naval tactical data system , tactical data link, MK 92 fire control system, SLQ-32 electronic warfare system, and chaff launchers, Stark is well-armed for defense against air threats--particularly anti-ship cruise missiles.
With its modern systems for surveillance and self-defense, Stark was a good choice for patrol duties in the Persian Gulf.
The Iran-Iraq War dominated the international situation in the Persian Gulf in May 1987.
Iran repelled the Iraqi assault and the war stagnated along the Shatt al-Arab estuary.
Iran and Iraq both frequently attacked oil facilities--including oil platforms and shipping terminals in the Persian Gulf--in an effort at crippling each other's economies.
During the first three years of the war, Iraq conducted sporadic attacks on shipping in the vicinity of Iranian ports and oil terminals.
In retaliation for Iraqi attacks on oil facilities, Iran was stopping and boarding tankers entering the Persian Gulf to verify that their destination was not Iraq.
The shipping war escalated in May 1984 with the first Iranian attacks on commercial shipping in the Persian Gulf.
Iraq also escalated its attacks on shipping in 1984, conducting attacks more frequently and covering more of the Persian Gulf.
Mirage fighters fired Exocet missiles at whatever contacts they picked up on radar without attempting to identify their nationality--hitting ships belonging to Iraq's allies on more than one occasion.
Iran and Iraq further intensified their anti-shipping campaigns in 1986, conducting twice as many attacks as in 1985.
Iran was viewed as the primary threat due to its hostility to the United States and to Arab nations siding with Iraq.
United States Navy ships began escorting American-flag merchant ships in the Persian Gulf after Iran began attacking shipping in 1984.
In the spring of 1987 the United States, responding to a request from Kuwait for assistance in countering an Iranian campaign against Kuwaiti shipping, was making final plans for reflagging and escorting Kuwaiti tankers.
Their presence was intended to show the flag, demonstrating United States resolve to keep the sea lanes open and deterring Iran from attacking American shipping.
To avoid inadvertently shooting down any of the many friendly aircraft over the Gulf, the rules of engagement required Navy ships to radio warnings to approaching planes and carefully assess their actions for indications of hostile intent before firing.
Prior to the Stark incident, those procedures had appeared sufficient to avert possible attacks on United States Navy ships while avoiding incidents with civilian aircraft.
United States Navy ships were warnea that the primary danger to them was inadvertent attacks, and were told that ete y were to regard all Iranian and Iraqi aircraft as potentially hostile.
Stark had been briefed on the Persian Gulf rules of engagement on February 28, 1987, just prior to joining the Middle East Force.
The report of the investigation into 112, ear Admiral Grant Sharp, “Formal Investigation Into the Circumstances Surrounding the Attack on the USS Stark on 17 May 1987,"" letter serial no.
The Rules of Engagement that were in existence on 17 May 1987 were sufficient to enable Stark to properly warn the Iraqi aircraft, in a timely manner, of the presence of a United States warship; and, if the warning was not heeded, the Rules of Engagement were sufficient to enable Stark to defend herself against hostile intent and ippinent danger without absorbing the first hit.
Stark was authorized to use force in anticipatory selfdefense against any aircraft that demonstrated hostile intent by flying an apparent anti-ship attack profile and failing to respond to radio warnings to remain clear.
Iraqi aircraft were routinely detected on antishipping flights, but usually did not provoke a reaction by United States Navy ships because the Trddis' were regarded as nonhostile and their targets were inside the Iranian Exclusion Zone--well away from United States Navy patrol areas.
Middle East Force had warned on May 14 and 16, 1987, that Iraqi planes were conducting anti-shipping strikes in the central Persian Gulf (the area in which Stark was operating), creating an increased danger of indiscriminate attacks.
Stark had received these messages and was thus fully appraised of the threat.
On May 17, 1987, Stark was patrolling the central Persian Gulf about eighty-five miles northeast of Bahrain, twelve miles outside the Iranian Exclusion Zone.
Stark was informed that a United States Air Force AWACS radar plane had aekectes an Iraqi aircraft two hundred miles from the ship heading southeast along the coast of Saudi Arabia.
Stark picked up the plane on air search radar when it was seventy miles away and detected the Mirage's radar in the search mode.
The near miss occurred in 1986 when an Iraqi missile struck a ship about six miles from the destroyer USS John Hancock.
At 9:07 P.M. the Mirage launched an Exocet missile from a range of about twenty-two miles.
A minute later the plane launched a second Exocet missile at a range of about fifteen miles.
Stark was sending a second warning to the Iraqi plane when the second missile was launched.
Stark's electronic warfare system detected the homing radars on the Exocet missiles, but they were misidentified as the Mirage's radar ina fire control mode.
The Tactical Action Officer ordered initial defensive actions after the missiles were launched, but the response was too late to be effective.
First detection of the missiles was a sighting by a lookout, who did not recognize them as missiles and sound a warning until seconds before they struck.
About twenty seconds later the gecond missile eee the ship near where the first had struck, exploding just inside the ship.
No United States ships or aircraft attempted to engage the Iraqi plane before the attack and none were able to engage it after the attack.
The Urited States delivered a formal diplomatic protest to Iraq and demanded a full explanation for the attack.
Reagan Administration spokesmen described the incident as an accident, a case of mistaken identity.
The United States also stated that it expected an apology and compensation for the men who died and the damage to the ship.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff revised the rules of engagement for Middle East Force ships, requiring radio warnings and defensive measures be taken at longer ranges, and emphasizing that all aircraft approaching United States Navy ships must be treated as potentially hostile.
Iraqi spokesmen stated that the pilot believed he was attacking an Iranian ship and had not heard the warnings broadcast by Stark.
Iraq also claimed Stark had been ten miles inside the Iranian Exclusion Zone, a charge the United States refuted.
Iraq and the United States later reached an agreement on measures to prevent inadvertent attacks on United States Navy ships, but incidents continued to occur in which United States ships had to warn off Iraqi aircraft.
In some cases Iraqi planes veered away only seconds before they would have been shot down.
Findings This section will review the 1987 attack on Stark to answer the four research questions.
The identity of the attacking aircraft was known well before the attack, and military commanders at the scene quickly concluded that the attack had been inadvertent.
No effort was made to shoot down the Iraqi plane because no United States forces were in a position to do so.
The only sense in which actions at the tactical level failed to support national policy was that Stark failed to take defensive actions authorized under the rules of engagement.
Because the attacking aircraft was known to have been Iraqi, there was no question that Iran might have been responsible for the attack on Stark.
Without such intelligence, United States commanders in the Persian Gulf probably would have suspected that Iran had conducted the attack.
Circumstantial evidence pointing to Iranian complicity and lack of an Iraqi admission of responsibility could well have led to the President ordering retaliatory attacks on Iranian forces or bases.
It appears that inadvertent escalation would be more likely when intelligence is incomplete and ambiguous, supporting worst-case assessments of the nature and implications of an attack on United States forces.
For example, onscene commanders could conclude that full-scale attacks on United States forces at the scene of the crisis will soon follow, placing a premium on preempting the expected enemy attack.
Under certain circumstances on-scene commanders might have authority to preempt without having to seek permission from higher authority.
Neither of these problems arose after the attack on Stark, but the attack itself was an inadvertent military incident.
The attack on Stark illustrates the danger of inadvertent military incidents —— United States naval forces are operating in close proximity to hostilities.
United States Navy ships in the Persian Gulf had ample authority under the rules of engagement to use force in self-defense or anticipatory selfdefense.
Nevertheless, Navy commanders in the Persian Gulf had been placed in a complex and dangerous tactical environment.
There was great risk of United States ships being attacked inadvertently or deliberately, and equally great risk of political embarrassment to the United States if civilian of friendly military aircraft were shot down.
Rules of engagement cannot eliminate the dangers and risks inherent in such an environment, they can, at best, reduce the likelihood of incidents with undesirable political or military consequences.
Circumstances and Motives Comparing the circumstances in which the four incidents occurred and the possible motives of the attackers will shed further light on the nature of peacetimes attacks on United States Navy ships.
Circumstances of Peacetime Attacks There are important similarities in the international circumstances of the attacks.
In all four cases some form of conflict, tensions, or rivalry among the major powers structured the environment and affected American interests sufficiently to compel limited United States involvement.
In three cases a local armed conflict was being fought at the time of the incident.
In the Pueblo case an intense ideological and political rivalry, held in check only by an uneasy military armistice, had recently escalated to a high level of tension--accompanied by a series of military clashes and a significant rise in casualties.
As the case studies show, such factors are not always effective in preventing peacetime attacks on Navy ships.
The situation was politically and militarily complex in all four cases--the United States had interests compelling it to become involved in the conflicts, but other interests and political constraints restrained the United States from direct military intervention.
Thus, naval forces were employed to pursue limited political-military objectives.
The missions being conducted by the United States Navy ships also varied considerably.
In three of the cases the ships were on an intelligence collection mission (Tonkin Gulf, Liberty, and Pueblo), and in the remaining case the ship was on a surveillance mission.
In two of the cases the missions had no important political objectives and were ordered for military purposes.
The political implications of the naval missions in the four cases also varied.
Two of the missions (Liberty and Pueblo) were viewed as nominally non-political, but in fact had significant latent or inadvertent political impact.
If one accepts the theory that the Israeli attack on Liberty was deliberate, then it is possible that the unannounced presence of Liberty off the Sinai sent an inadvertent signal of retrenchment to Israel-symbolizing opposition to unrestrained Israeli offensives against neighboring Arab countries, particularly new offensive action against Syria.
Pueblo appears to have sent an inadvertent signal of hostility to North Korea, symbolizing support for South Korean offensive action against the North.
Two of the missions had definite political purposes in addition to important military functions.
Stark had the political purposes of demonstrating United States support for the Persian Gulf states opposed to Iran , and supporting the principle of freedom of navigation in the international waters of the Persian Gulf.
These two cases clearly show the politicalmilitary nature of military actions taken during crises.
Motives for the Attacks The motives of the perpetrators of the attacks in most cases cannot be ascertained with certainty, but sufficient evidence is available to postulate reasonably plausible motives.
Two of the attacks were motivated by self-defense, defense of territorial waters, or retaliation for hostile acts believed to have involved the ship that was attacked.
However, in neither case had the ship committed the hostile acts of which it wishacunsein The other two attacks were portrayed as accidents that resulted from mistaken identity.
Although allegations have been made to the contrary, none of these four cases can be Genciated weiky established as having been deliberate unprovoked aggression against a warship known by the attacker to belong to the United States and to be on routine operations in international waters.
North Vietnam apparently perceived Maddox as having participated in or supported South Vietnamese raids that had taken place nearby immediately before a destroyer arrived.
Since it was Pueblo's first mission, North Korea probably had no way of knowing that Pueblo would be a lucrative target.
The political situation on the Korean Peninsula in early 1968 and the pattern of North Korean hostility toward the United States suggest that Pueblo's mission probably was perceived by the North Koreans.
North Korea had been pursuing an aggressive campaign of provocations against the South, raising tensions nearly to the crisis level, and had been warning South Korea and the United States against violating North Korean territorial waters.
The North Koreans were spoiling for a fight and were particularly sensitive about the presence of United States aircraft and vessels off its coast.
North Korea may have misperceived Pueblo to be an immediate threat to North Korean territory or territorial waters (perhaps landing South Korean saboteurs or agents in retaliation for North Korean attacks on the South), or as a deliberate political provocation in response to the North Korean propaganda campaign.
Israel claimed Liberty was mistaken for the Egyptian transport El Quisir, and Iraq claimed Stark was mistaken for a civilian tanker headed for an Iranian port.
The danger of United States ships accidently being caught in the fighting was recognized in the Liberty and Stark cases, as evidenced by the precautions that were taken.
In the Liberty case the threat of indiscriminate attacks-Geliberate attacks launched without efforts to identify the target--appears to have ee underestimated, with the result that Liberty was inadequately protected against such a threat.
In the Stark case the rules of engagement authorized measures to defend against indiscriminate attacks and Middle East Force ships had been warned of the danger of indiscriminate attacks.
Thus, the threat of indiscriminate attacks must be regarded as everpresent when United States ships must operate in the vicinity of hostilities.
This underscores the danger of accidental or indiscriminate attacks in peacetime, and warns against assuming that friendly nations can be relied upon to avoid United States ships or tacitly provide them a shield.
These incidents also warn against reliance on the imaginary lines prominently displayed on charts--the limits of territorial waters, exclusion zones, or war zones~-as providing protection against attacks.
Precise navigation is a luxury often foregone, either deliberately or inadvertently, in the heat of battle.
Questions were raised in the aftermath of the attacks on Liberty and Stark about whether they were, in fact, accidental.
From a purely military perspective the attack was a rational action, but the political-rationale for a deliberate attack is weak.
Why in this one instance it was necessary to attack a United States ship rather to just ignore United States pressure is not clear.
There is insufficient evidence to resolve the controversy over the Liberty incident.
The Israelis insist to this day that the attack was an accident, and have given an elaborate scenario explaining how it occurrea.
In 1956, photographs taken by U-2 reconnaissance planes had alerted President Eisenhower to British, French, and Israeli. military and naval moves, enabling him to exert strong pressure on the three nations to abandon their plan to seize the Suez Canal early in the operation.
Liberty could have been viewed by the Israelis as giving President Johnson the same advantage in 1967.
In an interview with the author, Arthur C Lundahl, Director of the CIA's National Photographic Intelligence Center in 1956, confirmed that U-2s had monitored the crisis.
The arguments given by Israel to support their claim of mistaken identity (Claims that Liberty was not flying a United States flag, did not have United States hull markings, and was moving at over thirty knots) can be dismissed as an effort to cover a poor showing by the Israeli Defense Forces.
The Stark incident appears to be a clear-cut case of indiscriminate attack, but allegations have been made that it too was deliberate.
Of the charges raised in the three incidents, this one is least plausible and least supported by evidence.
At the time Israel and Britain were allies in the Suez Crisis, and Crane was on patrol as part of their campaign against Egypt.
During the 1973 Yom Kippur War, Israeli Navy missile boats accidently struck Greek, Japanese, and Soviet merchant ships with Gabriel anti-ship missiles while attempting to attack Syrian naval vessels.
Thus, the Israelis launched indiscriminate attacks in the 1956, 1967, and 1973 wars, apparently due to permissive rules of engagement and lax identification requirements. -In the 1956 and 1967 wars, the Israeli Air Force appeared to be poorly trained and organized for war at sea, particularly in the areas of ship recognition training for pilots and intelligence support for maritime operations.
Iraqi leaders would have had to have been extremely ill-informed of United States domestic political opinion, which was sceptical of the Navy role in the Gulf to begin with, in order to think that such an attack--~easily identified as Iraqi~--would have provoked a greater role in the Gulf.
If anything, the attack influenced the United States aucdislion to delay the start of convoying of Kuwaiti tankers.
The first set of motives, those for the attacks the perpetrators claimed they had thought they were launching, are all routine wartime reasons for attacking ships.
As these two incidents show, indiscriminate attacks are motivated by common wartime political-military objectives.
This appears to have been the motive for indiscriminate attacks in the Liberty and Stark incidents--neither Israel nor Iraq were motivated to identify their targets before striking.
Given delegation of decisionmaking authority, these motives may come into play at low levels in the chain of command even when national policy is one of restraint and caution.
Indiscriminate attacks are most likely when armed forces equipped with powerful modern weapons have only rudimentary. tactical training, as in the case of Iraq, but can also occur when well-trained forces have permissive rules of engagement that emphasize military expediency, as in the case of Israel.
The second set of motives for the two attacks are those that would have prompted deliberate attacks on ships known to-‘have been United States Navy.
Similar motives could well prompt deliberate attacks on United States naval vessels in future crises.
A wide range of military and political motives for attacking ships in wartime could create tactical circumstances in which United States Navy ships are indiscriminately or accidently attacked.
Belligerents in a local conflict could also have motives for deliberately attacking United States ships near the scene of fighting.
Conclusion This chapter presented the third phase of the research design, a structured focused comparison of four cases in which United States Navy ships were attacked during peacetime or crisis operations.
Four research questions, addressing the decoupling of stratified interactions, stratified escalation dynamics, misperceptions, and political-military tensions, were asked in each of the cases.
The next chapter integrates the findings from all three phases of the research design and from them derives contingent generalizations on the theory of stratified interaction.
That is, it must be capable of offering differentiated explanations for a variety of crisis management and crisis stability problems.
A differentiated explanatory theory is constructed by formulating contingent generalizations-regularities that occur only under certain specific conditions.
The objective of this study has been to identify different causal patterns associated with variation in crisis military interaction.
For this purpose an analyticinductive procedure was used to analyze four historical cases of crisis naval operations and four cases of peacetime attacks on United States Navy ships.
This yielded a typology of crisis management and crisis stability problems, each linked with a somewhat different causal pattern.
To develop the contingent generalizations, eight questions addressing specific aspects of the theory were applied to historical cases through the method of structured focused comparison.
The purposes of this chapter are to summarize the findings of the eight case studies and to derive from them contingent generalizations on crisis military interactions and crisis stability.
The first section will present the findings on the theory of stratified interaction, including the corollary of decoupled interactions.
The second section will present the findings on crisis stability, including the crisis security dilemma, escalation dynamics, and misperception.
The third section will present the findings on the three political-military tensions.and their impact on crisis management.
The final section will present the contingent generalizations on crisis military interaction.
These questions were examined in the four case studies of crisis naval operations.
Mechanisms of indirect control, rather than direct control by national leaders, played the major role in the 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis, but decisionmaking authority was delegated selectively.
To control the risk of escalation, the President retained total control of nuclear weapons and delegated authority to retaliate with conventional weapons against mainland targets only under circumstances in which the Joint Chiefs did not have time to consult with the him prior to taking action.
Throughout the crisis Washington was illinformed of the status of operations currently in progress, which precluded American leaders from exercising close control over the operations.
However, they primarily controlled naval operations through mechanisms of indirect adtunci® particularly mission orders and rules of engagement, rather than through direct control.
The President and tieNanare retained authority certain crucial decisions, particularly retaliation against Cuban air defenses and the boarding of ships.
Other than this, however, they exercised control by negation, rather than positive control, over Navy operations they felt were particularly sensitive.
Less sensitive a were not Closely controlled, with methods of delegated control being used.
In the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, The Johnson Administration did not attempt to exercise direct control over the operations of the Sixth Fleet other than its movements in the Mediterranean.
When the USS America experienced severe Soviet harassment on June 8 the on-scene commanders were guided by standing Navy policies for handling such situations, rather than by special instructions from the White House.
In the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the Nixon Administration did not attempt to exercise direct control over the operations of the Sixth Fleet other than its movements in the Mediterranean.
Rather then giving the fleet boundaries on where it was permitted to operate, as in 1967, Washington told the fleet exactly where to operate.
In summary, the pattern observed in the four case studies of United States naval operations in crises was one of direct control being exercised selectively ate to a limited degree.
Heavy reliance was placed on mechanisms of indirect control in all four cases, although the guidance contained in those mechanisms was not always revised to reflect the specific circumstances of the crisis at hand.
Tacticallevel military interactions rarely were under the direct control of political-level leaders.
The pattern of Communist Chinese shelling suggested that they had good intelligence on the convoys and Chinese protests of alleged United States violations of their airspace and territorial waters suggest that they were able to keep close tabs on United States navy operations in the Straits.
The United States and Communist China both took steps to prevent Clashes between their forces and those measures largely prevented interactions from occursing.
Thus, although the intelligence requirement for tight coupling of the two sides’ forces was met, tactical interactions tended to be dampened by measures taken to avoid clashes.
In both cases, however, Khrushchev's decision not to challenge the quarantine dampened the interactions between the two sides.
The Soviet submarines were not attempting to force their way through United States naval forces to get to Cuba, they were — to return home unmolested.
The only Soviet ships that approached the quarantine line were those that the United States would have no reason to take into custody.
Interactions between United States and Cuban forces were also dampened by the efforts that leaders on both sides made to avoid provocations.
Soviet and American naval forces in the Mediterranean were tightly coupled during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War.
Soviet tattletales closely monitored the Sixth Fleet, United States aircraft closely monitored the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron, and United States ships and planes searched for and trailed Soviet submarines.
Thus, Soviet and American forces were tightly coupled during the crisis-~-much more tightly than they had been in any previous Soviet-American crisis.
In summary, naval forces at the scene of the crisis were tightly coupled in all four of the crisis naval operations case studies.
However, the tightness of coupling between the forces of the two sides can vary significantly from crisis to crisis and over time within a particular crisis.
Tactical-level military commanders have independent access to intelligence and surveillance information on adversary forces, and thus are not dependent on politicallevel decisionmakers for information on the adversary.
As would be expected under conditions of tight coupling, naval forces tend to react quickly to changes in the other side’s operations, seeking to maintain or improve their tactical position in the event of hostilities.
Both Communist China and the United States used their military forces for political purposes in the 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis.
The United States responded by accepting a test of capabilities under the ground rules established by the Chinese Communists, backed by a massive concentration of naval and air power in the Straits to convey a strong deterrent threat.
The President and McNamara actively sought out ways to reinforce the signals being sent to the Soviets, such as by modifying Navy ASW procedures to support the political objectives of the quarantine.
Khrushchev was probably avoiding signals of hostile intent by not placing Soviet forces at full alert, recalling freighters carrying arms, and recalling the three submarines in the Atlantic.
Shooting down an American U-2 over Cuba on October 27 certainly sent the wrong signal to the United States, but this action may not have been authorized in the Kremlin.
The United States and the Soviet Union used their naval forces for political signalling in the 1967 ArabIsraeli War.
It is clear that the United States used the Sixth Fleet for political signaling.
That the Soviets received the signals being sent with the Sixth Fleet is indicated by the note the Soviets sent on October 12, 1973, protesting the movement of the United States fleet into the eastern Mediterranean.
The Soviet Union used its Mediterranean Squadron for political signaling, and it is clear that United States leaders received the Soviet signals.
In summary, naval forces were used by both sides for political signalling or related political functions in all four of the case studies on crisis naval operations.
Use of naval forces for political purposes can bring naval units of the two sides in a crisis into close proximity, creating a danger of military incidents.
Both sides faced their forces as a political instrument under conditions of acute crisis.
In the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, the United States relied on methods of delegated control, United States and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean were tightly coupled, and both sides used their forces as a political instrument under conditions of conditions of acute crisis.
The stratified interaction model of international crises, in which DP iniesactsone evolve in separate, semi-independent sequences at the political, strategic, and tactical levels, offers a good description of Soviet-American interactions in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War.
In the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the United States relied on methods of delegated control, United States and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean were tightly coupled, and both sides used their forces as political instruments under conditions of acute crisis.
For example, President Nixon had no direct control over Sixth Fleet counter-targeting of Soviet ships carrying anti-ship cruise missiles, and was probably unaware that this activity had inadvertently been set in motion by White House orders making the fleet an easy target for the Soviet Navy.
Communications between Washington and the Far East were slow and cumbersome.
When the President suspended convoy escort operations on October 6 in response to the Communist unilateral ceasefire announcement, the order was not received by Commander Taiwan Patrol Force until after two more Nationalist convoys had been escorted on October 7.
As it turned out, the extra day of escort operations did not adversely affect United States efforts to resolve the crisis, but it could have had a much more serious impact--the Chinese Communists had made the ceasefire contingent on the United States not escorting Nationalist convoys.
Compounding the control problems created by this rapidly evolving situation was the ambiguous Eisenhower Administration policy toward defense of the offshore islands.
On-scene commanders had ample authority to take military action under the terms of the defense treaty with the Nationalists and the Formosa Resolution if Taiwan were threatened, but initially had He epee unde guidance on the offshore islands.
Left to their own devices, the on-scene commanders took actions on August 24 and 25--sending United States destroyers the assistance of Nationalist forces defending the offshore islands--that the Président may not have authorized had he been able to make the decisions himself.
This is another potential example of decoupling during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis.
Despite the advances that had been made in communications technology, the effort to Evenetes Close control over large-scale cperations seriously overloaded and degraded United States communications systems.
Similarly, the intercept and boarding of merchant ships takes place at a uedaurery pace and is relatively easy to control.
Fast-paced eno tgenellés:. such as air combat and sea battles fought with tactical aircraft and cruise missiles, never arose.
This appears to have been a key factor in the success of the President's crisis management efforts--opening with operations that were inherently slow-paced.
By tailoring certain key guidance contained in | mission orders and rules of engagement to support the President's political objectives, tie President and McNamara avoided the problem of inappropriate guidance in mechanisms of indirect control.
McNamara did not attempt to rewrite Navy tactical doctrine, but did impose certain requirements and limitations on the Navy.
The method of control they used--control by negation--only required that orders be given if a Navy commander embarked on a course of action that they opposed.
He had been briefed on and approved quarantine plans that directed the Navy to surface and identify Soviet submarines, and authorized use of force, if necessary, to prevent Soviet submarines from reaching Cuba without being inspected for offensive weapons.
McNamara received detailed briefings on Navy operations, including ASW operations, at least once daily in Flag Plot and received frequent situation reports in between briefings.
McNamara‘'s knowledge of Navy ASW procedures was detailed enough to know that the Navy would need to develop special procedures for signalling submarines to surface for identification.
Navy ASW forces strictly complied with the special submarine and surfacing procedures.
No unauthorized actions occurred despite the resentment many senior Navy officers felt against the close attention that the President and McNamara paid oem operations.
Two of the potential causes of decoupling-~--communica—_— problems and a fast-paced tactical environment--were present in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, but there were no serious instances of decoupling.
The United States communications system did not permit cinealituids Baent to exercise real-time direct control over the Sixth Fleet.
A second potential cause of decoupling-~-a fast-paced tactical environment--was also present during some periods of the crisis.
In spite of these factors, divergence of tactical-level military operations from political-level objectives was not a serious problem during the crisis.
Although on-scene commanders often made operational decisions on their own authority, their decisions generally supported the President's political objectives.
The response of Navy on-scene commanders to Soviet harassment on June 8 may have been an. instance of tactical-level military operations diverging from political-level objectives, but there is no evidence that the President disapproved of how they handled the situation.
The United States communications system provided much faster and more reliable communications in 1973 than it had in 1967, but still did not permit the President to exercise real-time direct control over the Sixth Fleet.
President Nixon was in the midst of the Watergate scandal and the resignation of Vice President Spiro Agnew.
Although President Nixon reportedly made key decisions himself and was kept informed of major developments in the crisis, he clearly did not exercise close, detailed control over United States actions in the crisis.
The tactical environment in the Mediterranean was fastpaced during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
The White House did not directly control the actions of the Sixth Fleet and available accounts suggest that Nixon and Kissinger were unaware of the intensity of the naval interactions that were occurring.
The same situation could well have existed for the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron, which was constantly exugeted at point blank range by United States warships and attack aircraft.
Tactically inappropriate orders were a major factor in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War and may have led to decoupling.
This made the United States fleet extremely vulnerable to a Soviet preemptive strike.
The factors listed above may have led to decoupling of tactical-level interactions during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
The Sixth Fleet was moved to south of Crete in order to demonstrate to the Soviet Union that the United seawes was prepared for any contingency, but had no aggressive intent and was not preparing to take an active part in the conflict.
Sixth Fleet movements of October 25 were intended to deter escalation of the conflict--specifically, Soviet intervention in Egypt with airborne forces--but the fleet was restrained in order to avoid signalling excessive hostility or an intention to intervene directly in the conflict.
There may well have been tactical-level interactions between United States and Soviet naval forces that complicated management of the crisis.
Although the technical capacity to do so may have existed, the Defense Department and Navy communication systems were not configured to enable Washington to speak directly to ships at sea in the Far East.
Although conditions for decoupling were present in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents, the operational decisions made by tactical-level commanders did not diverge from the political-military objectives of political-level leaders.
The on-scene commander acted with caution to avoid encounters with North Vietnamese forces while conducting the surveillance mission, and Commander Seventh Fleet ordered the engagements on August 2 and 4 halted as soon as the United States ships were out of danger.
Interestingly, the on-scene commander had the greatest doubt that there had been a North Vietnamese attack on August 4 and cautioned against a hasty reaction.
The pattern in the two incidents was one of momentary decoupling followed by tactical-level escalation and disengagement.
On-scene commanders, fe ting on their own authority under guidance contained in the rules of engagement, used limited force in response to apparent imminent attacks.
Once the immediate threat had been countered and the destroyers were out of danger, the on-scene commanders halted the engagements--again on their own authority and without guidance from higher in the chain of command.
The actions ordered by Commander Sixth Fleet were restrained and anticipated the desires of top-level officials in Washington.
Commander Sixth Fleet carefully spelled out rules of engagement intended to avoid unnecessary incidents while defending Liberty.
Bmergency messages from Pueblo required over an hour to reach Washington and United States military commanders in the Pacific.
President Johnson was not confronted with having to halt combat operations or approve them after the fact because Bante were initiated.
United States commanders in the Far East had already come to the conclusion that there were no effective military actions that could be taken to rescue Pueblo without needlessly endangering the crew.
Therefore, although the President did not have direct control over the initial response to the North Korean attack on Pueblo, United States foroes ected essentially as he would have wanted them to act under the circumstances.
The attack lasted only a few minutes and was over before any other units could employ their weapons in support of Stark.
No United States forces were in a position to shoot down the Iraqi plane.
In summary, various potential causes of decoupling were present in all eight of the cases examined in this study.
The most common cause of decoupling was communica-~ tions problems or properly functioning communications that are simply too slow to permit direct control of military operations.
The second most common cause of decoupling was a fast-paced tactical environment.
This was a factor in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis, the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents, the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, the 1967 Liberty incident, and the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
Ambiguous orders were a factor in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis and tactically inappropriate orders were a factor in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
Impairment of political-level decisionmaking was a factor in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
The pattern between instances of momentary decoupling is parallel stratified interactions.
Momentary decoupling was seen in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis, and possibly in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
In this pattern, a tactical-level incident occurs that is not directly controlled by political-level leaders and does not support their political objectives.
Decoupling followed by disengagement occurred in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents.
The stratified crisis security dilemma is that, in a crisis, the security dilemma is stratified, arising from the interaction processes occurring separately at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of war separately at each level.
National leaders and on-scene commanders holding different threat perceptions appears not to have been a serious problem in the 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis.
The entire chain of command, from the President down to commanding officers at sea in the Straits, appear to have been aware of the danger of incidents with Communist Chinese forces.
The emphasis in JCS operational directives was on avoiding clashes with the Communists, and on-scene commanders took similar measures on their own initiative.
These actions largely prevented United States forces from operating in the sights of Communist guns, thus reducing their vulnerability to preemption by the Communists.
Although some United States commanders in the Far East wanted to take more vigorous action against Communist China, they did not perceive a significantly greater threat to United States forces than did officials in Washington.
However, the differences were not extreme and the President and McNamara were also concerned about the Soviet submarine threat.
There was edcogaitiion at all levels that for several reasons, including that fact that submarines were to be stopped and boarded under the quarantine, the Navy would have to conduct intense ASW operations.
Navy commanders were particularly concerned about the threat from Cuban Komar missile boats.
Perceptions of the threat from Cuban aircraft were mixed, not following any pattern, and were not stratified.
Threat perceptions and the security Gilemma thus were not stratified during the crisis.
During the first week of the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, United States Navy on-scene commanders were relatively unconcerned about the Soviet naval threat because the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron essentially continued normal peacetime operations.
From October 14 onward, however, the tactical situation changed dramatically for the worse.
Henry Kissinger, in particular. did not perceive a threat from the Soviet Navy during the crisis, and was either unaware of the Soviet anticarrier exercise or did not understand the threat it represented to the Sixth Fleet.
The Navy chain of command from the JCS Chairman down to the carrier Commanding Officers perceived a serious. threat from Soviet anti-carrier operations, while civilian officials did not perceive a threat to the Sixth Fleet.
Thus, stratified threat perceptions did arise between civilian and military officials at the top of the chain of command.
The on-scene commander lacked important information on the political context of the crisis and had to interpret Soviet behavior on the basis of the military and naval moves being made by Soviet forces.
It is not surprising, there-fore, that Soviet naval opera~ tions in the Mediterranean appeared much more threatening to the Navy chain of command than they did to Kissinger.
At the political level of interaction, neither the United States nor the Soviet Union had an incentive to launch a preemptive first strike against the other.
Military and naval moves, including the United States DEFCON 3 alert, were taken primarily for political purposes.
At the tactical level of interaction, however, United States -and Soviet naval forces had strong ee to strike first and were actively targeting each other.
United States Navy on“scene commanders were seriously concerned about the threat of a Soviet preemptive attack due to Soviet anti-carrier operations.
Soviet Navy commanders must have shared similar -eoncerns due to United States counter-targeting of their major combatants.
The security dilemma was thus stratified--mild at the political level, but acute at the tactical level.
A number of incidents could have triggered an inadvertent naval battle in the Mediterranean that United States and Soviet leaders might not have been able to control until the initial engagements were over.
Although escalation dynamics cannot be addressed directly--none of the cases escalated to war--research was done to identify escalationinhibiting factors and conditions that can cause those factors to break down.
When decoupling occurred in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis, it did not produce tactical-level escalation.
This tactical-level prudence compensated for lack of operational guidance when decoupling occurred, preventing escalation even when actions took place that the President had not ordered.
The second factor inhibiting escalation in the 1958 Taiwan straits Crisis was that both sides took steps to avoid military clashes and adhered to tacit ground rules for a test of capabilities between their forces.
Those ground rules included no Communist attacks on United States forces, no United States attacks on Chinese forces except in self-defense (and Gefense of Nationalist forces in international airspace or waters), and no United States attacks on the Chinese mainland.
By 1958 the United States and Communist China had evolved tacit rules of crisis behavior, and those rules contributed to preventing escalation.
The first was caution and prudence on the part of U.S., Soviet, and Cuban leaders @Guring the crisis.
President Kennedy's decision to open with relatively slow-paced naval operations, Khrushchev's early decision not to challenge the quarantine, and Castro's decision not to provoke the United States aes the factors that determined the nature of the tactical-level interactions.
Escalation was avoided by the tactical environment 1001 having been structured in such a manner as to prevent Clashes from occurring.
Although this was what President Kennedy had in mind when he selected the quarantine over other military options, the outcome was due to decisions made in Moscow and Havana as well as in Washington.
The fact that no effort was made by on-scene commanders to strike at Cuban air defenses marks compliance with the requirement that the President approve retaliatory attacks.
The special ASW procedures specified by McNamara were used as he had intended.
There were no instances of naval forces conducting unauthorized operations or using weapons in violation of the rules of engagement.
The need for communication between the two sides. is well established in the crisis management literature.
Formal and informal messages were used to clarify 1002 intentions, express concern over incidents, and defuse situations that might otherwise have generated even greater tensions between the two sides.
Military moves were not the only means of signalling intentions available to President Kennedy, he had several other channels for delivering formal and informal messages to Khrushchev.
Because Kennedy and Khrushchev were exchanging communications frequently during the crisis, they could wait, send a protest, and assess the implications of an isolated incident, rather than immediately reacting to it.
These communications were not perfect, but the availability of formal and informal communications. channels between the two superpowers appears to have moderated the use of military forces for political signaling by allowing diplomatic rather than military responses to military incidents.
The first factor was caution on the part of United States leaders in the pcssittins Bacers they placed on Sixth Fleet movements and caution on the part of United States naval commanders in the Mediterranean when potentially serious incidents did occur.
The most dangerous interactions took place on June 7 and 8 during Soviet harassment of USS America and her 1003 escorts.
The second factor inhibiting escalation in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War was that the Soviet Mediterranean Squadron generally behaved in a cautious and circumspect manner.
Soviet caution was an important factor in the lack of escalation during particularly intense interactions at sea.
United States Navy commanders could tolerate a certain amount of indiscretion by individual Soviet ships because it clearly Was not part of a pattern of harassment and did not appear to presage a Soviet preemptive attack.
Thus, while Soviet efforts to show caution around the Sixth Fleet were not entirely successful in preventing tensions from arising, they did help to prevent serious incidents from occurring.
The third factor inhibiting escalation in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War was the tight coupling between United States and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean.
Overall, this was beneficial for crisis management because the signal the United States and Soviet Union were sending with their fleets was one of non-involvement in the hostilities.
Both sides used the hot line to express concerns, give warnings, and avoid misperceptions.
Ironically, while tight coupling of the naval forces in the Mediterranean increased the need for the hot line, it also increased the effectiveness of the hot line as a means for conveying political messages.
There were intense tactical-level interactions during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, but no instances of the interactions generating an escalation sequence.
The most dangerous inter-actions occurred during the Soviet antiCarrier exercise , but they @i@ not escatate to violence.
Although each side was constantly targeting 1005 the other and both sides were ready to instantly launch preemptive attacks, no weapons were fired during the crisis.
First, neither the United States nor the Soviet Union wanted to intervene militarily in the war if they could possible avoid it, largely out of concern for an armed clash with the other superpower.
Therefore they both acted cautiously with their military and naval forces, avoiding situations that could inadvertently involve them in the fighting and, with one exception, avoiding actions that were unnecessarily provocative.
The only exception to this pattern was the Soviet anti-carrier exercise that commenced on October 26--an action much different from Soviet behavior throughout the rest of the crisis.
Thus, while the overall pattern of Soviet military behavior was one of restraint, the Soviets were willing to engage in certain highly provocative activities.
The second factor inhibiting escalation in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War was that the United States and the Soviet Union communicated with each other frequently during the crisis.
Soviet warnings to the United States on October 24 that it was prepared to intervene unilaterally in the Middle East if Israel did not respect the United Nations ceasefire were particularly important for avoiding a clash between the 1006 superpowers.
Although that warning prompted the most intense superpower tensions of the crisis, including the United States worldwide DEFCON 3 alert, the situation could well have been much worse if the United States and the Soviet Union had not been in direct communication.
The superpowers probably would have had great difficulty interpreting the political significance of each other's military moves on October 24 and 25 had they not been able to express their interests and concerns to each other.
The third factor inhibiting escalation in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War was caution and restraint on the part of United States Navy commanders in the Mediterranean.
This was particularly important for United States ships and aircraft assigned to monitor high-threat Soviet ships and destroy them if they attempted to launch anti-ship missiles.
When the Soviets commenced their anti-carrier exercise, United States ships and planes counter-targeting the Soviets had to distinguish between preparations for simulated and actual attacks--an exceedingly difficult task.
The second escalation-inhibiting factor in the Tonkin Gulf Incidents was compliance by on-scene commanders with the guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control.
Under the peacetime rules of engagement in effect in 1964, United States forces were authorized to use force in self-defense and in anticipatory self-defense when attack appeared to be imminent.
Hot pursuit of the attacking force was authorized in international waters and was used on August 2 when Navy planes attacked the PT boats after they had disengaged.
On the other hand, retaliation aa ee in North Vietnam was not authorized unless specifically approved by the President.
On the one hand, these provisions allowed force to be used without further permission from higher authority, but | on the other hand, they resulted in the engagements halting quickly rather than escalating.
Double-checking the accuracy of initial reports is important for avoiding unwarranted escalation of a confrontation--particularly when there may not have been a confrontation at all.
The first condition is long-term frustration and animosity toward the other side ina aie or incident.
The naeana condition is the immediate prior occurrence of a confirmed provocation by the other side, particularly when the United States response to the prior incident was retrained and the other side was warned against further incidents.
But the August 4 incident provoked United States retaliation against the North even though the circumstances of the incident were not clear.
The third condition that can degrade the escalationinhibiting factors is for all levels in the military chain of command, from the President to the on-scene commander, to hold similar views toward the adversary and toward the need for immediate retaliation.
The Liberty incident sheds light on three escalationinhibiting factors.
Second, use of the hot line apparently helped prevent the Soviets and Egyptians from misperceiving the intent of actions taken by the on-scene commander.
Third, rapid Israeli notification of the United States that 1010 it had inadvertently attacked a United States naval vessel cleared up confusion in Washington and resulted in Sixth Fleet planes being recalled before they entered the war zone off the coast of Sinai.
United States military commanders complied with the restrictions imposed on military operations by the sesgeuins peacetime rules of engagement, barring their forces from attacking North Korean forces inside North Korean territorial waters and airspace, and not ordering actions that would have constituted pti ue against North Korea.
The guidance contained in the peacetime rules of engagement may or may not have been mipropriaté to the specific circumstances, but United States military commanders were careful to comply with that guidance.
Circumstantial evidence pointing to Iranian complicity and lack of an Iraqi admission of responsibility could well have led to the President authorizing retaliatory attacks —— Iranian forces or bases.
This situation is analogous to that described in the Liberty incident, when accurate information on Soviet forces in the Mediterranean prevented United States military commanders from suspecting that the Soviets had attacked Liberty.
It appears that inadvertent escalation is more likely when intelligence is incomplete and ambiguous, supporting worst-case assessments of the nature and implications of an attack on United States forces.
For example, on-scene commanders could conclude that full-scale attacks on United States forces at the scene of the crisis will soon follow, placing a premium on preempting the expected enemy attack. unde¥ certain circumstances on-scene commanders might have authority to preempt without having to seek permission from higher authority.
In summary, six internal and two external escalationinhibiting factors were identified in the case studies.
The 1012 internal factors function within the government and military chain of command of one nation.
The internal factors are military prudence (avoiding threat of surprise attack and combat under unfavorable circumstances), caution and restraint on the part of on-scene commanders, compliance by on-scene commanders with the guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control, national leaders structuring the tactical environment to dampen military interactions, accurate and timely tactical intelligence on friendly and potentially hostile forces, and national leaders and the military chain of command double-checking the accuracy of initial reports of military incidents.
These factors tend moderate the intensity of tactical-level interactions, prevent armed clashes from occurring, and produce disengagement rather than escalation when clashed do occur.
External escalation-inhibiting factors function between the two sides in a crisis.
Tacit rules of crisis behavior are best developed between the United States and the Soviet Union, but also ‘contributed to avoiding escalation in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis.
Soviet naval forces have engaged in exceedingly dangerous behavior--dangerous maneuvering at close quarters and simulated attacks on United States naval forces-1013 during international crises.
The 1972 Soviet-American Incidents at Sea Agreement has only been partially successful in moderating such Soviet behavior.
The most dangerous situation arises in confrontations with nations that the United States does not share tacit rules of crisis behavior, like Libya, Iran, and North Korea.
The findings of the eight case studies indicate that, contrary to what the escalation dynamics theory predicts, there is a tendency for naval tactical-level interaction to lose momentum and for the forces involved to disengage after an initial incident or armed clash.
Pauses tend to occur naturally in naval operations due _ the need to regroup and prepare for further action.
Due to the risk of defeat in battle, naval commanders are reluctant to initiate or sustain combat operations under circumstances they cannot predict or control.
Naval commanders quickly reach the limits of their authority and need permission from higher authority to initiate further combat operations.
If do not have such permission, or anticipate that they will not be able get it, naval commanders normally will try to break off combat ac-tion as soon as it is safe to do so--rather than risk being left in an untenable tactical position.
The Operational requirements of crisis management, if being followed, tend to accentuate the tendency toward disengagement by denying on-scene commanders tactical Options (such as surprise attack and concentration of 1014 superior force) that can be crucial for successful combat operations.
The first condition is for national leaders and military commanders to be predisposed to take action against the adversary due to a long-term failures of diplomacy to resolve tensions, military and diplomatic frustration with the adversary.
Sustained hostility, harassment, or a history of aggression by the adversary can generate a perception that the adversary's leaders are unreasonable, irresponsible, or uninterested in serious negotiations, reducing the incentive to pursue diplomatic initiatives toward the adversary.
These expectations could be eiCuey correct, but could also result from insufficient or ambiguous intelligence on the adversary's objectives and intentions.
Prior attacks can create an expectation that further attacks will occur or that the adversary is likely to escalate the level of violence.
As with long-term frustrations, short-term expectations of further violence could be entirely correct, but could also result from 1015 insufficient or ambiguous intelligence on the adversary's objectives and intentions.
The short-term effects of immediate prior hostile acts can reinforce the effects of long-term frustration with the adversary, appearing to confirm negative assessments of his intentions.
Expectation of further attacks tends to predispose national leaders and military commanders toward broader military options toward the adversary.
The third condition that can erode the escalationinhibiting factors is for all levels in the chain of command, from the President to the on-scene commander, to hold similar views toward the adversary and the need for immediate retaliation for provocations.
A strong unity of views can suppress the skepticism that normally greets ambiguous initial reports on a military incident, or lead to hasty assessment of the incident in the rush to launch retaliatory attacks.
The principle problem that the United States experienced arose from the ambiguity of the Eisenhower Administration's commitment to the defense of the offshore islands.
The Eisenhower Administration attempted to resolve this dilemma with a calculated policy of ambiguity, which only prompted the Communist probe of the American commitment and subsequent efforts by the Nationalists to use the crisis as grounds for striking back at the mainland.
The problem was not that the Communists and Nationalists misperceived United States it pemtienvemgunt rather that they correctly perceived the ambivalence in United States policy.
There do not appear to have been any instances of the Soviets seriously misperceiving the intent of Sixth Fleet Operations during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, largely due to Close Soviet monitoring of the fleet and United States use of the hot line.
It 1018 thus complicated United States efforts to manage the crisis by lending credibility to Arab claims of American complicity in the Israeli attacks--claims that contributed to serious deterioration in United States relations with the Arab nations.
There were no inadvertent military incidents that seriously affected United States crisis management efforts in the 1967 Arab-Israeli War.
The most serious incident of the crisis was the attack on the Liberty, but Israel quickly notified the United States that it had conducted the attack, thus defusing tensions over the incident.
The second most serious incident of the crisis was the harassment of USS America by Soviet ships on June 7 and 8.
The most important factor in avoiding incidents that coulda complicate crisis management was the decisions made by netional leaders on the two sides that structured the tactical environment in such a manner as to moderate the tensions that would arise from tactical-level interactions.
There were no inadvertent military incidents serious enough to affect United States crisis management efforts during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, but there appear to have been instances of United States leaders misperceiving the political signals being sent by Soviet naval movements.
Kissinger 1019 interpreted Soviet naval moves at the start of the war as demonstrating non-involvement in the conflict, but the actual pattern of Soviet naval operations suggests a higher degree of Soviet commitment to Syria and Egypt than Kissinger perceived.
Kissinger also missed the point that Soviet naval movements demonstrated an intent to neutralize the Sixth Fleet if it were positioned to intervene.
Naval analysts and other observers have read political signals into several other United States and Soviet naval actions during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
It is not clear, however, that any of those alleged signals were intentional or that the other side perceived the signals allegedly being sent.
This further underscores the inherent ambiguity of naval movements as political signals, and the tendency for naval movements to be perceived as political signals even when undertaken for non-political purposes.
The United States response to the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents G@id not send any serious inadvertent political signals or result in any serious inadvertent military ‘silanes 2 However, the Desoto patrols apparently were misperceived by North Vietnam.
Some United States intelligence analysts and military officers suspected that the North Vietnamese misperceived the Desoto patrol destroyers as participating in or directly 1020 supporting OPLAN 34A attacks on North Vietnam.
Although McNamara would later insist that there were no grounds for the North Vietnamese to have confused the Desoto and OPLAN 34A operations, such a misperception provides a plausible explanation for the August 2 attack on Maddox.
The United States response to the attack on the Liberty did not ‘send any serious inadvertent political signals or result in any serious inadvertent military incidents.
Commander Sixth Fleet carefully limited the fleet's response to the attack and the President used the hot line to prevent misperceptions from arising.
The Israeli attack on Liberty was itself an inadvertent military incident, momentarily complicating United States crisis management efforts in the Middle East War, but no further incidents occurred during the Sixth Fleet's response to the attack.
The United States response to the North Korean seizure of the Pueblo did not send serious inadvertent political signals or result in serious inadvertent military incidents, probably due to the relatively passive United States response to the North Korean provocation.
North Korea achieved a fait accompli, effectively limiting United States options to settling on North Korean terms.
The passive Se e¥Spense annoyed the South Koreans, but this arose from correct perceptions rather than from misperceptions.
The attack on Stark dllustrates the danger of inadvertent military incidents when United States naval forces are operating in close proximity to hostilities.
In summary, inadvertent political signals may have been a factor in some of the crises, but inadvertent military incidents were not serious problems in the eight cases examined in this study.
Misperceptions of United States intentions or the purposes of United States naval operations may have been a factor in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents, the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, and the 1968 Pueblo incident.
United States naval operations in response to the four peacetime attacks on United States Navy ships appear not to have generated misperceptions.
There appear to be three reasons for the lack of inadvertent military incidents in crises.
The primary reason why exercises are cancelled is that the forces are needed for crisis operations, but exercises have also been cancelled to avoid potential political complications.
The second reason is that the military chain of command usually advises on-scene commanders to act with caution and to avoid provocative actions.
Military prudence is occasionally violated by top-level political officials ordering naval forces into dangerous waters, but on other occasions United States leaders have been careful to keep United States forces well clear of fighting in a local conflict.
Tensions between political and military considerations were examined in all eight case studies.
Political vs Military Considerations In the 1958 Taiwan Strait crisis, tension between political considerations and military considerations arose in the restrictions placed on the support that could be provided for the Quemoy resupply effort.
The most efficient way of resupplying the Nationalist garrison ar have been to carry their supplies in United States amphibious ships escorted right up to the beach by United States warships.
However, this would have been a serious provocation to the Communists, who might mot have refrained from shelling the American vessels.
That probably would have led re United States naval bombardment and air strikes against Communist shore batteries, air fields, and naval bases.
There was also concern that the President's strategy of applying military force in graduated increments would increase the difficulty of carrying out the air strike or invasion options by alerting the Cubans--losing the tactical and strategic advantage of surprise.
Further, tensions arose between the military consideration of protecting United States forces against a sudden attack by Cuban or Soviet forces, and the political consideration of avoiding military moves that appeared to threaten an immediate effort to achieve a military solution to the crisis.
However, civilian leaders accommodated military commanders to a much greater degree than past accounts have acknowledged.
President Kennedy and Secretary McNamara were sympathetic. to the military's concern with protecting its men.
The rules of engagement issued for the quarantine were not significantly Gdifferent from normal peacetime rules and did not infringe upon a commander’s right of self-defense.
The only operational area in which the President deliberately denied the military any authority to take action in self-defense was in the case of Cuban air defenses firing on United States reconnaissance aircraft, but this was based on the well-established distinction between self-defense and retaliation.
There was moderate tension between political and military considerations during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War.
The carrier force commanders objected to restrictions on their mobility, which denied them one of the greatest advantages of carrier air power, and the publicity surrounding their movements, which they believed made it easier for the Soviets to target the carriers.
The restrictions were disregarded by the on-scene commander when it was necessary to respond to the attack on the Liberty.
The President later authorized the actions that Commander Sixth Fleet had already initiated, which indicates that tensions between political and military considerations were not serious.
There was tengion between political and military considerations during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
The most serious tension was between Washington's need to control Sixth Fleet movements for political purposes and the onscene commander's need for freedom to maneuver the fleet in order to reduce its vulnerability to Soviet preemptive attack.
The White House restricted the movements of the Sixth Pleet lest the fleet's movements send a misleading signal of United States intentions to the Soviet Union.
Soviet Navy doctrine placed heavy emphasis on the first strike, making it a central objective of strategy as well ea tactics.
United States Navy tactical doctrine for the defense of surface ship battle groups emphasized destruction of launch platforms before they can launch their missiles.
The side that gets off the first salvo in the D-day shootout is likely to accrue a significant tactical advantage that could determine the Outcome of a war at sea.
A restriction imposed on the fleet for political purposes (avoiding misperceptions of United States intentions) exacerbated the risks of a military confrontation and the danger that a minor incident could touch off an armed clash at sea between the superpowers.
None of the three political-military tensions was serious in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents because the United States responses were limited and all levels of the chain of command held generally similar views toward the need to retaliate.
The only tension was that generated by the White House demand for confirmation that there had been a North Vietnamese attack in the second incident.
But confirmation required time to assess the evidence, which could delay the retaliatory strikes-ealerting the adversary and losing the advantage of surprise.
There was little tension between political and military considerations in the Liberty incident because the incident was over before significant diplomatic activity-other than hot line messages--could begin.
The limitations that Commander Sixth Fleet placed on his forces supported United States political objectives in the crisis.
There were essentially no tensions between political land military considerations in the Pueblo incident.
All levels in the chain of command gneed that effective military action could not be taken before Pueblo entered Wonsan.
But these disagreements primarily revolved around the military feasibility of the options proposed by the military, rather than the political implications of the options.
The Chief of Naval Operations insisted on frequent and detailed reports from Navy commanders in the far East, but methods of delegated control were used and officials in Washington relied heavily on mechanisms of indirect control.
The origin of the tension was a sudden attempt to impose radically new methods of direct control on a command system set up for delegated methods of control without prior planning, consideration of the implications, or even consultation with the military.
The Navy, with its tradition of granting autonomy to commanders at sea, reacted strongly to the Kennedy Administration's efforts at closely controlling military operations.
Admiral Anderson, at the interface between 1029 between civilian authorities and the Navy chain of command as Chief of Naval Operations and the JCS Executive Agent for Cuban operations, took the lead in preventing what he perceived to be unreasonable civilian interference in naval operations.
There was a widespread attitude that McNamara was incompetent at controlling military operations.
There was thus serious tension between the President's desire to maintain control over events and the Navy's desire to operate on the basis of its traditional philosophy of command, in which commanders at sea are delegated substantial authority.
The fact that Navy commanders who did not have to work aiwectd> with McNamara felt less resentment and better understood the President's 1030 political objectives strongly suggests that much of the friction and anger visible in Washington was generated by the McNamara's personality, management style, and personal attitudes, rather than by the underlying policy conflicts.
Because of the emphasis on direct civilian control of military operations, civilian authorities did not keep Military leaders adequately informed of the overall United States political-diplomatic strategy for resolving the crisis.
By not informing the JCS of political-diplomatic efforts at resolving the crisis, the President risked defeating his efforts to ensure that military operations supported his political objectives.
The Chiefs did not need to know the details of sensitive communications with the Soviets to understand the President's diplomatic objectives.
Orders to the Sixth Fleet were passed via the chain of command and only the general location and movements of the fleet in the Mediterranean were closely controlled.
On-scene commanders disliked this control of their operations, but it did not seriously interfere with their ability to carry out their mission.
President Nixon and Schlesinger respected the military chain of command, using it to send orders to the Sixth Fleet rather than attempting to communicate directly with the fleet.
Tensions arose primarily from the emphasis that President Nixon and Kissinger placed on using the Sixth fleet for political signalling, which required close White House control of the fleet's movements.
There was little level of control tension in the Liberty. incident because the incident evolved too rapidly for officials in Washington to play a direct role in controlling events.
JCS and the Secretary of Defense could only reaffirm orders already given by Commander Sixth Fleet.
Crisis vs Wartime Missions Tensions arose between crete kieran of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions in the 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis.
The CNO's staff was concerned that prolonged operations would erode United States capabilities for military operations in other parts of the world or for general war.
CNO Admiral Arleigh Burke felt that United States naval forces were overextended during the crisis and would have been hard pressed to respond to an outbreak of fighting elsewhere while committed in the Taiwan Straits.
Of the three types 1033 of political-military tensions, tension between performance of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions was the most serious in the 1958 Taiwan Straits crisis.
Military men were not overly concerned about the negative consequences of the Srawazat tions for invasion of Cuba because there was no immediate need for the forces elsewhere.
This situation would have changed drastically if the Soviets had moved against Berlin or Turkey in response to a United States move against Cuba, which justifies the President's concern for such a Soviet move.
There was very little tension between performance of crisis political missions and readiness to perform wartime combat missions during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War.
Sixth Fleet operations during the crisis did not seriously detract from the fleet's readiness for wartime contingencies.
The only feature of the crisis operations that the on-scene commanders did not like, even though they understood its purpose and importance, was the publicizing of the fleet's 1034 movements.
Other than this, there was little tension between performance of crisis missions and readiness for wartime contingencies.
There was moderate tension between performance of crisis political missions and readiness to perform wartime combat missions in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
There apparently was little concern that the Navy's response to the crisis would degrade its ability to respond to threats elsewhere.
Wartime considerations as well as political considerations influenced the location of the Sixth Fleet in the Mediterranean, and the fleet's carriers did not experience a serious degradation of their readiness to perform wartime missions during the crisis.
The greatest concern for United States wartime readiness arose from the transfer of large quantities of United States military equipment and munitions to Israel, which depleted United States war-reserve stocks and left some operational units without sufficient equipment and supplies to carry out wartime missions.
There was no tension between performance of crisis missions and maintaining readiness to perform wartime missions in the Liberty incident because the Sixth Fleet response to the attack was small-scale and of short duration.
There was some tension between performance of crisis missions and readiness to perform wartime missions in the 1035 Pueblo incident.
The limited time available for taking action meant that the initial response to the North Korean attack on Pueblo had to be made with United States forces in and around Japan and South Korea.
Maintaining readiness for wartime missions had greater impact on the decision whether or not to retaliate against North Korea.
The heavy commitment of United States forces in Vietnam limited the options available to United States military commanders and made the President and Secretary of Defense reluctant to take wetiioes against North Korea that could result in another military conflict.
None of the three political-military tensions was present in the Stark incident because the incident was brief and the attack was known to have been inadvertent.
There was great risk of United States ships being attacked inadvertently or deliberately, and equally 1036 great risk of political embarrassment to the United States 4f civilian of friendly military aircraft were shot down.
Contingent Generalizations The dependent variable is the outcome of crisis interactions; specifically, whether or not tactical-level military interactions cause escalation of a crisis.
Inadvertent escalation originally was defined as any mer ene in the level or scope of violence in a crisis that was not directly ordered by national leaders or anticipated by them as being the likely result of their TCs orders.
Escalation of the crisis arises from deliberate aeedki ons made by national leaders, rather than from uncontrolled tactical-level or strategic-level interactions.
The escalation is inadvertent because national leaders did not intend to escalate the crisis and did not anticipate that their moves would provoke escalation by the adversary.
Inadvertent controlled escalation and deliberate escalation can halt short of war or continue on to war.
In the third and fourth patterns--momentary decoupling of interactions and decoupled interactions followed by disengagement--tactical-level interaction halts without Significant escalation.
Crisis Interaction Patterns Crisis Interaction Unified Stratified Interaction Interaction Parallel Decoupled Stratified Interaction Interaction No No Escalation Escalation Escalation Occurs Momentary Decoupling Decoupling Followed by Disengagement | Inadvertent Inadvertent Inadvertent Controlled Strategic-~level<————-Tactical-level Escalation Escalation Escalation War Deliberate Escalation Disengagement Short of War War 1039 escalation to war, or deliberate escalation to war.
These six patterns constitute a typology of crisis military interaction and appear to cover the full range of interactions that could occur in a crisis.
However, because they were identified through an analytical-inductive process, rather than deductively, no claim is made that the six patterns constitute the universe of possible crisis military interactions.
Additional patterns could be identified through further empirical research.
More tran sne of the patterns of crisis military interaction can occur ina crisis.
The first four patterns-unified interaction, parallel stratified interaction, momentary decoupling of interaction, decoupled interactions followed by disengagement, and inadvertent tactical-level escalation--can an 1h various sequences in a crisis.
Changes in the seven independent variables affecting oe tary interactions determine which pattern occurs.
At any given moment in a crisis, some of the independent variables could have values allowing more than one of the five patterns to occur.
Events that are inherently unpredictable, such as communications failures or military accidents, can determine which pattern arises.
Assessments of the likelihood of 1040 inadvertent escalation must therefore be made in probabilistic terms--that is, in terms of which patterns are more or less likely to occur.
Contingent generalizations will be formulated for the six patterns of crisis military interaction, offering a distinct causal pattern for each type of interaction.
Each of the causal wl egns is produced by specific variations in seven independent variables.
These seven independent variables were identified in the case studies as significant in determining the outcome of crisis military interaction.
The first step in formulating the contingent generalizations will be to define the seven independent variables and describe the range of variation of each variable.
The six types Sfacrisis Military interaction and ee causal patterns will then be described.
Political-level control of tactical-level military operations will be described as direct, indirect, or loss of control.
Direct control means that national leaders can direct changes in military operations as necessary to support their strategy for managing a crisis.
National leaders do not have to make every operational decision |themselves in order to effectively exercise direct control, but they must have the capability to intervene in the conduct of military operations on a real-time basis when necessary for crisis management.
Indirect control means that national leaders are relying primarily on mechanisms of indirect control to coordinate the actions of military forces.
Under indirect control, national leaders normally have some capability to direct changes in military operations in order to ensure that those operations support their crisis strategy.
Communications or other constraints preclude constant, realtime, direct control of tactical-level military operations, forcing delegation of control and reliance on mechanisms of indirect control.
Loss of control means that national leaders are not able to direct changes in military operations in order to support their crisis strategy.
National leaders can experience loss of control even while in direct communication with the on-scene commander.
The second independent variable is the scale of crisis military operations being conducted by United States armed forces.
The scale of military operations partially determines three other factors.
First, it affects the ability of political-level officials to control tacticallevel military operations.
Generally, the larger the scale of operations the more difficult it is for national leaders to maintain direct control over all the operations being conducted and the more likely it is that decoupling will occur.
Second, it affects the opportunity for military interactions with the other side's forces.
Generally, the larger the scale of operations, the greater the number of tactical interactions between the forces of the two sides.
Third, it affects the opportunity for inadvertent military incidents to occur.
Generally, the larger the scale of Operations, the greater the likelihood of inadvertent military incidents.
The scale of military operations will be described as local, theater, or global.
Local operations cover a 1044 relatively small, well-defined geographic area, and involve relatively small forces--a single navy task force, army division, a single air force air task force, or joint task force of roughly equivalent size.
The joint task force that invaded Grenada in 1983 represents the approximate maximum size of local-scale operations.
Forces larger than this generally require theater-level control in order to coordinate operations.
Theater operations involve a substantial portion of the conventional forces ina particular theater.
The operations may not cover the entire theater, but require theater--level coordination.
The forces that participated in operations against Cuba during the Missile Crisis (including preparations for air strike and invasion contingencies) represent the approximate maximum size of theater-scale operations.
The erie independent variable is the intensity of tactical-level interactions between the military forces of the two sides in acrisis.
This independent variable is separate from scale of operations because large scale operations do not necessarily result in intense interactions.
The adversary may choose not to initiate 1045 operations on a similar scale, or may take precautions to reduce contact with the other side's forces.
Although the United States Navy conducted extensive operations off the coast of the mainland, providing ample opportunities for interaction with Communist Chinese forces, the Communist Chinese did not exploit those opportunities and were careful to avoid incidents with us forces.
The intensity of tactical-level military interactions is also affected by geography, the operations being conducted, and the political signals being sent.
Geography includes such factors as the presence of national boundaries to separate ground forces and the amount of sea room available for naval forces to maneuver.
The nature of the operations being conducted can affect how close the forces are in proximity to each other and the threat they appear to present toward each other.
For example, United States destroyers escorting convoys in the Persian Gulf are brought into more frequent contact Iranian forces than is a carrier battle group maintaining a presence in the Gulf of Oman.
The nature of the political signals being sent with military forces also affects the frequency of contacts and apparent level of threat.
On the other hand, forces used to signal reassurance and an intent not to resort to force tend to be moved away from the scene of the crisis and tend to conduct less threatening operations.
The intensity of interactions will be described as routine, heightened, or intense.
Routine intensity of dnteraction is the level normally experienced in peacetime.
It includes normal peacetime surveillance activities and, for naval forces, the normal level of peacetime contact among vessels at sea.
Heightened intensity of interaction includes increased surveillance activity, closer proximity of forces, and tactical positioning of some forces for the possibility of combat.
An example would be Soviet anticarrier forces moving to within missile range of United States carrier battle groups.
Severe intensity of interaction includes deliberate harassment, constant surveillance and targeting activities, and frequent maneuvering by both sides to maintain and improve Sreue waeotiaal positions.
The fourth independent variable is the perceived threat of attack held by tactical-level military commanders.
Tactical-level commanders (also referred to as onscene commanders) are those directly commanding forces at the scene of a crisis.
For naval forces, tactical-level commanders include commanding officers of ships and commanders of task groups and task forces.
Tactical~level commanders are constantly assessing the threat to their forces on the basis of their tactical situation relative to the adversary's forces.
Because the on-scene commander must at all times be prepared for a sudden outbreak of fighting--either on orders from his superiors or instigated by the adversary--his assessment of the adversary’s intentions is heavily influenced by the actions the adversary's forces are taking.
This is a particular form of the military practice of assessing intentions on the basis of capabilities.
On-scene commanders do not, of course, base their assessment of the adversary's intentions only on the basis of what adversary forces are capable of doing, but this factor plays a much larger role at the tactical level of interaction than it does at the political level of interaction.
The threat perceptions held by tactical-level military commanders can range from being entirely accurate to being acute misperceptions.
The on-scene commander could accurately perceive that the adversary's forces are unlikely to attack, or that they are making final preparations for an imminent preemptive attack.
But the on-scene commander 1048 might also misperceive military actions taken by the adversary to send political signals or improve defensive capabilities as indicating an intent to attack.
Many of the actions a state takes in a crisis in order to increase its security and improve its bargaining position decrease the security of its adversary.
This dilemma is particularly acute in naval warfare, where the fragility of platforms relative to the destructiveness of weapons dictates tactical emphasis on shooting first.
Many of the actions taken with naval forces in crises to increase a nation’s security and improve its bargaining position inherently increase the vulnerability of the adversary'’s naval forces to a first strike.
Quite apart from the crisis security dilemma, another possibility is that the on-scene commander could be deceived into thinking that an attack is unlikely by adversary efforts to cover an imminent surprise attack with secrecy and deception.
In this situation the on-scene commander misperceives the threat of attack as being unlikely, when in fact an attdck is imminent.
An on-scene commander also might not have sufficient information on the level of hostility being shown by the adversary outside the immediate vicinity, producing a misperception that the threat of attack is less than it actually is.
Thus, the threat perceptions held by tactical-level military commanders can 1049 range from highly accurate to acute misperceptions, and misperceptions can be of a threat that is either greater or lesser than the actual threat.
The perceived threat of attack held by tactical-level military commanders will be described as unlikely, possible, or imminent.
These are terms commonly used by military forces to designate threat warning levels.
The perception that threat of attack is possible means that the adversary has the capability to launch an attack in the near future, but there is not sufficient information to determine that it is in fact his intention to attack.
The perception that threat of attack is imminent means that the adversary has the capability to launch an attack, and the apparent intention of launching an attack, in the immediate future.
The fifth independent variable is the relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions.
Political-level authorities can hold threat perceptions much different from those held by tactical-level military commanders.
The two groups of decisionmakers are making their assessments in much different environments and often on the basis of different information.
National leaders focus primarily on the overall political and 1050 strategic picture, including communications with the adversary.
To national leaders the tactical situation at the scene of the crisis is but one element in constructing the overall picture.
On-scene commanders, on the other hand, focus on their immediate tactical situation, particularly the behavior of the adversary's forces in the vicinity.
On-scene commanders normally have only limited information on the overall political-military situation-primarily intelligence reports on adversary military moves-and use that information to assess the local picture.
A military move that is only a political signal to the national leaders can be seen as a seriously threatening change in the tactical situation by the on-scene commander.
Such differences in perceptions are what is meant by stratification of threat perceptions.
Such differences in political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions are important because they create the stratified crisis security dilemma.
The stratified crisis security dilemma is that the security dilemma can arise independently at different levels of interaction, affecting the the likelihood of war separately at each level.
For example, tactical level military commanders can perceive a severe threat of imminent attack while political level authorities perceive little likelihood of attack.
Further, decisionmakers at one level may not be aware that decisionmakers at the other level hold much different threat 1051 perceptions.
Thus, the likelihood of serious fighting erupting and escalation occurring can be different at the different levels of crisis interaction.
The relationship between political-level and tacticalllevel threat perceptions will be described as convergent, similar, or divergent.
Convergent threat perceptions occur when decisionmakers at the political and tactical levels of interaction hold essentially the same threat perceptions, even though their focus may be different.
For example, threat perceptions would be convergent when national leaders perceive that the adversary has decided to resort to war and that war cannot be averted by further diplomatic efforts, while on-scene commanders perceive that attack by the adversary's forces at the scene of the crisis is imminent.
Divergent oreeat perceptions are significantly Gifferent at the political and tactical levels of interaction.
Historically, the tendency is rex tacticallevel decisionmakers to perceive a greater threat of attack than do political-level decisionmakers.
The sixth independent variable is the strength of the factors inhibiting escalation.
As was discussed earlier in this chapter, there are six internal and two external escalation-inhibiting factors.
The internal factors are military prudence, caution and restraint on the part of 1052 on-scene commanders, compliance by on-scene commanders with Rieandams of indirect control, national leaders structuring the tactical environment to dampen military interactions, accurate and timely tactical intelligence on friendly and potentially hostile forces, and national leaders and the chain of command double-checking the accuracy of initial reports of military incidents.
The external factors are tacit rules of crisis behavior observed by the two sides and communications between the two sides in a crisis.
The strength of the factors inhibiting escalation will fue described as strong, weak, or lacking.
Strong inhibiting factors prevent escalation from occurring other than as the result of a deliberate decision by national leaders.
Week inhibiting factors allow escalation to occur when an engagement first breaks out, but prevent the military action from gaining sustained — Lack of the inhibiting factors can allow escalation to arise fram an inadvertent Military incident and gain momentum, exceeding the ability of national leaders to control it.
The seventh independent variable is the impact of inadvertent military incidents on stratified interactions.
Inadvertent military incidents include unanticipated authorized actions, military accidents, and unauthorized actions.
Inadvertent military incidents can trigger decoupling of tactical-level military interactions from political-level crisis management objectives, and the start 1053 of an escalation sequence at the tactical level of interaction.
Decoupling and escalation are not inevitable consequences of inadvertent military incidents.
Whether or not decoupling and escalation occur is a function of the ability of national leaders to exercise direct control over tactical-level military operations, the threat perceptions held by tactical-level military commanders, and the strength of the factors inhibiting escalation.
Thus, the significance of inadvertent military incidents can vary widely, and they generally are not particularly dangerous.
The impact of inadvertent military incidents will be described as minor, moderate, or significant.
Minor means that inadvertent military incidents have little effect on stratified interaction--they do not occur often, are not likely to cause decoupling when they do occur, and do not impede the re-establishment of control when decoupling does occur.
Moderate means that the impact of inadvertent incidents can vary widely, depending on the circumstances in which they occur.
The impact can range from momentary decoupling to an uncontrollable escalation sequence.
Significant means that inadvertent military incidents tend to have a major impact on stratified interaction.
Significant incidents tend to cause decoupling of tactical-level Military interactions from political-level objectives, to prevent rapid re-establishment of political-level control, and to trigger escalation sequences.
In this pattern, political-level leaders exercise direct control over tactical-level military operations.
There were no examples of this pattern of crisis military interaction in the case studies.
The fact that the pattern was not actually observed suggests that its occurrence is improbable, particularly in a military establishment as large and complex as that of the United States.
If the crisis escalates to war, it is through deliberate decisions by national leaders.
This does not mean that national leaders preferred war to diplomatic efforts from the beginning of the crisis.
They May--particularly in the age of nuclear weapons--opt for war with great reluctance and apprehension, out of desperation rather than hope for decisive gains.
That is, the level of violence at the tactical level reflects the strategy being pursued at the political level.
Political-level control] of tactical level military operations is the most significant independent variable determining whether this pattern occurs.
Small-scale local military operations favor occurrence of the pattern because national leaders tend to shift from direct to indirect control as the scale of military operations increases.
Declaring a worldwide alert (DEFCON 3 or higher) puts great pressure on direct control by setting 1056 in motion a large range of military operations that can generate military interactions with the other side's forces.
Routine to heightened intensity. of tactical-level interactions between the two sides eases the difficulty of exercising direct control over military operations.
As the intensity of interactions increases, national leaders are increasing left out of the tactical picture.
On-scene commanders must increasingly make their own decisions to keep pace with rapidly-changing tactical circumstances.
Any level of tactical-level threat perceptions, whether unlikely, possible, or imminent, can cause unified interactions.
An example of convergent threat perceptions would be for national leaders to perceive that the adversary intends to resort to war while on-scene commanders perceive that an attack by the other side is imminent.
Convergent threat eee ae also occur when national leaders perceive that the adversary intends to seek a diplomatic solution to the crisis and onscene commanders perceive that an attack is unlikely.
Convergent threat perceptions tend to prevent tactical~level interactions from becoming decoupled from political-level 1057 control.
Unified interaction do not exclude the possibility of war resulting from misperception.
When misperceptions occur, they are convergent--national leaders incorrectly perceive that the adversary intends to resort to war while on-scene commanders incorrectly perceive that attack is imminent.
If the factors inhibiting escalation are strong, they contribute to the occurrence of unified interactions; but such factors do not have a major causal role because the independent variables already mentioned tend to prevent escalation pressures from occurring.
That is, tacticallevel military commanders tend not to feel greater pressure to escalate than do political-level leaders.
The internal factors inhibiting escalation tend to prevent tactical-level interactions from Aerating bottom-up escalatory pressures.
The external factors inhibiting escalation become important only when national leaders begin contemplating escalatory military options.
The impact of inadvertent incidents must be minor for the unified interaction pattern to occur.
Inadvertent incidents do not trigger decoupling of tactical-level interactions; national leaders retain direct control.
The most important independent variables causing unified interactions are thus direct political-level control of tactical-level Military interactions and convergent threat perceptions.
In this pattern national leaders retain control over the escalation and de-escalation of conflict.
The separate interaction sequences at the political and tactical levels evolve in parailel, in the sense of reflecting the same overall strategy toward the adversary.
National leaders do not control every operational decision made at the tactical level, but the decisions made by on-svene commanders support the crisis management strategy of national leaders.
Political-level control of tactical-level military interaction is the most important independent variable in this pattern.
Political-level control is indirect, rather than direct, as in the unified interaction pattern.
National leaders rely primarily on mechanisms of indirect control for ensuring that tacticallevel interactions support their strategy for managing the crisis.
For this reason crisis interactions are stratified, rather than unified.
Local to theater scale of operations favor occurrence of the pattern because national leaders tend to have greater difficulty controlling tactical-level military operations as their scale increases.
The likelihood of tactical-level interactions becoming decoupled from political-level objectives tends to increase as the scope of military operations increases.
Smaller-scale operations thus contribute to stratified interactions being parallel.
Routine to heightened intensity of tactical-level interactions between the two sides makes the task of controlling tactical-level military pene one feasible.
As the intensity of interactions increases, national leaders are increasingly left out of the tactical picture and 1060 on-scene commanders must make their own decisions to keep pace with rapidly~changing tactical circumstances.
Intense tactical~level interactions tend to increase the likelihood of decoupling and inadvertent military incidents, causing one of other patterns of crisis military interaction.
Any level of tactical-level threat perceptions, whether unlikely, possible or imminent, can cause parallel stratified interactions.
As in the unified interaction pattern, the more important independent variable causing the parallel stratified interaction pattern is that the threat perceptions held by political-level leaders and tacticallevel military commanders are convergent.
Convergent threat perceptions tend to keep ee 1ere1 interactions parallel with political-level interactions when national leaders are not exercising direct control of military Operations.
When misperceptions occur, however, they are convergent--national leaders incorrectly perceive that the adversary intends to resort to rr while on-scene commanders incorrectly perceive that attack is imminent.
If the factors inhibiting escalation are strong, they contribute to the occurrence of parallel stratified interactions; but such factors do not have a major causal role because the independent variables already mentioned tend to prevent stratified escalation pressures from occurring.
Tactical-level commanders tend not to feel greater pressure to escalate than do political-level leaders.
The internal factors serve only to prevent escalation of tactical-level interactions, they do not prevent escalatory pressures from arising separately at the political level of interaction.
The most dangerous situation under conditions of parallel stratified interactions is for escalatory pressures to arise simultaneously at all three levels in the chain of command-political, strategic, and tactical.
This is a convergence of perceptions at the three levels that escalation of the conflict is the only course of action that can forestall unacceptable damage to vital national interests.
This type of convergence is essentially what occurred in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incident, in which all levels in the chain of command perceived the North Vietnamese attacks as deliberate provocations warranting strong retaliation.
Doubts about the circumstances of the attacks and whether retaliation was appropriate were not thoroughly explored due to a broad consensus supporting an escalatory response.
The impact of inadvertent military incidents must be Minor for the parallel stratified interaction pattern to occur.
That is, the responses made by on-scene commanders 1062 tec inadvertent incidents support the itetsiniete cote nt strategy being pursued by national leaders--the essence of parallel interactions.
The most important independent variables in the parallel stratified interaction pattern are thus indirect political-level control of tactical-level military operations and convergent threat perceptions.
Momentary Decoupling The third pattern of crisis military interaction is momentary decoupling of interaction.
In this pattern Mational leaders temporarily lose control of military teractions. but are able to quickly re-establish control.
However, there is a brief period in which national leaders are not controlling tactical-level military interactions. ering that period, the actions taken by the on-scene Rigasander do not support the crisis management efforts being pursued by national leaders.
Those actions could well be authorized under guidance contalawd in the mechanisms of indirect control, but nevertheless complicate political and diplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis.
This aces not mean that the on-scene commander was “wrong” to take the actions.
For example, he may have been compelled to use force in self-defense as authorized in his rules of engagement.
The use of force could well have been necessary to avert an attack, appropriate to the tactical circumstances, and fully justified under international law, 1063 but still have interfered with crisis management efforts.
The key point is that tactical-level interactions not controlled by national leaders occur, and that those actions complicate or interfere with political-level crisis management efforts.
National leaders lose effective direct or indirect control over military operations.
The important feature is that whatever causes decoupling is not permanent; it does not prevent national leaders from quickly re-establishing control.
Local to theater scale of military operations favor the occurrence of momentary decoupling by increasing the likelihood that national leaders will be able to to reestablish control over Caasunenewel military interaction.
Global-scale operations make it more difficult for national Peeders to re-establish control over tactical-level military interaction after decoupling occurs.
At the lower intensities, decoupled tacticai-level interactions are less likely to gain a momentum of their own and national leaders have less difficulty keeping abreast of the tactical 1065 situation--both of «sshich facilitate the re-establishment of control over tactical-level military operations.
The tactical-level threat perception that favors the eccurrence of momentary decoupling is that attack is unlikely or possible.
Momentary decoupling can result from technical problems with communications systems even when the on-scene commander views an attack as unlikely.
But Momentary decoupling can also result from actions taken in response to a perception that attack is possible.
The perception that attack is imminent tends not to be associated with momentary égaeu pluie wsecatec 1t prompts more intense tactical interactions, which prevent national leaders from immediately re-establishing control.
A relationship between political-level and tacticallevel threat perceptions that is convergent or similar favors the occurrence of momentary decoupling.
Convergent or similar threat perceptions facilitate the ability of national leaders to re-establish _— over tactical-level military operations.
Divergent threat perceptions, on the other hand, tend to cause tactical-level interactions to Maintain their own momentum, resisting control by national leaders.
Strong internal factors inhibiting escalation facilitate the ability of national leaders to re-establish control over tactical-level military operations.
For example, on-scene commanders normally reach the limits of their authority under the mechanisms of indirect control early in an engagement, and turn to the chain of command for further guidance.
This Creates an opportunity for control to be re-established if communications channels are open and top-level officials have a grasp of the tactical situation.
The external factors inhibiting escalation also facilitate reestablishment of control by slowing the pace of action and preventing tactical-level interaction from gaining momentum during the period in which control is lost.
When inadvertent military incidents have a significant impact on crisis military interactions, they tend to cause the initial decoupling of tactical-level military interactions from political-level objectives.
The most common type of incident is for an unanticipated authorized action by an on-scene commander to produce an engagement with the other side.
An example would be use of force in selfdefense under the rules of engagement.
The use of force is both necessary and authorized, but had not been directly ordered by national leaders and results in an engagement 1067 over which they have no control.
This situation has arisen several times in the Persian Gulf when Iranian forces ae eatened United States Navy ships or aircraft.
In every incident the on-scene commanders halted the engagement when the immediate needs of self-defense were met and sought guidance from higher authority concerning retaliatory attacks.
In some instances the President was able to issue order on retaliatory attacks within minutes of an engagement, a clear example of direct control being re-established after ‘decoupling.
Although accidents and unauthorized actions can also trigger momentary decoupling, there were no instances of this occurring in any of the case studies.
In summary, two of the independent variables cause decoupling to occur, while the other five cause the decoupling to be momentary.
The independent variables that cause decoupling to occur are loss of political-level control over tactical-level military operations and inadvertent incidents with a significant impact on crisis military interaction.
The independent variables that cause the decoupling to be momentary are local to theater scale of military operations, routine to heightened intensity of tactical-level military operations, unlikely to possible tactical-level threat perceptions, a convergent to similar relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions, and strong escalation-inhibiting factors.
Momentary decoupling is the most cosson of the four crisis military interaction 1068 patterns that are marked by decoupling of tactical-level military interaction from political-level objectives.
Decoupled Interactions Followed by Disengagement The fourth pattern of crisis military interaction is decoupled interactions followed by disengagement.
This pattern begins with decoupling of tactical-level interaction from political-level control.
National leaders are not able to immediately re-establish control due to communications problens, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced tactical environment.
But the initial tactical-level engagement between the two sides does not gain momentum and escalate, it loses momentum and the forces disengage.
By the time national leaders re-establish control, the shooting has stopped.
Tactical-level disengagement can be a requirement for political-level control to be re-established, particularly in a fast-paced tactical environment.
The Tonkin Gulf incidents of August 2 and 4, 1964 are examples of decoupling followed by disengagement.
President Johnson and his advisors had not been paying close attention to the USS Maddox prior to the first North Vietnamese attack, and were not able to control the engagement once it started.
Although the White House was paying much closer attention to events in the Tonkin Gulf at the time of the second incident, United States communications capabilities still did not permit top-level officials to control the engagement.
United States naval forces disengaged as soon as the immediate threat of attack by North Vietnamese appeared to have been countered, rather than being ordered to disengage by national leaders.
On-scene commanders consulted with higher authority on retaliation and President Johnson made the decision on further military operations against North Vietnam.
Thus, although escalation occurred after the second Tonkin Gulf incident, it was was deliberate escalation.
National leaders tend to lose ntrol because they are remote from the scene of action and e on-scene commander does not have time to consult with gher authority.
A fast paced-tactical vironment eae luded direct White House control over the gagements between United States Navy and Iranian forces in the rsian Gulf in 1987.
On the other hand, improved mmunications contributed to the President being able to ke speedy decisions on retaliation against Iranian forces, lowing retaliatory attacks to commence soon after Iranian ovocations.
The primary effect of improved communications us has been to make it easier to re-establish control ter an engagement begins, making the momentary decoupling tern more likely than the decoupling followed by sengagement pattern.
The scale of military operations tends not to be a gnificant independent variable causing the decoupling 1071 followed by disengagement pattern because loss of control is primarily caused by the nature of the local tactical environment.
The pattern can occur during military operations of any scale when the local tactical environment is the cause of decoupling.
Although no examples were found in the case studies, it is possible that this pattern of crisis military interaction could also be caused by communications or decisionmaking problems.
Such problems are more likely to arise as the scale of operations increases to theater and global.
The intensity of tactical-level military interactions is a significant independent variable causing the decoupling followed by disengagement pattern.
Intense tactical-level interactions are more prone to cause loss of control and an initial engagement than are routine intensity of interactions, and make it more difficult for national leaders to to re-establish control before the forces disengage.
Tactical-level threat perceptions that attack is imminent tend to cause aco vei tite and the initial engage-~ ment.
The tactical-level perception of threat can range from being completely accurate, as in the first Tonkin Gulf Incident, to being an acute misperception of the adversary's intentions.
Regardless of the threat perceptions they may hold, national leaders are not able to re-establish control over tactical-level interaction until the forces disengage.
Strong escalation-inhibiting factors favor occurrence of the decoupling followed by disengagement pattern, rather than the two patterns involving escalation.
Internal BA EMORS ine vent the tactical-level engagement from Spreading upward, becoming a larger battle involving additional forces.
The on-scene commander breaks off the engagement once the immediate threat to his forces is countered.
External factors can also contribute to the forces of the two sides disengaging rather than escalating after the initial engagement.
The most important external factor is adherence to tacit rules of crisis behavior.
Even when the adversary instigates an incident with a deliberate provocation, he could well decide that escalation of the resulting ieee would not serve his interests.
The adversary's leaders could also be decoupled from their forces, leaving the escalation decision to the 1073 adversary's on-scene commander.
In either case, observance of tacit rules of crisis behavior by the adversary contributes to disengagement rather than escalation being the result of an incident.
The occurrence of inadvertent military incidents with a significant impact on crisis military interaction favors occurrence of the decoupling followed by disengagement pattern.
Inadvertent military incidents can trigger the decoupling of tactical-level inter-actions and the initial engagement between the forces of the two sides.
The most Picts pattern is for an unanticipated authorized action by an on-scene commander to produce an engagement with the other side, as in use of force in self~defense under the rules of engagement.
Military accidents or unauthorized actions could also trigger this pattern of decoupling, but no examples were found in the case studies.
In summary, four of the independent variables cause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur, one of the independent variables causes disengagement to occur without tactical-level escalation, and two cf the independent Petite ere not significant causes of the pattern.
The independent variables that cause decoupling ae the initial engagement to occur are loss of political-level control over tactical-level military operations, intense tactical-level military operations, tactical-level threat perceptions that attack is imminent, and inadvercent incidents with a 1074 significant impact on crisis military interaction.
The independent variable that causes decoupled tactical-level interactions to disengage rather than escalate is strong escalation~inhibiting factors.
The independent variables that have no significant role in causing the pattern to occur are the scale of military operations and the relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions.
The decoupling followed by disengagement pattern occurs less often than the momentary decoupling pattern, but more often than the two decoupling patterns involving escalation.
Inadvertent Tactical-Level Escalation The fifth pattern of crisis military interaction is inadvertent tactical-level escalation.
This pattern begins with decoupling of tactical-level interaction from politicallevel crisis management objectives.
National leaders are not able to immediately re-establish control due to communications problems, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced tactical environment.
The initial. tactical-level engagement gains momentum and escalates, increasing in violence and involving an increasing amount of each side's forces.
The third scenario-national leaders halting tactical-level escalation after losing control--is unlikely due to the extreme difficulty of maintaining direct control of forces once they are engaged in battle.
There were no examples of this crisis military interaction pattern in the case studies.
The possibility of decoupled interactions being followed by tactical level escalation can be inferred from observed variation in the independent variables affecting military interaction.
The most significant independent variables in the inadvertent tactical-level escalation pattern are loss of politicallevel control of tactical-level military interaction, divergent threat perceptions, and weak factors inhibiting escalation.
Loss of political-level control of tactical-level military interaction causes decoupling to occur and allows tactical-level escalation that is not controlled by national leaders to occur.
Such loss of control can be caused by communications and information flow problems, impairment of political-level decisionmaking, a fast-paced tactical environment, ambiguous or ambivalent orders, tactically inappropriate orders, i Aeentoetiste guidance in mechanisms of indirect control, or unauthorized actions by military commanders.
Inadvertent tactical-level escalation could even occur while national leaders are in direct communication with the on-scene commander if they are incapable of staying abreast of a rapidly changing tactical environment.
Theater to global scale of military operations are normally significant in causing the inadvertent tacticallevel escalation pattern.
Larger-scale operations can cause loss of control arising from communications and information 1077 flow problems or impairment of political-level decisionmaking.
Inadvertent tactical-level escalation can also occur during smaller-scale military operations when the cause of decoupling is a fast-paced tactical environment, ambiguous or ambivalent orders, tactically inappropriate orders, inappropriate guidance in mechanisms of indirect control, or unauthorized actions by military commanders.
Intense tactical-level military interaction contributes to causing the inadvertent tactical-level escalation pattern by causing loss of political-level control of tactical-level military interaction and making it more difficult for national leaders to re-establish control before significant tactical-level escalation occurs.
Tactical-level threat perceptions that attack is a tend to cause decoupling, the initial engagement, and the tactical-level escalation.
A perception that attack is imminent can prompt the on-scene commander to use force Piiseer Gonsulting with higher authority or without waiting for a top-level decision after reporting his intentions.
The tactical-level perception of threat can range from being completely accurate to being an acute misperception of the adversary’s intentions.
A divergent relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions is an important independent variable in the inadvertent tactical-level escalation pattern.
Divergent threat perceptions inhibit the 1078 re-establishment of political-level control over tacticallevel interaction, but also help prevent tactical-level escalation from causing inadvertent strategic-level or deliberate political-level escalation.
A divergent relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions thus contributes to escalation remaining limited to the tactical level of interaction.
Weak escalation-inhibiting factors favor occurrence of the inadvertent tactical-level escalation pattern.
Neither internal nor external escalation-inhibiting factors are sufficient to prevent tactical-level escalation from occurring.
On the other hand, the internal and external escalationinhibiting factors prevent escalation from spreading upward to the strategic and political levels. theevnally, strategic~level military commanders and political-level leaders react with caution to the tactical-level engagement.
Externally, both sides adhere to tacit rules of Crisis behavior that inhibit escalation, and communications between the two sides may be used to avoid escalation and hasten tactical disengagement.
The escalation-inhibiting factors are Cre too weak to prevent tactical-level escalation, but are strong enough to S amerit inadvertent strategic~level escalation or deliberate a1 i eiledl le usa escalation.
The occurrence of inadvertent military incidents with a significant impact on crisis military interaction favors 1079 the occurrence of the inadvertent tactical-level interaction pattern.
The most common pattern is for an unanticipated authorized action by an on-scene commander to produce an engagement with the other side, as in use of force in self-defense under the rules of engagement.
Military accidents or unauthorized actions could also trigger this pattern of decoupling.
In summary, four of the independent variables cause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur, two of the en tident variables zause tactical-level escalation to eccur, and two of the independent variables allow tacticallevel escalation to occur but prevent it from causing inadvertent strategic-level escalation or deliberate political-level escalation.
The independent variables that cause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur are loss of political-level control over tactical-level military Operations, intense tactical-level military operations, tactical-level threat perceptions that attack is imminent, and inadvertent incidents with a significant impact on crisis military interaction.
The independent variables that cause decoupled tactical-level interactions to escalate are intense tactical-level military interaction, and a tacticallevel threat perception that attack is imminent.
The independent variables that allow tactical-level escalation 1080 but prevent inadvertent strategic-level escalation or Geliberate political-level escalation are a divergent relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions and weak escalation-inhibiting factors.
Inadvertent Strategic-Level Escalation The sixth pattern of crisis military interaction is inadvertent strategic-level escalation.
Inadvertent strategic-level escalation arising from tactical-level escalation was the path examined in this study, which focused on tactical-level military interaction.
Inadvertent strategic-level escalation without prior tactical-level escalation could arise from inadvertent military incidents (unanticipated authorized actions, military accidents, and unauthorized deliberate actions) involving strategic-level forces.
Many of the factors affecting tactical-level interaction probably also affect strategic-level interaction, but such strategic level factors were not addressed in this study.
The remainder of this discussion will address only inadvertent strategiclevel escalation. arising from tactical-level escalation.
Inadvertent strategic-level escalation arising from tactical-level escalation begins with tactical-level 1081 interactions decoupling from political-level control.
National leaders are unable to immediately re-establish control over tactical-level interaction due to communications problems, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced tactical environment.
The tacticallevel escalation spiral generates escalatory pressures at the strategic level, reinforcing perceptions that the adversary is preparing for war and is not interested ina diplomatic solution to the crisis.
The scope of fighting rapidly grows to the theater level and spreads to other theaters, possibly becoming global in scope.
The spread of the escalatory spiral to the strategic level of interaction is eeeugh deliberate decisions made by strategic-~-level military commanders, but is considered to be inadvertent because it was not directly ordered by national leaders and did not apy oet their efforts to manage the crisis.
First, 1082 inadvertent escalation to war could occur when tacticallevel and initial strategic-level escalation is misperceived as initiation of war by the adversary.
Strategic-level military commanders then order wartime operstisns under the authority delegated to them to act in such situations.
This would appear to be the most likely circumstances for inadvertent escalation to war.
Second, inadvertent escalation to war could arise from strategic-level military commanders misperceiving that national leaders desire that Wartime operations be initiated, but are for some reason incapable of issuing the order.
Based on the findings of this study, this would be the least likely path for inadvertent escalation to war.
Deliberate escalation to war occurs when inadvertent strategic-level escalation prompts national leaders to make a deliberate decision to initiate wartime operations.
The final decision for war is a deliberate one made by national leaders.
The decision for. war could be based on an accurate assessment to that the adversary intends to initiate wartime Military operations, or has already done so, but could also be based on a misperception of the adversary'’s intentions 1083 and the causes of the tactical-level and strategic-level escalation being experienced in the crisis.
There were no examples of the inadvertent strategiclevel escalation pattern of crisis military interaction in the case studies.
The possibility of decoupled interactions being followed by escalation spreading to the strategic level can be inferred from observed variation in the independent variables affecting military interaction.
However, the fact that the pattern was not actually observed suggests that its occurrence is improbable.
The most important independent variables causing this pattern are loss of political-level control of tactical-level military interaction, convergent threat perceptions, and lack of escalation-inhibiting factors.
Such loss of control can be caused by communications and information flow problems, impairment of political-level decisionraking, a fast-paced tactical environment, ambiguous or ambivalent orders, tactically inappropriate orders, inappropriate guidance in mechanisms of indirect control, or unauthorized actions by military commanders.
Decoupling could occur while national leaders are in direct communication with the on-scene commander if they cannot stay abreast of a rapidly changing tactical environment.
Global-scale Military operations tend to favor the occurrence of the inadvertent strategic-level escalation 1085 pattern.
Larger-scale operations make loss of politicallevel control over tactical-level and strategic-level interactions more likely, and provide an opportunity for a tactical engagement to rapidly — to theater and strategic forces.
The most acute danger is when the military forces of both sides are at a high level of alert, maintain-~ ing readiness to commence combat operations on short notice.
Tactical-level threat perceptions that attack is dmminent tend to cause decoupling, the initial tacticallevel engagement, and tactical-level escalation.
A perception that attack is imminent can prompt the on-scene commander to use force without consulting with higher authority or without waiting for a top-level decision after reporting his intentions.
A convergent relationship between strategic-level and tactical-level threat perceptions is an important independent variable in the inadvertent strategic-level escalation pattern.
The spread of escalation to the strategic level results from strategic-level military commanders perceiving that war with the adversary is imminent and unavoidable.
Further, a convergent relationship between political -level and strategic-level threat perceptions is important in Causing deliberate escalation to war to result from inadvertent strategic-level escalation.
National leaders make a 1086 deliberate decision to initiate wartime military operations, rather than to halt strategic-level escalation, because previous tactical-level and strategic-level escalation appears to confirm their suspicions that the adversary is not interested in a diplomatic solution to the crisis.
Convergence of threat perceptions is thus a significant independent variable in the inadvertent strategic-level escalation pattern of crisis military interaction.
A lack of escalation-inhibiting factors is also a significant independent variable in the inadvertent strategic-level escalation pattern.
The internal factors that would ordinarily prevent escalatory pa aaa from Spreading upward are nullified by convergent threat perceptions.
On-scene commanders and the chain of command have little incentive to react with military and political Caution because national lealers shaze their worst-case perceptions of he adversary's intentions.
A lack of, or erosion of, tacit rules of crisis behavior cause the two sides to react to tactical-level escalation with strategiclevel escalation, rather than restraint, and communications between the two sides are not used or not effective in preventing misperceptions of intentions and arresting the escalation spiral.
The occurrence of inadvertent military incidents with a significant impact on crisis military interaction favors 1087 the occurrence of the inadvertent strategic-level interaction pattern.
Inadvertent military incidents can trigger the decoupling of tactical-level interactions and the initial engagement between the forces of the two sides; and can also contribute to the spread of tactical-level escala-~ tion to the strategic level.
For example, accidental launch of a strategic nuclear weapon in the midst of tactical-level escalation could well trigger strategic-level escalation by appearing to be preemption by the other side.
In summary, five of the independent variables cause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur, while five of the independent variables cause tactical~-level escalation to result in inadvertent strcetegic-level escalation.
The | independent variables that cause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur are loss of political-level control over ad leve) military operations, global-scale military Operations, intense tactical-level military interaction, tactical-level threat perceptions ee attack is imminent, and inadvertent incidents with a significant impact on tactical-level military interaction.
The independent Variables that cause tactical-level escalation result in inadvertent strategic-level escalation are loss of politicallevel control over strategic-level military operations, global-scale military operations, a convergent relationship between strategic-level and tactical-level threat perceptions (and, in the case of deliberate escalation to war, 1088 convergent political-level and strategic-level threat perceptions), a lack of escalation-inhibiting factors, and inadvertent incidents with a significant impact on strategiclevel military interaction.
The inadvertent strategic-level escalation pattern appears to be the crisis interaction pattern least likely to occur.
Conclusion The dependent variable in the theory of stratified interaction is the outcome of crisis military interaction; specifically, the degree to which and the manner in which tactical-level military interactions cause escalation of a crisis.
Inadvertent controlled escalation and deliberate BearMacion can halt short of war or continue on to war.
However, because they were identified through an analytical-inductive process, rather than deductively, additional patterns could be identified through further empirical research.
More than one of the patterns of crisis military interaction can occur in a crisis.
The first four patterns-unified interaction, parallel stratified interaction, momentary decoupling of interaction, decoupled interactions followed wr disengagement, and inadvertent tactical-level escalation--can occur in various sequences in a crisis.
Contingent generalizations were formulated for the six patterns of crisis military interaction, offering a distinct Causal pattern for each type of interaction.
Each of the causal patterns is produced by specific variations in seven independent variables that were identified in the case Studies as significant in determining the outcome of crisis Military interaction.
The seven independent variables that 1090 determine the nature of crisis military interaction and the likelihood of escalation are the degree of politicallevel control over tactical-~level military interaction, the scale of military operations, the intensity of tactical-level military interactions, the perceived threat of attack at the tactical level, the relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions, the strength of escalation-inhibiting factors, and the impact of inadvertent military incidents.
Independent variables are lettered in the Sequence given at the top of this page.
Independent variables are lettered in the sequence given at the top of page 1090. stratified interactions become decoupled, and the degree to which decoupled interactions result in escalation of a crisis.
Parallel stratified interaction, momentary decoupling, 1092 decoupled interactions followed by disengagement, inadvertent tactical-level irit@eaect ion: inadvertent strategic-level interaction, and unified interaction.
The independent variables that most affect this ranking are political-level eontrol of tactical-level interaction and the strength of the escalation-inhibiting factors.
Direct political-level control of tactical-level cinan een operations is difficult for United States leaders due to the size and complexity of the United States armed forces, making the unified interaction pattern rare and providing ample opportunities for stratified crisis interactions to become decoupled.
The escalation-inhibiting factors are generally quite strong, preventing escalation even when decoupling occurs--making momentary decoupling and es iang followed by disengagement much more common than inadvertent tactical-level escalation or inadvertent strategic-level escalation.
First, what do these findings imply for the analytical value of the theory of stratified interaction.
Second, what are the implications of these findings for the practice of crisis Management.
Third, to what degree can these findings be generalized to crises involving forces other than naval forces.
These issues will be addressed in the next chapter, which will offer overall conclusions on the theory of stratified interaction, the implications of these findings for crisis management, and areas for further research.
The theory provides differentiated explanations for a variety of crisis military interactions, thus allowing policymakers to diagnose specific situations in which crisis management and crisis stability problems can ee Studies of international crises have repeatedly concluded that the success of crisis management is critically Beaendant upon top-level political authorities Maintaining close control of the actions of their military forces.
This essential requirement for crisis management has also been identified as a potentially serious problem area.
But the existing literature on crises and crisis Management by and large has not progressed beyond identifying general requirements for crisis management.
Policymakers need an enhanced ability to diagnose specific situations in which particular crisis management and crisis Stability problems can arise.
Policymakers cannot operate effectively only on the basis of general requirements for 1093 ‘ 1094 crisis management.
Rather, they need the ability to judge how the general requirements of crisis ishagement apply in the particular crises they face.
Contemporary crisis management theory has poor diagnostic power when applied to a particular crisis situation.
Scholars engaged in formulating crisis management theories generally have not attempt to develop a differentiated typology of situations in which crisis Management and crisis stability problems can arise.
Most scholars megagea in formulating crisis management theory have been insufficiently concerned with explanatory, as opposed to prescriptive, theory.
What is needed is an explanatory theory that is policy-relevant without being prescriptive.
Earlier studies have not succeeded in identifying theoretically relevant variation in crisis military interaction.
Crisis management and crisis stability problems can arise in different ways, causing crisis management to fail for different reasons.
That is, it must be capable of offering differentiated explanations for a variety of patterns of crisis military interaction.
A differentiated explanatory theory is possible by formulating contingent generalizations, which identify regularities that occur only under certain specific. conditions.
The objective of this study was to identify different causal patterns associated with variation in crisis military interaction.
For this purpose an analyticalinductive procedure was used to analyze four historical cases of crisis naval operations and four cases of peacetime attacks on United States Navy ships.
This inductive procedure yielded a typology of crisis military interactions, each linked with a somewhat different causal pattern.
The dependent variable was whether on not inadvertent escalation occurs in an international crisis.
For the purposes of this study, inadvertent escalation was defined as any increase in the level or scope of violence in a crisis that was not directly ordered by national leaders or anticipated by them as being the likely result of their orders.
The specific phenomena explained in the study were the interaction of military forces in crises and the impact of such interactions on crisis stability.
The analysis defined discrete patterns of tactical-level crisis interaction, each associated with a particular causal pattern.
Because the patterns of tactical-level interaction were arrived at empirically, the patterns identified in this study probably do not cover the universe of interaction patterns~~additional patterns could well be identified through further empirical research.
The first was that both sides in a crisis sought to protect er advance vital national interests, or at least had vital interests at stake that they were unwilling to sacrifice for the purpose of avoiding war.
Both sides thus took military actions intended to support crisis bargaining and to counter Military moves by the other side.
The second condition was that neither side desired war as the outcome of the crisis.
National leaders on each side limited their objectives and restrained their military moves to avoid provoking a war.
Both sides thus sought to avoid inadvertent escalation of the crisis while deterring escalation by the other side.
That, in turn, required a research design in which a small number of cases were examined using the method of structured focused comparison, rather than a research design using a large number of cases and statistical methods to identify significant causal variables explaining variance in outcomes.
The Theory of Stratified Interaction Previous studies of international crises pli cileay viewed the various political and military interactions that occur between the two sides as a single interaction sequence.
Multiple interaction sequences, evolving simultaneously but semi~independently, arise when national leaders do not make all operational decisions themselves, but must delegate significant decisionmaking authority to subordinates.
Decoupling occurs to the extent that O99 operational decisions on the employment of military forces made at the strategic and tactical levels differ from the operational decisions political level decisionmakers would. have made to coordinate those military actions with their political-diplomatic strategy for resolving the crisis.
Crisis Stability Crisis stability exists to the extent that neither side has an incentive to strike the first military blow.
The stratified crisis security dilemma is that, tn a crisis, the security dilemma is stratified, arising from the interaction processes occurring separately at each of the three levels, and affecting the likelihood of war separately at each level.
An important implication of the stratified crisis security dilemma is that tactical-level military commanders can perceive incentives to preempt while political-level leaders do not.
Tactical-level commanders can be delegated the authority to order certain types of preemption under the doctrine of anticipatory self-defense.
Such tactical-level preemption could well set in motion an escalation sequence that is at least temporarily beyond the control of national leaders.
War can also arise inadvertently through an escalation process in which the two sides take increasingly threatening military and diplomatic moves in an effort at gaining leverage in crisis bargaining and improving their military positions.
Accidents and other inadvertent military actions contribute to the escalation process.
The escalation dynamic is driven by rising stakes in the outcome of a conflict, which increase the motivation of national leaders to prevail, and by an action-reaction process, in which an escalatory action by one side provokes an escalatory reaction by the other side in recurring cycles.
This escalation dynamic increases tensions and hardens resolve until it results in a deliberate or preemptive decision for war.
When signalling adversaries, the dilemma is between inadvertent signals of hostility and inadvertent Sigmar cr acquiescence.
When signalling an ally or friend, the misperception dilemma is between inadvertent signals of encouragement and inadvertent signals of PecpenCiment.
Misperceptions can arise at one level without other levels necessarily being aware of them, providing a mechanism by which stratified interactions can become decoupled.
Political-Military Tensions The crisis management literature is based on an erroneous view of the manner in which military forces are controlled in crises.
Although this description is essentially correct, it fails to grasp the complexity of military command and control, and leads to inaccurate assessments of the crisis management problems arising from the employment of military forces in crises.
Even in crises, military commanders are delegated significant authority to make operational decisions on the employment of their forces-~-including decisions on the use of force.
Under certain circumstances military commanders can use conventional weapons without seeking permission from higher authorities.
The interaction of political and military considerations when military force is employed as a political instrument in crises generate tensions~--actual and potential 1103 conflicts between political and military considerations which force decision-makers, either knowingly or tacitly, to make trade-offs among individually important but mutually | incompatible considerations.
The second is tension between the need for top-level control of military options in a crisis, and the need for tactical flexibility and instantaneous Miiision-naking at the scene of the crisis.
The third is tension between performance of peacetime political missions and readiness to perform wartime combat missions.
These three tensions between political and military considerations affect the HeglSe to which stratified interactions become decoupled in a crisis, thus having a significant impact on Crisis decision-making and crisis stability.
Mechanisms of Indirect Control Organization and management studies show that Significant delegation of decisionmaking authority is common in large organizations.
Organization and management studies show that tension between autonomy and control is always present in public and business organizations, particularly those consisting of humerous independent operating units.
Pressures toward secenenels ced control are driven by severe constraints on the ability of top-level authorities to effectively control tactical operations, and by the advantages gained by granting the on-scene commander flexibility to exercise initiative.
They relieve higher authorities of 1106 the burden of having to closely monitor the details of military operations--a burden that can quickly exceed their {nformation processing and decisionmaking capabilities when large-scale operations are being conducted in a fast-paced political~military environment.
Relieved of this burden, top-level authorities are better able to concentrate on monitoring the overall political-strategic situation, formulating and revising their strategy for dealing with the confrontation, and coordinating the overall execution of military operations so that they support that strategy.
Collegial and nonhierarchical controls are relied upon heavily in military organizations.
Members of these units are indoctrinated that their elite status requires that they meet superior standards of performance--typically discipline, endurance, aggressiveness, and fighting skill-unique to Bieter organizations.
On the one hand, controls such as discipline, loyalty, and respect for the chain of command are essential for delegated control and mechanisms of indirect control to function at all.
Studies of public administration and business management repeatedly show that in large organizations comprised of numerous independent operating units, optimum performance is achieved with decentralized decisionmaking combined with appropriate--primarily collegial and nonhierarchical-controls.
The issue as to what degree of centralization or decentralization is optimum for military operations was not directly addressed in this review of the military command System.
The optimum degree of centralization or decentralization can vary widely depending on the nature of the military Merstion being conducted and the politicalmilitary context of the operation.
The United States armed forces rely on a flexible combination of direct and indirect control.
The methods of control range from positive direct control and direct control by negation at the tight end of the ""tightness of control” spectrum, to monitored delegated control and autonomous delegated control at the loose end.
When a military commander delegates control of operational forces, he does not relinquish all control of those forces to his subordinate.
In most cases, he retains a certain amount of direct control, which Seti vary widely in tightness.
Mechanisms of 1109 indirect control are order:3, instructions, or detailed guidance issued to a commander prior to the start of a mission in order to ensure that the operational decisions he makes support the objectives and intentions of his superiors.
As the method of control being used moves across the ""tightness of control” spectrum from tight to loose--that is, as the subordinate is granted increasing freedom from direct control--the importance of the mechanisms of indirect control increases.
The United States alert system, which is based on five levels of Defense Readiness Condition , defines the overall framework for controlling the readiness of United States forces, providing a uniform system for all operational commands.
Within this framework, following guidance from the Joint Chiefs of Staff , individual commands formulate alert procedures and readiness postures applicable to their forces.
Much of the detailed guidance 1110 for operational forces is included in standing orders and contingency plans activated as higher levels of DEFCON are declared.
They must maintain the minimum readiness level set by JCS, but can place their forces at a higher condition of readiness if warranted by the particular threat facing their commands.
They can also select from among various readiness postures-tailored for different types of threats--within a given DEFCON level.
Lower level emilee. alin do not have authority to order changes in DEFCON) can also increase the readiness of their forces independent of the worldwide or theater DEFCON level.
Standing orders are detailed guidance on operational procedures prepared on a routine basis during peacetime.
Mission orders include letters of intent , Operations plans or operations orders issued for a specific short-term operation, and various Stunde Gapes of orders used to initiate routine and non-routine operations.
Mission 1111 orders can range from being very detailed and specific to being very brief and general.
At a minimum, a mission order dneludes the objective of the operation, the forces assigned to it, the identity of the commander, and the time frame for the operation.
Mission orders serve as a mechanism of indirect control by relieving a commander of having to exercise direct control over the details of an seeucuantls execution.
A mission order can specify which decisions must be referred to higher authority and which decisions the subordinate commander is authorized make einer.
Contingency plans are those operations plans prepared in advance for execution in the circumstances specified in the plans.
The only 1112 ‘direct orders that are needed are last-minute revisions to the contingency plan and the mission order directing that it ‘pe executed as modified.
Rules of engagement serve as -a mechanism of indirect control by allowing top-level ‘authorities to specify policies on the use of force prior to situations in which direct control of the decision to use force is not possible.
The purpose of rules of engagement is to provide guidance to operating forces from National Command Authorities, via the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Operational chain of command, on how to respond to threat of attack in peacetime, and on limitations on fighting in wartime.
Wartime rules of engagement place limits on military action when United States forces are engaged in an armed conflict.
Certain military options may be deemed undesirable in wartime due to escalation control, diplomatic, and humanitarian considerations.
For example, an important escalation control function of wartime rules of engagement is to prevent incidents with the military forces of non-belligerents.
Wartime rules of engagement can also be eae prevent geographic expansion of a conflict when it is politically 1113 and diplomatically desirable to confine the fighting to a limited area.
Wartime rules of engagement allow military action under such circumstances only for self-defense--the adversary 4s forced to make the decision to escalate or expand the conflict.
The peacetime rules prohibit United States military commanders from using force in peace‘tine unless absolutely necessary for self-defense.
Special rules of engagement are issued to cover a sensitive situations, such as operations near a country openly hostile to the United States and operations during an international crisis.
The operational requirement of crisis management that national leaders maintain close control over military operations can be exercised in a variety of ways.
One approach is to shift from methods at the loose end of the tightness of control spectrum--autonomous delegated control monitored delegated control--to methods at the tight end of the 1114 spectrum--direct control by negation and positive direct control.
This is the approach commonly referred es in the crisis management literature.
This type of direct control has its costs, and can even hinder effective crisis management.
National leaders typically focus on selected aspects of the operations, which may not be the most important or dangerous evoluticns taking place.
The need for close control thus needs be weighed against the constraints on the ability of national leaders to exercise effective direct control of military operations.
A second approach to maintaining close control of ¢risis military operations is through the mechanisms of indirect control.
Close attention to the rules of engagement is particularly important in this regard.
As was also true with methods of control, excessive tightness in the ee ee of indirect control can be counterproductive--denying the on-scene commander the flexibility he needs to adapt to rapidly Changing circumstances.
Establishing precisely where the optimum balance L235 between control and delegation lies is one of the inherent tensions in crisis management.
The United States armed forces rely on a flexible combination of direct and delegated control that eroitaines | delegation of authority and providing on-scene commanders with freedom of action.
Monitored delegated control is the method of control preferred by military commanders, and when direct control is necessary, control by Repaleon is preferred over positive control.
Primary emphasis is placed on use of mechanisms of indirect control rather than on the exercise of direct control.
These preferences are strongest in the Navy, which has a long tradition of operational autonomy and which accords substantial authority to commanding officers.
They can occur a 1116 under delegated as well as direct control, and can be ordered in mechanisms of indirect control as well as directly over real-time communications links.
Inadvertent military incidents are troublesome because decisionmakers may fail to realize they are umauthorized and perceive them as a deliberate provocation, signal bistiowti1e intent, or escalation of a crisis.
Unanticipated authorized actions are military actions taken by military commanders in compliance with guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control, but not directly ordered or specifically approved by national leaders.
But they are unanticipated, in the sense that national leaders did not directly order the specific action Or anticipate that the specific action would result from 1117 guidance contained in mechanisms of delegated control. wagiiened leaders can only react to unanticipated authorized actions and try to manage their impact on the crisis.
The most common phenomenon appears to be that national Wales order a military operation without understanding the full range of specific military actions that military commanders have authority to take in order to carry out that operation.
Reliance on methods or delegated command and mechanisms of indirect control is the most important condition giving rise to the possibility of unanticipated authorized actions, but such actions can also occur when tighter methods of control are being exercised.
National leaders exercising control by negation could tacitly approve a military action (by not vetoing it) without understanding what the action entails.
This could occur when a military commander 1118 misperceives the political-military context of the local tactical situation.
For example, he might misperceive aggressive enemy military moves as indicating that friendly forces are in imminent danger of attack, or even that war had started, and order military actions that would have been authorized in these situations.
The possibility of such misperceptions underscores the danger inherent in simulating attacks on an adversary's forces during a crisis--such as the Soviet Navy conducted against the United States Sixth Fleet while United States forces were at DEFCON 3 in the 1973 Middle East War.
In this instance United States Navy commanders 16 the Mediterranean either knew or presumed that the Soviets were only conducting an exercise and did not attack any Soviet ships.
Under other circumstances, however, such forbearance could be much more difficult for on-scene commanders.
Contingency plans can be a source of unanticipated authorized actions if national ieaders do not fully understand the operational implications of the plans or do not have the time or inciination to carefully review the content of a plan before ordering it executed.
Although United States military contingency plans contain a broad range of options for the employment of military forces, civilian policy-makers tend to view most predefined military options @s inappropriate because the options were designed for a Crisis scenario different than the one at hand, or were defined to meet purely military objectives rather than the 11193 requirements for employment of military forces in a crisis.
In practice, top-level military and civilian officials jointly review and revise contingency plans to meet the needs of the specific crisis at hand prior to executing them.
Further, they may not be informed that a particular action has been initiated until it is too late to halt it or until it has already had an Reed etictipated effect on the crisis.
Ambiguous or ambivalent orders greatly increase the likelihood of unanticipated authorized actions by leaving the on-scene commander uncertain as to 1120 the objectives of his mission, the intentions of national leaders, and the actions he is authorized to take.
Movement of forces outside the scene of a crisis into battle positions, employment of weapons in self-defense in accordance with the rules of engagement, and stepped up surveillance of sensitive targets are all actions the President might not anticipate as resulting from his decisions, but which could raise tensions in a crisis.
Military accidents are actions not ordered or deliberately initiated at any level in the chain of command.
Since almost any military action could conceivably be the result of orders from national leaders, an adversary may | assume that those leaders ordered an action, that was, in fact, an accident.
Thus, virtually any military action can assume strategic importance if believed to have been conceived and personally supervised by national leaders.
In practice, national leaders and even military commanders attempt to atettagaTet accidents from deliberate provocations or attacks.
One tactic is to assume (at least for diploMatic purposes) that an isolated incident was an accident, but warn that further such incidents would be viewed as deliberate provocations or attacks.
Both of the superpowers have used the ""hot line"" to prevent incidents from becoming confrontations.
The primary reason why exercises are cancelled is that the forces are needed for crisis operations, but exercises have also been cancelle@ te avoid potential political complications.
The second reason for the rarity of accidents in erisis is that the military chain of command usually advises on-scene commanders to act with caution and to avoid provocative actions.
Military prudence is occasionally violated by toplevel political officials ordering naval forces into dangerous waters, but on other occasions United States leaders have pe ce been careful to keep United States forces well clear of fighting ina local conflict.
These three factors countericce other factors--increased tempo of operations and adversary forces in close proximity~-that might otherwise contribute to the occurrence of inadvertent military incidents.
Unauthorized deliberate actions are ordered or executed by tactical-level military commanders in violation of orders issued directly by national leaders, or in violation of operational guidance contained in mechanisms of indirect control.
This type of unauthorized action is especially likely when the orders given to military forces are vague or ambiguous, leaving ample room for an on-scene commander coma eittnd lree his actions.
An on-scene military commander with an appreciation of the political objectives being pursued by national leaders could well decide to ignore orders that are inappropriate for the local situation and pursue a course of action that better supports crisis management efforts.
A constructive unauthorized action is taken in the lief that actions called for in existing orders are inapropriate under the circumstances, and that the unauthorized ietion would better support the national objectives in the ‘risis.
Whether or not the outcome is constructive is a dif‘erent matter, and a well-intentioned action could seriously ‘omplicate crisis management efforts.
The mark of a conitructive unauthorized action is an effort to inform the thain of command as soon as possible of the action taken and ‘he reasons for taking it.
A malicious unauthorized deliberate action is taken jut of opposition to the objectives underlying specific orders, disrespect for the chain of comnznd or the method of control being usea@, or frustration with particular orders ‘felt to be unnecessarily endangering the men perferming the hission.
The mark of a malicious unauthorized action is an 2ffort to conceal the action from higher authority.
Incidents at sea wecigns’ weeiwas forms of harassment and other dangerous interactions between Soviet and American Raval forces.
Findings of the Case Studies Eight questions addressing specific aspects of the heory of stratified interaction were addressed in the case tudies.
The pattern bserved in the four case studies of United States naval operations NM crises was one of direct control being exercised electively and to a limited degree.
Heavy reliance was laced on mechanisms of indirect control in all four cases, ithough the guidance contained in those mechanisms was not jlways revised to reflect the specific circumstances of the risis at hand.
Tactical-level military interactions rarely ere under the direct control of political-level leaders.
Naval forces at the scene of the crisis were tightly upled in all four of the crisis naval operations case ‘udies.
However, the tightness of coupling between the wees of the two sides can vary significantly from crisis » crisis and over time within a particular crisis. ictical-level military commanders have indeperdent access » intelligence and surveillance information on adversary xrces, and thus are not dependent on political-level »¢disionmakers for information on the adversary.
As would > expected under conditions of tight coupling, naval forces end to react quickly to changes in the other side's perations, seeking to maintain or improve their tactical 2sition in the event of hostilities.
Naval forces were sed by both sides for political signalling or related olitical functions in all four of the case studies on risis naval operations.
Use of naval forces for political urposes can bring naval units of the two sides in a crisis nto close proximity, creating a danger of military Ncidents.
In the 1958 Taiwan Straits isis, the United States relied on methods of delegated ntrol, United States and Chinese Communist military forces were ghtly coupled, and both sides used their forces as a litical instrument under conditions of acute crisis. teractions occurred at the tactical level that were not rectly controlled by American leaders.
The findings of is case suggest, however, that stratification is not an isolute concept--there can be degrees of stratification. asures taken by both sides to prevent confrontations tween their forces can greatly reduce opportunities for ictical-level interaction to occur.
Although the President sought to maintain close conol of military operations in the 1962 Cuban Missile “isis, he relied heavily on methods of delegated control id communications problems constrained his ability to 'fectively exercise direct control.
In certain operations lere was tight coupling between the forces of the two des.
Both sides used their forces as a political istrument under conditions of acute crisis.
Interactions curred at the tactical level that were not directly ntrolled by American leaders.
Navy 1128 orces encountered Cuban air and naval forces on several scasions without the President or McNamara controlling the ateractions.
The President's attention was focused on a ery small portion cf the overall operations that were in rogress.
In the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, the United States relied n methods of delegated control, United States and Soviet naval orces in the Mediterranean were tightly coupled, and both ides used their forces as a political instrument under onditions of conditions of acute crisis.
Interactions ccurred at the tactical level that were not directly ontrolled by American leaders.
For example, peesident ohnson had no control over whether or not the Soviet arassment of America on June 8 would produce a clash etween the United States and Soviet navies.
The stratified interction model of international crises, in which interactions volve in separate, semi~independent sequences at the Olitical, strategic, and tactical levels, offers a good escription of Soviet-American interactions in the 1967 ArabSraeli War.
In the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, the United States relied mn methods of delegated control, United States and Soviet naval 1129 irces in the Mediterranean were tightly coupled, and both des used their forces as political instruments under mditions of acute crisis.
Significant and dangerous teractions occurred at the tactical level that were not iectiy controlled by American leaders.
For example, resident Nixon had no direct control over Sixth Fleet ounter-targeting of Soviet ships carrying encarehip cruise issiles, and was probably unaware that this activity had 1advertently been set in motion by White House orders aking the fleet an easy target for the Soviet Navy.
The most mmon cause of decoupling was communications problems or operly functioning communications that are simply too slow permit direct control of military operations.
The second most common use of decoupling was a fast-paced tactical environment. is was a factor in the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis, the 64 Tonkin Gulf Incidents, the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, the 67 Liberty incident, and the 1973 Arab-Israeli War. ibiguous orders were a factor in the 1958 Taiwan Straits ‘isis and tactically inappropriate orders were a factor in ie 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
Impairment of political-level 1cisionmaking was a factor in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
Three patterns of tactical-level interactions were ren in the eight cases.
Seciiemleaeian interacions that were not directly controlled by political-level a but which generally supported their political objecives and crisis management strategy.
The pattern between instances | momentary decoupling is parallel stratified interacons.
Momentary decoupling was seen in the 1958 Taiwan raits Crisis, and possibly in the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
In this pattern, a tactical-level incident occurs M is not directly controlled by political-level leaders id does not support their objectives for the operation in ‘ogress.
The incident leads to an armed clash, but then is ‘ted by the on-scene commanders without intervention by ylitical-level authorities.
Decoupling followed by vent occurred in the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents.
This gestion addresses the second corollary to the theory of tratified interaction, that the security dilemma can become tratified in crises.
The implication of this is that Milador-nakers at the political and tactical levels can Old different perceptions of the offense-defense balance, ulnerability to preemption, and the need to strike first.
Threat perceptions were stratified in the 1962 Cuban issile Crisis and the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
A umber of incidents could have Se eal an inadvertent aval battle in the Mediterranean that United States and Soviet eaders might not have been able to control until the nitial engagements were over.
This question addresses the third corollary to he theory of stratified interaction, that escalation ynamics can be stratified in a crisis.
Although escalation ynamics cannot be addressed directly--none of the cases scalated to war--research was done to identify es:alationnhibiting factors and the conditions that can cause those actors to break down.
Six internal and two external escalation-inhibiting actors were identified in the case studies.
The internal actors function within the government and military chain of 1133 mmand of one nation.
The internal factors are military udence (avoiding threat of surprise attack and combat der unfavorable circumstances), caution and restraint on e part of on-scene commanders, compliance by on-scene mmanders with the guidance contained in mechanisms of direct control, national leaders structuring the tactical vironment to dampen military interactions, accurate and mely tactical intelligence on friendly and potentially stile forces, and national leaders and the military chain ' command double-checking the accuracy of initial reports military incidents.
These factors tend to moderate the itensity of tactical-level interactions, prevent armed i sashes (Cou occurring, and produce disengagement rather jan escalation when clashed do occur.
Tacit rules of crisis behavior are best developed Weveen the United States and the Soviet Union, but also mtributed to avoiding escalation in the 1958 Taiwan traits Crisis.
Soviet naval forces have engaged in Rebedingly dangerous behavior--dangerous maneuvering at lose quarters and simulated attacks on United States naval forces-uring international crises.
The 1972 Soviet-American Ge e 1134 icidents at Sea Agreement has only been partially iccessful in moderating such Sediree behavior.
The most ingerous situation arises in confrontations with nations yat the United States does not share tacit rules of crisis *havior, like Libya, Iran, and North Korea.
The findings of the eight case studies indicate that, mtrary to what the escalation dynamics theory predicts, vere is a tendency for naval tactical-level interaction to 9se momentum and for the forces involved to disengage after 2 initial incident or armed clash.
Pauses tend to occur rally in naval operations due to the need to regroup and repare for further action.
Naval commanders are reluctant > initiate or sustain combat operations under circumstances ney cannot predict or control due to the risk of defeat in attle.
Naval commanders quickly reach the limits of their uthority and need permission from higher authority to nitiate further combat operations.
The perational requirements of crisis management, if being Ollowed, tend to accentuate the tendency toward disengageent by denying on-scene commanders tactical options (such S surprise attack and concentration of superior force) that an be crucial for successful combat operations.
The rst condition is for national leaders and military commanra to be predisposed to take action against the adversary e to a long-term failures of diplomacy to resolve nsions, military and diplomatic frustration with the versary.
Sustained hostility, harassment, or a history of gression by the adversary can generate a perception that e adversary's leaders are unreasonable, irresponsible, or interested in serious negotiations, reducing the incentive ) pursue Giplomatic initiatives toward the adversary. lese expectations could be entirely correct, but could also sult from insufficient or ambiguous intelligence on the iversary's objectives and intentions.
The second condition is the immediate prior occurrence ' one or more hostile acts against United States forces, tizens, or vital interests.
Prior attacks can create an sppectation that further attacks will occur or that the iversary is likely to escalate the level of violence.
As th long-term frustrations, short-term expectations of irther violence could be entirely correct, but could also sult from insufficient or ambiguous intelligence on the iversary's objectives and intentions.
The short-term fects of immediate prior hostile acts can reinforce the fects of long-term frustration with the adversary, 1136 pearing to confirm negative assessments of his itentions.
Expectation of further attacks tends to ‘edispose national leaders and military commanders toward ‘oader military options toward the adversary.
The third condition that can erode the escalationihibiting factors is for all levels in the chain of ymmand, from the President ie the on-scene commander, to ld similar views toward the adversary and the need for mediate retaliation for provocations.
Inadvertent political signals may have been a factor nh some of the crises, but inadvertent military incidents ere not serious problems in the eight cases examined in his study.
WS berCeptioiie of United States intentions or the urposes of United States naval operations may have been a factor in he 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incidents, the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, L37 a the 1968 Pueblo incident.
United States naval operations in sponse to the four peacetime attacks on United States Navy ships pear not to have generated misperceptions.
Level of control tensions were serious in the 1962 uban Missile Crisis and the 1973 Arab-Israeli War, moderate nh the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, and minor in the 1958 Taiwan traits Crisis, and the four cases of peacetime attacks on 1138 Navy ships.
Contingent Generalizations The dependent variable in the theory of stratified interaction is the outcome of crisis military ie OSes GRAICHYs Specifically, the degree to which and the manner in which tactical-level military interactions cause escalation of a Crisis.
In the third and fourth patterns--momentary decousiaing of interactions and decoupled interactions followed by disengagement--~tactical-level interaction halts without significant escalation.
The first four patterns-unified interaction, parallel stratified interaction, Mentary decoupling of interaction, decoupled interactions Mdliowed by disengagement, and inadvertent tactical-level escalation--can occur in various sequences in a crisis.
The seven independent variables that determine the nature of crisis military interaction and the likelihood of escalation are the degree of rained sittin’ control over tactical-level military interaction, the scale of military operations, the intensity of tactical-level military interactions, the perceived threat of attack at the tactical level, the relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions, the strength of escalation-inhibiting factors, and the impact of inadvertent Military incidents.
The seven independent variables determine the degree to which crisis interactions to become stratified, whether or not stratified interactions become decoupled, and the degree to which decoupled interactions result in escalation of a crisis.
The causal pattern for unified interaction is direct political-level control of ee eee interaction, local scale of military operations, routine to heightened intensity of tactical-level military interaction, any tactical-level threat perceptions (not a significant Variable in this pattern), a convergent relationship between political-level and vec teetoee1 threat perceptions, strong factors inhibiting escalation, and inadvertent military incidents that have minor impact on crisis military interaction.
There were no examples of the unified interaction pattern in the case studies.
The second pattern of crisis military interaction is Parallel stratified interaction.
The separate interaction sequences at the political and tactical levels evolve in parallel, in the sense of reflecting the same overall strategy toward the adversary.
National leaders do not control every operational decision made at the tactical level, but the decisions made by on-scene commanders support the crisis management strategy of national leaders.
The causal pattern for parallel stratified interaction is indirect political-level control of tactical-level military interaction, local to theater scale of military operations, routine to heightened tadentates of tacticallevel military interaction, any tactical-level threat perceptions , a | convergent relationship between political-level and tacticallevel threat perceptions, strong factors inhibiting escalation, and inadvertent military incidents that have minor impact on crisis military interaction.
The most important independent variables in the parallel stratified interaction pattern. are ieaieéet political-level control of tacticallevel military operations and convergent threat perceptions.
In this pattern ational leaders temporarily lose control of military interactions, but are able to quickly re-establish control. \eqever, there is a brief period in which national leaders ire not controlling tactical-level military interactions. luring that period, the actions taken by the on-scene commander do not support the crisis management efforts being sursued by national leaders.
Those actions could well be uuthorized under guidance contained in the mechanisms of \ direct control, but nevertheless complicate poittedleal and liplomatic efforts to resolve the crisis.
This does not nean that the on-scene commander was “wrong” to take the actions.
The use of force could well heave bcen necessary to avert an attack, appropriate to the tactical circumstances, and fully justified under international law, but still have interfered with crisis management efforts.
The key point is that tactical-level interactions not controlied by national leaders occur, and that those actions complicate or interfere with political-level crisis management efforts.
The independent variables that cause decoupling to occur are loss of political-level control over tactical-ledel military sperations and inadvertent incidents with a significant imsact on crisis military interaction.
The important feature is that whatever causes decoupling is not permanent; it does 10t prevent national leaders from oe re-establishing sontrol.
The independent variables that cause the decoupling to be momentary are local to theater scale of military operations, routine to heightened intensity of babical-level military operations, unlikely to possible tactical-level threat perceptions, a convergent to similar relationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions, and strong escalation-inhibiting factors.
Momentary decoupling is the most common of the four crisis military interaction patterns that are marked by decoupling of tactical-level military interaction from political-level objectives.
The fourth pattern of crisis military interaction is decoupled interactions followed by disengagement.
National leaders are not able to immediately re-establish control due to communications problems, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced tactical 1145 nvironment.
But the initial tactical-level engagement etween the two sides does not gain momentum and ad Helleke, t loses momentum and the forces disengage.
By the time ational leaders re-establish control, the shooting has topped.
Tactical-level disengagement can be a requirement or political-level control to be re-established, articularly in a fast-paced tactical environment.
In the causal pattern for decoupling followed by disengagement, four of the independent variables cause lecoupling and the initial engagement to occur, one of the wndependent variables causes disengagement to occur without sactical-level escalation, and two of the independent | iiables are not significant causes of the pattern.
The wndependent variables that cause decoupling and the initial mgagement to occur are loss of political-level control over sactical-level military operations, intense tactical-level hilitary operations, tactical-level threat perceptions that attack is imminent, and inadvertent incidents with a significant impact on crisis military interaction.
The decoupling followed by disengagement 1146 attern occurs less often than the momentary decoupling aattern, but more often than the two decoupling patterns nvolving escalation.
The fifth pattern of crisis military interaction is ivertent tactical-level escalation.
This pattern begins ith decoupling of tactical-level interaction from politicalevel crisis management objectives.
National leaders are 10t able to immediately re-establish control due to communiions problems, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced factical environment.
The initial tactical-level engagement jains momentum and escalates, increasing in violence and snvolving an increasing amount of each side's forces.
There rere no examples of this crisis military interaction pattern in the case studies.
The third scenario--national leaders halting tactical-level escalation after losing control--is unlikely due to the difficulty of maintaining direct control of forces once they are engaged in battle.
The independent variables that ause decoupling and the initial engagement to occur are oss of political-level control over tactical-level military ‘erations, intense tactical-level military operations, actical-level threat perceptions that attack is imminent, ind inadvertent incidents with a significant impact on irisis military interaction.
The independent variables that fause decoupled tactical-level interactions to escalate are mtense tactical-level military interaction, and a tacticalevel threat perception that attack is imminent.
The independent variables that allow tactical-level escalation ut prevent inadvertent strategic-level escalation or leliberate political-level escalation are a divergent felationship between political-level and tactical-level threat perceptions and weak escalation-inhibiting factors.
The sixth pattern of crisis military interaction is inadvertent strategic-level escalation.
Inadvertent strategic-level escalation rising from tactical-level escalation was the path examined a this study, which focused on tactical-level military ection.
Inadvertent strategic-level escalation without rior tactical-level escalation could arise from inadvertent Witary incidents (unanticipated authorized actions, jlitary accidents, and unauthorized deliberate actions) nvolving strategic-level forces.
Many of the factors ffecting tactical-level interaction probably also affect trategic-level interaction, but such strategic level actors were not addressed in this study.
There were no xamples of this crisis military inter-action pattern in the ase studies.
Inadvertent strategic-level escalation arising from actical-level escalation begins with tactical-level nteractions decoupling from political-level control. ational leaders are unable to immediately re-establish conrol over tactical-level interaction due to communications roblems, decisionmaking overload, or a fast-paced tactical Hnvironment.
The initial tactical-level engagement gains omentum and escalates, increasing in violence and involving hn increasing amount of each side's forces.
The tacticalevel escalation spiral generates escalatory pressures at he strategic level, reinforcing perceptions that the idversary is preparing for war and is not interested in a 1149 iiplomatic solution to the crisis.
The scope of fighting sapidly grows to the theater level and spreads to other eters, possibly becoming global in scope.
The spread of the escalatory spiral to the strategic level of interaction is through deliberate decisions made by strategic-level nilitary commanders, but is considered to be inadvertent secause it was not directly ordered by national leaders and 4id not support their efforts to manage the crisis.
In the causal pattern for inadvertent strategic-level escalation, five of the independent variables cause Weeupling and the initial engagement to occur, while five of the independent variables cause tactical-level escalation to result in inadvertent strategic-level escalation.
The independent variables that cause decoupling and the initial engagement are loss of political-level control over tacticallevel military operations, global-scale military operations, intense tactical-level military interaction, tactical-level threat perceptions that attack is imminent, and inadvertent incidents with a iit deane impact on tactical-level Military interaction.
The independent variables that cause tactical-level escalation to result in inadvertent strategiclevel escalation are loss of political-level control over pA ie trategic-level military operations, global-scale military perations, a convergent relationship between strategicevel and tactical-level threat perceptions (and, in the ase of deliberate escalation to war, convergent politicalevel and strategic-level threat perceptions), a lack of scalation-inhibiting factors, and inadvertent incidents ith a significant impact en strategic-level military nteraction.
The inadvertent strategic-level escalation attern appears to be the crisis interaction pattern least ikely to occur.
The independent fariables that most affect this ranking are political-level tontrol of tactical-level interaction and the strength of she escalation-inhibiting factors.
Direct political-level control of tactical-level military operations is difficult ‘Or United States leaders due to the size and complexity of the United States irmed forces, making the unified interaction pattern rare and providing ample opportunities for stratified crisis Interactions to become decoupled.
The escalation-inhibiting are actors are generally quite strong, preventing escalation yen when decoupling occurs--making momentary decoupling and ecoupling followed by disengagement much more common than nadvertent tactical-level escalation or inadvertent trategic-level escalation.
Generality of Findings The generality of this study--that is, the applicabilty of the theory and findings to international criseée other shan cases that were studied--must be addressed because the sases studies all concerned crisis naval operations and yeacetime attacks on Navy ships.
As was explained in the introduction, there were four reasons for this focus. first, the Navy is the branch of the United States armed forces salled upon most often to respond to crises.
Second, American leaders and many analysts perceive naval forces as having important advantages over other types of forces for Hicis response.
Third, in spite of the frequency of use and perceived advantages of naval forces, the role of naval forces as a political instrument is not well understood.
Fourth, in some respects naval forces have a greater escalatory potential than do other types of military force.
These reasons for focusing on naval forces provide a Starting point for assessing the generality of the findings.
The theory and contingent generalizations are applicable to a broad range of crisis naval operations.
Because aval —_— are the type of force most commonly used by the sited States in crises, the theory is thus directly splicable to most of the crises in which the United States ass been involved over the past forty years.
The theory and contingent generalizations are also splicable to most other United States crisis operations with convenional forces, including amphibious en eee ground force perations, shore~based air operations, and operations with combination of forces.
The theory is applicable to other -S. forces because central features of the United States command and ontrol system-~-such as delegation of control and the echanisms of indirect control -ffect tactical-level interaction involving all types of -S. forces.
Additionally, the escalation-inhibiting facOrs and the conditions that can erode those factors are not Mique to naval forces--they would affect the likelihood of scalation regardless of the type of force being employed in Crisis.
All forms of tactical-level military interaction an thus be accommodated by the theory.
The key to applying the theory to military interCtions other than those involving naval forces is to take 1153 nto account the specific command and control procedures ised by other United States forces, and the differing warfare nvironments of other types of forces.
The technology of naval arfare has long placed a premium on striking first in attle (particularly in the age of anti-ship cruise fissiles), but the offensive has enjoyed--or has been erceived as enjoying-~a similar advantage in land warfare ‘tt various times.
Naval battles tend to be intense but xief--ordnance is rapidly exhausted and losses of ships and jlanes mount quickly, forcing disengagement.
On the other land, once fighting among eaonna forces has started, it can ee more difficult for national leaders to control and less ikely to die out without escalation after the initial mgagement.
In short, relative to naval forces, ground iorces are less likely to become engaged in fighting, but ire more BeRRacd)t to disengage after fighting starts. these differences are readily accommodated in the theory, hich explicitly recognizes that they exist.
One area to which this study cannot be applied is the *Mployment of strategic nuclear forces as a political 1154 instrument in crises.
Strategic nuclear forces are under sommand and control procedures significantly more centralzed than those of general purpose forces.
While there is, of necessity, significant delegation of authority concerning she details of strategic force operations, decisionmaking authority for employment of nuclear weapons is highly sentralized--resting with National Command Authorities.
The theory can be applied to crises involving countries other than the United States, but again care must be taken to account for the different command and control methods and procedures used by other ie the differing strategic environments they face, and the differing warfare environments their forces face.
The forces of some countries, such as the Israeli and West German armies, emphasize freedom of action for and initiative on the part of lower-level commanders.
In other countries, notably the soviet Union, the emphasis is on centralized control of Military operations.
Differences in command and control Philosophies, operational styles, and professional traditions can produce significant differences in the crisis ‘A 1155 anagement and crisis stability problems facing different ations.
Implications for Crisis Management The theory of stratified interaction and the findings f this study have several implications for crisis manageent.
The most important is that effectively exercising lose control of all crisis military operations can be xceeding difficult in practice.
This is an inherent roblem that improved communication technology has affected Mly marginally.
Several variables affect the ability of op-level political authorities to exercise direct, realime control of military operations, including the scale of he operations, the nature of the missions, the intensity of nteraction with the other side's forces, the pace at which he tactical situation evolves, and the speed and reliaility of communications links.
As the scale of Military operations and the intensity f interactions with the other side increase, there is a endency for top-level officials to become overloaded and ocus their attention on selected, narrow aspects of crisis perations.
But tactical-level-military interactions are ften too fast-paced for top-level officials to exercise iirect control over even small-scale local operations. lational leaders therefore generally delegate significant ilscretionary decisionmaking authority to military 1156 mnanders and rely heavily on mechanisms of indirect conol to guide tactical-level decisionmaking.
Not only can national leaders be overly optimistic sout their ability to closely control crisis military perations, they can also be overly optimistic about their bility to use military force--or the threat of military Orce--as a precision instrument for political signaling. h some circumstances, particularly when the scope and intenity of military operations are relatively small, national eaders can be highly discriminating in the manipulation of orces for signaling.
But as the scope and intensity of perations increase, Military forces become an increasingly nwieldy political instrument.
In addition to the control roblems mentioned above, this is caused by the scale, speed nd complexity of modern combat.
If military operations are to be conducted effecively, whether their purpose is to send a political signal 1157 r to achieve a military objective, they must be conducted a accordance with the operational principles on which their ffectiveness depends.
Those principles often have a great eal of flexibility, but attempting to bend them excessively na effort at sophisticated political signaling can create erious problems for tactical-level military commanders--an xample of the tension between political and military onsiderations.
Such problems arose during the 1967 Arabsraeli War, when the Sixth Fleet placed in a situation of Lee vulnerability to preemption by Soviet naval forces in he Mediterranean--a situation created by White House dierts to use the fleet for political signalling.
Efforts y United States on-scene commanders to cope with their vulnerability reated a situation in which the naval forces of the two ides were constantly targeting each other at point blank ange, and were at hair-trigger readiness to launch reemptive strikes against each other.
National leaders must expect that some things will go rong when they employ military forces in crises.
Inadverent military incidents of various types occur in virtually ll crisis military operations.
The friction Clausewitz bserved in war begins as soon as military forces are set in otion, and long before the first shot is fired.
Although nadvertent military incidents are unavoidable, they enerally are not particularly dangerous.
The tendency is Or inadvertent incidents to provoke highly cautious 1158 yactions on the part of on-scene commanders.
At least in aval operations, when eles calls occur, they tend to end 1ickly rather than escalate.
The military chain of command tends to doubleneck the accuracy initial reports before ordering further llitary operations.
Thus, the most recente action that ational haaaers can take when an inadvertent military ncident occurs is not to seize direct control of tactical ecisions, but rather to focus on communicating with the ther side in order to avoid misperceptions of the incident.
A further implication of the findings of this study or crisis management, one certainly not anticipated when he study was launched, is that the greatest danger of a risis escalating to war may well arise from decisionmaking t the political level of interaction, rather than from ecisionmaking at the tactical level of interaction. arallel Stratified interaction--tactical-level interaction hat generally supports political objectives even though not irectly controlled by national leaders--was found to be the ost common pattern of crisis military interaction.
When 1159 etical-level interactions become decoupled from political-~ wel objectives, the most common patterns are momentary coupling and decoupling followed by disengagement, rather jan escalation.
Tactical-level military engagements tend 1 lose momentum as on-scene commanders reach the limit of wir authority and seek guidance from oo authority. ie@ implication of these findings is that tactical-level litary interaction normally will not escalate to war withit a deliberate decision by national leaders to initiate irtime operations.
The trategic, political, psycholoyical, and ccgnitive factors nat can cause national leaders to abandon diplomatic fforts and resort to war--whether reluctantly or eagerly-AUS are probably the most important VeEsawlee in crisis and scalation theory.
Further Research The previous discussion of the generality of the heory of stratified interaction suggested that additional ssearch would allow refinement of the theory to apply to a roader range of crisis military interactions.
Additional 1160 case studies of United States crisis naval operations would pe useful for refining the theory in a broader range of crisis situations.
The theory would also benefit from, and provide useful samalytical tools for, case studies of United States amphibious operations, such as the 1958 Lebanon Crisis, 1965 intervention in the Dominican Republic, and 1983 invasion of Grenada.
Amphibious operations entail particularly complex command and control procedures, and involve a wide range of forces.
Thus, there is potential for a much wider range of interaction with the forces of the other side.
Case studies of amphibious operations allow the command procedures and warfare environments of diverse forces to be contrasted in the context of a single intervention.
Additionally, case Studies of these three operations would address the 1161 sarticular problems of limiting and controlling the use of force by ground forces.
The command and control procedures and crisis Mdtions of the other United States armed forces need to investigated in the manner that the United States Navy was investigated in this study.
There are differences among the services in the details of their command philosophies and the operational environments they face in crises.
Certain types of military operations, such as covert missions by special forces, can raise particularly difficult command and Mel probiens.
Strategic level interaction needs to be examined in the same manner that tactical level interaction was examined in this study.
Although strategic nuclear command and control is highly centralized, there could be opportunities for decoupling and escalatory sequences to occur.
Crisis military interaction involving the forces of other countries needs to be examined in the same manner that interactions involving United States forces were examined in this study.
Different countries can have different command iand control philosophies, and face different strategic and 1162 tactical environments in crises.
Additional research in these areas would broaden the applicability of the theory of stratified interaction.
Closing Remarks In summary, the theory of stratified interaction provides a policy-relevant explanatory theory of crisis military interaction.
The contingent generalizations derived from the theory provide differentiated explanations for a variety of crisis military interactions, thus allowing policymakers to diagnose specific situations in which oaieas Mieasenent and crisis stability problems can arise.
The theory thus advances the study of crisis management beyond identification of crisis management requirements to identify the manner in which those requirements apply in specific crisis situations.
The method of structured focused comparison, which provides an inductive approach to theory formulation based on historical case studies, is a valuable Mehodology.
It is particularly appropriate for the formulation of a differentiated theory cast in the form of contingent generalizations.
Further studies using this method to examine crisis military operations would broaden and refine the theory of stratified interaction.
Commanding Officer of USS Porterfield during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis.
Commanding | Officer, of USS Dennis J Buckley during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis.
Commander in Chief United States Pacific Fleet during the 1964 Tonkin Gulf Incident, Commander in Chief Atlantic during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, and Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
Head of the International Negotiations Branch , Politico-Military Policy Division , Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, and member of the United States delegation to the Incidents at.
Director, Office of Program Integration, Office of the Secretary of Defense.
Commanding Officer of USS @attnotad during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis.
Letter to author, April ii, 1988. feakley, Vice Admiral Wallace M., United States Navy.
Commanding Officer of USS McGinty during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis.
Letter to author, February 19, 1988. jlackburn, Vice Admiral Paul P., Jr., Commander United States Taiwan Patrol Force during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis.
Assigned to the staff of the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs and member of the United States delegation to the Incidents at Sea Agreement negotiations in 1972.
Commanding Officer of USS John F Kennedy Guring the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
Commanding Officer of USS America during the 1967 Arab-Israeli War, and Deputy Commander in Chief United States Naval Forces Europe during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
Director, Politico-Military Affairs Division , Office of the Chief of Naval Operations, during the 1958 Taiwan Straits Crisis.
Commander in Chief, United States Pacific Fleet during the 1968 seizure of USS Pueblo.
Commanding | Officer of USS Canberra during the 1962 Cuban ; Missile Crisis.
Assistant Chief of Staff for Operations for Commander Seventh Fleet during the 1968 seizure of USS Pueblo, and Commander Carrier Group SIX, embarked in USS John F Kennedy during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
Commanding Officer of USS Franklin D Roosevelt (CVA 462) during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War.
Assistant Chief of Staff for Inteliigence for Commander Seventh Fleet 1965-1967, and Officer in charge of Navy Field Operational Intelligence Office, Fort Meade, Md., during the 1968 North Korean seizure of USS Pueblo.
Letter to author, March 10, 1988. kuchti, James R First Secretary, United States Embassy, Nairobi, Kenya, in 1964.
Commander Cruiser Division Three , Girected search and rescue operations for the crew of a USAF RB-50 shot down off the coast of the Soviet Union in July 1953.
Delegation Head, May 1983 Annual Review of the U.S.USSR Incidents at Sea Agreement.
Letters to author, March 28 and April 13, 1988. 1171 ral Histories nderson, Admiral George W., Jr.
United States Naval Institute, Oral History Program, 1972. ooks and Monographs bel, Elie.
International Institute for Strategic Studies, 1980. iiger, John I The Quest for Victory.
Little, Brown and Co., ri. kllison, Graham T., Albert Carnesale, and Joseph S Nye, Jr., eds.
South Carolina, May 1981. irnard, Chester I The Functions of the Executive.
Crane | Russak, 1977. ottome, Edgar M The Missile Gap: A Study of the Formulation of Military and Political Policy.
Westview Press, 1983. rittin, Burdick H International Law for Seagoing Officers, Fifth Edition.
Naval Institute Press, 1957. f""arrison, Captain Daniel J The United States Navy.
Praeger, 1968. arter, Ashton B., John D Steinbruner, and Charles A Zzraket, eds.
Longman, 1981. sllins, John M United States Defense Planning: A Critique.
Addison-Wesley, 1982. linerstein, Herbert S The Making of a Missile Crisis: October 1962.
Viking Press, 1967. upuy, Trevor N Elusive Victory: The Arab-Israeli Wars, 1947-1974.
Harper and Row, 1978. | isenhower, Dwight D The White House Years: Waging Peace, 1956-1961.
FergamonBrassey's, 1987. ‘utrell, Robert F The United States Air Force in Korea, 1950-1963.
Addison-Wesley, 1977. | mllery, Rear Admiral Daniel V The Pueblo Incident.
The Free Press, 1979. : Managing U.S.-Soviet Rivalry: Problems of Crisis Prevention.
Westview Press, 1983. eorge, Alexander L., David K Hall, and Williom E Simons.
Bantam, 1976. sorshkov, Admiral of the Fleet of the Soviet Union Sergei G Red Star Rising at sea.
McGraw-Hill, 1968. reenstein, Fred I The Hidden-Hand Presidency: Eisenhower as_ Leader.
Rand, December 1966 (Declassified March 1975). Bureaucratic Politics and Foreign Policy.
Pitman Publishing, 1986. 1180 mad, Richard G., Frisco W Short, and Robert C McFarlane.
Presidential Decision Making in the Mayaguez and Korean Confrontations.
The Free Press, 1972. syrick, Robert W Soviet Naval Strategy: Fifty Years of Theory and Practice.
Naval Institute Press, 1986. 1181 ntington, Samuel P The Soldier and the State: The Theory and Politics of Civil-Military Relations.
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971. mhnson, Robert E Far China Station: The United States Navy in Asian Waters, 1800-1898.
Norton, 1969. hrushchev, Nikita S Khrushchev Remenbers, translated and edited by Strobe Talbott.
Little, Brown, 1970. Khrushchev femembers: The Last Testament, translated and edited by Strobe Talbott.
Little, Brown and Co., 1974. issinger, Henry A Nuclear Weapons and Foreign Policy.
Macmillan, 1969. arson, David L The “Cuban Crisis” of 1962, Second Edition.
York: John Wiley and Sons, 1958. farolda, Edward J., and Oscar P Fitzgerald.
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1965. duandt, William B Soviet Policy in the October iS7: War, R-1864.
Rand, 1976. Decade of Decisions: American Policy Toward the Arab-Israeli Confiict, 1967-1976.
Belknap Press, 1978. larkesian, Sam C Beyond the Battlefield: The New Military Professionalism.
Twentieth Century Fund, 1961. chick, Jack M The Berlin Crisis, 1958-1962.
Humanities Press, 1972. 'tolper, Thomas E China, Taiwan, and the Offshore Islands.
United States Army War College, April 1981. iutherland, John W Administrative Decision-Making: Extending the Bounds of Rationality.
Public Affairs Press, 1965. lam, Adam B Expansion and Coexistence: Soviet Foreign Policy, 1917-72, Second Edition.
Center for Strategic and International Studies, 1979. eintal, Edward, and Charles Bartlett.
MIT Press, 1974. hiting, Alan S The Chinese Calculus of Deterrence: India and Indochina.
Praeger Publishers, 1969. ung, Kenneth T Negotiating with the Chinese Communists: The United States Experience, 1953-1967.
William Kimber, 1967. igoria, Donald S The Sino-Soviet Conflict, 1956-1961.
Administrative Science Quarterly 21 (March 21976); 1-19. eich, David A., and James G Blight.
International Institute for Strategic Studies, April 1965. . ohistetter, Roberta.
Report to the President and the Secretary of Defense on the Department of Defense.
Commission on the Orysanization of the Government for the Conduct of Foreign Policy, Report on the Organization of the Government for the Conduct of Foreign Policy.
Inquiry Into the USS Pueblo and EC-121 Plane Incidents.ist Congress, ist Session.
Review of Department of Defense Worldwide Communications, Phase I Hearings, 9znd Congress, lst Session.
Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, Preparedness Investigating Subcommittee.
Authorization for Military Procurement, Research and Development, Fiscal Year 1969, and Reserve Strength.
Robert S McNamara, ""Background Briefing on the Cuban Situation,” transcript, October 22, 1962.
Commission on Beirut International Airport Terrorist Act of October 23, 1983.
Department of the Navy, Commander in Chief United States Pacific Fleet.
Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center. : a Department of the Navy, Commander Sixth Fleet.
Department of State Publication 3573, Far Eastern Series 30, August 1989.
De L215 National Security Council, Executive Conmittee, Planning Subcommittee.
Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center. 1216 mmander in Chief United States Atlantic Fleet.
Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center, Liberty incident file. ommander Sixth Fleet.
Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center, Liberty incident file. ommander Task Force 136.
Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center. ommander Task Group 72.1.
Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center, Tonkin Gulf Incident files. ommander Task Group 72.1.
Operational Archives, Naval Historical Center. ; 1217 yint Chiefs of Staff.
Operational | Archives, Naval Historical Center, Liberty incident file.
Boted Hek PO Hehe -f vs Rs oa : 9 Koa 8B R.A GSD oA 9h O RYE: 08 BE BD TMIELY O SORP AD He BED aed o> oe Voy . , ne DPC PLY Me she cbad wi.
Pe Dae \ BAR 2 STDS AB OT 4. ney, 229A: Nob' yt UF Shectes P88 Le ee ® ia hoe, RO, Os a Se ore ne ‘ 8 : , IUY Ss Vin Poy A Soe “PAL WEY B Sos des: cA Y B*Vew spe &,9,° osuEyte SA . o%e es o°. ¥ wo ys ’ ° °° t 8. iy . tp datiep NS ON eM BIB TED Lm E ES ‘3 eRe TR OFEr awl RF Bs tyes 8"" a a i ke ee : i ‘ SEPLSd Nor erg.
SO Sy esa het se ab) vlid 20} “wegser& vay 18,8 6 e ) he eee erro 7 camer ‘ a ee oe 4 ae ye PAS DPAL* Peer graher DSS Hee de ara sch tsul tote.
SRPY J OOE NAM Fy ANION EP or wey he gee. hy tyre a7* -€8 we? , S¥t ula pew ot.
Of F .husd,e en de ef err ar Tae ee 8 te ice Pr, . eA Te Wa MIG OTE AT Pyaar kD OYE Y -geste og.
