After weighing the options, President Kennedy decided to announce a blockade of Cuba and a demand for the Soviets immediately withdraw their missiles from Cuba.
At the last, moment Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles and war was avoided. .push; The United States continued to strategize for the ouster of Fidel Castro, in the aftermath of the "" Bay of Pigs"" debacle.
In August 1962, reports reached Washington of a significant increase in Cuban aid.
Over the previous month, twenty Soviet ships arrived in Cuba carrying military supplies.
Khrushchev had decided to try and change the strategic balance with the US, by installing medium-range missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev hoped his actions would deter the United States from attacking Cuba, while strengthening Cuba's ties to the Soviet Union and giving the Soviets additional leverage in Berlin.
The Kennedy administration was worried about the Soviet military buildup, although it was initially unaware of its exact nature.
Reconnaissance photos soon made it clear that the Soviets were installing Surface-to-Air -2 anti-aircraft missiles in Cuba.
The SAM-2 missiles were useful only against very high flying aircraft, such as U-2 planes.
If the missiles were not being installed to protect against an invasion, they were obviously there to protect something else.
Theories abounded throughout September and early October, but there was no hard evidence.
On October 14th, the sky over Cuba cleared and the U-2 flight took place.
By the following night, photo experts had come to the indisputable conclusion that the Soviets were building medium-range missile sites in Cuba.
At 8:45 am on Tuesday morning, October 16, United States National Security Advisor, McGeorge Bundy knocked on the President's door and broke the news to him.
Lyndon Johnson, Dean Rusk, Robert McNamara, Robert Kennedy, General Taylor, John McCone, Douglas Dillon, Adlai Stevenson, McGeorge Bundy, Ted Sorenson, George Ball, Roswell Gilpatric, Llewellyn Thompson, Alexis Johnson and Edwin Martin.
This group became known as the "" Excom"" In addition, Dean Acheson and Robert Lovett attended some of the meetings.
Initial discussions centered on the nature of a possible military response.
Those response options ranged from a swift, sudden bombing of Cuba, to a declaration of war and an invasion.
First, a surprise attack on the missile sites reminded many of Pearl Harbor in reverse.
Second, it soon became clear that there was no such thing as a "" surgical air strike"" to remove the missiles.
It would take almost 1,000 sorties to accomplish destruction of 90% of the mission.
In addition, the administration was convinced that the Soviets would respond in Berlin where the United States was much more vulnerable.
And, it was felt that foreign governments would not understand the need for such drastic actions.
For almost a week, meetings took place to decide on a course of action.
On Thursday, Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko had a meeting with the President.
Gromyko gave his assurances that the Soviets would never place any offensive weapons in Cuba.
On Monday, October 22, 1962 Congressional leaders were brought to the White House and informed of the latest developments.
The meeting was difficult, with Kennedy later describing it as one of his toughest.
However, Congressional leaders from both parties agreed to rally around the President.
After the meeting, Kennedy joked with Hubert Humphrey that if he€™d known the job was this tough, he would not have beaten Humphrey in West Virginia.
One hundred million Americans sat in front of their TVs and radios to listen to the speech.
This number represented the largest number of Americans to ever to hear a Presidential address.
As Kennedy spoke, 22 United States Air Force planes turned toward Cuba, in case the response to his speech was an attack.
In his speech, Kennedy announced the "" quarantine"" , and demanded that the missiles be removed.
Immediately, 56 American warships steamed into their positions to enforce the blockade.
All military leaves were cancelled, and United States forces were placed on a DEFCON-3 alert.
The Organization of American States met and voted unanimously to condemn the Soviet actions, and to demand the removal of Soviet missiles.
On Wednesday, as the blockade went into effect, word was received that a number of Russian ships had stopped in mid-sea.
He made it clear, however, that he was not interested in initiating thermo-nuclear war.
A series of messages passed back and forth between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
It looked like an agreement could be reached, but no one was quite sure.
Finally, on the morning of October 28th, Moscow radio announced that there would be an important message that evening, Moscow time.
The United States subsequently agreed to withdraw its medium-range missiles from Turkey.
The world had come closer to a nuclear war than any time before or since.
He heard various parties and opinions and set course on a response that allowed Khrushchev to back down, while not endangering the vital interests of the US. .push; About American history and world history can be found at historycentalHistory's home on the web.
Explore our complete time lines of major events in American history as well as World History.
Research our special sections on diverse subjects ranging from presidential elections to naval history.
Whatever aspect of history you wish learn about, you will find it at Historycentral.com Facebook Twitter Google+ Pinterest Instagram Youtube Take A Look Wars Favorite Section Civil War Ju Navy United States Navy Biography JFK Historymaker Popular Categories Wars1 Elections2 Primary Sources3 Revolution4 Almanac5 World History6 Vietnam War7 Presidents8 © 1996-2020 Historycentral.
