William Devane, Ralph Bellamy, Howard Da Silva, James Hong, Martin SheenDirector: Anthony PageGenres: Drama, Television, Mystery & SuspenseNR 2001 2hr 30minThis recreation of the events leading up to the cuban missile crisis begins with kennedys discovery of soviet missiles in cuba & follows his difficult decision-making process.
Commentary by william devane ralph bellamy mar... more &raquotin sheen & howard da silva.
President John F Kennedy and his Ex-Comm group as they try to force the Soviets to remove the missiles from Cuba while avoiding a nuclear conflict.
The film successfully conveys the fears and difficulties faced by JFK and his team, their thoughts and deliberations.
The script is fairly close to the actual facts as they are understood today.
This is a wonderfully educational production that any parent would do well to watch with his or her children.
Good casting throughout.One of the excellent things about the production is the occasional interjection of period news bulletins of nuclear tests, the escalating conflict, etc.
These added a wonderful sense of authenticity even as they entertained.A few quibbles, all minor.
Nor was Bobby Kennedy against invading Cuba--the record is pretty clear that both Kennedys had been pushing for removing Castro by various means before the crisis began.
Bobby Kennedy's comment that bombing the missiles out of Cuba would be like a ""reverse Pearl Harbor"" was disdained as amateurish by most of Ex Comm.
The movie portrays the United States Navy as lusting after conflict in a manner I thought was unseemly--this was my only major criticism of the film.
Hollywood often cannot pass up a chance to take a swipe at the military.This is an incredibly worthwhile production that I make a point of watching every year or so.
Michael Ziegler | Philadelphia, Pennsylvania United States | 04/19/2005static_rating; ""In the fall of 1974 I gathered with others at a friends house with the intention of going out for the evening.
By chance, a commercial announced that ""The Missiles of October"", one of television's first attempts at a docu-drama was about to come on.
Silence pervaded the room as the drama unfurled and there was an overwhelming sense of ""you are there"" that kept us riveted to the story.
Looking back now I realize that this was one of the greatest stage productions ever made on what then had been somewhat of a mystery to the average American, namely, what had actually transpired during the thirteen days of intense struggle of October of 1962, when the world was on the edge of nuclear Armageddon.
This work is very intellectual, superbly written and gripping in dramatic scenes.
It is important to remember that this was shown during an era of STRONG anti-military feeling.
The country was winding down from Vietnam and to see a positive resolvency of a possible global catastrophe by politicians concerning an incident in '62 from when we were only children reminded us of what America CAN accomplish when sane men seek safe ways out of conflict.
The scenes are cleverly done, shifting between Washington and Moscow with tid-bits of B&W 'events in the world' film thrown in.
We get to see ""inside"" the exec committees of both the White House and Kremlin and how they plot strategy.
Attempts to duplicate the success of this stage drama failed miserably.
Derman | Bismarck, ND USA | 09/07/2001static_rating; ""I've been waiting for The Missiles of October to come out on DVD since I first got my DVD player over a year ago.
My VHS copy of Missiles, which is over 15 years old, has degraded greatly in picture and sound quality, so I was hoping that the DVD copy would be an improvement.
It has an amazingly crisp picture and the sound is excellent.When the movie Thirteen Days came out I was anxious to compare it to Missiles.
Thirteen Days was a good film, but I still prefer The Missiles of October.
All the performances are excellent, but William Devane, Martin Sheen and Howard DaSilva top the list.
I was barely six years old when the actual event occurred back in 1962 so I don't remember the incident from then.
However, I did see the movie when it originally aired in 1974 and was greatly impacted by it then.
They did an excellent job in weaving the actual documentary footage together with their dramatization.
Watching the thirteen day countdown to possible worldwide nuclear destruction is compelling watching.
The screenplay is constructed from factual sources, such as official documents, interviews, and reports.
Although some of the dialogue is dramatized, the story still follows with surprising accuracy, for Hollywood, of the events of those 13 deadly days.
I have seen plenty of actors try to do Kennedy, but Devane nails the character.
There are some historical shortcomings, like leaving LBJ out of the movie when in reality he was very much a part of the deliberations of the ExComm.
Derman | 05/17/1999static_rating; ""This 1973 teleplay dramatizes in an excellent fashion the events of October, 1962, when the United States and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear war over the deployment of Soviet nuclear missiles to Cuba.
In almost documentary fashion, the film depicts the emotionally-charged process by which President Kennedy and his advisors tried to determine the American response that would get the missiles out of Cuba but avoid a nuclear war.
Less attention is given to the reactions of Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev , though the Soviet viewpoint is by no means ignored.
