He said the bases could handle missiles carrying nuclear warheads up to 2,000 miles.
One was its direct thrust at the Soviet Union as the party responsible for the crisis.
Mr Kennedy treated Cuba and the Government of Premier Fidel Castro as a mere pawn in Moscow's hands and drew the issue as one with the Soviet Government.
The other aspect of the speech particularly noted by observers here was its flat commitment by the United States to act alone against the missile threat in Cuba.
He said the launching of a nuclear missile from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere would be regarded as an attack by the Soviet Union against the United States.
All this the President recited in an 18-minute radio and television address of a grimness unparalleled in recent times.
He read the words rapidly, with little emotion, until he came to the peroration--a warning to Americans of the dangers ahead.
And one path we shall never choose is the path of surrender or submission.
The President's speech did not actually start the naval blockade tonight.
To meet the requirements of international law, the State Department will issue a formal proclamation late tomorrow, and that may delay the effectiveness of the action as long as another 24 hours.
Crisis Before Public The speech laid before the American people a crisis that had gripped the highest officials here since last Tuesday, but had only begun to leak out to the public over the weekend.
Tuesday that he got the first firm intelligence report about the missile sites on Cuba.
Last month, he said, the Soviet Government publicly stated that its military equipment for Cuba was ""exclusively for defensive purposes"" and that the Soviet did not need retaliatory missile bases outside its own territory.
Gromyko, told him in a call at the White House that the Soviet Union ""would never become involved"" in building any offensive military capacity in Cuba.
An hour before the President spoke, a personal letter from him to Mr Khrushchev was delivered to the Soviet government in Moscow.
Mr Kennedy disclosed that he was calling for an immediate meeting of the Organ of Consultation of the Organization of American States to consider the crisis.
The O.A.S. promptly scheduled an emergency session for 9 A.M. tomorrow.
State Department officials said they were confident of receiving the necessary 14 votes out of the 20 nations represented.
This was taken as an allusion to a possible summit conference with Mr Khrushchev.
This meant that the United States was determined on this course no matter what any international organization--or even the United States' allies-might say.
Support from Congress Congressional leaders of both parties, who were summoned to Washington today to be advised by the President of the crisis and his decision, gave him unanimous backing.
Mr Kennedy went into considerable detail in his speech in outlining the nature of the military threat in Cuba, and this country's response.
He said ""confirmed"" intelligence indicates that the Cuban missile sites are of two types.
One kind, which his words implied were already or nearly completed, would be capable of handling medium-range ballistic missiles.
The President said such missiles could carry nuclear weapons more than 1,000 nautical miles--to Washington, the Panama Canal, Cape Canaveral or Mexico City.
The second category of sites would be for intermediate range ballistics missiles, with a range of more than 2,000 miles.
The President said they could hit ""most of the major cities in the Western hemisphere"" from Lima, Peru, to Hudson's Bay in Canada.
He said the Soviet Union's action was ""in flagrant and deliberate defiance"" of the Rio Pact of 1947, the United Nations Charter, Congressional resolution and his own public warnings to the Soviet Union.
