NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 HISTORY P1 NOVEMBER 2017 ADDENDUM This addendum consists of 14 pages.
SOURCE 1A The source below outlines Fidel Castro's negotiations with Nikita Khrushchev about the deployment of missiles in Cuba.
By 1962 Castro's Cuba was well established as an enemy of the United States.
Two years earlier the Eisenhower administration had hired members of the Mafia to assassinate Castro and had begun training anti-Castro Cuban exiles for an invasion of their homeland.
The Kennedy administration inherited the project that led to the Bay of Pigs.
Castro, again not unreasonably, turned to the Soviet Union as Cuba's protector.
He hoped, through a proclamation or an alliance or Soviet conventional military aid, to deter American aggression.
After all, the Soviet Union had every right under international law to send the missiles and Cuba had every right to receive them.
Fortunately for the imperialists Khrushchev did not follow Castro's advice.
Had he done so, it would have been far harder to force the missiles out.
It outlines the steps that Kennedy intended to take against the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate this clandestine , reckless and provocative threat to world peace and to stabilise relations between our two nations.
I call upon him further to abandon this course of world domination … and withdrawing these weapons from Cuba by refraining from any action which will widen or deepen the present crisis and then participating in a search for peaceful and permanent solutions.
Khrushchev stated that he was prepared to withdraw missiles from Cuba on condition that the United States of America stopped the blockade of Soviet missiles to Cuba.
You say that it worries you because it lies at a distance of ninety miles across the sea from the shores of the Unites States.
We agree to move those weapons from Cuba which you regard as offensive weapons.
SOURCE 2A The source below highlights how various Angolan liberation movements were assisted by foreign powers after the collapse of the Alvor Agreement.
Both the Alvor Agreement and the coalition government had been strongly endorsed , particularly by other African states through the OAU (Organisation of African Unity) but without results.
Heavy fighting broke out among the three former liberation movements in July 1975, and the coalition government collapsed … As the conflict escalated, each movement turned to its old allies from the struggle for independence for military hardware and personnel.
During the transitional period, foreign powers became increasingly involved in the situation in Angola, rapidly expanding into an East-West power struggle and an extension of the Cold War … The question of 'who came first' has been the subject of much debate.
It was written by the leader of the Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola , Agostinho Neto, while visiting Dar es Salaam.
Dar es Salaam, 26 January 1975 Dear Comrades Given the situation on the ground of our movement and our country, and taking into account the results of the exploratory trip of the official Cuban delegation, we are sending you a list of the urgent needs of our organisation.
The establishment, organisation and maintenance of a military school for cadres.
We urgently need to create a company of security personnel, and we need to prepare the members of our military staff.
We need to rent a ship to transport the war material that we have in Dar es Salaam to Angola.
The delivery in Angola, if this were a Cuban ship, could take place outside of the territorial waters.
Comrades, accept our revolutionary greetings and convey the good wishes of the combatants of the MPLA and of the new Angola to Prime Minister Fidel Castro.
On 5 November 1975, at the request of the MPLA, the leadership of our party decided to send with great urgency a battalion of regular troops and anti-tank weapons to help the Angolan patriots resist the invasion of the South African racists.
This was the first Cuban troop unit sent to Angola … Cuba alone bears the responsibility of taking that decision.
The USSR had always helped the people of the Portuguese colonies in their struggle for independence, provided besieged Angola with basic military equipment and collaborated with us when imperialism had cut off practically all our air routes to Africa.
The USSR is extraordinarily respectful and careful in its relations with Cuba.
Ford and Kissinger lie to the people of the United States and to world public opinion when they try to place the responsibility for Cuba's action in solidarity with Angola on the Soviet Union.
SOURCE 3A The extract below outlines Stokely Carmichael's explanation regarding the philosophy of Black Power.
The concept of Black Power … is a call for black people in this country to unite, to recognise their heritage, to build a sense of community.
There has been only a 'civil rights' movement, whose tone of voice was adapted to an audience of middle-class whites.
It served as a sort of buffer zone between that audience and angry young blacks.
It claimed to speak for the needs of a community, but it did not speak in the tone of that community.
None of its so-called leaders could go into a rioting community and be listened to.
It is based on complete acceptance of the fact that in order to have a decent house or education, black people must move into a white neighbourhood or send their children to a white school.
This reinforces, among both black and white, the idea that 'white' is automatically superior and 'black' is by definition inferior.
For this reason, 'integration' is a subterfuge for the maintenance of white supremacy.
It outlines the need for African Americans to take up arms to fight for their freedom.
We suffer political oppression, economic exploitation and social degradation , all of them from the same enemy.
Anytime you live in the twentieth century, 1964 and you're walking around here singing 'We Shall Overcome', the government has failed us.
Cassius Clay can sing, but singing didn't help him to become the heavy-weight champion of the world, swinging helped him become the heavy-weight champion.
This government has failed us, the government itself has failed us and the white liberals who have been posing as our friends have failed us.
And once we see that all these sources to which we've turned have failed, we stop turning to them and turn to ourselves.
We need a self-help programme, a do-it-yourself philosophy , a do-it-right-now philosophy, an it's-already-too-late philosophy.
This is what you and I need …, and the only way we are going to solve our problem is with a self-help programme.
Before we can get a self-help programme started, we have to have a self-start philosophy.
For example, on the government payroll they supplied explosives to Black Panther members and sought to incite them to blow up public buildings and they promoted kangaroo courts encouraging Panther members to torture suspected informants.
