Because the crisis began when the Soviet Union began putting missiles in Cuba and ended when the missiles were removed, it was considered an unambiguous triumph achieved by a president more hawkish than some of his dovish advisers.
In the crisis, Robert Kennedy notified former Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that United States missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn within months of withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba, but it was imperative (obviously for American domestic political reasons) that the linkage of the withdrawals not be announced.
Rusk’s letter reveals that if the Soviet Union had insisted on public linkage, President Kennedy would have complied.
On Aug., 1962, five weeks before the aanilllisuauuu uiatuvcicu me nuadiics, incw York’s Republican Sen.
Thus it is fascinating that he says, in praise of the former president, that Kennedy wanted to practice appeasement but , calculated incorrectly.
Even assuming Sorensen is wrong, Schlesinger’s romanticizing is not right.
In 1978, MiG-2ps (nuclear-delivery vehicles far more menacing than the 1962 missiles) were introduced into Cuba.
Today, most “peace plans"" for Central America postulate the moral equivalence of United States and j Soviet involvements in the region, another legacy of the missile-crisis “triumph"" that killed the Monroe Doctrine.
Stevenson, the Democratic presidential candidate in 1952 and 1956, never got over the hurt from the incident, according to a close friend.
When construction of the Cuban missile sites was confirmed on Oct. 15, 1962 — barely three weeks before congressional elections in which the Republicans had made Cuba a big issue — there was a widespread view in the NSC that air strikes should be launched at once and an invasion of Cuba prepared.
The NSC “hawks” initially insisted on launching air strikes, then settled for a naval “quarantine” of Cuba.
But the idea of withdrawing missiles from Turkey as a quid pro quo for the Soviet Union, remained appealing to the president.
On Oct. his brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, secretly proposed to the Soviet ambassador here, Anatoliy Dobrynin, that if the Soviet missiles were withdrawn from Cuba, the United States “within three or four months” would withdraw, with no public announcement, its Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
It was essential, he told Dobrynin, that it should not appear that such a deal had been struck.
If Khrushchev had not accepted the deal Robert Kennedy offered to Dobrynin, Rusk revealed in his letter, President Kennedy was willing to go farther and publicly agree to withdraw United States missiles in Turkey.
Rusk dictated the proposal to Cordier and told him to deliver it upon receipt of an agreed signal.
When Khrushchev accepted the Kennedy-Dobrynin deal, the signal was never sent.
In fact, the Turkish government was eager that the 15 Jupiters — which technically belonged to NATO, not the United States — remain on Turkish soil, and though the Kennedy administration perceived the missiles as obsolete, at the time of the missile crisis no NATO decision had been taken to 1 remove them.
Rusk prepared his letter for a meeting last March of experts on the Cuban crisis held in Hawk’s Cay, Fla.
One of the conference participants -was George Ball, Kennedy's undersecretary of state.
Another participant was Bundy, who said the transcript will show that there is still considerable tension between the “hawks"" and. “doves” of 1962 but that it is easy to laugh now about some of the bloopers that came out of the crisis.
One involved General Thomas Powers, commander of the Strategic Air Command.
Powers inadvertently put out an uncoded message over a clear channel that his nuclear bomber crews should go to a war-alert status.
C LIO, THE MUSE of history, is in bed with a splitting headache, prostrated by the task of trying to correct the still multiplying misunderstandings of the Cuban missile crisis.
Actually, there was not much By George F Will of a brink, and no triumph worth celebrating.
The meeting was at a Florida resort with the wonderfully inapt name of Hawk’s Cay.
In the crisis, Robert Kennedy notified Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that United States missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn within months of withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba, but it was imperative (obviously for domestic American political reasons) that the linkage of the withdrawals not be announced.
Mr Rusk’s letter reveals that if the Soviet Union had insisted on public linkage, Kennedy would have complied.
Kennedy succeeded because his militaiy advantage was huge and his goal was tiny.
The Soviet Union was not going to war at a time when United States advantages were three to one in long-range bombers, six to one. in loncr-rancre missiles and 16 to one in warheads.
The Kremlin must have been astonished — and elated — when Kennedy, in spite of advantages that would have enabled him to insist on severance of Soviet military connectiops with Cuba, sought only removal of the missiles.
The stunning revelation in Mr Lukas’ report is not Mr Rusk’s letter; it is something said at the reunion by Ted Sorensen, the aide closest to Kennedy.
Kennedy’s non-invasion pledge guaranteed the survival*^ this hemisphere’s first communist regime and makes attempts to remove or reform the second seem disproportionate.
The Reagan administratifai, which began by talking about deling with Nicaragua by ""going to tfte source” — Cuba, is reduced to dating for piddling sums for the contras, a recipe for another protracted tenure.
Most “peace plans” for Central America postulate the moral equivalence of United States and Soviet Involvements in the region, another legacy of the missile-crisis “triumph” that killed the Monroe Doctrine.
