Less than 12 hours later, on the morning of Oct. 27, 1962, an American U2 spyplane crashed near the base.
President Kennedy and his advisers, who did not know of the firefight at the Cuban base, assumed the Soviets had shot down the U2 with a missile from that base.
The significance of the military skirmish in Cuba, Seymour Hersh is a Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist and author of "" The Target Is Destroyed . "" which became known only when the United States broke a Soviet code in 1964, is that it shows the Cubans were more independent of Moscow in the crisis than the Kennedy administration thought possible.
In particular, it suggests that Soviet Premier Nikita S Khrushchev may not have had complete control of the SAM battery that shot down the U2.
The Kennedy administration's assessment of the U2 shootdown, one of the most emotional issues of the crisis, was shaped by its assumption that Khrushchev had direct control of all surface-to-air missile batteries in Cuba and had ordered the shootdown — perhaps to deliberately escalate the crisis.
The U2 shootdown was a factor in President Kennedy's decision to send his brother Robert to see Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin on the evening of Oct., according to Robert Kennedy’s posthumous memoir.
The Soviets should begin dismantling the missiles within 48 hours or the United States would strike.
Khrushchev caved in overnight and agreed to an immediate withdrawal of the Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba in return for a private American commitment to remove Jupiter missiles within five months from Turkey and Italy, as well as a public pledge not to invade Cuba.
Word of thqJU. shootdown came late in the morning on Oct., just moments after the White House learned that Khrushchev had toughened his demands for a settlement of 'the crisis>by -insisting in a letter to Kennedy that any withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba be publicly-linked to the withdrawal of American missiles from Turkey.
There also w$re reports that Cuban-run antiaircraft batteries had opened fire on two low-flying American rbfcbnhaissance aircraft, without causing setfoijs damage, and there were questions in^the^ ExComm, according to the minutes, abdutrthe extent of Khrushchev's control over the antiaircraft units.
Rudolph Anderson Jr., whose flight two weeks before h&d been theTirst to bring back photographic evidence of ‘the Soviet missile installations.
T he firsirchallenge to American assumptions about the U2 shootdown came about T8’‘months later, in early 1964, when analysts atlhe National Security Agency succeeded in 1 breaking a Soviet code.
The Soviet code system,known to some in the American intelligencecommunity as ""Silver,” had been in widespread usage by Soviet forces stationed inOubSln 1962.
He subsequently reported that he was advancing with troops and that, three soldiers were killed and 15 other were wounded.
The commander, identified by the NSA as an officer named* Mal'tsev, also issued a call for surgeons; Seven physicians were ^pnt to the scene that night, j Other NSA v intercepts showed that Mal'tsev, whose ^advance” was apparently a counterattack against Cuban troops seeking to storm the SAMobase, was ordered to make a full report incperson the next morning, Oct. i7, to Col.
GenJ of Aviation Victor Davidkov, apparently thefsenior Soviet commander at the time in Cuba.
The intercepts; which made clear that Soviet soldiers had been ""shot and wounded,” did hot specifically 1 name the attacking forces as Cuban, although' NSA analysts quickly reached the obvious i conclusion that the fighting was between Soviets and Cubans.
The intercepts suggested Chat .the attack had ended by the morning of Oct., but the NSA analysts were finable to preclude the possibility that the SAM site at Los Angeles may not have been fully under Soviet control when the U2 was shot down.
By early 1964, according to a former official who was at the top of an intelligence agency at the time, there was clear evidence that the Cuban military — and thus Fidel Castro — had been in direct control of the many antiaircraft batteries scattered throughout the island at the height of the crisis.
Furthermore, he said, there was no available evidence linking Khrushchev to an order to shoot down Maj.
Cuban accounts of the crisis are contradictory, and it remains unclear why Cubans would have attacked the Los Angeles SAM site.
An American who recently visited Havana said that a senior Cuban official had told him that he had no knowledge of such a firefight in October 1962.
If such an incident took place, he \ said, it could have been Russians fighting Russians; However, an American professor said in an interview last week that during a research trip to Cuba several years ago, he had been told that that the Cubans indeed had taken over a Soviet military base by force during the Cuban missile crisis.
T he highly classified communications intelligence, with its implication that policy-makers had made a serious miscalculation during the missile crisis 18 months earlier, was kept under tight wraps inside the National Security Agency.
Conversations in recent weeks with former members of the ExComm, including McGeorge Bundy, Kennedy’s national security adviser, indicated that none of the key Kennedy administration actors in the missile crisis had been briefed on the new material in 1964.
The report of the firefight at Banes apparently did not surface again until 1979, when William B Bader, an assistant deputy undersecretary of defense for policy, initiated an exhaustive study of Soviet forces in Cuba.
The Carter administration was then in the embarrassing position of having called public attention to the so-called Soviet ""brigade” in Cuba only to learn that it had been in place since the resolution of the missile crisis, which hinged in part on a pledge by the Kennedy administration not to invade the island.
Bader, in a recent interview, recalled asking the intelligence community in 1979 for all of its files on Soviet forces in Cuba.
Bader, who is now a vice president of a think tank called SRI International, only realized much later the significance of the 1964 intelligence report ""This raises an important question,” he said.
One government official who did understand the strategic significance of the intercepts in 1964 was Daniel Ellsberg, then a consultant from the Rand Corp. at work on a highly classified study for the Johnson administration of crisis communications during the Cuban missile crisis.
But he didn't disclose his special knowledge of the missile crisis until April 1986, when he was interviewed by WGBH, the Boston public television station, for a documentary on the Cuban missile crisis to be aired in 1989.
A ccording to a transcript of Ellsberg’s interview, he recalled that the Los Angeles site had been under ground attack on Oct., apparently by Cubans, with a fierce Soviet counterattack.
Ellsberg did not mention in the television interview that his"" information about the firefight came from communications intercepts.
In addition, only a few of the scores of books and academic studies on the missile crisis have raised any doubts as to the extent of Khrush( chev’s control over the SAM sites in Cuba, and the few doubters invariably suggested that the downing of the U2 had been ordered behind Khrushchev’s back by dissident military men inside the Soviet Union.
Ellsberg, informed in recent weeks that a reporter had obtained independent corroboration for his account of the firefight at Banes, told more of the story.
His crisis-communications study, which was undertaken for W Walt Rostow, then the State Department counselor, gave him enormous access to America’s most closely held secrets as well as to members of the ExComm.
Ellsberg also had been deeply involved in the missile crisis in 1962, working with a group planning the Cuban air strikes.
Among those interviewed by Ellsberg in early 1964 was Robert Kennedy, who told of his extraordinary meeting with Dobrynin on the evening of Oct., after the U2 shootdown.
That meeting also came after the receipt of Khrushchev's letter in which he demanded that the Jupiter missiles be pulled out, with an official announcement, as part of a settlement.
Kennedy, obviously aware that his remarks were meant only for a highly classified internal government study, told Ellsberg of his ultimatum to Dobrynin.
That ultimatum would not become publicly known until Kennedy’s memoir of the crisis, ""Thirteen Days,” was published in 1969.
In essence, the Soviets were told that the United States would attack the missile sites inside Cuba by Tuesday morning, Oct., unless there was some evidence within the next 48 hours that the sites were being dismantled.
Soviet officials already had learned that American planning for a full-scale invasion was underway, with D-Day set for early Tuesday morning.
Kennedy was specific, Ellsberg said, in recalling that he had told Dobrynin he had 48 hours to act.
The shooting down of the U2 was “a most serious turn of events,"" he quoted himself as telling the Soviet ambassador.
Kennedy was assuming that Khrushchev had control not only over the SAM sites in Cuba but also over the many antiaircraft batteries there, including those gun emplacements that had fired on the two lowflying American reconnaissance planes on the morning of the 27th.
In Ellsberg's view, Khrushchev understood what Kennedy did not — that he, and perhaps even Fidel Castro, could not stop the firing of the antiaircraft batteries.
He had no reason to believe that Khrushchev was going to be so reckless as to shoot anything else down.
T hat fact also didn’t occur to Ellsberg— until he was informed on April 14, 1964, about a month after his meeting with Kennedy, of the new intelligence finding.
Khrushchev didn't have control and that’s why he backed off right away"" — within 12 hours instead of taking the next 48 hours and attempting to improve his bargaining positon.
Khrushchev knew that the United States would send more reconnaissance flights at first light the next morning and he also knew, Ellsberg theorized, that he could not guarantee that the Cubans manning the antiaircraft guns — and perhaps the SAM site at Los Angeles— would not shoot down another aircraft and precipitate an immediate American response.
Castro, in an interview with journalist Tad Szulc published last year, acknowledged that on Oct. he had given his antiaircraft forces blanket authority to shoot at low-flying American reconnaissance planes.
Only ""the inexperience of our artillerymen,"" he said, led them to miss that day.
Garthoff, who wrote many key memoranda during the crisis as a young State Department officer, reports new details about the extent of Soviet-Cuban estrangement in his new book on the missile crisis, which will be published later this month.
The first telephone message, dated Oct., was from Adlai Stevenson, the American ambassador to the United Nations, who relayed Thant’s account of a meeting on Oct. in Havana with the Soviet ambassador and a young brigadier general, identified as Igor.
Statsenko, who introduced himself as the commander of Soviet forces in Cuba.
Thant quoted the officer, according to Stevenson, as explaining that all of the antiaircraft weaponry auu SAM sites on Cuba are ""manned by Cubans.
Statsenko’s statement to Thant suggested, as Ellsberg understood, that the Cubans were manning the SAM sites as of Oct., three days after the only known firing of a SA2 SAM missile had taken place.
Since it was highly improbable that the Soviets would turn over control of the SAM sites to the Cubans after the U2 had been shot down and after Khurshchev had agreed to no longer attack American reconnaissance aircraft, Statsenko's comment seemed to mean that the Soviets had permitted the Cubans to operate the SAM sites at least since the 27th, even if a Soviet officer was on the scene and nominally in charge.
The second telephone message to Rusk discovered by Ellsberg came from George Ball, the undersecretary of state, who reported Nov. on a conversation he had with Thant’s military adviser, Indian Gen.
Rikhye described a conversation with Fidel Castro in which the Cuban premier was quoted, as relayed by Ball, as saying that ""Castro talked as though he had all the antiaircraft and he did boast that it was the Cubans who had shot down Maj.
Rusk and other members of the ExComm thus had been provided with evidence within days of the shootdown from both the Cubans and the Soviets in Cuba that the U2 probably had not been attacked on orders from Khrushchev.
But the senior officials could not see the significance of the information because everyone in the government assumed that the spyplane had been shot down by a Soviet' SA2 missile in the control of the Soviet forces on • the ground — and thus by Khrushchev.
Castro himself has since provided varying accounts of who was in control, telling a Washington Post reporter during an interview in 1985, for example, that Soviet troops had been manning the SA2 missiles when the U2 was shot down.
The strong assumption of Soviet control inside Cuba made it inevitable that the information provided by Thant and his military adviser also would be overlooked throughout the intelligence community, although senior American intelligence officials, in interviews in recent weeks, acknowledged that the United States government had no hard information as of Nov., 1962, as to how Maj.
George Ball, in a telephone interview from 1 his office in Princeton, N J., confirmed that he had held a conversation with Rikhye.
