At height of missile crisis, Pentagon proposed assassination of Cuban officials 9 Comments / Assassination, Presidency / By Jefferson Morley A newly declassified Pentagon study, published today by the non-profit National Security Archive, sheds new light on the thinking of United States military leaders at the height of the Cuban missile crisis in October 1962.
The Pentagon’s case for ‘provocation’ JFK and Air Force General Curtis LeMay, one of the Joint Chiefs in October 1962.
The legacy of excessive secrecy The document sheds news light the profound differences between JFK and the Pentagon as Kennedy’s presidency entered its final year.
The exact same report, held in the Office of the Secretary of State, remains heavily redacted.
According to a recent NDC report, nearly 40 percent of the millions of pages of documents reviewed, most of which are over 40 years old, have been withheld on national security grounds.
In August 2011, the leaders of the NDC said they would not make a priority of declassifying 1,100 CIA records related to JFK’a assassination.
Those documents will not be made ublic until October 2017, at the earliest.
At height of missile crisis, Pentagon proposed assassination of Cuban officials” David Regan January 10, 2015 at 12:14 am The divide between JFK and the JCS could not have been more apparent in October 1962.
John Kennedy was the first president to be seriously confronted with a nuclear war.
The peaceful settlement of the Cuban Missile crisis and the quid pro quo removal of missiles by the Soviet Union from Cuba and the United States from Turkey turned Kennedy steadfastly against nuclear proliferation.
If there is a connection between Cuba and the murder of JFK that is the connection.
Nuclear weapons in Israel were no different than nuclear weapons in Turkey at that time.
You can see that Operation Northwoods never really went away, despite Kennedy’s opposition to it.
In 1962-63, the United States had an overwhelming advantage in nuclear missiles, and the hawks were certain that the United States could launch a surprise attack and beat the USSR easily.
Just another piece of evidence against the real culprits behind the JFK assassination.
Reply JSA February 22, 2014 at 8:42 am A lot of blame has been cast upon the CIA for the assassination of JFK, and rightly so, in my opinion.
I look at the Bethesda autopsy as a MILITARY operation, with LBJ and Hoover assisting and supporting this operation.
I wouldn’t rule out some of the top military helping to set up the Dallas shooting gallery at Dealey, maybe in a supporting technical role.
The reason I mention Bethesda specifically however is because of the generals and top brass directing everything, you could say micromanaging the autopsy down to the smallest detail.
But history has shown many times the threat that a powerful military can be to a non-military or in modern day lingo, “civilian” government.
The Romans were well aware of the threat to Rome and tried to keep a separation, as did our original Framers, who tried to address the problem in 1787.
They could not foresee the explosive growth of intelligence and a permanent military in general, grown to tumor-like size after WW2, feeding off large corporations and permanently installed while amateur elected officials come and go in Washington.
Reply Tim Gratz February 21, 2014 at 7:57 pm Escalante’s book does not go far enough if it suggests that VIA operations against Cuba stopped in 1962.
CIA Covert Operations 1959-62 says that the CIA was continually involved in such plans throughout the period 1959-62.
It discusses a whole series of proposals for dealing with the missiles, and lists the advantages and disadvantages of each, from an all-out invasion to much more limited options.
Yes it does include a remarkably short reference to the assassination of Cuban and Russian officials but I can only shrug with respect to the proposed assassination of Cuban officials.
There is of course debate whether JFK/RFK were witting of the events that continued even after the end of the missile crisis.
What I do find startling is the almost off-hand suggestion of the assassination of Russian leaders.
I am not aware and I invite reader comment if the CIA had ever contemplated the assassination of RUSSIAN leaders.
Granted, other actions considered by the Chiefs might have escalated into a clash between the super-powers but our assassination of Russian leaders would surely have done so.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff believed the United States could fight a nuclear war and win.
They stubbornly opposed directives that reduced their authority to decide when to go nuclear.
