Statesmanship, strategy, and serendipity gave you this opportunity to learn from this dramatic crisis, which is admirably and lucidly re-told and portrayed in this book.
Blight and Lang also make clear that the genesis of the confrontation began long before October 1962, that the potentially catastrophic circumstances lasted for three agonizing weeks beyond the famous 13 days, and that Cuba’s threat calculus and behavior had an effect on the both the crisis and its aftermath.
The Armageddon Letters will deeply engage both students and general readers, because it uniquely focuses on the emotions of Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro as they faced what each perceived to be no way out of an impending Armageddon.
James Blight and janet Lang, two innovative scholars who have long studied the crisis, have written a book that is a giant step toward rendering the events of October 1962 too memorable, too frightening, and too personal ever to be forgotten.
We were lucky that the inclination of the leaders of the United States and USSR, Kennedy and my father, was not to shoot first, then think, but was rather to do the opposite, to first think, then think once more, and do not shoot at all.
Had either of them “shot first,” we would not be alive today and, in that case, we would not have an opportunity to read this excellent book.
The portraits of President Kennedy, my father, Soviet Chairman Nikita Khrushchev, and Cuban leader Fidel Castro are intimate, totally believable and instructive.
Based on decades of careful research, this is a work of sober history that reads like a horror novel with an almost miraculously lucky outcome.
An Inside Account of the Man and His Era, by His Son, Sergei KhrushchevThree cheers for epistolary history.
In these crafty but wondrously expressive ""Armageddon Letters"" pen-pals Kennedy and Khrushchev were writing the bedrock literature of the nuclear age.
There's a great gain of intimacy in this telling of the story, and no sacrifice of absurdity, no slighting of the essential madness in the nuclear fantasy.
Fifty years after the October weekend when human civilization hung by a thread, Blight, Lang & Company are reminding us irresistibly that the fantasy is not dead, the trap is still lethal, the danger is not over—that a tiny fragment of the world's nuclear arsenal could explode and end life on the planet forever. — Christopher Lydon, Host of Radio Open SourceAn innovative look at one of the most important crises of the twentieth century.
Eleven Lessons from the Life of Robert S McNamaraFor over a quarter century Jim Blight and janet Lang have earned the gratitude of scholars and the interested public by highlighting and preserving the human dimension of the Cuban missile crisis, the most dangerous moment of the twentieth century.
Khrushchev, Castro & Kennedy, 1958-1964In The Armageddon Letters, authors James Blight and janet Lang provide readers with a front row seat to one of the most terrifying horror stories of all time.
For 13 harrowing days in October 1962, the leaders of the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba inadvertently brought the world within a hairs breadth of nuclear catastrophe.
Beneath the seemingly stable veneer of the Cold War lies the chaos of the Cuban missile crisis.
So long as nuclear weapons exist – and approximately 22,000 of them can still be found in nine countries—the risk of catastrophe will remain.
We may not be so lucky next time. — Kingston Reif, director of nonproliferation at the Center for Arms Control and NonproliferationA brilliant reconstruction of the most dangerous days in history when thermonuclear war seemed all but inevitable.
Based on a quarter century of research, you see the crisis not only from Washington, but also from Moscow and Havana.
Pakistan, America and the Future of the Global JihadManga meets the Missile Crisis in this compelling book.
They demonstrate the inadequacies of analyzing the crisis in any of the traditional ways, and instead provide us with a sophisticated applied psychology that reads like a Stephen King horror novel, but is thoroughly and painstakingly grounded in the historical record.
Blight draws creative connections that grab our attention. ... the authors achieve their heartfelt intention of saturating us with warnings about a nuclear disaster.
