KAAY’s on-air date of Labor Day weekend 1962 was only a few weeks prior to the October 1962 standoff between United States President Kennedy and Khrushchev of Russia.
Russia’s actions in Cuba, and President Kennedy’s response to it brought the world to the very brink of all out nuclear war.The historical context was this the Batista government in Cuba had recently been overthrown by Castro's revolutionaries, and Khrushchev was in power in Russia.
American school children were being taught about nuclear attacks and how to ""Duck and Cover"" in classrooms.
Khrushchev was a belligerent international bully, and he saw Cuba as a natural extension of Russia's nuclear arsenal, right in America's backyard, just 90 miles from Florida.
Khrushchev was supporting the new Communist regime in Cuba with aide and money and military materiel.
Russian ""advisors"" had taken up permanent residence in Cuba.KAAY was in a unique position because of its powerful night-time signal into downtown Havana.
KAAY was a brand new radio station, still getting on its feet and building a new business with new advertisers.
So when the call came requesting KAAY participate in the VOA broadcasts to Cuba, there were a number of factors pulling the new staff in opposite directions.In some private conversations with AJ, he gave some insight into behind the scenes activity during this period.
To say that everyone on staff at KAAY agreed with the station's role in broadcasting to Cuba is an understatement.
Instead, some on the staff held sharply divided opinions, and some vigorously objected to anything having to do with the Cuban broadcasts.Those opposed were motivated in part by the practical aspects of getting the new station on its feet and developing an audience.
KAAY, after all, had just gone the air just a few short weeks beforehand.
Broadcasting to Cuba meant that local advertising could not be sold, eliminating part of the vital revenue stream needed to keep the new station on the air.
The other rationale was the simple fear of getting directly involved in a situation that could potentially result in the physical harm to people or themselves, and possibly jeopardize the radio station itself.
Both of these were good reasons ""not"" broadcast to Cuba.So Americans, including the KAAY staff had every right to be very afraid of the potential consequences.
The Russians were building nuclear missile launch sites in Cuba, aimed at the United States mainland.
Americans were rightly afraid that Khrushchev's USSR would act on their threat to launch nuclear missiles onto the United States mainland.
United States Air Force planes overflew Cuba daily taking reconnaissance photos, and these pictures were broadcast on United States nightly news pictures of the Cuban missile launchers being installed and populated with Russian nuclear tipped missiles.President Kennedy had no choice other than to call the bluff of Khrushchev and Castro.
A United States Navy blockade was formed, United States Navy ships ""surrounded"" Cuba, to prevent any shipping from reaching Cuba.
The blockade enraged Khrushchev and tension escalated to an impossible level.
It truly appeared that we were on the verge of an all out nuclear war with Russia.
We had tiptoed up to the brink.One thing was well known KAAY had the second strongest American radio signal into downtown Havana at night.
So the services of KAAY were sought and brought into action.The VOA broadcasts in Spanish went on the air nightly.
We have heard anecdotally from Cuban ex-pats from those days, who listened to KAAY in Spanish, and of the Cuban attempts to jam those broadcasts.
Many continued to listen to KAAY after the jamming was lifted – KAAY was their source of American music and information.Diplomats of all sides sought a peaceful end to it.
Thankfully, the crisis devolved over a period of days, and both the United States and USSR were able to announce a diplomatic resolution had been reached.
KAAY was the only radio station in the state with a 50kw transmitter, and therefore the only radio station that could cover the entire state with news and information in the event of a national emergency.Almost anticipating unforseen future historical events, when the KTHS transmitter site was built, a generator set was installed.
The generator set and an underground fuel tank would insure that the transmitter would be able to stay on the air for ""days"" at full power in the event of a national emergency.
A fallout shelter was built on the ground floor of the transmitter building and it was provisioned with several weeks’ food and water supply.
A small studio was also built in the fallout shelter, and a basic telephone line was installed to the downtown studios using a magneto crank phone.Later, the transmitter itself and assorted support equipment were fitted with a ""EMP"" kits to protect it from Electromagnetic Pulse radiation that would be radiated from a nuclear blast.
I was expecting to record the Rob Robbins Show, and when it didn't air, there is a loud clunk when I abrubtly switched off the tape.
I knew the cause was good, but I didn't understand a word of the Spanish broadcasts.
I was disappointed because I think the Cuban broadcasts were not aired at the same time each night.
From Jerry Sims ""Paris In The Spring"" Lyrics Tommy Armstrong Checks In Jerry Sims's elephant ride KAAY Vs. ""kaay"" Vietnam Radio Stories and KAAY KAAY News Promos from Phil North ► August ► July Picture Window theme.
