Since January 2003, while United States attention has been consumed by Iraq, North Korea has reprocessed the 8,000 spent fuel rods frozen under the 1994 Agreed Framework to produce enough plutonium for six nuclear weapons.
It has restarted its nuclear research reactor at Yongbyon, which is now producing an additional two bombs worth of plutonium annually.
Over the past decade, it has sold and delivered missiles to Iran, Iraq, Pakistan, Egypt, Syria and Yemen.Moreover, despite the American-organized Proliferation Security Initiative that seeks to prevent North Korean exports, it is continuing to sell and deliver missiles to dangerous customers.
His calculation about possible American responses would include judgments about United States capabilities to determine the origin of a terrorist nuclear weapon and President Bush's willingness to respond.Americans think of Mr Bush as decisive and quick to act.
Kim Jong Il's experience with this president has been quite the opposite.
But after Mr Kim crossed each of these red lines, the Bush administration reacted mildly, and the world moved on.
Despite Mr Bush's 2003 assertion that ""we will not tolerate nuclear weapons in North Korea,"" or his recent announcement that a missile test would be ""unacceptable,"" Mr Kim has stiffed Mr Bush without consequences.North Korea could have doubts about United States capabilities to identify the source of a nuclear weapon brought to an American city by terrorists.In sum, we should contemplate the possibility of Mr Kim selling a nuclear weapon to terrorists.
Were he to do so, the danger of a nuclear explosion in a United States city would increase drastically.To deter Mr Kim from this extreme act, the United States government should act now to convince him that North Korea will be held accountable for every nuclear weapon of North Korean origin.
To do this, Mr Bush can take a page from President John F Kennedy in the Cuban missile crisis.
In 1962, the Soviet Union was installing nuclear-tipped missiles in Cuba.
Some worried that these weapons might fall under the control of a young, hotheaded revolutionary leader named Fidel Castro.After careful consideration, Mr Kennedy issued an unambiguous warning to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev.
Mr Khrushchev understood that meant nuclear war.The Bush administration should announce a new policy of nuclear accountability and warn Kim Jong Il directly and unambiguously that the explosion of any nuclear weapon of North Korean origin on the territory of the United States or our allies will be met by a full retaliatory response that assures that this could never happen again.
