The speech was aimed at moving forward that agreement—and it succeeded.
Just seven weeks later, a treaty that was almost unimaginable to most Americans and to many elsewhere in the world was signed; and one month after that, it was ratified by the United States Senate, which is a near-miracle on any occasion.
It was ratified, moreover, not only by the two-thirds required under the American Constitution for a treaty, but by an overwhelming majority of 80 to 19.
JFK’s quest for peace is the story of leadership; how John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev helped to guide the world from October 1962 through to September 1963, when this treaty was presented at the United Nations in Kennedy’s last speech to the General Assembly on 20 September 1963.
The entire world, with only the notable exceptions of China and France, participated in a global expression of profound relief and a sense of having turned away from a disaster as close as could be imagined to a chance, at last, for peace.
But Kennedy had accomplished something of definitive and lasting value.
He proved by accomplishment, not simply by assertion, that it was possible to reach a binding agreement with the Soviet Union that was in the interests of peace, that was in the interests of both sides, and that would be honoured, as indeed it was.
Not only was that treaty secured, ratified and proved successful, but it was followed—as Kennedy anticipated, hoped and planned—five years later by an * This is an edited version of a talk given by the author at Chatham House in July 2013.
Jeffrey D Sachs even more important treaty, the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty of 1968.
This treaty has by no means solved the world’s problems, but it has dramatically reduced the chances of mass proliferation of nuclear weapons.
This is, of course, an issue we continue to grapple with every day, but Kennedy believed, and the intelligence and analysis of the day suggested, that there could be 40 nuclear powers by the 1980s if something was not done to stop the proliferation process.
In explaining and expressing our common humanity, our common experience of living on a crowded planet, this is as compelling an expression of our shared human fate as is possible.
One is that it arguably saved the world, since the record up until 1963 was not one of a stable balance of terror, as some of the game theorists of the nuclear age believed, nor one of a mutual assured destruction in which two Great Powers were in a stable way paired against each other, but one of a world filled with accidents and misjudgements and near-disasters—one that was perfectly capable of blowing itself up, as I fear it still is.
And the last year of his life is a period of nearly miraculous leadership; almost everything done right, just as many things had been done wrong during the first two years of his presidency.
Most powerfully, this is an episode that demonstrates that what is taken to be the conventional wisdom, what is taken to be the normal way of doing things, can be disastrously wrong.
And I feel that the same is very much true today in international relations, from the moment-by-moment developments in Egypt or Iran or Syria to the more slow-moving but equally or more consequential issues of how we face the challenges of climate change and planetary wreckage.
There are a lot of smart people around—they’re in 10 Downing Street, they’re at the White House, they’re in all the corridors of power—and they are not solving our problems; they are not even coming close.
And therefore it’s a moment that is important for us to capture, to understand, to savour; one from which to draw lessons that are appropriate and applicable for us today.
It takes place at a time in which the two superpowers were each filled with ideas about the other that were dangerous, misguided, unnecessary, and ultimately had enormously high potential for destruction.
Both sides felt that they were most likely engaged in a battle to the end for the fate of the planet—that either the United States would come to defeat communism, if necessary by war, or that communism would take over the world in its godless, heedless manner and that would be the end of the story.
In fact, both sides were struggling with far more mundane matters of trying to keep their economies afloat, facing challenges of civil rights, dealing with internal instability—many, many problems that were very far from world domination.
But the notion on each side that the counterpart was an implacable foe, ready to do anything, however irrational, however evil, however desperate, to gain global domination, was very strong.
Of course, it was not held universally, by any means; there were powerful voices for peace.
There were peace movements; there were, of course, anti-nuclear movements of tremendous significance all over the world.
But there were hard-liners on both sides exerting constant pressure, and when there was doubt on one side or the other, the hard-liners tended to dominate.
And that basic logic was reflected in the so-called ‘prisoner’s dilemma’ and the threat of escalation where either of two sides fears that any step back from a hard line would be nothing more than appeasing the enemy.
With the Munich agreement and the lead-up to the Second World War only very recent history, the fear of being soft in the face of a foe was a big fear politically as well as strategically.
All through the 1950s, and especially after Stalin’s death in 1953, both sides were groping for some manner of mutual accommodation, even as they built their nuclear arsenals.
Eisenhower, the United States President, was very keen to find some way to reach an accommodation with the Soviet Union; yet he was surrounded by hard-liners.
His foreign minister, John Foster Dulles—famously referred to by Churchill, who did not think very highly of him, as ‘dull, duller, Dulles’—was a terrible Secretary of State.
The second agent of constant unrest and destructiveness was the CIA, an agency that has continued its disastrous tradition up to the present day.
During the 1950s, they prevented Eisenhower—who took a very collegial and bureaucratic view of the presidency—from taking any bold or daring initiatives.
One of the ironic things about this entire situation is that Mr Khrushchev and I occupy approximately the same political positions inside our governments.
Kennedy and Khrushchev at the Vienna summit, April 1961 In the immediate lead-up to Kennedy’s presidency, both sides had proceeded some way down the path to a nuclear test ban; but this process ground to a halt, for two main reasons.
First, and most fundamentally, Eisenhower toyed with the idea of sharing nuclear weapons with Germany, which was Russia’s biggest fear by far.
This was an example of the United States’ lack of self-reflection or understanding of legitimate Soviet security concerns.
At the end of the 1950s there was a proposition for something called the Multilateral Force, which was based on the idea of sharing nuclear weapons in some form.
JFK and the future of global leadership would gain access to nuclear weapons.
From the fiscally conservative Eisenhower’s point of view, there were benefits to this—US troops could come home, it would be a lot cheaper, save money on the budget—but of course from the Soviet point of view this was as grave a strategic threat as could be imagined for the Soviet Union, given the history of destruction that Germany had caused just 15 years earlier.
Of course, the Soviets knew very well, and the CIA knew that they knew very well, that these overflights were taking place.
They intercepted pilot Gary Powers, shot down the U2, captured him alive, captured and collected the wreckage of the U2, and announced that a spy plane had been shot down.
Again Eisenhower lied, the United States declaring that the intercepted plane had been on a weather surveillance flight launched from Turkey—at which point the Soviet side produced Mr Powers and the U2 wreckage for global television.
Jeffrey D Sachs Kennedy came into office in January 1961 determined to find a path to peace.
He was determined that he would settle issues with the Soviet Union, and find a way back from the nuclear arms race.
Kennedy resisted, as Eisenhower had a year earlier, but was assured that the military brass and the CIA guaranteed that nothing could go wrong.
Kennedy foolishly not only agreed to the plan, but agreed in the most absurd way, saying that the invasion would take place but there would be no US air cover for it—guaranteeing that when the Cubans landed in the Bay of Pigs they were immediately captured or killed.
The planes which are bombing Cuban cities belong to the United States of America, the bombs they are dropping are being supplied by the American Government.
All of this evokes here in the Soviet Union an understandable feeling of indignation on the part of the Soviet Government and the Soviet people.
Twice within a year, he had been directly lied to by the President of the United States on an issue of the highest security.
Such is our smart international politics, of the kind that we rely on to this moment.
If the United States was going to threaten to invade Cuba, the Soviets would defend Cuba.
If the United States had intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Turkey, then the Soviets would have intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Of course, Khrushchev himself lied blatantly and brazenly—it seems to have been a tradition of the time—and denied that the Soviet Union would ever use Cuba as an offensive base.
Kennedy asked repeatedly, and insisted that placing such missiles in Cuba would be viewed as a casus belli, that this was intolerable from the United States point of view.
The Soviet Union, from top to bottom, assured that this would never be done.
It was just about the stupidest thing in the world imaginable, which is what our leaders are always capable of doing.
Kennedy was thrown onto the back foot, because his political opponents were insisting the Soviet Union was building a base in Cuba for offensive missiles, and Kennedy insisted again and again that wasn’t the case.
When that was indeed revealed to be the case, Kennedy could not afford to lose face by abandoning this commitment.
What happened next is too well known to need recounting in detail here; but it is worth emphasizing just how many accidents nearly occurred in 13 days, and how many advisers on both sides gave precisely the advice that would have ended humanity.
It’s our undeserved blessing that it happened, because it could have turned out so differently; but in the end the crisis ended, and I think from that moment on, these were two uniquely changed individuals.
Never in history had two leaders experienced what they had just experienced.
This wasn’t about two countries, this wasn’t about war; this was about the world.
He had come to office as a student of history; he had come to office completely aware of how stupidities could multiply.
He had closely studied the First World War, reading historical analyses by Winston Churchill and Barbara Tuchman that argued that this was a case in which both sides had stumbled into disaster—stumbled, by accident, for no deep reason.
The last year of Kennedy’s presidency and life is a year of a complete change in tone, capacity, quality of leadership and determination to get it right.
The peace speech was written nearly in secret, without the standard intergovernmental, interdepartmental reviews.
It was a draft by Kennedy and Ted Sorensen, and was seen by very, very few others.
This is an approach that I don’t think I’ve seen taken before or since by any American president.
Some say that it is useless to speak of peace or world law, or world disarmament, and that it will be useless until the leaders of the Soviet Union adopt a more enlightened attitude.
I believe we can help them do it, but I also believe that we must re-examine our own attitudes as individuals and as a nation, for our attitude is as essential as theirs.
Kennedy’s genius was to dig deep, and put the international challenge on a moral basis and on a common human basis.
