The Détente Decade of To the dismay of Henry Kissinger, By John T Correll his masterpiece.
Khrushchev’s power play failed when his missiles in Cuba were discovered before they were operational and ready to use.
Although the Soviet Union might inflict massive casualties, it could be wiped off the map in a nuclear exchange.
The superpowers came away from the experience heading in opposite strategic directions.
The Soviets, determined not to be humiliated again, pushed their nuclear buildup with unrelenting vigor.
The United States stopped building its forces and cut back on nuclear programs.
United States policymakers had developed doubts about strategic superiority.
President John F Kennedy understood the need for military strength, but he also saw it as provocative.
But Kennedy and his advisors looked more closely at the events that had led to World War I They believed that a sequence of mutually threatening mobilization plans and actions had gotten out of hand and escalated into war in 1914.
The CIA’s National Intelligence Estimate for 1964, one of several later proved to be faulty, reported no evidence of a Soviet force buildup.
The emergence of ICBM technology had simplified the fielding of long range nuclear strike capability, so the loss of United States nuclear superiority was probably inevitable, but the United States abandoned the effort and decided unilaterally to accept parity in strategic weapons.
The Minuteman missile program was cut by half, the B-70 bomber was canceled, and a unilateral limit was imposed on the ICBM fleet.
In 1965, McNamara promulgated Mutual Assured Destruction, or MAD, as the planning base, setting the strategic force requirement at no more than what was necessary to inflict reciprocal destruction on the enemy.
Bettman/CORBIS photo In the next four years the Soviets would draw even with the United States on numbers of strategic missiles and then pull significantly ahead.
Defense cutters in Congress opnot everyone saw the benefits of posed any attempt to regain superiority as destabilizing.
Besides, the ongoing Vietnam War was making money in the defense budget scarce for anything else.
In October 1968, during the presidential election camAP photo by Chick Harrity paign, Republican challenger Richard M Nixon promised to restore “clear-cut American military superiority” over the Soviet Union, but that was wishful thinking.
It fell to Nixon, the consummate Cold Warrior, to confirm the new balance of power in the doctrine of détente.
Once he had stated sufficiency as a principle, Nixon never again raised the goal of strategic superiority.
Nixon had depth in foreign affairs in his own right, but the high priest of détente was Henry A Kissinger, the national security advisor and later secretary of state, who overshadowed both Secretary of Defense Melvin R Laird and Secretary of State William P Rogers.
Congress was not willing to keep pace with the Soviet nuclear buildup, much less seek to recover dominance.
Against All Challengers The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks became “the flagship of détente,” said Raymond L Garthoff, senior arms control specialist at the Brookings Institution.
Preliminary discussions had begun in the Johnson Administration but the SALT I treaty in 1972 was concluded on Nixon’s watch.
SALT froze strategic nuclear forces at existing numbers—deployed or under construction—for five years.
Since the Russians were ahead in ICBMs, they got a three-to-two advantage in launchers.
Kissinger defended the agreement in a briefing to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
The United States was not going to increase its ICBM force with or without SALT I, and the treaty might have some restraining effect on the Russians, who continued to add to their missile force.
We had stopped building during the Johnson Administration; we had no new missile program in production and the Vietnam-era Congress would not have approved In this 1973 political cartoon, the United States and Russia are proud one.
For us the sacrifice was theoretical.” parents to détente, holding an olive branch.
Henry M “Scoop” Jackson , who had been Nixon’s first choice for secretary of defense, 1970, the Soviet Union surpassed the United States in the took exception.
Like Kissinger did not regard the loss of superiority as all Jackson, Schlesinger thought that Kissinger was giving that important.
Brezhnev had his own reasons Soviet Union and Third World audiences as well.” for wanting to tone down the confrontation.
Among them Détente had begun as the best available adjustment to a was a rift with China, which triggered a redeployment of deteriorating situation, but had evolved into the centerpiece forces to the Soviet-Chinese border.
Détente made this of foreign policy and Kissinger would defend it aggresreallocation easier by reducing the pressure elsewhere. sively against all challengers.
Brezhnev gained further flexibility from the “Ostpolitik” initiative by West German Chancellor Willy Brandt, which The Foibles of Ford included a nonaggression pact with the Soviet Union and Nixon’s presidency was cut short by Watergate, and Geracceptance of the Soviet presence in central Europe. ald R Ford, who succeeded him in August 1974, did not Kissinger introduced “linkage” as an adjunct to détente. have Nixon’s depth in foreign policy.
He was dependent on He insisted that all aspects of the US-Soviet relationship Kissinger and deferred to him in affairs of state.
For example, Kissinger said, “We made progress in setIn 1975, Kissinger steered Ford into the Helsinki Accords, tling the Vietnam War something of a condition for advance a 35-nation agreement that recognized the “inviolability 60 AIR FORCE Magazine / August 2013 of frontiers” in Europe and proclaimed an assortment of E Pipes, to take an independent look at whether Soviet human rights assurances.
Kissinger argued that this “posed a much clination by drafters of the NIEs to “minimize the Soviet greater restraint on the power possessing the largest land strategic buildup because of its implications for détente” army” than it did on the democracies.
The Warsaw Pact and that Soviets leaders were, beyond a reasonable doubt, nations hailed it as a great triumph. reaching for strategic superiority.
National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski took a “All hell broke loose,” Kissinger said.
President Carter himself was also chief spokesman of American foreign policy sided with the inclined toward détente.
Kissinger tried stretched out the MX ICBM, and slowed down the Trident to blame it on a scheduling problem but said the meeting submarine-launched ballistic missile. would have been “disadvantageous” at that particular point.
II treaty, which he had sent to the Senate for consideration, Schlesinger’s clash with Kissinger, and by extension and expressed hope that the principles of détente might be with Ford, worsened and in November 1975, Ford fired resumed at some later date.
Donald H Rumsfeld, who followed Schlesinger as secretary of defense, recast “Essential Equivalence” as “Rough Equivalence,” which made no difference except to put Rumsfeld’s name on the terminology.
I don’t believe that the Romanians consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union.
I don’t believe that the Poles consider themselves dominated by the Soviet Union.
Tackled by Team B Once SALT had imposed a limit on launchers, the Soviets concentrated on increasing the accuracy and throw weight of their missiles.
In 1973 alone, they tested four new ICBMs, three of them with MIRVs, or multiple independently targetable re-entry vehicles.
The CIA’s National Intelligence Estimates, perceived as reflecting the bias of the liberal and academic communities, downplayed the challenge.
The 1975 NIE was especially President Jimmy Carter, followed by Secretary of Defense egregious.
It said that the best of the Soviet missiles were Harold Brown, waves as he leaves a speaker’s podium at the not accurate enough to threaten United States Minuteman silos.
Carter was inclined toward détente, but fell out with the Soviets over Afghanistan.
Brown said that no matter In 1976, Director of Central Intelligence George H W. what the United States did, the Soviet buildup continued.
Reagan could hardly be accused of categorically opposing arms reductions.
At the Reykjavik summit in 1986, he proposed mutual elimination of all ICBMs and SLBMs.
The deal fell through only because Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev insisted that the “Star Wars” Strategic Defense Initiative be included and Reagan refused.
Ten years after Reagan pronounced the end of détente, the Soviet Union was gone, disestablished in the dramatic close of the Cold War.
Reagan critics would say his actions had nothing to do with it, that the USSR was already in deep decline.
In 1982, Arthur M Schlesinger Jr., court historian to the Kennedy Administration, returned from a trip to the Soviet Union with the conclusion that “those who think the President Ronald Reagan addresses the nation in a televised Soviet Union is on the verge of economic and social collapse event in support of his proposed defense budget.
Reagan are kidding themselves.” revoked détente, saying the Soviets had treated it as a oneway street.
The critics said Reagan had been more lucky than prescient, but whatever it was, it seemed to work.
There was a “dangerous asymcollapse, confirmed Reagan’s perspective to a considerable metry,” he said.
Reagan Pulls the Plug In some years, Gorbachev said, Soviet military expenditures Ronald Reagan, running against Carter in the 1980 elec“reached 25 to 30 percent of our gross national product—­that tion, said that if the United States made a serious effort at is, five or six times greater than analogous military spending rearmament, the Soviets could not afford to keep up.
In Diplomacy, published in 1994, Kissinger said that Reagan At his first press conference as President in January “had only a few basic ideas” and that his conception of the 1981, Reagan revoked détente.
John T Correll was editor in chief of Air Force Magazine for 18 Reagan’s critics were outraged, declaring that Reagan years and is now a contributor.
Typical of their objections was a Halt on the Elbe,” appeared in the July issue.
