Kennedy’s choice of a blockade hinged on the narrative “suppression” of its most dangerous possible consequence, namely the perils of a later attack against operational missiles, something accomplished through omission, self-censorship, ambiguation, uptake failure, and narrative interdiction.
The article makes the very first connection between the localized dynamics of conversation and decision making in times of crisis, and offers a novel processual account of one of the most fateful decisions in human history.
Within three hours he assembled his top advisers in the Cabinet Room; this group became known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or the ExComm.
After listening to an intelligence report about the incriminating U-2 photographs, the group launched into the first of many discussions about the extent of the missile deployment, Soviet intentions, and possible United States responses.
Those ranged from an immediate military strike to doing nothing whatsoever, with various forms of diplomacy, some with the threat of military action attached, in between.
Informed by these discussions, the president announced a naval blockade of Cuba on October 22, and then made a succession of equally consequential decisions regarding enforcement of that blockade and negotiations involving NATO missiles in Turkey.
The last meeting of the ExComm was on October 28, when Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in return for a public pledge from the United States not to invade Cuba, and a back-channel promise that Kennedy would remove the missiles from Turkey sometime soon thereafter.
Janis , for one, famously contrasted these deliberations with those preceding the Bay of Pigs invasion, arguing that the former were spared from the “groupthink” that marred the latter.
Another well-known account is in Allison’s Essence of Decision , which hypothesizes that the positions taken by ExComm members can be traced to their bureaucratic positions in, for instance, the State Department and the Department of Defense.
Both Janis and Allison worked from a position of evidentiary disadvantage, however, for neither knew what was actually said in the ExComm meetings.
This points to the central puzzle, of how the ExComm came to consider the blockade palatable, thereby giving Kennedy a way forward.
I begin with a more extended consideration of past research on the ExComm’s deliberations, research that has almost entirely ignored the conversational medium through which these deliberations were conducted, and thus both what the main interactional obstacles were and how the ExComm found its way around them.
Central to those deliberations was the construction of stories about the consequences of each course of action, so next I review research on how stories about the past are collaboratively constructed and anticipate some of the distinctive characteristic of stories about events that have not yet come to pass.
These practices were in turn effective due to the episodic and even “amnesic” quality of future stories, which could end differently on different occasions without anyone seeming to be concerned about this fact.
In the discussion section, I offer a processual interpretation of the findings that replaces the question of why the group favored the blockade with the question of how a favorable view of that option emerged through time.
Then I consider the implications of the findings for our understanding of decision making.
Contrary to the widely held view that decisions culminate from a gradual process of information processing and judgment , my analysis points to a process that is much more fragmented, iterative, and contingent.
THE EXCOMM The ExComm consisted of select members of Kennedy’s cabinet, their immediate subordinates, the director of central intelligence, the chairman of the joint chiefs of staff, and a number of other top-level advisers.
The ExComm discussed a wide range of topics, including the United States response to the Soviet provocation, the interpretation of the photographs, plans for additional surveillance, the number of sorties needed for each variation of the air strike, questions from the media, goings-on at the United Nations, covert action in Cuba, plans to evacuate dependents from Guantánamo Bay, and many other things besides.
Given that, one might wonder whether the ExComm’s deliberations actually shaped Kennedy’s perceptions and ultimate decisions.
First, it seems unlikely that Kennedy would have spent more than 20 hours with his advisers during the most significant crisis of the Cold War simply for the sake of appearances, especially given his determination in the opening days of the crisis that the ExComm’s work remain secret.
At each stage Kennedy seemed unsure of what to do, and at 2 There is some disagreement about this.
Suffice it to say that if votes occurred, they were infrequent, informal, and, of course, not binding upon the president.
The same can be said of many theoretical treatments, such as those written from a gametheoretic or more psychological perspective.
It is the bureaucratic politics model that speaks to what was actually said in the ExComm meetings.
When Essence of Decision was first written, however, it was impossible to test this theory against the statements of particular participants for lack of reliable and detailed information about what was actually said during the meetings.
Based again on memoirs (along with some interviews), Janis argues that the ExComm escaped the dangers of groupthink, a phenomenon that occurs when critical thinking yields to the pressure for consensus.
This, he says, was the result of the president’s efforts to transform the decision-making process following the Bay of Pigs invasion, which Janis takes as a prime instance of that particular pa365 American Journal of Sociology thology.
The features of the ExComm’s deliberations that allegedly contributed in this direction included an openness to dissenting opinions, the systematic examination of the consequences of each course of action, and the continuous gathering and processing of new information, all conducted in a conversational environment in which protocol, status differences, and bureaucratic affiliations were suspended.
Though the president nominally chaired these meetings (at least those at which he was present, which includes all of those analyzed in detail here), once the intelligence report that opened each meeting was complete, discussion was fairly egalitarian and informal.
That said, Janis relied on the accounts of people with an interest in putting the best possible spin on events, and his description reflects their determination to take the most credit possible for a good outcome.
As with Allison, scholars began suspecting the reliability of the memoirs once some of the transcripts became available; Welch , for instance, points out that the ExComm only gave sustained consideration to two options, a blockade and an air strike, and completely shortchanged both purely diplomatic options and the possibility of doing nothing.
Further, I will show that even the option that Kennedy ultimately selected hardly received the sort of systematic and cumulative exploration that Janis supposed.
Anderson made a significant advance in his analysis of detailed notes taken by National Security Council staff members at four ExComm meetings, notes that were unavailable to Janis.
Anderson argues that contrary to the conventional decision-making model in which all options are set side by side and compared, with the best option selected based on calculations about expected outcomes, the ExComm’s actual decisionmaking process involved a succession of yes-no choices on binary options , with each choice shaping the options subsequently encountered.
In particular, the ExComm really did spend a great deal of time deliberating between competing (and not merely binary) options, including distinct military options (to stage air strikes against the missiles, against the missiles and airfields, or to invade) and whether to first attempt an ultimatum, although that would have immediately changed the military landscape.
More generally, like Janis, he is trying to reconstruct what happened from what someone said happened, and there is no reason to assume that stories about talk can stand in for the real thing.
As already indicated, the members of the ExComm quickly realized that they had no good options for responding to the Soviets.
To do nothing, it was thought, would embolden Khrushchev to make aggressive moves elsewhere, including West Berlin, and would weaken an alliance that depended on resolute leadership from the United States.
To stage an immediate air strike on the missiles (at first, the preferred plan) risked escalation and would be seen as a betrayal of America’s allies, leaving them unprepared for any Soviet response to an action about which they had not been consulted.
And to impose a blockade would not stop the Russians from developing the missiles already on the island, and indeed would give them the time needed to complete at least some of the missiles before an air strike that would probably be needed to remove them—thereby greatly increasing the risk to the United States of a (perhaps unauthorized) missile attack.
Thus, while in hindsight we are apt to say that Kennedy’s decision to implement a blockade, with the threat of additional military action if the missiles were not removed, was the right one, given the outcome, at the time this was far from evidently the case.
And it was achieved through the conversational telling, and retelling, of stories.
NARRATING THE FUTURE According to Dewey, genuine reflection begins with a problem or crisis— some interruption of taken-for-granted routine—that demands a choice between alternative courses of action.
When people deliberate aloud, together, this “dramatic rehearsal” takes the form of talk about possible futures, largely in the form of stories about how events are likely to unfold within different scenarios.
We know little about how people tell stories about the future but a great deal about how they construct stories about the past.
Second, a story’s coherence rests upon the plausibility of each of its clauses given all the clauses that preceded it.
If, for instance, I start to tell a story about a trip to a foreign country and then narrate a visit to a location close to home, my interlocutors will question either their understanding of my story or my intentions, honesty, or interactional competence.
Third, stories can be told by single individuals or, to varying degrees, collaboratively.
We will see that the basic chronological template of stories, and many of the associated narrative techniques,6 apply to stories about the future as well, with important differences.
Second, conditional if . . . then assertions are the stuff of stories about the future, the means by which ontologically equivalent futures are imagined aloud, whereas past-tense counterfactuals (if I had only asked her to marry me) have only an ancillary role in most stories about the past as the unrealized shadows of what did happen.
Future scenarios, in contrast, can spin off in entirely different directions, culminating in a world without nuclear weapons or Armageddon, an influenza pandemic or a lifelong flu vaccine, a happy marriage or a broken household.
That is, while stories about the past are constrained to converge at points where the historical record is thought to be clear, a future narrative is judged primarily according to its coherence in the sense defined above, in terms of the believability of each action or event in light of those that preceded it.
Consequently, the trajectory of a future narrative is especially sensitive to the events that get included in it along the way, making such stories highly path dependent, or contingent.
These three distinguishing characteristics of future stories are foreseeably consequential.
Path dependency also heightens a story’s sensitivity to the vicissitudes of group conversation, such as the ever-present threat of interruption and overlapping talk, since either can downgrade a narrative clause to the point of inconsequentiality.
One important result of all of this is the heightened contestability of stories about the future.
But contestation can also occur within the chronological format, particularly when one narrates an undesirable consequence of some story in progress, or actively suppresses someone else’s attempt at narrating such a consequence.
When it came to the blockade scenario, the most important consequence—the one from which the blockade had to be interactionally liberated—was the possibility of a subsequent United States air strike against operational missiles that might then be fired against United States cities.
Then, in 1973, it was revealed that Kennedy, like Presidents Johnson and Nixon after him, had secretly tape-recorded many White House meetings and telephone conversations—unbeknownst to anyone except, perhaps, JFK’s brother Robert.
Fursenko and Naftali , in particular, draw upon them for insight into the American side of the crisis in their impressive One Hell of a Gamble.
They were also important for the revised Essence of Decision (Allison and Zelikow 1999), though, as noted by Bernstein , Allison and Zelikow found little in the transcripts that led them to significantly reconsider Allison’s original analysis.
Kennedy decided on the blockade on October 20, based on discussions from the 16th to the 20th; thus, these meetings are the focus of this article.
Not all of the ExComm meetings during this stage of the crisis were recorded, however, mainly because of efforts to keep the meetings secret.
Two meetings on the first day of the crisis were recorded, as was the 11:00m. meeting on the morning of the 18th, but the meetings on the evening of the 18th and the afternoon of the 20th were held in the mansion, rather than the Cabinet Room where the microphones were hidden, in order to escape notice by the press, and there were other meetings on the 17th and 19th in the State Department that Kennedy did not attend that were also not recorded.
That several meetings were not tape-recorded is a problem but not as much of one as it might seem.
Furthermore, after the meeting on the evening of the 18th, Kennedy dictated some notes, one being that the day had ended with consensus in favor of a blockade , and later both McNamara and Sorensen claimed that Kennedy had indicated in that meeting that this was his tentative decision.
Finally, we have detailed minutes from the meetings of the 19th and 20th, and less thorough notes from the meeting of the 17th.
While these provide for only a loose kind of conversational “data,” they will support my argument that the main sticking point of the blockade plan was that it would exponentially increase the risks incurred by a subsequent military strike, and that the discursive neutralization of this concern was the sine qua non for Kennedy’s ultimate decision.
The most important of these others was the long meeting of the 20th, when many of the debates were reopened and at the end of which Kennedy stood poised to make his final decision.
All episodes of explicit talk about the main options and their consequences were transcribed using the modified conversation-analytic conventions detailed in appendix B,10 summing to about 45 minutes.
There are, consequently, more gaps in these transcripts than in those usually used by conversation analysts.
Also, while I generally relied upon the published transcripts for speaker identities, there are times that I disagreed with those identifications.
The premise of conversation analysis , and the motivation behind the taxing work of such meticulous transcribing, is that such details are both revealing with respect to underlying conversational rules and practices, such as of 10 These should be studied, including by those familiar with conversation-analytic orthography, because they have been modified to accommodate some of the peculiarities of the data, particularly the greater-than-usual frequency of unintelligible talk and occasional difficulties of speaker identification.
In this article, such details will shed crucial light on, among other things, the phenomenon of suppression, whereby something that could have been said was not, or was not said successfully, say due to interruption or overlap.
In several important respects, however, I deviate from conversationanalytic orthodoxy.
Second, I alternate between detailed analyses of the sort that a conversation analyst would undertake and a “bird’s-eye” perspective on the overall organization of statements for and against an air strike following a blockade or some other sort of advance warning.
Third, the reason that I undertake such an analysis is because of my interest in the way in which the mechanics of conversation were implicated in the development of understanding that culminated in a decision.
Though this resonates with recent research on talk in institutional settings where decisions are sometimes involved (Clayman and Reisner 1998; Stivers 2005; see also Maynard, Freese, and Schaeffer 2010), I am much more interested in how talk was used to construct a “mental model”—or rather, its discursive equivalent—of the alternatives and their consequences, on the basis of which a difficult decision could be justifiably made.
AVOIDING CATASTROPHE Now I turn to the historical question of how, by means of such stories, the ExComm turned an unacceptable option, the blockade, into an acceptable one.
Central to the palatability of this option was the assumption that an air strike against the missiles would still be possible in the event that Khrushchev held his ground.
Kennedy wanted the missiles out more than anything, neither he nor anyone else thought that the blockade by itself would do the job, and hopes for a negotiated settlement were dim until much later in the crisis.
Secretary McNamara, in particular, repeatedly stated that an air strike against operational missiles would have been unacceptably reckless, putting the United States at direct risk of a nuclear attack.
That is, there was no occasion on which anyone expressly denied that it could happen, or downplayed its likelihood or consequences, or made any reference to such a rebuttal being made, effectively or not, behind the scenes, in memos, or in meetings not recorded.
And from the perspective of a strict utilitarian calculus, even a small chance of this occurring should have made an attack on Cuba imprudent, since such a launch could have resulted in the deaths of millions of Americans.
Accordingly, there was no occasion on which the identification of this threat was immediately followed by further planning for a warning; more typical was a change of topic , a shift to consideration of a different response altogether , or talk about general military mobilization.
The ultimate palatability of the blockade option was not, therefore, due to some decisive counterargument, or any factual revelation, or any explicit weighing of costs and benefits, but rather to the ExComm’s ability to tell stories—and, as time went on, to increasingly favor such stories— in which the prospect of millions of dead Americans was not affixed to the blockade.
Again, what was most problematic about the blockade option was not the blockade itself, but the possibility that it could eventuate in a U.S. air strike against operational missiles.
This was envisioned as most likely if the United States gave the Soviets advance warning prior to an air strike, which the blockade would provide, though the issue came up in 11 Estimates for how long it would take to ready at least some of the missiles for launch ranged from a few hours to several days, but no one really knew, and this uncertainly was repeatedly acknowledged.
Thus, we need to focus on exchanges about the prospects and perils of an attack on operational missiles, keeping in mind that it was mainly in connection with a blockade that this was imagined as happening, with the result that the blockade plan was the principal beneficiary once those perils were suppressed.
Below the line are indicated all statements regarding the dangers of an air strike after a warning or after the missiles otherwise became operational, whether or not a blockade or some other advance warning was specifically mentioned; also indicated are all instances in which the need for a surprise attack was taken for granted.
Above the line are indicated all instances in which a story was told about a United States air strike against the Soviet missiles after a warning to Khrushchev, again whether or not a blockade was specifically mentioned.
Also indicated are occasions when the dangers of a strike against operational missiles were incipient or projected but, in one way or another, suppressed.
This shift in what was said did not reliably reflect a shift in what was thought, however.
Rather, what happened was that, through various mechanisms—ranging from simple omission to aggressive interruption—the blockade plan was interactionally divorced from its primary failing, freeing Kennedy to make a decision that was discursively warranted though no less perilous than the alternatives.
American Journal of Sociology in detail instances in which the dangers of this plan were hearably imminent but omitted, unsuccessfully articulated, or incipient but interdicted.
Finally, I turn to the meeting of the 20th, the minutes from which bring us up to the moment of decision at the same time as they support— as well as such minutes can—my contention that that decision required the willful dissociation of the blockade from a nuclear attack on the United States.
McNamara wasted no time in voicing his belief that any air strike had to occur before the missiles became operational.
McNamara’s worry, then, was less about a deliberate nuclear attack on the United States than an unauthorized missile launch, a possibility no one could rule out.
During this first meeting, the president was, by all indications, convinced, in every instance taking as his premise that the missiles would have to be destroyed before they were ready to be launched.
A short time later, after another warning from McNamara, Kennedy gave the first articulation to the warning-then-strike plan (no. in fig. 1); this and the brief exchange that followed are in excerpt 1.
For the germ of what became the plan that resolved the crisis, this had a fairly inchoate inception.
At first, it is Latin American governments (who it was feared would be threatened by a Communist backlash to an air strike), then he adds NATO allies “who have a right” to know (British Prime Minister Macmillan and French President de Gaulle), and then suddenly he is talking about a “public statement” that would, by necessity, include the Soviets.
Talk of an air strike after an announcement made relevant McNamara’s oft-repeated concern that operational missiles might be fired, yet the de13 I use the present tense when analyzing an excerpt, as is customary in conversation analysis, though I use the past tense otherwise, as is customary in historical writing.
A possible explanation is that in retelling this story , Kennedy begins with the Saturday air strike and then adds the precursor, namely an announcement the day before—putting the air strike slightly beyond easy reach for anyone looking to identify its consequences.
Still, McNamara might then simply have said, but once we warn them we really can’t do the air strike because of the risk of a missile launch.
Thus, while in the first meeting it was uniformly assumed that any air strike would be a surprise air strike, in that no one attempted a story to the contrary, in the second meeting such a story was ventured but failed 15 I adopt the common practice of referring to the attorney general by the familiar version of his first name in order to avoid confusion resulting from the fact that he shared his last name with his brother, the president, and his first name with the defense secretary.
ExComm members met off and on throughout the next day , for about five hours total, but because Kennedy skipped these meetings to see to other business, the only record we have is a meager 3. pages of notes taken by CIA Director John McCone.
There was also “an extensive discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of a military blockade” ( United States Department of State 1961– 63, 97), but no record of the arguments made on either side.
At first, the midday meeting of the 18th, with Kennedy in attendance and the tape recorder rolling once again, seemed destined to go the way of the two meetings of the 16th.
The context is a discussion of the air strike variation that would have targeted not only missiles but Soviet aircraft as well.
Kennedy just asked whether this would eliminate the threat of retaliation by those aircraft.
The president responds by raising the question of nuclear weapons, but then dismisses this, essentially on the grounds that the Soviets would not want to start a nuclear war.
But in saying this, Kennedy generalizes beyond nuclear bombs (which, everyone basically agreed, would probably 16 This was a change for McNamara and the joint chiefs, who originally resisted an invasion.
When pressed by the president, McNamara said that the new recommendation was necessitated by the discovery of additional missiles, which convinced him that it might not be possible to locate and destroy all missiles from the air.
This exchange is important because it shows that McNamara’s concern about bombing operational missiles persisted into the third meeting and also that he was willing to directly challenge the president.
After Thompson expressed a preference for the blockade option, Kennedy asked how he proposed to deal with the missiles already on the island.
Then National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy checks that the strike would include Russian aircraft, and talk segues into the timing of the announcement and air strike.
The casualness here is too consistent to be by chance; one interpretation is that each speaker hoped to thwart an objection from McNamara by denying him a well-formed narrative clause on which he could hang his objection.
Second, the first three of these six stories were delivered by someone other than the president— two by Thompson and one by Ball—so this was not simply a case of the president taking a stand and others falling into line, contrary to Stern .18 Third, these stories effectively ignored earlier worries about bombing operational missiles, as if they had never been expressed.
Fursenko and Naftali are wrong in saying that Kennedy “overruled concerns—especially those expressed by McNamara—that any use of force implied taking the risk of an inadvertent nuclear war” , for this suggests that Kennedy declared them ungrounded, which is not what happened.
In contrast, whenever McNamara had earlier warned of the danger of a nuclear response to an air strike following an advance warning, further planning for that scenario never occurred.
This is exactly the sort of path dependency anticipated in a previous section, with the trajectory of the story depending on whether someone narrated nuclear reprisal at the point at which the United States was imagined bombing possibly operational missiles.
But now there is an added twist, that the story also had to lack a disastrous ending as a precondition for the narrative backtracking needed to fill out the details of how to bring that story to pass.
Instead, what is surprising is that talk of an air strike after a warning survived in spite of the fact that a strong, and unanswered, objection to such a plan had been voiced repeatedly in this and the earlier meetings.
Further, after the third of the six consecutive blockade-then-strike stories, McNamara said that the disadvantage from the loss of surprise “is not very great” (tape 30a, 06:01), without being called to account for contradicting all of his earlier warnings.
I take this collaborative not-saying as one form of suppression, under the assumption that while one person can simply forget to make a pertinent observation when the opportunity presents itself, or for some reason find themselves fleetingly unable to do so, something more deliberate is at work when many people fail to repeat it.
But something else is at work here, for it is not merely that the earlier objection was not reraised, but, moreover, that immediately subsequent talk proceeded as if that objection had never been voiced.
This suggests that the primary narrative requirement was not to tell a story that was sensible and defensible given everything that had been said before, or even just very recently, but to tell a story that was plausible taken in isolation.
More important than the long-term synthesis of information and perspectives, in other words, was the immediate, episodic, even if amnesic, telling of stories—which was just about the only way hopeful stories could be told.
Then, though, as if remembering his defense secretary’s objection, Kennedy raised the issue of the loss of surprise ; see excerpt 4.
Sorensen had just questioned the need for an advance warning to Khrushchev and proposed that the premier be notified of the attack at the time it commenced.
Bobby and Rusk countered with the moral argument against a surprise attack against a small country, and then excerpt 4 begins.
Kennedy responds by reviving the warning-then-air-strike scenario, which would have given Khrushchev time to get his people out of the way of American bombs.
Instead there are two substantial pauses separated by Kennedy’s “uh” in line 26.
For periods during which nothing was said, these are pregnant with meaning, for once again these were in fact opportunities for anyone to raise the missile threat, yet no one did.
Instead, Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs Alexis Johnson changes the topic to the president’s upcoming meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Gromyko.
Talk of advance warning, then, made the threat of retaliation from aircraft and the threat of a missile launch narratively relevant, but Kennedy restricted himself to the former even as he anticipated, but failed to deliver, and failed to induce anyone else to deliver, the second.
But then, toward the end of the third meeting, there were three occasions on which someone did try to raise concerns about an air strike against operational missiles, but was in some way foiled.
In lines 1–4, Kennedy and Bundy identify the argument for a quick strike, that any delay would give the Soviets the chance to ready some of the missiles for firing.
But then Kennedy appears to embark on the familiar response, that the Soviets are unlikely to fire missiles from Cuba unless they are prepared for nuclear war, in which case they could just as well fire them from somewhere else.
In the midst of this, Bundy attempts his own response, beginning somewhat belatedly but answering Kennedy as if he had finished his point while disregarding Taylor’s existing claim to speakership.
Kennedy’s incipient suggestion that the Russians would never fire their missiles, he says, assumes their rationality , something that the ExComm had good reason to wonder at given the great risks the Soviets were running in placing missiles in Cuba to begin with.
His point is interactionally lost, however, for it is engulfed by Taylor’s.
Bundy’s response that is the more pointedly relevant to Kennedy’s line of argument.
Yet the fact that Taylor is speaking at the same time , and continues speaking for some time after Bundy finishes , makes it possible for Kennedy to avoid acknowledging the point or its relevance to the air strike versus blockade debate, where it further helps that McNamara speaks after Taylor, putting more distance between Bundy’s objection and Kennedy’s next turn-attalk.
In excerpt 6 , Bobby asks for the best date for an air strike from the perspective of military planning and preparation.
Bobby then attempts to point out that the missile sites could be completed in the meantime, apparently in response to the estimate from Taylor,19 with the implication that this would be a problem.
Bobby brings his turn 19 In this case, the danger arose not from giving the Soviets advance warning but, rather, postponing the air strike long enough that they could complete the missiles even without it.
Rusk is the next undisputed speaker and connects his remark to the importance of giving the military time to prepare (somewhat oddly under the circumstances, for fear that “somebody really gets hurt”) that so concerned Taylor, effectively responding to the last person to successfully monopolize the floor.
Thus, Bobby attempts to resurrect McNamara’s earlier concern about the threat from the missiles, but conversational vicissitudes downgrade his remarks twice in succession, rendering them interactionally inconsequential.
Excerpt 7 is from the end of the third recorded meeting, at which point the president was no longer in the room.
Bobby presses his point again but finds himself repeatedly thwarted by none other than McNamara, now determined to exploit the chronological nature of narratives and other turn-taking practices to suppress a narrative that otherwise threatens to derail the scenario to which he has become increasingly attached.
In the excerpt, Bobby tries no fewer than eight times to launch a future narrative about the consequences of a blockade.
From the excerpt, it is ExComm locate Rusk and Robert Kennedy almost directly across the rectangular table from each other, so this seems unlikely.
McNamara, perhaps impressed with the difficulty of destroying so many missiles from the air (the number seemed to increase with every new cache of photographs), now strongly favors that plan, but without the threat of later military action; rather, he imagines negotiations.
Virtually everyone else, though, assumes that an air strike (and perhaps invasion) will be necessary, and it seems that McNamara has decided to suppress the frightening consequences of such an air strike lest they count against the blockade in the minds of other ExComm members, though those consequences had originally come from his very mouth.
McNamara accomplishes this suppression through effective use of four tactics.
First, he exploits opportunities created by Bobby’s penchant for asking him to affirm the narrative’s first step, namely that the Soviets would be permitted to complete some of the missiles.
Third, he resists the terms of Bobby’s questions and charges, offering “pseudo-responses” that begin as responses but then advance his own vision of the blockade-and-negotiate narrative.
And then, as if Bobby were not already having a hard enough time, third parties occasionally interject, on one occasion forcing Bobby to restart his enterprise from scratch and on another forcing him to abandon it entirely.
To help the reader follow along, the attempts, along with one lengthy interlude and one shorter side exchange, are demarcated by dashed lines in the excerpt.
Attempt 1 Bobby gets off to a convoluted start, apparently asking McNamara about the likelihood of surveillance detecting further progress on the missiles even after a United States ultimatum.
Or at least this is how his question is understood by McNamara, who, in the context of this understanding, answers straightforwardly, agreeing that this is a likely scenario.
McNamara’s “this goes back” then seems, at first blush, to introduce an attempt to diagnose the problem with Bobby’s narrative, in which missile development can be stopped through bombing, as lying somewhere earlier in its (perhaps implicit) development.
But then McNamara appears to misconstrue Bobby’s point, resisting the implication that the United States should threaten to use military force, though in fact in lines 9–10, Bobby seemed more interested in the actual use of force than in its threatened use.
Attempt 2 Receiving little satisfaction from his first attempt, Bobby asks the question more pointedly in lines 14 and 16.
McNamara accepts the floor and again advances his version of the blockade-and-negotiate narrative rather than accepting the terms of the yes/no question put to him.
Then comes the story’s first step again, though worded not in terms of what the Soviets will do but in terms of what the United States will “tell them they can” do.
Taking excerpt 7 as a whole, it is apparent that Bobby is less concerned with what the Soviets are told than with what they actually do, so his use of “we tell them” requires analysis.
One possibility is that Bobby is being drawn into McNamara’s way of describing United States actions in terms of what the Soviets are told, either unconsciously or as a way of trying to overcome a persistent rhetorical divide.
More likely, Bobby intends “we tell them” not to denote a communicative event but, rather, as a way to underscore United States responsibility for what seems to him the likely consequence of a blockade.
Whichever it is, the formulation affords McNamara an immediate foundation for sharp dissent , followed by his prepared version of what the United States will literally say to the Soviets—that the missiles are unacceptable and that the outcome of negotiations must be their removal.
Then he makes a fifth attempt at his own story, now formulated as a blunt prediction of Soviet behavior.
McNamara is unfazed and simply narrates a counterannouncement by the United States that returns the narrative to the blockade-and-negotiate track (lines 45– 47), derailing Bobby’s narrative again.
For the most part, excerpt 7 is dedicated to Bobby’s attempt to construct a narrative that follows from the strategy favored by McNamara, and McNamara’s attempt to thwart that narrative.
Attempt 6 At the end of line 69, Bobby has regained the floor, just as McNamara is poised to enumerate other options, and finding his narrative seriously disrupted, restarts it.
And then, tactically speaking, he repeats one of his earlier mistakes, framing a prediction of a Soviet response to a blockade as what the United States will “tell them” they can do.
In this, McNamara appears to exploit Bobby’s “uh,” which marks trouble in turn production, as an excuse to take the floor before Bobby can produce a complete turn to which a response might need to be supplied.
Bundy announces he has to leave, there is a brief exchange about the next meeting time, and then Bobby apparently departs, for while Bundy, McNamara, Taylor, and Sorensen continue talking, the attorney general is not heard from again.
The attorney general clearly wants to tell a story about the blockade that will narrate the deleterious consequences of giving the Soviets the opportunity to complete work on the missiles already in Cuba.
He could do that best were he to be given solitary speaker privileges for the duration of his story.
This appears to be his undoing, for it is not for lack of total speaking time that he is unable to make his case.
Presumably, his objective is to tell a convincing story about the consequences of a blockade in which cause and effect are made plain.
That effort is subverted every time someone interrupts, and particularly when McNamara interjects with his own narrative.
This is because were Bobby to then simply pick up where he left off upon regaining the floor, his further narrative could be heard not as a continuation of his earlier, interrupted narrative, but of whatever competing story was developed in the interim.
The meeting on the evening of the 18th was not tape-recorded, nor were minutes taken.
The minutes from this day’s meetings (which started at 11:00m. and ran off and on throughout the day) are not especially detailed, but one thing is directly relevant to my analysis.
In the course of the afternoon discussion, the military representatives, especially Secretary McNamara, came to expressing the view that an air strike could be made some time after the blockade was instituted in the event the 22 A comparable interactional strategy is described in Molotch and Boden’s article on the Watergate hearings, in terms of Senator Edward Gurney’s attempt to interrogate White House turncoat John Dean while denying him the opportunity to provide the context within which particular choices might have been more accountable.
The Attorney General took particular note of this shift, and toward the end of the day made clear that he firmly favored blockade as the first step; other steps subsequently were not precluded and could be considered; he thought it was now pretty clear what the decision should be.
Thus, it seems that this was mainly McNamara’s opinion, perhaps with some support from Gilpatric and Nitze, and one not based on any new intelligence that Taylor was aware of.
This is consistent with my earlier speculation that McNamara decided to change his strategy in order to safeguard the blockade plan against the very objection he had earlier raised against it.
In any event, this was an important development, including in the eyes of the minute taker and Bobby Kennedy, supporting my claim that the primary stumbling block for the blockade plan was the difficulty of a later air strike.
Then, after the president was handed a document by Sorensen laying out the “blockade route,” McNamara listed that alternative’s disadvantages and advantages.
Missing from the former was any risk of later having to bomb operational missiles, the reason presumably being, once again, that McNamara envisioned negotiations (possibly including an offer to remove nuclear missiles from Italy and Turkey) rather than a threat of, or preparations for, military action.
Kennedy pointed out, apparently in response, that during the blockade some missiles would be operational, as a result of which “the threat would increase” ( United States Department of State 1961–63, p.9; no. in fig.), but without specifically tying this to a subsequent air strike.
Then after an exchange between Kennedy and Taylor about the effectiveness and timing of an air strike early in the week, “Rusk asked Taylor whether we dared to attack operational strategic missile sites,” to which Taylor responded, evasively, that “the risk of these missiles being used against us was less than if we permitted the missiles to remain there” .24 Sometime later, the president was handed a document laying out the immediate air strike scenario.
Kennedy suggested giving the Russians two hours advance notice, Taylor indicated that from a military point of view 24 hours would be acceptable,25 and Kennedy increased his recommendation to seven hours.
Because even seven hours would, by some estimates, have given the Soviets time to ready some of the missiles for firing, all of these proposals are subsumed under no. , as an instance of a story involving advance warning before an air strike, albeit not, in this instance, in connection with a blockade.
Shortly afterward, Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon proposed a 72-hour wait between the start of the blockade and an air strike , and then McCone echoed this 24 This might sound like an instance of the kind of overt cost-benefit analysis that we otherwise find lacking in these discussions, but the scenario to which Taylor alluded, involving a future attack on the United States by Cuba-based missiles in the event that they were permitted to remain, was never really discussed by the ExComm.
Thus, while Taylor may have believed this statement, the calculation suggested by it would not have been taken at face value by other ExComm members.
In each instance , no objection was recorded, though it had been alluded to only minutes before.
Dillon, however, then went on to raise this very concern himself, admitting that “the limited use of force involved in a blockade would make the military task much harder and would involve the great danger of the launching of these missiles by the Cubans” ( United States Department of State 1961–63, 132; no. in fig.).26 This, of course, was the crucial point, but its effects on the discussion were modest and short-lived.
Thompson stated his support for a blockade followed by an air strike (no.
With the next to last of these , Kennedy seemed to have made up his mind to go with the blockade with preparations for military action.
Yet not long afterward, he was back to talking about the possibility of a surprise air strike.
Though we cannot expect the minutes to 26 There was some concern that Khrushchev would turn control of the missiles over to the Cubans, but most ExComm members thought this unlikely.
Dillon may have misspoken here, or perhaps this was a mistake on the part of the minutes taker.
That this enabled Kennedy to make a deliberatively warranted decision does not mean that he was actually persuaded that an air strike could be safely conducted days after the Soviets were alerted to United States knowledge of the missiles.
Yet when the ExComm seriously resumed planning for an air strike on the 25th, amid evidence of accelerated work on the missiles, there were a dozen or so occasions on which the possibility of an air strike was mentioned without a single expressed concern about the danger that operational missiles might be fired.
Though puzzling taken by itself, this is consistent with what began happening during the third taped meeting, when such an attack became the elephant in the room that ceased to be narrated though nothing had been said to alleviate the need to worry.
Further, now the ExComm had even more on its plate, including talks at the UN, questions about surveillance, the interception of ships at the blockade line, and, on the 27th, Khrushchev’s contradictory offers (see Gibson, in press, chaps.–6) and the downing of a U-2.
Overall, there seems to have been a sense that the initial decision in favor of the blockade, with the threat of subsequent military action, had set the United States on this particular path, so that all the ExComm could do was plan for the air strike even as it hoped for a diplomatic breakthrough.
This apparent willingness, or ability, to “forget” earlier objections is a striking finding.
If we assume that when people talk about something happening they are simultaneously imagining it happening, it follows that it will appear increasingly less likely when it is not talked about.
This would explain why so many people started telling this story in the third meeting once McNamara stopped warning against it, if they were attracted to the blockade because it did not immediately escalate the crisis but needed the dangerous consequence to fade from view before they could sign on.
But it would not explain the more overt and even strenuous work of suppression and ambiguation that was involved in keeping the blockade and its most damning risk apart.
What we need to explain, then, is the systematic and largely consensual nonsaying of something that could have been said, or its only vague saying, and the complicity in its suppression when someone like Bundy, Bobby, Taylor, or Dillon tried to give it articulation.
I propose that, faced with no good options, the ExComm’s practical problem shifted from finding a solution to the problem of the missiles to finding a solution to the problem of seeming to find a solution.
While this meant putting serious reservations out of mind, or mouth, it may have seemed necessary if hours of meetings were to leave the president with anything more than a uniformly grim assessment of all of the options.
And from Kennedy’s perspective, the need to take some action may have become paramount once the goal of divining the best action proved elusive.
The ExComm took full advantage of this, retelling stories until such a time that one, involving a blockade with preparation for military action, was discussed on a succession of occasions without the threat of a nuclear response being narratively affixed to it, though that threat had been repeatedly stated not long before, though some people tried unsuccessfully to reintroduce it, though it was still being alluded to on the 20th, and though Kennedy fretted about it to all and sundry in the days after the blockade was announced.
Had they done so, that might have been Kennedy’s choice, but the dangers of an immediate air strike were stated repeatedly, and without letup.
Here it is tempting to fall back upon the conventional explanation that Kennedy felt compelled to do something and feared that a surprise air strike could send the crisis spiraling out of control , and there is probably some truth in this.
A processual explanation, and one more faithful to the data, changes the question from why Kennedy chose a blockade to how the blockade option emerged from the fray as viable.
Far from determined by 28 This provides interactional form to what Cerulo calls “positive asymmetry,” whereby the possible benefits of a course of action receive more consideration than its risks.
These findings have important implications for our understanding of decision making, particularly in times of crisis.
Perhaps oddly, scholars of decision making hardly ever give any serious thought at all to talk, that is, to what people say when they make decisions together.
The standout exception is Vaughan’s detailed analysis of the decision to launch the doomed Challenger space shuttle, culminating in a meeting of NASA and contractor engineers at which the decision to go ahead with the launch was made.
My analysis of the ExComm meet403 American Journal of Sociology ings suggests a very different picture, one more fragmented, iterative, and locally contingent.
Once again, the ExComm cycled in and out of talk about particular scenarios, revisiting each repeatedly with little express recognition of having “been here before,” and thus little concern that stories about, in particular, the blockade ended differently on some occasions than on others.
This made it possible for one scenario to eventually be liberated from its primary failing, through omission and even more overt forms of suppression.
And this, I have suggested, was just about the only way that consensus, or the appearance of consensus, could be attained, given that all options looked bad.
Thus, in place of Anderson’s “decision-making by objection,” we have “decision-making by suppression,” as something we should expect when the alternative, paralysis, is judged least acceptable of all.
The decision-making theory to which this bears the greatest affinity is garbage can theory, but with a new twist.
In Cohen, March, and Olsen’s original statement of the theory, solutions float around an organization looking for problems with which to pair, even when the fit is imperfect.
This was an important inversion of the traditional idea that problems generate the search for solutions.
This article takes the argument further, into the domain of face-to-face interaction, by introducing solutions that need to avoid the problems that they create in order to carry the day, with help from speakers who can choose to fuse them together, like DNA base pairs, or keep them separate.
When all solutions have problems, perhaps the only way forward is to keep one solution and its problems apart, especially during the critical minutes before a decision has to be made.
In this regard, the rest of the crisis unfolded differently, and the comparison tells us much about the way in which the temporal characteristics of an unfolding crisis interact with the temporal properties of talk.
After Kennedy announced the blockade, the ExComm had to decide which ships to intercept.
A few hours later, during the 10:00m. meeting, the ExComm considered stopping it belatedly ( United States ships had been trailing it), but again no decision was reached, and the issue was tabled until the 5:00m. meeting.
On the evening of the 26th, Khrushchev offered to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba in return for a United States pledge to respect the island’s sovereignty, but the very next morning, he changed the terms of the deal, demanding the withdraw of NATO Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
Here again the group was under pressure to make a quick decision, for fear that Khrushchev would issue more demands or that NATO allies, scheduled to meet on the 28th, would make statements that would make a subsequent deal involving the Jupiter missiles impossible.
And once again, no consensus could be reached, with Kennedy’s advisers (or at least the vocal ones) advocating that the United States accept the first offer and ignore the second one, and Kennedy insisting that Khrushchev would not be satisfied with that, and that by proposing it, he would only be prolonging the crisis and increasing the risk of escalation.
The effect of the former upon the latter is nicely captured by the idea of “environmental impatience,” which refers to the various ways in which an organization can be pressured by external actors to make a decision , and, I would add, the meanings that are assigned to indecision if none is forthcoming.
When the environment demands an answer before that process is complete, the result can be inaction or, alternatively, a decision that reflects unresolved narrative contention, and that is potentially seen as incoherent or indecisive.
However, it may be that had the ExComm had more time to contemplate its response to the missiles, challenges to the blockade option might have been successfully resurrected and rechampioned.
Perhaps the appearance of a rational choice ultimately depends on two things.
When deliberation is performed with others, it assumes the form of storytelling about the future, or the collaborative attempt to map out roads that have not yet been laid.
While we might learn something about the nature of talk from such settings, such as how normal conversational procedures are adapted for institutional ends , the decision itself probably does not hinge on the contingent and situationally sensitive unfolding of particular exchanges.
In contrast, to the degree that there is no “right” answer, power differences are provisionally suspended, and vested interests are set aside in pursuit of a common goal, the perception of a correct answer, of a way forward, is an interactional outcome, something achieved through conversation and subject to its rules and vicissitudes rather than merely discovered by means of it.
One implication is that things could have turned out otherwise, both in terms of the decisions that came out of those discussions, and in terms of the course of events in the wider world.
If, for example, McNamara, Bundy, Dillon, and Robert Kennedy had been more successful (or in McNamara’s case, more consistent) in articulating the dangers of bombing operational missiles, or if Kennedy had been forced to make his decision on the 16th , he might have ordered a surprise air strike instead.
In either scenario and many others besides, Khrushchev might have felt compelled to retaliate, and both leaders feared their inability to (borrowing an image from one of Khrushchev’s missives) untie the knots of war once they were pulled tight.
Even were we to assume that people come to an encounter predisposed to make certain kinds of statements—as also postulated by the bureaucratic politics model —how those statements are elicited, articulated, strung together, and interpreted will always be somewhat contingent and underdetermined in advance, unless there is a script in the literal sense.
Up close, things rarely seem as inevitable as they seem from afar, after the fact, but the temptation to deny this sort of indeterminacy is great, especially at the end of analyses that purport to explain decision outcomes as the natural result of structure, culture, or the interplay of interests.
Another is when an adversary is poised to respond very differently to one decision rather than another, placing the world at a turning point to which it can never return once the die has been cast.
And there are presumably other conditions still that explain when backroom encounters between activist leaders translate into demonstrations that topple governments.
Whatever the complete list of such conditions, that events of tectonic importance are sometimes at the mercy of much more fluid and contingent processes at the very bottom of the micro-macro continuum is, to be sure, disconcerting.
One thing demonstrated by this article, however, is that such processes are not immune to sociological investigation.
But such investigation requires an accurate and fine-grained record of what transpired, the likes of which sociologists are only rarely provided.
Former Ambassador to Soviet Union ⻫ ⻫ Note.—Excludes CIA officials responsible for opening intelligence briefings.
Also present at the October 20 meeting were UN representative Adlai Stevenson and Special Assistant to the President Kenneth O’Donnell.
A: percent  Vertically aligned partial brackets indicate overB: that’s right lapping speech.
I might but Numbers in parentheses indicate pauses in secwithin three days onds, measured to one decimal point.
Inhaling is indicated with a leading period, and exhaling with the lack of a period.
Breathing was only transcribed when its producer—generally the person currently speaking—was apparent.
I Single parentheses contain the transcriber’s guess as to speech that cannot be discerned clearly.
Double underlining means that more than one other person is speaking in this (unintelligible and unidentifiable) manner.
An underlined pause means that someone can be heard speaking during a lull in the named speaker’s turn.
Ellipwarning them ses enclosed in this way indicate talk omitted from a given speaking turn.
Then talk turns to air strike options, seeming to assume a surprise attack.
Robert Kennedy then raises the possibility of an invasion, and talk turns to military preparations.
A warning would secure more “political support” (tape 28, 95: 15) from United States allies but would come at the cost of loss of surprise.
JFK then continues to waver about whether to make an announcement before a strike.
Warning could allow Soviets time to complete the missiles and would also increase the chance of Soviet bombers attacking the East Coast.
Then there is a period of talk about United States vulnerability to such bombers, and whether they might carry nuclear weapons.
Robert Kennedy then asks whether United States surveillance planes could monitor missiles after an announcement.
Dillon then challenges the wisdom of an announcement, and Ball proposes that only close allies be informed.
Rusk then continues a long monologue, turning to an OAS vote backing United States action and then the dangers of the alternative, a surprise air attack.
McNamara goes on to argue that the missiles do not change the balance of power but do present political problems and might also embolden Khrushchev.
Thompson seems about to say that the United States would threaten to attack Cuba after the imposition of a blockade “if they’re made operational” when he is interrupted.
JFK and Thompson then argue about the threats and demands Khrushchev would make in response to a blockade.
Bundy then interrupts to speculate about when Khrushchev intends to announce the missiles.
Taylor then expresses concern that the warning would give the Soviets time to hide “the planes and so on” before a strike.
An announcement before an air strike sacrifices surprise, but Russian aircraft carrying nuclear bombs can be shot down.
Alexis Johnson then changes the topic to the president’s meeting with Foreign Minister Gromyko.
JFK says that the Soviets would not fire missiles in the event of an air strike after a warning, and Bundy responds “if they were rational,” but in overlap.
Taylor says that the best day for an air strike, from the perspective of military preparations, would be on Tuesday.
There’s general agreement that Khrushchev would be approached before any air strike.
Then follows an exchange about the ExComm splitting into subgroups to analyze options, and plans for the next meeting.
Then there are several remarks about the advantages of a blockade, and soon thereafter about the need for OAS support.
Bobby Kennedy tries to tell a story about the dangers of allowing the missiles to be readied but is continuously thwarted by McNamara.
After Taylor advocated an air strike on Tuesday , “Secretary Rusk asked General Taylor whether we dared to attack operational strategic missile sites in Cuba.
President Kennedy suggested giving the Soviets a few hours advance notice before an air strike.
Bobby Kennedy advocated a blockade followed by an air strike if needed.
Dillon suggested waiting 72 hours after the instituting of a blockade before an air strike.
McCone also suggested waiting 72 hours between the start of a blockade and an air strike.
Gilpatric then stated his support for a blockade while acknowledging that it would probably come at the expense of later military action.
Basten, Ulrike, Guido Biele, Hauke R Heekeren, and Christian J Fiebach.10.
Devine, Dennis J., Laura D Clayton, Benjamim B Dunford, Rasmy Seying, and Jennifer Pryce.01.
Studies in Conversation Analysis, edited by John Atkinson and John Heritage.
Pp.7–34 in The Micro-Macro Link, edited by Jeffrey C Alexander, Bernhard Giesen, Richard Munch, and Neil J Smelser.
In Honor of Robert Hopper, edited by Phillip Glenn, Curtis D LeBaron, and Jenny Mandelbaum.
Pp.5–250 in Ambiguity and Choice in Organizations, edited by James G March and Johan P Olsen.
