Please enter a valid email address and try again."",""expired_card"":""This card has expired.
Please try again with a different payment method."",""incorrect_address"":""The supplied billing address is incorrect.
Please check the card's address or try again with a different card."",""incorrect_cvc"":""The card's security code is incorrect.
Please check the security code or try again with a different card."",""incorrect_number"":""The card number is incorrect.
Please check the card number or try again with a different card."",""invalid_number"":""The card number is incorrect.
Please check the card number or try again with a different card."",""incorrect_zip"":""The card's postal code is incorrect.
Please check the postal code or try again with a different card."",""postal_code_invalid"":""The card's postal code is incorrect.
Please check the postal code or try again with a different card."",""invalid_cvc"":""The card's security code is invalid.
Edit This worksheet can be edited by Premium members using the free Google Slides online software.
Key Facts & Information Prior to the Crisis On January 1, 1959, after overthrowing Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar through a revolution, Fidel Castro took over the military government in Cuba and aligned himself with the Soviet Union.
In fact, the Soviets provided military and economic aid to Castro’s government.
For the next two years of Castro’s presidency, he reduced American influence in the Cuban economy by nationalizing major American industries like sugar and mining.
As a result, Americans banned the importation of Cuban sugar to the United States collapsing the sugar industry for a little while until the USSR agreed to buy the imports.
In addition, the United States State Department and the Central Intelligence Agency attempted to end Castro’s power.
In April 1961, the CIA launched an all-out invasion of Cuba through 1,400 American-trained Cubans who had fled to the United States after the revolution.
After the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, United States President John F Kennedy ordered the installment of nuclear missile sites in Turkey and Italy.
At the same time, the United States and the USSR were engaged in the Cold War, which lasted until 1991.
The Cold War, which started in 1945, was a series of political, technological and economic clashes between the United States and the Soviets.
Beginning of Crisis On October 14, 1962, an American U-2 spy plane operated by Air Force Pilot Richard Heyser passed over Cuban airspace and photographed a Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missile.
On October 16, 1962, JFK immediately gathered together a group of officials and military advisors to form the executive committee, also known as ExCom.
Members of the ExCom felt the urgency of the situation since the missiles were installed just 90 miles south of Florida.
They analyzed that from the launch point, missiles could easily target any parts of the eastern United States.
With his intention of increasing nuclear strike capability, USSR Chairman Nikita Khrushchev sent missile installations to Cuba.
They leveled the playing field since American missiles located in Western Europe and Turkey were targeting them.
After the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, Khrushchev saw a great opportunity to lessen American aggression in Cuba.
On October 18, 1962, Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko and was informed that the Soviets were only aiding Cuba in growing crops and that missiles were installed primarily for defense.
Robert Kennedy informed his brother, who was in Chicago, about the ExComm suggestion.
On October 22, President JFK appeared on television and addressed the American people that a missile installation was discovered in Cuba.
In response, he ordered a naval blockade and removal of missiles on the Soviet end.
On October 23, Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships to stop in the Atlantic to avoid confrontation with the United States Navy.
After a day, however, he refused to remove missiles in Cuba and accused JFK of initiating nuclear war with the blockade.
By October 25, the United States Air Force had increased flights over Cuba while the ExComm suggested an invasion of Cuba.
On the 27th, Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles if JFK agreed not to invade Cuba.
Kennedy agreed to the proposal and also quietly removed missile installations in Turkey.
End of Crisis The thirteen-day tension between the USSR and the United States was diffused through diplomatic communications with both leaders constantly communicating through exchanged letters and other means.
On October 28, Khrushchev went live on Radio Moscow announcing his agreement with JFK, thus ending the crisis.
In order to prevent similar situations in the future, a direct hotline was installed facilitating direct communication between Washington and Moscow the following year.
As a result, Castro was upset with Khrushchev because he was not consulted before removing the missiles in Cuba, which deteriorated Cuba-Soviet relations.
The Soviets were perceived to be retreating from the situation causing the downfall of Khrushchev two years later.
Wordly Facts Operation Anadyr was the Soviet code name for secretly installing missiles in Cuba.
Operation Mongoose, also known as the Cuban Project, was a CIA operation commissioned during the last year of President Eisenhower.
It was officially authorized by JFK after the failed Bay of Pigs invasion, which was meant to remove Communist power in Cuba.
Maskirovka was a strategy employed by the Soviets for Operation Anadyr.
Blockade is an act of sealing a place or territory to prevent goods or people from entering or leaving.
A naval blockade was enforced by JFK but they preferred to use the word ‘quarantine’ to avoid declaration of war terms.
You can use these worksheets as-is, or edit them using Google Slides to make them more specific to your own student ability levels and curriculum standards.
