AUTONOMOUS OPERATIONS X Oi^ijj_ nf__Aul;o iiomous Operations The integrated Covert Action Program for Cuba, approved by Higher Authority in June 1963, provided for ""support of autonomous anti-Castro Cuban groups to supplement and assist in the execution"" of the other courses of action approved under this program.
The concept of autonomous groups was. first voiced in September 1962 in Mr Walter Rostow's , proposal for a ""Track Two"" approach to Cuban operations.
Implicit .in the autonomous .concept is the understanding that the leadership would posse™ a degree of operational self-determination which in certain 'circumstances, such as during the recent overflight crisis, could conflict with United States security interests.
If this coat in lives becomes unacceptable to the United States conscience, autonomous operations can be effectively halted by the withdrawal of United States support; but once halted, they cannot be resumed.
Ml autonomous operations will be mounted outside the ■kot-i'i-kory of the United States.
The United States presence and direct participation in .the operation would be kept to an absolute minimum.
Before entering into an operational relationship with a group, the United States representative will make it clear that his Government has no intention of intervening militarily, except to counter intervention ma by the Soviets.
He may be expected to influence but not control the conduct of operations.
The Standing Group agreed -that the paper would be presented with an affirmative recommendation of the Group to Higher Authority.
Higher Authority approved the program \ ^ ° as presented and approved by the Standing) """""" Group.
Among other item's the question of the disappointingly premature publicity concerning our autonomous operations with ARTIME was raised.
The discussion centered around means of counteracting this premature publicity and several suggestions to do so were made.
Special Group . to push planned harassment operations in the hope that Castro might launch an offensive against Nicaragua which SOMOZA believed would bring forth United States intervention.
The Special Group agreed that ARTIME should shift the main weight of his operation to Costa Rica without breaking with SOMOZA and that the State Department would give as much encouragement as possible to Costa Rican support of ARTIME without showing undue United States . interest in ARTIME's activities.
It was reported that ARTIME agreed to make greater use of Costa Rica in addition to using Nicaragua.
In the course of discussion on possible support to the autonomous anti-Castro exile EVB 0""7 12 Nov 1963 Meeting at the White House to review the Cuban program. -ri*> jjti*' S V jjjiip organization, Comandos L, the Special Group was informed that the ARTIME group planned to be ready to go in November.
A full status report on the 6-point integrated program against Cuba was presented.
Specific point was made that Manuel ARTIME and the MRR has made substantial progress and expects to mount his first operations in December.
In addition it was reported' that the Agency was now supporting Manuel RAY to the extent of $25,000. per month although he has not progressed to the point that ARTIME has.
During this discussion Mr McGeorge Bundy commented that when the autonomous grcfup started operations this might cause some problems due to the acknowledged lack of tight control.
In the course of the briefing which included the autonomous operations, Higher Authority asked the cost of these operations and he was informed the total was about $5,000,000.
He also asked the cost of Cuban operations for the current year and was informed it was about $21 or 22 million.
SECRET 6 March 1964 Letter to Mr McGeorge Bundy reviewing various operational problems in connection with Cuba.
Our support to the autonomous exile groups headed respectively by Manuel ARTIME and Manuel RAY was again reviewed and a short status report given.
The problem of suspending autonomous operations was also briefly discussed.
The problem of .these groups and their potential for continuing operations on their own and the momentum of. these groups even after support was cut was also discussed.
It was clear that the groups headed' by ARTIME and RAY constituted a potential threat.
Mr Mann stated that he leaned away from CIA-conducted raids and towards autonomous operations.
Higher Authority was. fully brief edon the present status of autonomous operations including the fact that ARTIME was planning to launch his operational program on 12 April.
This memorandum .notified Special Gr^up members of the planned 17/18 April raid by ARTIME's autonomous group against Santa Cruz del Sur.
