It was the most dangernedy’s strategy in 1962 “was not ous moment in human history.’’ preemption.
It was the reverse of For Bush, the key lesson of the preemption,” stated former Defense missile crisis was that a preempSecretary Robert McNamara.
If tive strike was warranted to take President Bush was his student, out Saddam Hussein’s purported Schlesinger told the Washington weapons of mass destruction.
A decade ago the 92 President John F Kennedy signs a proclamation allowing United States warships to interdict the delivery of military equipment to Cuba during the Cuban missile crisis.
Paul Schutzer/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images; Hulton Archive/Getty Images; Time Life Pictures/Department Of Defense /Getty Images missile crisis were Secretary of State Dean Rusk, left, and Defense Secretary Robert McNamara.
Bottom, a U-2 spy plane photo of a Soviet ballistic missile site in Cuba that set off the U.S.–Soviet confrontation. nuclear weapon systems that the CIA never detected in Cuba.
These new revelations remind us of how terrifyingly close the world came to atomic Armageddon.
But the declassified record has also revealed major new details on how committed both Kennedy and Khrushchev were to using creative diplomacy to stop the forces of a final Cold War confrontation that they themselves had inadvertently unleashed.
THE OFFICIAL STORY The genesis of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev’s offer of a nuclear deterrent to Cuba, and Castro’s decision to deploy the missiles on Cuban sabers of war were rattling over Iraq; today the United States and Israel soil, dates back to the April 1961 CIA-led paramilitary assault at the Bay of are openly debating a preemptive strike against Iran.
Sadly, Schlesinger, Pigs, and the subsequent covert program known as “Operation Mongoose” Sorensen and McNamara are no longer here to point out the implications which was intended to lead to another United States invasion of Cuba.
The search for a full appreciation of official starting point of the missile crisis came on October 14, 1962, when the lessons of the crisis, nevertheless, continues. a U-2 spy plane snapped hundreds of reconnaissance photos of a series of Incredibly, despite the current global importance for a complete newly constructed installations and camps in the Cuban countryside.
The accounting of the missile crisis, significant parts of the historical record next day, analysts at the CIA’s National Photographic Interpretation remain secret and sealed.
Even so, in the decade since the conference in Center spotted hard evidence—images of launchers, missiles, trailers and Havana, which brought together surviving officials from Cuba, the forspecial transport trucks—that proved the existence of medium­-range mer USSR and the United States along with newly declassified documentation ballistic missile sites on the island.
Additional photo intelligence from all three nations, the narrative of the conflict has evolved, allowing soon revealed bases for intermediate-range missiles capable of striking analysts and historians to revisit and revise the events of October 1962. targets over 2,800 miles away in the United States.
Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear On October 16, Kennedy gathered a select group of advisors—an War, for example, has revealed that besides the ballistic missiles, the executive committee officially known as the “ExComm”—to discuss a Soviets secretly brought dozens of nuclear-tipped cruise missiles to Cuba, strategic response.
The Mikoyan and edited by Svetlana Savranskaya, draws on never-beforeExComm’s initial discussions focused on a massive United States military assault seen Soviet documents that record the struggle between Moscow and on the nuclear installations and other bases in Cuba, and whether the Havana over withdrawing those cruise missiles, and other battlefield Soviets would counterattack in Berlin or elsewhere.
Would a United States attack on Cuba killing thousands of Soviet personnel At 7pm on October 22, Kennedy went on television to give one of —the CIA estimated 8,000 Soviet troops and technicians on the island the most dramatic 18-minute speeches in modern times.
He ankind of a world we live in after we’ve struck Cuba, and we, we’ve started nounced a “strict quarantine” against ships carrying weapons to Cuba, and it… After we’ve launched fifty to a hundred sorties, what kind of world demanded that Khrushchev “halt and eliminate” this threat to world peace.
Yes, he had That question plagued the president as he resisted pressure from top sent missiles to Cuba, he privately told William Knox, the president of aides and the Joint Chiefs of Staff to authorize a week of carpet bombing Westinghouse Electric International who happened to be visiting Moscow of Cuba—more than 1,000 sorties were planned for the first two days of on October 24.
But they were meant to defend the revolution against the airstrikes—followed by a massive invasion.
If the Americans now attacked Cuba, the the blockade option to buy time to negotiate the withdrawal of the United States Guantanamo Naval Base would “disappear the first day,” he warned, missiles, Air Force General Curtis LeMay accused him of a Munich-style according to Dobbs’ book. appeasement.
The cigar-chomping General—LeMay served as the role “I’m not interested in the destruction of the world,” he informed model for the unhinged military officer Buck Turgidson in Stanley Kubrick’s Knox, who became the first emissary in the missile crisis.
Strangelove—who had 3,000 missiles under his comus to all meet in Hell, it’s up to you. mand, seemed to believe a nuclear war was winnable.
If the missiles flew, During the ensuing six days of the increasingly dangerous superpower some 70 million Americans could be killed, President Kennedy pointed showdown, President Kennedy pursued a strategy combining the naval out.
Pole and strayed deep into Soviet territory over the Chukot Peninsula, a fellow just blinked,” Secretary “provocation,” as the Kremlin interpreted it, that set off alarms that the Rusk told the ExComm—a Nikita Khrushchev United States was preparing for an attack there; Khrushchev’s anxieties were furstatement that became the ther increased by a message he received from Fidel Castro arguing that a most iconic, if erroneous, representation of the missile crisis.
Finally, in a direct and dramatic military confrontation “eyeball” confrontation on the high seas never took place.) on the high seas, United States naval warships dropped depth charges on a Soviet On October 26, a glimmer of hope for a resolution emerged when a Foxtrot submarine, unaware that it carried a nuclear tipped torpedo.
Soviet KGB agent meeting with ABC News correspondent John Scali Unable to communicate with Moscow, the sub’s captain believed that war suggested that the Kremlin might consider a non-invasion of Cuba had broken out and considered arming and launching the nuclear weapon, guarantee by Washington as a basis to withdraw the missiles.
A private rather than surface and surrender. message from Khrushchev to Kennedy arrived the same day stating that As events seemed to spin out of control, both Kennedy and Khrushit was the constant “threat of armed attack and aggression” against Cuba chev redoubled their efforts to find a solution.
In Moscow, Khrushchev that had prompted the Soviets to position the missiles there; if the United States convened the Politburo and made it clear he was looking for a politically would give “assurances” of no future invasions of Cuba, “then too, the acceptable way to dismantle the missile sites in Cuba.
In Cuba, a U-2 spy plane was shot down by a Soviet anti-aircraft battery at the height of the missile crisis, further increasing tensions.
In the background is the Hotel Riviera, which was a prominent building from the pre-Castro era.
Russian documents reveal, continued over the removal of other nuclear When they start these things and grab Berlin, weapons systems the Soviets had secretly brought to Cuba.
Today it sounds great to reject it, mystique and mythology around the facts and handling of the conflict. but it’s not going to after we do something.
On December 8, 1962, the Saturday Evening Post published a long On the evening of October 27 Kennedy sent his brother, Robert, to article, “In Time of Crisis,” which established the official narrative on the personally deliver a carefully worded proposal to Soviet Ambassador Cuban missile crisis.
Dispelling the communiqué stated, “would enable us to work toward a more general any rumors of a quid pro quo, anonymous aides painted the most liberal arrangement regarding ‘other armaments…’ ” an oblique reference to the member of Kennedy’s crisis management team, UN Ambassador Adlai Jupiter missiles.
Washington would mented unbeknownst to many of his top advisors and the public. never publicly acknowledge that such a quid pro quo had been made, At the time, the Kennedy White House went to considerable lengths Kennedy said.
He made it clear to the Russian diplomat that time was of to keep this agreement secret.
Kennedy’s memoir of the missile crisis, Thirteen Days, was published postThe news reached President Kennedy in his bedroom at the White House humously in 1969, it omitted the critical details about his discussion on the as he was dressing to attend Church.
The time has now come when he must take the interests of RFK’s diaries” on which the we must make the Cuban people, must now break clearly with the Soviet Union, book had been based.
But after his dramatic October 22 ” in view of the fact that the trade way again. presidential address to the nation, the President ordered the ExComm to was still a secret at the time, look again at “alternative courses of action” to the use of force.
The idea was to coax Castro to eject Such secrecy enabled the early depiction of Kennedy’s successful the missiles along with the Soviets by opening the door to Cuba’s return brinkmanship and forceful resolve to become missile crisis folklore.
The United States would point out that “Cuba was merely being expresident had “dazzled the world” in handling the crisis, Arthur Schlesinger ploited in the interests of the Soviet Union and that any of the possible Jr. wrote in his 1966 hagiographic biography, A Thousand Days.
His crisis The State Department report added that Washington would “have to management skills had forced the Russians to “blink” and retreat. give some assurances, regardless of whether we intended to carry them But as the facts have emerged over the years, it is clear that the crisis out, that we would not ourselves undertake to overthrow the regime or was not a model of brinkmanship, nor was United States strategy so controlled and calibrated, nor was it a lesson in the use of force and resolve.
Kennedy did exercise nerve and wisdom, but it was devoted to his commitment to deploy diplomats instead of soldiers, to avoid a final war rather than risk one.
That commitment has been overshadowed by the “balls of steel” legend that has built up around the crisis.
THE CASTRO ‘APPROACH’ It took almost 30 years after the missile crisis for historians to obtain confirmation of the basic facts of the secret missile swap.
And more than 25 years for former members of the ExComm to reveal that Kennedy was so committed to resolving the crisis that he established a back-channel to United Nations Secretary General U Thant, in case Khrushchev did not accept the trade.
At a Florida conference of surviving Kennedy adminisSoviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin arrives at the State Department in tration officials in 1987, Sorensen read a letter from Dean Rusk in which Washington, D.C., in 1962 just an hour before President Kennedy’s he described a top secret presidential message he had transmitted to U television speech announcing the discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
A UN proposal, the message ships turn back that if he kicks out Sovs we can live him.” inferred, would provide Kennedy with the needed political cover to agree Such an approach “would be made to Castro through a Latin American publicly to such a deal. representative in Cuba, probably the Brazilian ambassador,” the State But in addition to his negotiations with Khrushchev and secret chanDepartment recommended.
Headed by the populist president João Goulart, nel to the UN, the most enduring secret of the missile crisis diplomacy Brazil had maintained strong ties to Cuba after the revolution, and a longwas that Kennedy actually made an approach to Castro, reaching out to standing interest in being a mediator to improve U.S.­–Cuban relations. the fiery Cuban leader through a third-country intermediary in a conAt the ExComm meeting on October 26, President Kennedy approved certed effort to bring the crisis to an end.
This hidden history, recorded in the clandestine back-channel communication.
At the very first ExComm meeting on October 16, when most senior In a top secret/eyes only cable from the Secretary of State to U.S. officials were focusing on attacking Cuba, Secretary of State Rusk had Ambassador Lincoln Gordon in Rio, Rusk stated that it was time to pushed the President to consider the alternative of “getting some word to “discuss with Castro alone RPT alone” a way out of the missile crisis.
For McNamara, Western Hemisphere has placed the future of the Castro regime the main lesson of the Cuba conflict was that there could be no such thing and the well-being of the Cuban people in great jeopardy. as successful crisis management in the nuclear age—therefore a global The Brazilian intermediary would then offer the carrot of better relaproject was needed to eliminate weapons of mass destruction.
U.S.—the military-political ties to the USSR and the aggressive To be sure, 50 years ago the world came closer than ever before to attitude toward the internal affairs of other Latin American atomic annihilation.
This view will be shared by other members of the Interthe extensive efforts to search for, and find, a diplomatic solution in which American system.
Of course this now means giving up the offensive both sides got something their leaders needed to save face and evade the nuclear capability being established in Cuba and sending home horror of nuclear war.
As the historical record has expanded, the image of Soviet military personnel, on which help can certainly be given if the resolute president has given way to the resolution president, commitneeded.
From such actions many changes in the relations between ted to extricating the U.S., the USSR, and Cuba from the danger of war Cuba and the OAS countries, including the U.S., could flow. in the dark shadow of the bomb.
To disguise the origins of this message, according to Hershberg’s reOf all the international crises in modern times, the Cuban missile search, United States embassy officers translated it into Portuguese and typed it crisis deserves a full understanding, by policy makers and citizens alike. onto plain paper; Ambassador Gordon then passed it to Brazil’s foreign But only when all archives have been opened, and every last page of documinister at a midnight meeting on October 27.
Maintaining secrecy around the missile crisis is, quite simply, a threat to By the time Brazil’s emissary General Albino Silva arrived in Havana global security.
