I5I.ANTON South Pacific Ocean Arctic Ocean New Zealand / ^onduraa^ EISalv/dor'^""™S“'‘ ''to S^^nams St.
Trend and Transformation Charles William Kegley, Shannon Lindsey Blanton Publisher: Suzanne Jeans Executive Editor: Carolyn Merrill Development Editor: Rebecca Green Assistant Editor: Katie Hayes Editorial Assistant: Angela Hodge Media Editor: Laura Hildebrand Associate Media Editor: Caitlin Holroyd Sr.
Amy Whitaker Marketing Coordinator: josh Hendrick Marketing Communications Manager: Heather Baxley Sr.
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706 For permission to use material from this text or product, submit all requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions.
Further permissions questions can be emailed to permissionrequest@cengage.com.
Pier Design Cover Image: nico_blue/iStockphoto Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred online store www.CengageBrain.com.
In a globe undergoing constant and rapid change, it is imperative to accurately describe, explain, and predict the key events and issues unfolding in international affairs.
These intellectual tasks must be performed well so that world citizens and policy makers can harness this knowledge and ground their decisions on the most pragmatic approaches to global problems available.
Only informed interpretations of world conditions and trend trajectories and cogent explanations of why they exist and how they are unfolding can provide the tools necessary for understanding the world and making it better.
Trend and Transformation provides the tools necessary for understanding world affairs in our present period of history, for anticipating probable developments, and for thinking critically about the potential long-term impact of those developments on countries and individuals across the globe.
Trend and Transformation aims to put both changes and continuities into perspective.
It provides a picture of the evolving relations among all transnational actors, the historical developments that affect those actors’ relationships, and the salient contemporary global trends that those interactions produce.
The major theories scholars use to explain the dynamics underlying international relations—realism, liberalism, and constructivism, as well as feminist and radical interpretations—frame the investigation.
That said, this book resists the temptation to oversimplify world politics with a superficial treatment that would mask complexities and distort realities.
Moreover, the text refuses to substitute mere subjective opinion for information based on evidence and purposefully presents clashing and contending views so that students have a chance to critically evaluate the opposed positions and construct their own judgments about key issues.
It fosters critical thinking by repeatedly asking students to assess the possibilities for the global future and its potential impact on their own lives.
OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK To facilitate student learning and provide the tools and information for analyzing the complexities of world politics, this book is organized into five parts.
It introduces the leading theories used to interpret international relations.
It looks at relations and interactions between them, and now considers the processes and procedures by which transnational actors make decisions.
CHANGES IN THE 2010-201 1 EDITION Changes to Structure, Presentation, and Pedagogical Aids In order to keep you and your students abreast of the latest developments.
World Politics has always changed in response to the unfolding developments across our world.
Since the publication of the twelfth edition update of this book in February 2009, numerous changes have taken place.
This 2010-2011 edition has been prepared to incorporate the latest developments in global events and scholarly research findings so that students will have access to the most current information.
Changes to this edition include; ■ A significant reorganization of the material that consolidates coverage of previously dispersed topics, alters the thematic order of the chapters, and more fully integrates theoretical perspectives throughout the book.
As a result, there are now five parts and seventeen chapters, with chapters focusing on armed aggression and the military now preceding those on economics, human security, demographics, and the environment in order to enhance the flow of the book as a whole.
Discussion of the theoretical contributions of constructivism and feminism are enhanced and highlighted across the book’s chapters.
While there has been a reduction in the overall length of World Politics, the depth of coverage remains unchanged.
The 2010-2011 edition retains the streamlined chapter-openers Preface XIX with traditional chapter outlines so that students can preview and review the material presented.
It continues to incorporate thoughtprovoking quotations throughout each chapter so as to broaden and deepen awareness of competing ideas and to stimulate interest in the insightful opinions of authors and policy makers on past and present global issues.
Now, however, the number of featured quotations has been reduced, and they are placed strategically at several key points in the chapter in order to enhance the relevance of the material and avoid distracting the student from the flow of the material in the rest of the text.
Addressing both classic dilemmas in international affairs and the most heated current debates.
One of the most popular pedagogical features of the text, the illustration program, has been revised to broaden the book’s coverage, provoke interest, and enable students to visualize the central developments and most recently available data.
The 2010-2011 edition includes more than six dozen new photographs, maps, tables, and figures that have been selected to introduce the timeliest topics and include detailed captions that explain their relevance to the larger issues discussed in the text.
Students today are often woefully uninformed about world geography, and the extensive map program helps remedy this problem.
Key terms continue to be highlighted with bold-faced text and glossed definitions in the margins where the terms are first introduced.
Now, however, each term is glossed only the first time it is introduced, and a single definition is used to familiarize students with the broadest and most common meaning of the term.
If a term is used again in subsequent chapters, the term is identified in italics the first time that it appears within a given chapter as a reminder to students that they can find the definition of the term in the glossary at the end of World Politics.
This reference tool appears at the end of the text, so students can more easily access terms they may not remember from previously assigned or unassigned chapters.
New terms have been added to keep students up-to-date with key concepts in the study of world politics.
There is also a new prompt at the conclusion of each chapter encouraging students to take an online quiz to assess their knowledge and understanding of the material presented.
Changes to Content by Chapter The changes just listed highlight only the most salient structural modifications in the 2010-2011 edition of World Politics.
Needless to say, this text continues to take pride in identifying and reporting the most recent developments in international affairs and in providing the latest data on the most significant related trends.
The 2010-2011 edition includes new coverage on the most important issues on the global agenda, from instability and the eruption of armed conflict to the continued poverty and oppression of people across the globe, from the proliferation of nuclear capabilities to the pressing challenges posed by global warming and the debate surrounding the development of alternative energy sources, and from the volatility of the global marketplace to the technological innovations that are revolutionizing the manner in which we communicate with one another.
As always, this leading text incorporates many thematic shifts in emphasis that capture the latest changes in the way scholars and policy makers understand the key issues and problems in our world, and the entire text has been revised to address the most important changes and reflect the most current information available since the updated twelfth edition was released in February 2009.
This new edition includes twenty-seven new maps, figures, and tables, in addition to 2009 updates to most of the existing ones.
There are fifty-two new pictures as well as the accompanying background information.
Discussion of foreign policy and international relations has been consolidated, and the material has been updated to incorporate recently available information on current events.
Also more clearly presented is the book’s approach and new organization.
As a compelling alternative to the traditional realist and liberal theoretical interpretations of world politics, the presentation of the feminist critique and radical theory has been enhanced as well.
Discussion of realism has been revised and now distinguishes between offensive and defensive realism.
Additionally, the chapter introduces the concepts of a security dilemma and diplomacy.
There is a new section on the Post-Cold War period, and the chapter includes a new discussion of the future of great power relations.
There is new discussion of the concept of “small powers” and the legacy of mistrust between developed and developing countries.
Focusing on relations between the Global South and Global North today, there is enhanced coverage of the impact of the global financial crisis, constraints on democratization, and continuing instability in many developing countries, with attention also paid to the possibilities for narrowing the growing divide between the wealthy and poor countries of our world.
A new Chapter 5, “Nonstate Actors and the Quest for Global Community,” consolidates material on intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations that was previously spread across two chapters.
The discussion of the United Nations has been updated and streamlined, as has coverage on the European Union.
Greater distinction between ethnic groups and indigenous peoples is provided, and discussion on religious movements, terrorism and postmodern terrorism, issue-advocacy groups, and corporate social responsibility is enhanced.
Coverage of decision making as rational choice, the bureaucratic politics of decision making, and the role of leaders in making international decisions on behalf of the actors they head has been revised extensively.
Discussion of prospect theory and two-level games has been expanded, and includes a constructivist critique.
There is also new discussion of the potential influence of gender on decision making, incorporating constructivist and feminist perspectives.
This provides a fluid transition from the theoretical discussions in previous chapters to that on global conflict and peace.
Chapter 7, “The Threat of Armed Aggression to the World,” begins the section with updated data on armed conflicts and failed states.
There is enhanced discussion of aggression within states, and expanded coverage of the diversionary theory of war, terrorism, counterterrorism, and conflicts in Afghanistan, Pakistan, and elsewhere.
Chapter 8, “The Military Pursuit of Power through Arms and Military Strategy,” introduces the core premises and policy prescriptions underlying realist approaches to war and peace in general.
The latest international trends in military preparation are captured in updated data and coverage on military spending, the weapons trade, and the proliferation of chemical weapons.
There is expanded discussion on nuclear proliferation and the nuclear capabilities of rogue states, with new perspectives from antiwar feminism.
The chapter also includes enhanced discussion of missile defense and new discussion of robotic military technologies.
Chapter 9, “Alliances and the Balance of Power,” places emphasis on realist interpretations regarding the stabilizing influence of arms control on the preservation of the balance of power.
Revised discussion of the prospects for the United States as a global hegemon now includes a constructivist perspective as well.
There is new coverage of balancing by “emerging markets,” and the enhanced geopolitical emphasis on Eurasia.
New coverage is also included regarding United States efforts to renew global partnerships.
The emphasis on the liberal theoretical tradition has been retained, and supplemented with greater incorporation of constructivist theory throughout the chapter.
There is a new section on the judicial framework of international law, and enhanced discussion of the International Criminal Court and the International Court of Justice.
With a continued emphasis on the approach to international security most strongly advocated by liberals, greater discussion of constructivist and feminist perspectives on disarmament and international institutions is also included.
There is expanded coverage on regional IGOs, common moral values and norms, and global trade ties.
Chapter 12, “The Globalization of International Finance,” expands discussion of globalization and its implications for international finance.
There is enhanced coverage of the financial institutional framework, and a new discussion of the global financial crisis that includes insights from a broad array of theoretical perspectives.
The chapter concludes with consideration of the prospects for global finance reform.
There is expanded discussion of the globalization of production, and enhanced emphasis on the contest between liberal and mercantilist economic philosophies.
The chapter proceeds with a new look at the globalization of labor, and a new section on trade and global politics that includes discussion of trade policy, economic sanctions. and commercial peace.
Consideration of economic organizations is enhanced, and a new discussion of the linkage between trade, the financial crisis, and its aftermath is included.
Chapter 14, “The Demographic and Cultural Dimensions of Globalization,” examines the coverage of trends in population changes that are becoming an increasingly global challenge.
There is enhanced discussion of the demographic divide between the Global North and the Global South, with an emphasis on variances in birth rates that lead to pressures generated by a youth bulge in some countries and an aging population in others.
Chapter 15, now titled “The Promotion of Human Development and Human Rights,” updates and expands the treatment of human development and human rights.
There is revised discussion of the divide in human development between the Global North and the Global South.
New coverage of gender inequalities and the status of women, with a new section on human trafficking, is included that draws heavily on constructivist and feminist theories of international relations.
There is a new section on children and human rights, as well as one on the human rights legal framework.
Finally, the global community’s response to human rights abuse and the challenges of enforcement are given expanded attention.
Chapter 16, retitled “Global Responsibility for the Preservation of the Environment,” has been significantly reorganized and puts into perspective the entire range of global ecological issues, including revised discussions of climate change and global warming, ozone depletion, deforestation, and biodiversity.
There is enhanced discussion of ecopolitics that addresses the challenges of energy supply and demand, water shortages, and the struggle for advantage regarding access to the resources under the Arctic sea.
The chapter concludes with consideration of the possibilities for sustainability, and efforts at both the global, national, and local levels to counter environmental degradation.
The chapter inventories insights from philosophers and policy makers about the interpretation of the global condition, and introduces six of the leading issues being debated about the global future.
The chapter concludes with a challenge to students to formulate their own ideas about the possibilities for our global future.
You will have access to a set of PowerPoints with outlines specific to each chapter of World Politics as well as photos, figures, and tables found in the book.
You can also add your own materials—culminating in a powerful, personalized, mediaenhanced presentation.
Political Polling questions simulate voting, engage students, foster dialogue on group behaviors and values, and add personal relevance; the results can be compared to national data, leading to lively discussions.
Visual Literacy questions are tied to images from the book and add useful pedagogical tools and high-interest feedback during your lecture.
Save the data from students’ responses all semester—track their progress and show them how political science works by incorporating this exciting new tool into your classroom.
Use WebTutor™ to provide virtual office hours, post your syllabus, and track student progress with WebTutor’s quizzing material.
For students, WebTutor™ offers real-time access to interactive online tutorials and simulations, practice quizzes, and Web links—all correlated to World Politics.
These resources include podcasts by the text’s authors; simulations that can be assigned as homework; animated learning modules; case studies, which consist of Internet exercises and activities that correspond to instructor goals and challenges for the course; key term flashcards; and videos, all corresponding with concepts taught in each chapter.
The Premium Website also offers interactive timelines and maps, and NewsNow.
Available in both student and instructor versions, NewsNow is a combination of Associated Press news stories, videos, and images that bring current events to life.
For students, a collection of news stories and accompanying videos is served up each week via the Premium Website that accompanies their international relations text.
For instructors, an additional set of multimedia-rich PowerPoint® slides is posted each week to the password-protected area of the text’s Preface xxvii companion.
Instructors may use these slides to take a class poll or trigger a lively debate about the events shaping the world right now.
Companion Website www.cengage.com/politicalscience/kegley/worldpohticsl3e Students will find open access to learning objectives, tutorial quizzes, chapter glossaries, flashcards, and crossword puzzles—all correlated by chapter.
International Politics Atlas ISBN-10;0618837132 I ISBN-13:9780618837137 Free when bundled with a Wadsworth textbook, this atlas offers maps of the world showing political organization, population statistics, and economic development; maps highlighting energy production and consumption, major world conflicts, migration, and more; and extensive regional coverage.
Students will find it useful for understanding world events and to supplement their studies in international politics.
Those who made the greatest contributions to making this, the 2010-2011 edition, better include the following, whose assistance is most appreciatively acknowledged. xxviii Preface In the first category are the constructive comments and suggestions offered by reviewers.
Thanks are also given for the insights and advice of professorial colleagues in the Fulbright American Studies Institute, which Kegley co-directed with Don Puchala in 2003, 2004, and 2005.
The always helpful and accommodating project manager Christian Holdener with SdCarlisle Publishing Services and Photo Researcher Jaime Jankowski with Pre-Press PMG made valuable contributions to this book.
Executive Editor Carolyn Merrill and Development Editor Rebecca Green, who exercised extraordinary professionalism in guiding the process that brought this edition into print, assisted by the project management of Josh Allen and Permissions Editors Jennifer Meyer Dare and Katie Huha.
Gratitude is also expressed to the always instructive advice of Amy Whitaker, Wadsworth’s skilled Political Science Marketing Manager.
Charles William Kegley Shannon Lindsey Blanton meet your authors CHARLES WILLIAM KEGLEY is currently the Vice Chair of the Board of Trustees of the Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs.
A founding partner of Kegley International, Inc., a publishing, research, and consulting foundation, Kegley is a recipient of the Distinguished Scholar Award in Eoreign Policy of the International Studies Association, and he has widely published his primary research in the leading scholarly journals.
She oversees all undergraduate programs and provides leadership in curriculum planning, general education, the Center for International Programs and Services, the Honors Program, and the Learning Communities.
She is a past department chair and undergraduate coordinator, and has served nationally as a facilitator for leadership development in higher education.
She specializes in the areas of international relations and foreign policy, with an emphasis on human rights, democracy, international political economy, and the arms trade.
She has served on a number of editorial boards, including those for three of the discipline’s foremost journals.
International Studies Quarterly, Foreign Policy Analysis and International Studies Perspectives.
Her work has been published extensively in leading scholarly journals, including the American Journal of Political Science, Journal of Politics, International Studies Quarterly, Journal of Peace Research, International Interactions, Social Science Journal, Journal of Third World Studies, Journal of Political and Military Sociology, Business and Society, Conflict Quarterly, and Leadership.
Among those that pose a serious threat are the heatwaves and droughts that have spread across the glohe, such as that pictured here in Allahahud, India.
Arresting global warming is one of the many global challenges that face humanity.
It opens a window on the many trends that are unfolding, some of them in contrary directions.
The combined force of these trends may transform many aspects of international relations, even though they may persist.
There are obstacles that prevent us from understanding world politics accurately.
Chapter 1 explains how our perceptions of global realities can lead to distortions, and suggests how to get beyond these barriers by providing four keys to understanding world politics as well as an outline of the book’s thematic approach and organization.
Chapter 2 introduces the major rival theories that scholars have developed to help policy makers and citizens better describe, explain, and predict the evolving nature of international relations.
It also illuminates two powerful critiques of these mainstream theories; radicalism and feminism.
Such theories are important tools that can help you construct more accurate images of the complexity of world politics and better interpret emerging trends and transformations.
But be open to the detours that lead THE CHALLENGE OF J f f & f INVESTIGATING WORLD AFFAIRS to new discoveries.
As viewed from newspaper headlines, “world politics” looks much different.
Chapter 1 5 I magine yourself returning home from a two-week vacation on a tropical island where you had no access to the news.
The trip gave you a well-deserved break before starting a new school term.
They indicate that there is a downsizing of resources and troops from the insurgency in Iraq, and the “coalition of the willing” is comprised of the United States alone.
Instead, the focus has turned to the battle against A1 Qaeda and the Taliban in Afghanistan and parts of Pakistan, where violence and deaths have increased sharply.
As you ride home from the airport, you hear a radio broadcast that describes the continuing unrest in Iran in the aftermath of their presidential election, and the role that information technology is playing to sustain the protest.
Shortly after arriving at home, you connect to the Internet and find that the HlNl swine flu virus continues to spread, and countries around the globe are closely monitoring infected individuals and setting vaccine priorities in anticipation of the winter months, making you worry about whether this will affect your plans for a study tour in China over the winter break.
Finally, when listening to CNN later that evening, you hear several other reports; there are signs that the economic decline in the United States is leveling off, though Europe continues to suffer from record unemployment levels and Africa is beginning to feel the sting from reduced foreign investment.
You hope that conditions improve before you graduate and go on the job market.
In addition, CNN shows footage commemorating the life of Corazon Aquino, who served as a popular president of the Philippines and died at the age of 76.
CNN’s report concludes with an announcement that tensions continue to simmer between Russia and Georgia, with Georgia accused of stoking violence in South Ossetia.
Additionally, there may be a prospect for ongoing dialogue between the United States and North Korea in the wake of successful negotiations to release two imprisoned journalists.
The events identified record what actually occurred during the month of August 2009.
Undoubtedly, many individuals experienced fear and confusion during this turbulent period.
Putting this information about unfolding events together, you cannot help but be reminded that the world matters and that those changes in it affect your circumstances and future powerfully.
The “news” you received is not really new, because it echoes many old stories from the past about the growing sea of turmoil sweeping contemporary world circumstances.
Nevertheless, the temptation to wish that this depressing kind of chaotic world would just go away is overwhelming.
If only the unstable world would stand still 6 Interpreting World Politics long enough for a sense of predictability and order to prevail.
You cannot escape the world or control its turbulence, and you cannot single-handedly alter its character. world politics the study of how global actors’ activities entail the exercise of influence to achieve and defend their goals and ideals, and how it affects the world at large.
We are all a part of this world, and this world is an integral part of each of us.
Hence, if we are to live adaptively amid the fierce winds of global change, we must face the challenge of discovering the dynamic properties of world politics.
Because every person is influenced increasingly by world events, all can benefit by investigating how the global system works and how changes are remaking our political and economic world.
We must perceive our times accurately in order to best understand the political convulsions that confront the globe’s 6. billion people.
Interpreting the world in which we now live and anticipating what lies ahead for the globe’s future—and yours—presents formidable challenges.
We are constantly bombarded with a bewildering amount of new information and new developments.
Forging a meaningful understanding of the messages about world affairs we receive every day could be the most difficult task you will ever face.
This is a task that, as the seminal scientist Albert Einstein believed, is extremely challenging.
Another part of the challenge stems from the tendency of people to resist unfamiliar information and ideas that undermine their habitual ways of viewing and thinking about world affairs.
We know from repeated studies that people do not want to accept ideas that do not conform to their prior beliefs.
A purpose of this book is to help you to cultivate a questioning attitude about your preexisting beliefs about world affairs and about the many actors on the world stage.
To that end, we will ask you to evaluate rival perspectives on global issues, even if they differ from your current images.
Indeed, we will expose you to schools of thought prevailing today that you may find unconvincing, and possibly repugnant.
Because many other people make these views the bedrock of their interpretations, and these viewpoints accordingly enjoy a popular following.
For this reason, this text will describe some visions of world politics with which even your authors may not agree, so that you may weigh the wisdom or foolishness of contending perspectives.
The interpretive challenge, then, is to try to observe unfolding global realities objectively, in order to describe and explain them accurately.
To appreciate how our images of reality shape our expectations, we begin with a brief introduction to the role that subjective images of reality play in understanding world politics.
This will be followed by a set of analytic tools that this book will use to help you overcome perceptual obstacles to understanding world politics, and to empower you to more capably interpret the forces of change and continuity that affect our world.
It is the tragedy of the world that no one knows what he doesn’t know and the less a man knows, the more sure he is that he knows everything. —Joyce Carey, English author HOW PERCEPTIONS INFLUENCE IMAGES OF INTERNATIONAL REALITY We already hold mental images of world politics, although we may not have attempted to explicitly define our perceptions about the world in our subconscious.
But whatever our levels of self-awareness, our images perform the same function; they simplify “reality” by exaggerating some features of the real world while ignoring others.
Many of our images of the world’s political realities may be built on illusions and misconceptions.
Even images that are now accurate can easily become outdated if we fail to recognize changes in the world.
Indeed, the world’s future will be determined not only by changes in the “objective” facts of world politics but also by the meaning that people ascribe to those facts, the assumptions on which they base their interpretations, and the actions that flow from these assumptions and interpretations—however accurate or inaccurate they might be.
The Nature and Sources of Images The effort to simplify one’s view of the world is inevitable and even necessary.
Just as cartographers’ projections simplify complex geophysical space so that we can better understand the world, each of us inevitably creates a “mental map”—a habitual way of organizing information—to make sense of a confusing abundance of information.
Although mental maps are neither inherently right nor wrong, they are important because we tend to react according to the way the world appears to us rather than the way it is.
How we view the world determines our attitudes, our beliefs, and our behavior.
As Richard Ned Lebow warns, “Policymakers are prone to distort reality in accord with their needs even in situations that appear . . . relatively unambiguous.” schematic reasoning the process of reasoning by which new information is interpreted according to a memory structure, a schema, which contains a network of generic scripts, metaphors, and simplified characterizations of observed objects and phenomena.
Most of us—policy makers included—look for information that reinforces our preexisting beliefs about the world, assimilate new data into familiar images, mistakenly equate what we believe with what we know, and deny information that contradicts our expectations.
In addition, we rely on learned habits for viewing new information and for making judgments, because these “schema” guide our perceptions and organize information for us.
Research in cognitive psychology shows that human beings are “categorizers” who match what they see with images in their memories of prototypical events and people when attempting to understand the world by schematic reasoning.
The absentminded professor, the shady lawyer, and the kindly grandmother are examples of “stock” images that many of us have of certain types of people.
Many people assume that seeing is believing without questioning whether the ways they have organized their perceptions are accurate.
Students of perception argue that what you see is what you get, and that two observers looking at the same object might easily see different realities.
To illustrate this, perceptual psychologists are fond of displaying the following drawing, which, depending on how the viewer looks at it, can be seen as either a goblet or two faces opposing each other.
This principle has great importance for investigation of international relations, where, depending on one’s perspective, people can vary greatly on how they will view international events, actors, and issues.
To appreciate the controversies that can result when different people see different realities even though they are looking at the same thing, consider something as basic as objectively viewing the location and size of the world’s continents.
There exists a long-standing controversy among cartographers about the “right"" way to map the globe, that is, how to make an accurate projection.
The accuracy of their rival maps matters politically because they shape how people view what is important.
All maps of the globe are distorted because it is impossible to perfectly represent the three-dimensional globe on a two-dimensional piece of paper.
The difficulty cartographers face can be appreciated by trying to flatten an orange peel.
You can only flatten it by separating pieces of the peel that were joined when it was spherical.
Cartographers who try to flatten the globe on paper, without ripping it into separate pieces, face the same problem.
Although there are a variety of ways to represent the three-dimensional object on paper, all of them involve some kind of distortion.
Thus cartographers must choose among the imperfect ways of representing the globe by selecting those aspects of the world’s geography they consider most important to describe accurately, while making adjustments to other parts.
Cartographers’ ideas of what is most important in world geography have varied according to their own global perspectives.
These four maps (Maps 1.1,1.2,1.3, and 1.4) depict the distribution of the Earth’s land surfaces and territory, but each portrays a different image.
MERCATOR PROJECTION This Mercator projection, named for the Flemish cartographer Gerard Mercator, was popular in sixteenth-century Europe and presents a classic Eurocentric view of the world.
It mapped the Earth without distorting direction, making it useful for navigators.
However, distances were deceptive, placing Europe at the center of the world and exaggerating the continent’s importance relative to other landmasses.
Europe appears larger than South America, which is twice Europe’s size, and two-thirds of the map is used to represent the northern half of the world and only one-third the southern half.
PETER’S PROJECTION In the Peter’s projection, each landmass appears in correct proportion in relation to all others, but it distorts the shape and position of the Earth’s landmasses.
In contrast with most geographic representations, it draws attention to the less developed countries of the Global South, where more than three-quarters of the world’s population lives today.
ORTHOGRAPHIC PROJECTION The orthographic projection, centering on the mid-Atlantic, conveys some sense of the curvature of the Earth hy using rounded edges.
The sizes and shapes of continents toward the outer edges of the circle are distorted to give a sense of spherical perspective.
Many factors shape our images, including how we were socialized as children, traumatic events we may have experienced growing up that shape our personalities and psychological needs, exposure to the ideas of people whose expertise we respect, and the opinions about world affairs expressed by our frequent associates such as close friends and co-workers.
Accordingly, we try to keep that image consistent without other beliefs and, through a psychological process known as cognitive dissonance , reject information that contradicts how it portrays the world.
In short, our minds select, screen, and filter information; consequently, our perceptions depend not only on what happens in daily life but also on how we interpret and internalize those events.
The Impact of Perceptions on World Politics We must be careful not to assume automatically that what applies to individuals applies to entire countries, and we should not equate the beliefs of leaders, such as heads of states, with the beliefs of the people under their authority.
Still, leaders have extraordinary influence, and leaders’ images of historical circumstances often predispose them to behave in particular ways toward others, regardless of “objective” facts.
For instance, the loss of twenty-six million Soviet lives in the “Great Patriotic War” (as the Russians refer to World War II) reinforced a long-standing fear of foreign invasion, which caused a generation of Soviet policy makers to perceive United States defensive moves with suspicion and often alarm.
America’s impulse to isolate itself (its disposition to withdraw from world affairs), and its determination to reform the world in its own image whenever global circumstances become highly threatening.
The former led the country to reject membership in the League of Nations after World War I; the latter gave rise to the United States globalist foreign policy since World War II, which committed the country to active involvement nearly everywhere on nearly every issue.
Most Americans, thinking of their country as virtuous, have difficulty understanding why others sometimes regard such far-reaching international activism as arrogant or threatening; instead, they see only good intentions in active United States interventionism.
Because leaders and citizens are prone to ignore or reinterpret information that runs counter to their beliefs and values, mutual misperceptions often fuel discord in world politics, especially when relations between countries are hostile.
Distrust and suspicion arise as conflicting parties view each other in the same negative light—that is, as mirror images develop.
Each side saw its own actions as constructive but its adversary’s responses as hostile, and both sides erroneously assumed that their counterparts would misinterpret the intentions of their own policy initiatives.
When psychologist Urie Bronfenbrenner traveled to Moscow, for example, he was amazed to hear Russians describing the United States in terms that were strikingly similar to the way Americans described the Soviet Union; Each side saw itself as virtuous and peace-loving, whereas the other was seen as untrustworthy, aggressive, and ruled by a corrupt government.
Mirror-imaging is a property of nearly all enduring rivalries —long-lasting contests between opposing groups.
Eor example, in rivalries such as Christianity against Islam during the Crusades in the Middle Ages, Israel and Palestine since the birth of the sovereign state of Israel in 1948, and the United States and A1 Qaeda today, both sides demonize the image of their adversary while perceiving themselves as virtuous.
Self-righteousness often leads one party to view its own actions as constructive but its adversary’s responses as negative and hostile.
Not only do the opposing sides have different preferences for certain outcomes over others, but they do not see the underlying issues in the same light.
Eurther complicating matters, the mirror images held by rivals tend to be self-confirming.
When one side expects the other to be hostile, it may treat its opponent in a manner that leads the opponent to take counteractions that confirm the mirror images the tendency of states and people in competitive interaction to perceive each other similarly—to see others the same hostile way others see them. enduring rivalries prolonged competition fueled by deep-seated mutual hatred that leads opposed actors to feud and fight over a long period of time without resolution of their conflict.
Clearing up mutual misperceptions can facilitate negotiations between the parties, but fostering peace is not simply a matter of expanding trade and other forms of transnational contact, or even of bringing political leaders together in international summits.
Rather, it is a matter of changing deeply entrenched beliefs. foreign policy the decisions governing authorities make to realize international goals.
Although our constructed images of world politics are resistant to change, change is possible.
Overcoming old thinking habits sometimes occurs when we experience punishment or discomfort as a result of clinging to false assumptions.
Dramatic events in particular can alter international images, sometimes drastically.
The Vietnam War caused many Americans to reject their previous images about using military force in world politics.
The defeat of the Third Reich and revelations of Nazi atrocities committed before and during World War II caused the German people to confront their past as they prepared for a democratic future imposed by the victorious Allies.
The use of atomic bombs against Japan in the waning days of World War II caused many to confront the horrors of modern warfare and the immorality of weapons of mass destruction.
More recently, the rising human and financial costs of the prolonged United States war in Iraq have led many policy makers and political commentators to reexamine their assumptions about foreign policy priorities.
Often, such jolting experiences encourage us to construct new mental maps, perceptual filters, and criteria through which we may interpret later events and define situations.
Determining Foreign Policy As we shape and reshape our images of world politics and its future, we need to think critically about the foundations on which our perceptions rest.
Rethinking our images is one of the major challenges we face to avoid prejudice—prejudging what we see in world affairs based on misguided opinions, like a person with his or her nose pressed against the mirror trying to see his or her own body.
Questioning our images is one of the major challenges we all face in confronting contemporary world politics.
Chapter 1 15 There are no sure-fire solutions to ensure accurate observations, no ways to guarantee that we have constructed an impartial view of international relations.
However, there are a number of tools available that can improve our ability to interpret world politics.
As you undertake an intellectual journey of discovery, a set of intellectual roadmaps will provide guidance for your interpretation and understanding of past, present, and future world politics.
Trend and Transformation advances four keys to aid you in your inquiry.
Introducing Terminology A primary goal of this text is to introduce you to the vocabulary used by scholars, policy makers, and the “attentive public” who routinely look at international developments.
You will need to be literate and informed about the shared meaning of common words used worldwide to discuss and debate world politics and foreign policy.
Some of this language has been in use since antiquity, and some of it has only recently become part of the terminology employed in diplomatic circles, scholarly research, and the media—television, newspapers, and the Internet.
These words are the kind of vocabulary you are likely to encounter long after your formal collegiate education (and the course in which you are reading World Politics) has ended.
It is also the terminology your future employers and educated neighbors will expect you to know.
Some of these words are already likely to be part of your working vocabulary, but others may look new, esoteric, pedantic, and overly sophisticated.
Your use of them will facilitate your ability to analyze and discuss world affairs and mark you hereafter as a knowledgeable, educated person.
Learn these words and use them for the rest of your life—not to impress others, but to understand and communicate intelligently.
To guide you in identifying these terms, as you may already have noticed, certain words are printed in boldface in the text, and a broad definition is provided in the margins.
In cases when a word is used again in a different chapter, it will be highlighted at least once in italics, although the marginal definition will not be repeated.
In all cases, the primary definition will appear in the Glossary at the end of book.
Distinguishing the Primary Transnational Actors The globe is a stage, and the players in the drama are many.
It is important to identify and classify the major categories of actors who take part in international activities.
The essential building-block units, of course, are individual people—all 6. billion of us.
Every day, whether each of us choose to litter, light a cigarette, or parent a child affects in small measure how trends in the world will unfold.
All of these combine people and their choices in various collectivities and thereby aggregate the power of each expanding group.
Such groups often compete with one another because frequently they have divergent interests and goals.
For most periods of world history, the prime actors were individual groupings of religions, tribes whose members shared ethnic origins, and empires or expansionist centers of power.
When they came into contact, they sometimes collaborated with each other for mutual benefit; more often they competed and fought over valued resources.
The Emergence of the Nation-State System The more than eight thousand years of recorded international relations between and among these groups provided the precedent for the formation of today’s system of interactions.
As a network of relationships among independent territorial units, the modern state system was not born until the Peace of Westphalia in 1648, which ended the Thirty Years’ War in Europe.
Thereafter, rulers refused to recognize the secular authority of the Roman Catholic Church, replacing the system of papal governance in the Middle Ages with geographically and politically separate states that recognized no superior authority.
The concept of state sovereignty —that no other actor is above the state— still captures these legal rights and identifies the state as the primary actor today.
The Westphalian system continues to color every dimension of world politics and provides the terminology used to describe the primary units in international affairs.
Although the term nation-state is often used interchangeably with “state” and “nation,” technically the three are different.
A state is a legal entity that enjoys a permanent population, a well-defined territory.
A nation is a collection of people who, on the basis of ethnic, linguistic, or cultural commonality, so construct their reality as to primarily perceive themselves to be members of the same group, which defines their identity.
Thus, the term nationstate implies a convergence between territorial states and the psychological identification of people within them.
However, in employing this familiar terminology, we should exercise caution because this condition is relatively rare; there are few independent states comprising a single nationality.
Most states today are populated by many nations, and some nations are not states.
These “nonstate nations” are ethnic groups —such as Native Americans in the United States, Sikhs in India, Basques in Spain, or Kurds in Iraq, Turkey, Iran, and Syria—composed of people without sovereign power over the territory in which they live.
The Rise of Nonstate Actors The history of world politics ever since 1648 has largely been a chronicle of interactions among states that remain the dominant political organizations in the world.
States’ interests, capabilities, and goals are the most potent shaping forces of world politics.
However, the supremacy of the state has been severely challenged in recent years.
Such international organizations carry out independent foreign policies and therefore can be considered global actors in their own right.
In addition, as noted, individual people band together to form coalitions of private citizens in order to participate in international affairs.
Diverse in scope and purpose, these nonstate actors also push their own agendas and increasingly exert global influence.
In thinking about world politics and its future, we shall probe all these “units” or categories of actors.
The emphasis and coverage will vary, depending on the topics under examination in each chapter.
But you should keep in mind that all actors are simultaneously active today, and their importance and power depend on the trend or issue under consideration.
That probing should cast doubt on outdated images of international relations. nation a collectivity whose people see themselves as members of the same group because they share the same ethnicity, culture, or language. ethnic groups people whose identity is primarily defined by fheir sense of sharing a common ancestral nationality, language, cultural heritage, and kinship.
Distinguishing Levels of Analysis when we describe international phenomena, we answer a “what” question.
When we move from description to explanation, we face the more difficult task of answering a “why” question.
One useful key for addressing such puzzles is to visualize an event or trend as part of the end result of some unknown process.
This encourages us to think about the causes that might have produced the phenomenon we are trying to explain.
Most events and developments in world politics and its future are undoubtedly influenced simultaneously by many determinants, each connected to the rest in a complex web of causal linkages.
To make interpretive sense of the multiple causes that explain why international events and circumstances occur.
World Politics provides an analytic set of categories that suggest where to look for information about a puzzle by organizing it in terms of an inventory of possible explanatory causes.
This analytic distinction conforms to a widespread scholarly consensus that international events or developments can best be understood by first separating the multiple pieces of the puzzle into different categories, or levels, for analytic purposes.
To predict which forces will dominate the future, we also must recognize that many forces are operating at the same time.
The future is influenced by many determinants, each connected to the rest in a complex web of linkages.
Collectively, these may produce stability by limiting the impact of any single disruptive force.
If interacting forces converge, however, their combined effects can accelerate the pace of change in world politics, moving it in directions not possible otherwise.
The individual level of analysis refers to the personal characteristics of humans, including those responsible for making important decisions on behalf of state and nonstate actors, as well as ordinary citizens whose behavior has important political consequences.
Here, for example, we may properly locate the impact of individuals’ perceptions on their political attitudes, beliefs, and behavior.
We may also explore the questions of why each person is a crucial part of the global drama and why the study of world politics is relevant to our lives and future.
INFLUENCES AT THREE LEVELS The factors that shape states’ foreign policies and the decisions of all other global actors can he categorized at three basic ieveis.
At tbe giobai ievei are those structurai features of tbe internationai system sucb as tbe prevalence of civil wars and tbe extent of trade interdependence.
At the state level are internal or domestic influences such as the state’s type of government or the opinions of its citizens.
At the individual level are the characteristics of leaders—their personal heliefs, values, and personality.
All three levels simultaneously affect decisions, hut their relative weight usually depends on the issues and circumstances at the time of decision.
The state level of analysis consists of the authoritative decision-making units that govern states’ foreign policy processes and the internal attributes of those states (e.g., their type of government, level of economic and military power, and number of nationality groups), which both shape and constrain leaders’ foreign policy choices.
The processes by which states make decisions regarding war and peace and their capabilities for carrying out those decisions, for instance, fall within the state level of analysis.
The global level of analysis refers to the interactions of states and nonstate actors on the global stage whose behaviors ultimately shape the international political system and the levels of conflict and cooperation that characterize world politics.
The capacity of rich states to dictate the choices of poor states falls properly within the global level of analysis.
So does the capacity (or incapacity) of the UN to maintain peace. state level of analysis an analytical approach that emphasizes how the internai attributes of states influence their foreign policy behaviors. global level of analysis an analytical approach that emphasizes the impact of worldwide conditions on foreign policy behavior and human welfare.
Examples abound of the diverse ways in which global trends and issues are the product of influences at each level of analysis.
Protectionist trade 20 Interpreting World Politics policies by an importing country increase the costs to consumers of clothing and cars and reduce the standard of living of citizens in the manufacturing states.
Of course, for some developments and issues, factors and forces emanating primarily from one or two particular levels provide more analytical leverage than do those from the other level.
Accordingly, as we confront specific global issues in subsequent chapters, we emphasize those levels of analysis that provide the most informative lens for viewing them.
Distinguishing Change, Cycles, and Continuities Once we have identified factors from different levels of analysis that may combine to produce some outcome, it is useful to place them in a chronological sequence.
Anyone who owns a combination lock knows that the correct numbers must be entered in their proper order to open the lock.
Similarly, to explain why something happened in world politics, we must determine how various individual-, state-, and global system-level factors fit together in a configuration that unfolds over time.
One key to anticipating probable human destiny is to look beyond the confines of our immediate time.
It is important to appreciate the impact of previous ideas and events on current realities.
Thus, to understand the dramatic changes in world politics today and to predict how they will shape the future, it is important to view them in the context of a long-term perspective that examines how transnational patterns of interaction among actors have changed and how some of their fundamental characteristics have resisted change.
To begin our search, we discuss how the differences between continuities, changes, and cycles in world history can help you orient your interpretation.
Chapter 1 21 Every historical period is marked to some extent by change.
Now, however, the pace of change seems more rapid and its consequences more profound than ever.
To many observers, the cascade of events today implies a revolutionary restructuring of world politics.
The countries of the world are drawing closer together in communications and trade, producing a globalized market.
Yet at the same time, disintegrative trends paint a less promising picture.
Weapons proliferation, global environmental deterioration, and the resurgence of ethnic conflict all portend a restructuring fraught with disorder.
To predict which forces will dominate the future, we must recognize that no trend stands alone, and that divergent trends may produce stability by limiting the impact of any single disruptive force.
It is also possible for converging trends to accelerate the pace of change, moving world politics in directions not possible otherwise.
It appears that the world is now going through a transition period in world politics.
The opposing forces of integration and disintegration point toward the probable advent on the horizon of a transformation, but distinguishing true historical watersheds from temporary change is difficult.
The moment of transformation from one system to another is not immediately obvious.
Nevertheless, another useful key for students of world history is to recognize that certain times are especially likely candidates.
In the past, major turning points in world politics usually have occurred at the conclusion of wars with many participants, which typically disrupt or destroy preexisting international arrangements.
World Wars I and n and the Cold War caused fundamental breaks with the past and set in motion major transformations, providing countries with incentives to rethink the premises underlying their interests, purposes, and priorities.
Similarly, many people concluded that the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001 , produced a fundamental transformation in world affairs.
To analyze change in world politics, it is equally important to look also for the possibility of continuity amidst apparent transformation.
Consider how, despite all that may appear radically different since the 9/11 terrorist attacks, much also may remain the same.
Decades-old flash points remain, including the conflicts between India and Pakistan, North transformation a change in the characteristic pattern of interaction among the most active participants in world politics of such magnifude that it appears that one “global system” has replaeed another.
We often expect the future to bring changes automatically, and later are surprised to discover that certain patterns from the past have reappeared.
Given the rapid changes that are occurring alongside enduring continuities, it is dangerous to assume that a major transformation in world politics is under way.
The terrorist attack on the World Trade Center’s Twin Towers on 9/11 is widely regarded as a revolutionary date in world history, producing a sea change in world politics.
Time will tell whether this event will rank alongside the hirth of the nuclear age on August 6,1945, when the United States homhed Hiroshima, or the November 1989 dismantling of the Berlin Wall, which signaled the end of the Cold War, as events that truly changed the world.
These criteria might lead us to conclude that a new system has now emerged.
First, new trade Chapter 1 23 partnerships have been forged in Europe, the cone of South America, North America, and the Pacific Rim, and these trading blocs may behave as unitary, or independent, nonstate actors as they compete with one another.
Moreover, international organizations such as the EU now flex their political muscles in contests with individual states, and transnational religious movements such as Islamic extremist groups challenge the global system itself.
International law still defines this system as being composed primarily of each state consisting of various nationality groups who perceive themselves as unified by a common language, culture, or ethnic identity.
Second, territorial conquest is no longer states’ predominant foreign policy goal.
Instead, their emphasis has shifted from traditionally military methods of exercising influence to economic means.
Meanwhile, the ideological contest between democratic capitalism and the Marxist-Eeninist communism of the Cold War era no longer comprises the primary cleavage in international politics, and a major new axis has yet to become clear.
Third, the proliferation of weapons technology has profoundly altered the damages that enemies can inflict on one another.
Increasingly, however, the great powers’ prosperity depends on economic circumstances throughout the globe, reducing their ability to engineer growth.
The profound changes in recent years of the types of actors , goals, and capabilities have dramatically altered the hierarchical power ranking of states, but the hierarchies themselves endure.
The economic hierarchy that divides the rich from the poor, the political hierarchy that separates the rulers from the ruled, the resource hierarchy that makes some suppliers and others dependents, and the military asymmetries that pit the strong against the weak—all still shape the relations among states, as they have in the past.
Similarly, the perpetuation of international anarchy, in the absence of institutions to govern the globe, and continuing national insecurity still encourage preparations for war and the use of force without international mandate.
Thus, change and continuity coexist, with both forces simultaneously shaping contemporary world politics.
The interaction of constancy and change will determine future relations among global actors.
Because the emergent global system shares many characteristics with earlier periods, historically minded observers may experience global system the predominant patterns of behaviors and beliefs that prevail internationally to define the major worldwide conditions that heavily influence human and national activities. anarchy a condition in which the units in the global system are subjected to few if any overarching institutions to regulate their conduct. cycles the periodic reemergence of conditions similar to those that existed previously.
PREPARING FOR YOUR JOURNEY INTO WORLD POLITICS World Politics warns about the obstacles to accurate perceptions of international relations and then provides some guideposts to help you travel on your journey to discovery.
This introduction concludes with a brief outline of the book’s thematic approach and organizational roadmap.
Some view the world through a macropolitical lens, meaning they look at world politics from a “bird’s eye view” and explain the behavior of world actors based on their relative position within the global system.
Other scholars adopt a micropolitical perspective that looks at world politics from the “ground-up,” meaning the individual is the unit of analysis from which aggregate behavior is extrapolated.
By looking at world politics from a macropolitical perspective, we can see why actors that are similarly situated within the system may behave alike, despite their internal differences.
World Politics will accordingly inspect the major macro trends in world politics that set the boundaries for action, the values, interests, and capabilities of the individual actors affected by these global trends, and the ways these actors interact in their individual and collective efforts to modify existing global circumstances and how these interactions shape the ultimate trajectories of global trends.
Chapter 1 25 This analytic approach looks at the dynamic interplay of actors and their environment as well as how the actors respond and seek to influence each others’ behavior.
The approach outlined here can open a window for you not only to understand contemporary world politics but also to predict the likely global future.
The approach has the advantage of taking into account the interplay of proximate and remote explanatory factors at the individual, state, and global levels of analysis while avoiding dwelling on particular countries, individuals, or transitory events whose long-term significance is likely to decrease.
Instead, World Politics attempts to identify behaviors that cohere into general patterns that measurably affect global living conditions.
Thus, you will explore the nature of world politics from a perspective that places historical and contemporary events into a larger, lasting theoretical context, to provide you with the conceptual tools that will enable you to interpret subsequent developments later in your lifetime.
Chapter 1 explains how our perceptions of global events and realities lead to distorted views, and suggests how to move beyond the limited scope of those views by providing four keys to understanding world politics.
The chapter also provides an outline of the book’s organization and thematic approach.
Your journey continues in Chapter 2 with an overview of the realist, liberal, and constructivist theoretical traditions that scholars and policy makers use most often to interpret world politics.
It also considers the radical and feminist critiques of these mainstream traditions.
The comparison of these contending theories provides the intellectual roadmap for the description and explanation of the issues and developments treated in the remaining chapters.
Chapter 3 covers the great powers (those wealthy countries with the largest militaries) and their current national security strategies and relationships.
Chapter 4 incorporates into the picture the place of the weaker states, that is, the less developed countries of the Global South, and explains how the fate of this group of states is shaped by their relations great powers the most powerful countries, militarily and economically, in the global system.
Chapter 5 expands the account to cover IGOs such as the United Nations and the European Union.
It also captures the impact on world politics of such transnational NGOs as ethnic groups and indigenous peoples, transnational religious movements and terrorist groups, multinational corporations, and issue-advocacy groups.
This coverage describes how IGO and NGO actors interact with states and increasingly challenge the supremacy of all states, including even the great powers, by either transcending or subverting states’ sovereign control over their destinies.
Your understanding of world politics is further strengthened in Chapter 6, which introduces three ways of looking at international decision-making processes by all transnational actors.
It concludes by focusing on the global and domestic determinants of states’ international behavior, because states remain the principal actors in world politics.
Chapter 8 reviews realist theoretical accounts of power in world politics, trends in military spending and capabilities, military strategies, and coercive diplomacy through military intervention abroad.
The picture is completed in Chapter 9, which explores the role of alliances in world politics, with an emphasis on the realist perspective.
Chapter 10 looks at both the negotiated settlement of disputes through diplomacy and the legal control of armed aggression.
Chapter 11 focuses on arms control and disarmament, the maintenance of collective security through international organizations, and the creation of a shared international moral consensus through the expansion of free trade and democratic institutions.
Chapter 12 explores the international financial system and issues surrounding the worldwide flow of capital.
Chapter 13 follows with a discussion of trends in the globalization of international trade, and the various strategies pursued in the quest for wealth and power.
Coverage is continued in Chapter 14 by inspecting population change, migration patterns, the global health crisis, and the global information age as agents of Courtesy of Carla Martinez Chapter 1 27 global transformation.
Chapter 15 examines relative levels of human rights and security and the expanding global commitment, as well as the inherent difficulties, to protecting and improving the human condition.
Chapter 16 probes the multiple environmental challenges facing our world today, and the consequences that they pose for our continued survival and well-being.
Chapter 17 considers contending perspectives about the probable shape of the global future by focusing on some of the most hotly debated questions on the global agenda.
These dilemmas are likely to dominate discussion of world politics during the next decade.
IT’S A SMALL WORLD As you begin your journey of discovery to extend your knowledge of world politics, it is important to be aware of the images that you hold and be open to new experiences and interpretations of tbe world around you.
Take full advantage of all of your opportunities to study and learn about tbe global community.
Ellis, David C “On the Possibility of”’International Community’,” The International Studies Review 11 :l-26.
How Superpowers, Populations, and Globalization Will Change the Way You Live and Work.
We need theories to make sense of the blizzard of information that bombards us daily.
INTERNATIONAL THEORY AND THE GLOBAL FUTURE THEORETICAL CHALLENGES We live in a world of ever-changing international conditions.
Many trends are unfolding, some in contrary directions, and obstacles exist to understanding world politics accurately.
As you begin your study of trend and transformations in world politics, your challenge is to interpret theoretically the meaning of a changing world.
You are scheduled to deliver the State of the Union address on your views of the current global situation and your foreign policy to deal with it.
You face the task of both defining those aspects of international affairs most worthy of attention and explaining the reasons for their priority.
To convince citizens that these issues are important, you must present them as part of a larger picture of the world.
Therefore, based on your perceptions of world politics, you must think theoretically.
At the same time, you must be careful, because your interpretations will necessarily depend on your assumptions about international realities that your citizens might find questionable.
The effort to explain the world, predict new global problems, and sell others on a policy to deal with them is bound to result in controversy because even reasonable people often see realities differently.
When leaders face these kinds of intellectual challenges, they fortunately benefit from various theories of world politics from which they can draw guidance.
A theory is a set of conclusions derived from assumptions and/or evidence about some phenomenon, including its character, causes, and probable consequences, and their ethical implications.
Theories provide a map, or frame of reference, that makes the complex, puzzling world around us intelligible.
THEORIES AND CHANGE IN WORLD POLITICS Choosing which theory to heed is an important decision, because each rests on different assumptions about the nature of international politics, each advances different claims about causes, and each offers a different set of foreign policy recommendations.
Rival theories of world politics abound, and there is no agreement about which one is the most useful.
The reason is primarily because the world is constantly undergoing changes, and no single theory has proven capable of making international events understandable for every global circumstance.
So there are fads and fashions in the popularity of international theories; they rise and fall over time in popularity and perceived usefulness, depending on the global conditions that prevail in any historical period.
The history of the world is the history of changes in the theoretical interpretation of international relations.
In any given era, a paradigm, or dominant way of looking at a particular subject such as international relations, has arisen to influence judgments regarding which characteristics of the subject are most important, what puzzles need to be solved, and what analytic Chapter 2 31 criteria should govern investigations.
These paradigms, or “fundamental assumptions scholars make about the world they are studying” (Vasquez 1997), tend eventually to be revised in order to explain new developments.
Cycles are embedded in history, and theory is forever evolving in an effort to stay in sync with history’s pendulum.
Throughout history, paradigms have been revised or abandoned when their assertions have failed to mirror the prevailing patterns of international behavior.
Major wars have been especially potent in bringing about significant changes in the theoretical interpretation of world affairs.
Three such system-transforming wars dominated the twentieth century; World War I, World War II, and the Cold War; and likewise, the 9/11 terrorist attacks in 2001 shattered the preexisting international order.
Each shaped policy makers’ perceptions of world politics, and each provided lessons critical to developing policies to best preserve world order.
Thus, the theories that guide the thinking of policy makers and scholars in different historical circumstances tell us much about world politics itself.
The purpose of this chapter is to compare the assumptions, causal claims, and policy prescriptions of realism, liberalism, and constructivism—the most common theoretical perspectives policy makers and scholars use to interpret international relations.
Moreover, the chapter broadens coverage of the range of contemporary international theorizing by introducing you also to the radical and feminist critiques of these three dominant schools of thought.
The very idea that there is another idea is something gained. —Richard Jeffries, English author REALIST THEORY Realism is the oldest of these three contending schools of thought, and has a long and distinguished history that dates back to Thucydides’ writings about the Peloponnesian War in ancient Greece.
Other influential figures that contributed to realist thought include sixteenth-century Italian philosopher Niccolo Machiavelli and seventeenth-century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes.
Realism deserves careful examination because its worldview continues to guide much thought about international politics. realism a paradigm based on the premise that worid politics is essentially and unchangeably a struggle among self-interested states for power and position under anarchy, with each competing state pursuing its own national interests.
The Realist Worldview Realism, as applied to contemporary international politics, views the state as the most important actor on the world stage because it answers to no higher political authority.
States are sovereign; they have supreme power over their territory and populace, and no other actor stands above them wielding the legitimacy and coercive capability to govern the global system.
Given the absence of a higher authority to which states can turn for protection and to resolve disputes, realists depict world politics as a ceaseless, repetitive struggle for power where the strong dominate the weak and there is inherently a constant possibility of war.
Because each state is ultimately responsible for its own survival and feels uncertain about its neighbors’ intentions, realism claims that prudent political leaders seek arms and allies to enhance national security.
In other words, international anarchy leads even well-intentioned leaders to practice self-help, increase their own military strength, and opportunistically align with others to deter potential threats.
Realist theory does not preclude the possibility that rival powers will cooperate on arms control or on other security issues of common interest.
Rather, it asserts that cooperation will be rare because states worry about the unequal distribution of relative gains that can result from cooperation to the disadvantage of one of the parties and the possibility that the other side will cheat on agreements.
Leaders should never entrust the task of self-protection to international security organizations or international law, and should resist efforts to regulate international behavior through global governance.
Chapter 2 33 ■ World politics is a struggle for power —in the words of Thomas Hobbes, “a war of all against all”—and the possibility of eradicating the instinct for power is a hopeless utopian aspiration.
Economic growth is important primarily as a means of acquiring and expanding state power and prestige and is less relevant to national security than is military might.
As a state builds up its power to protect itself, others inevitably become threatened and are likely to respond in kind.
An arms race is commonly seen as a manifestation of the security dilemma, for even if a state is truly arming only for defensive purposes, it is rational in a self-help system for opponents to assume the worst and keep pace in any arms buildup.
With their emphasis on the ruthless nature of international life, realists often question letting ethical considerations enter foreign policy deliberations.
As they see it, some policies are driven by strategic imperatives that may require national leaders to disregard moral norms.
Embedded in this “philosophy of necessity” is a distinction between private morality, which guides the behavior of ordinary people in their daily lives, and reason of state , which governs the conduct of leaders responsible for the security and survival of the state.
Actions that are dictated by national interest must be carried out no matter how repugnant they might seem in the light of private morality.
Eor a national leader, “thinking with one’s heart is a serious offense.
Eoreign policy is not social work” . security dilemma the tendency of states to view the defensive arming of adversaries as threatening, causing them to arm in response so that all states’ security declines. balance of power the theory that peace and stability are most likely to be maintained when military power is distributed to prevent a single superpower hegemon or bloc from controlling the world.
The Evolution of Realist Thought We have seen how the intellectual roots of realism reach back to ancient Greece.
Discussions of “power politics” abound in the Arthashastra, an Indian treatise 34 Theories of World Polities REALIST PIONEERS OF POWER POLITICS In ffie Prince and The Leviathan Wm Niccolo Machiavelli and Thomas Hobbes , respectively, argued for basing international decisions on self-interest, prudence, power, and expediency above all other considerations.
This formed the foundation of what became a growing body of modern realist thinking that accepts the drive for power over others as necessary and wise statecraft. on statecraft written during the fourth century BCE by Kautilya, as well as in works written by Han Fei and Shang Yang in ancient China.
Kellogg-Briand Pact a multilateral treaty negotiated in 1928 that outlawed war as a method for settling interstate conflicts.
Modern realism emerged on the eve of World War II, when the prevailing belief in a natural harmony of interests among states came under attack.
Just a decade earlier, this belief had led numerous countries to sign the 1928 Kellogg-Briand Pact, which renounced war as an instrument of national policy.
In an effort to counter what they saw as a utopian, legalistic approach to foreign affairs.
Reinhold Niebuhr , Hans J Morgenthau , and other realists painted a pessimistic view of human nature.
Echoing seventeenth-century philosopher Baruch Spinoza, many of them pointed to an innate conflict between passion and reason; furthermore, in the tradition of St.
Augustine, they stressed that material appetites enabled passion to overwhelm reason.
For them, the human condition was such that the forces of light and darkness would perpetually combat for control.
The onset of rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union, the expansion of the Cold War into a wider struggle between Chapter 2 35 East and West, and the periodic crises that threatened to erupt into global violence all supported the realists’ emphasis on the inevitability of conflict, the poor prospects for cooperation, and the divergence of national interests among incorrigibly selfish, power-seeking states.
Whereas these so-called classical realists sought to explain state behavior by examining assumptions about peoples’ motives at the individual level of analysis, the next wave of realist theorizing emphasized the global level of analysis.
Kenneth Waltz , the leading proponent of neorealism (sometimes called “structural realism”), proposed that international anarchy—not some allegedly evil side of human nature—explained why states were locked in fierce competition with one another.
The absence of a central arbiter was the defining structural feature of international politics.
Vulnerable and insecure, states behaved defensively by forming alliances against looming threats.
According to Waltz, balances of power form automatically in anarchic environments.
Structural realism as envisioned by Kenneth Waltz is often referred to as defensive realism to distinguish it from the more recent variant, offensive realism.
From the perspective of realism’s critics, seeking security by amassing power was self-defeating.
Because much of realist theorizing was vague, it began to be questioned.
Even the policy recommendations that purportedly flowed from its logic were often divergent.
Realists themselves, for example, were sharply divided as to whether United States intervention in Vietnam served American national interests and whether nuclear weapons contributed to international security.
A growing number of critics also pointed out that realism did not account for significant new developments in world politics.
For instance, it could not explain the creation of new commercial and political institutions in Western Europe in the 1950s and 1960s, where the cooperative pursuit of mutual advantage led Europeans away from the unbridled power politics that brought them incessant warfare since the birth of the nation-state some three centuries earlier.
Other critics began to worry about realism’s tendency to disregard ethical principles and about the material and social costs that some of its policy prescriptions seemed to impose, such as hindered economic growth resulting from unrestrained military expenditures.
Despite realism’s shortcomings, many people continue to think about world politics in the language constructed by realists, especially in times of global tension.
A recent example can be found in the comments by former Bush Chapter 2 37 administration adviser Michael Gerson about how the United States should deal with Iran’s nuclear ambitions.
Arguing from the realist assumption that “peace is not a natural state,” he called for a robust American response based on a steely-eyed focus on preventing the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East.
Like realism, it has a distinguished pedigree, with philosophical roots extending back to the political thought of John Locke, Immanuel Kant, and Adam Smith.
Liberalism warrants our attention because it speaks to issues realism disregards, including the impact of domestic politics on state behavior, the implications of economic interdependence, and the role of global norms and institutions in promoting international cooperation.
The Liberal Worldview There are several distinct schools of thought within the liberal tradition.
Drawing broad conclusions from such a diverse body of theory runs the risk of misrepresenting the position of any given author.
Nevertheless, there are sufficient commonalities to abstract some general themes.
At the core of liberalism is a belief in reason and the possibility of progress.
Liberals view the individual as the seat of moral value and assert that human beings should be treated as ends rather than means.
Politics at the global level is more of a struggle for consensus and mutual gain than a struggle for power and prestige.
Realism liberalism a paradigm predicated on the hope that the application of reason and universal ethics to international relations can lead to a more orderly, just, and cooperative world; liberalism assumes that anarchy and war can be policed by institutional reforms thaf empower international organization and law.
Instead of blaming international conflict on an inherent lust for power, liberals fault the conditions under which people live.
Reforming those conditions, they argue, will enhance the prospects for peace.
The first element common to various strands of liberal thought is an emphasis on undertaking political reforms to establish stable democracies.
Based on tolerance, compromise, and civil liberties, democratic political cultures are said to shun lethal force as a means of settling disagreements.
In place of force, diplomacy provides a means for achieving mutually acceptable solutions to a common problem, and enables leaders to negotiate and compromise with each other in a peaceful manner.
Politics is not seen as a zero-sum game, as the use of persuasion rather than coercion, and a reliance on judicial methods to settle rival claims is the primary means of dealing with conflict.
According to liberal theory, conflict-resolution practices used at home can also be used when dealing with international disputes.
Viewing international politics as an extension of domestic politics, they generalize about the applicability of norms to regulate international competition.
Disputes between democratic governments rarely escalate to war because each side accepts the other’s legitimacy and expects it to rely on peaceful means of conflict resolution.
These expectations are reinforced by the transparent nature of democracies.
The inner workings of open polities can be scrutinized by anyone; hence, it is difficult to demonize democratically ruled states as scheming adversaries.
The second thrust common to liberal theorizing is an emphasis on free trade.
The idea that commerce can reduce conflict has roots in the work of Immanuel Kant, Charles de Secondat Montesquieu, Adam Smith, Jean-Jacque Rosseau, and various Enlightenment thinkers.
This view was later embraced by the Manchester School of political economy and formed the basis for Norman Angell’s famous rebuttal of the assertion that military conquest produces economic prosperity.
The doctrine that unfettered trade helps prevent disputes from escalating to wars rests on several propositions.
War reduces profits by interrupting The Granger Collection Christie’s Images/CORBIS Chapter 2 39 vital economic exchanges.
Second, cosmopolitan business elites who benefit most from these exchanges comprise a powerful transnational interest group with a stake in promoting amicable solutions to festering disagreements.
Finally, the web of trade between countries increases communication, erodes national selfishness, and encourages both sides to avoid ruinous clashes.
Finally, the third commonality in liberal theorizing is an advocacy of global institutions.
Liberals recommend replacing cutthroat, balance-of-power politics with organizations based on the principle that a threat to peace anywhere is a common threat to everyone.
They see foreign policy as unfolding in a nascent global society populated by actors who recognize the cost of conflict, share significant interests, and can realize those interests by using PIONEERS IN THE LIBERAL QUEST FOR WORLD ORDER A product of the Enlightenment, Scottish philosopher David Hume tried to temper his realist concern that reason is a “slave of the passions” by embracing the liberal faith in wealth-generating free markets and free trade that could cohesively bind people together to create a peaceful civil society.
Influenced by David Hume and JeanJacques Rousseau, Immanuel Kant in Perpetual Peace {M25) helped to redefine modern liberal theory by advocating global citizenship, free trade, and a federation of democracies as a means to peace.
The Evolution of Liberal Thought Contemporary liberal theory rose to prominence in the wake of World War I Not only had the war involved more participants over a wider geographic area than any previous war, but modern science and technology made it a war of machinery; Old weapons were improved and produced in great quantities; new and far more deadly weapons were rapidly developed and deployed.
By the time the carnage was over, nearly twenty million people were dead.
Convinced that another horrific war would erupt if states resumed practicing power politics, liberals set out to reform the global system.
The first group advocated creating global institutions to contain the raw struggle for power between self-serving, mutually suspicious states.
The League of Nations was the embodiment of this strain of liberal thought.
Its founders hoped to prevent future wars by organizing a system of collective security that would mobilize the entire international community against would-be aggressors.
The League’s founders declared that peace was indivisible; an attack on one member of the League would be considered an attack on all.
Because no state was more powerful than the combination of all other states, aggressors would be deterred and war averted.
A second group called for the use of legal procedures to adjudicate disputes before they escalated to armed conflict.
Adjudication is a judicial procedure for resolving conflicts by referring them to a standing court for a binding decision.
Loder, the court’s first president, as the harbinger of a new era of civilization, the PCIJ held its inaugural public meeting in early 1922 and rendered its first judgment on a contentious case the following year.
Liberal champions of the court insisted that the PCIJ would replace military retaliation with a judicial body capable of bringing the facts of a dispute to light and issuing a just verdict.
A third group of liberal thinkers followed the biblical injunction that states should beat their swords into plowshares and sought disarmament as a means of avoiding war.
Their efforts were illustrated between 1921 and 1922 by the Washington Naval Conference, which tried to curtail maritime competition among the United States, Great Britain, Japan, France, and Italy by Chapter 2 41 placing limits on battleships.
The ultimate goal of this group was to reduce international tensions by promoting general disarmament, which led them to convene the 1932 Geneva Disarmament Conference.
Although a tone of idealism dominated policy rhetoric and academic discussions during the interwar period, little of the liberal reform program was ever seriously attempted, and even less of it was achieved.
The League of Nations failed to prevent the Japanese invasion of Manchuria or the Italian invasion of Ethiopia ; major disputes were rarely submitted to the PCIJ; and the 1932 Geneva Disarmament Conference ended in failure.
When the threat of war began gathering over Europe and Asia in the late 1930s, enthusiasm for liberal idealism receded.
Although realists continued to focus on the state, the events surrounding the 1973 oil crisis revealed that nonstate actors could affect the course of international events and occasionally compete with states.
This insight led to the realization that complex interdependence sometimes offered a better description of world politics than realism, especially on international economic and environmental matters.
Rather than contacts between countries being limited to high-level governmental officials, multiple communication channels connect societies.
Instead of security dominating foreign policy considerations, issues on national agendas do not always have a fixed priority; and although military force often serves as the primary instrument of statecraft, other means frequently are more effective when bargaining occurs between economically interconnected countries.
In short, the realist preoccupation with governmentto-government relations ignored the complex network of public and private exchanges crisscrossing state boundaries.
States were becoming increasingly interdependent, that is, mutually dependent on, sensitive about, and vulnerable to one another in ways that were not captured by realist theory.
Although interdependence was not new, its growth during the last quarter of the twentieth century led many liberal theorists to challenge the realist conception of anarchy.
Although they agreed that the global system was anarchic, they also argued that it was more properly conceptualized as an “ordered” anarchy because most states followed commonly acknowledged normative standards, even in the absence of hierarchical enforcement.
International regime embodies the norms, principles, rules, and institutions around which global expectations unite regarding a specific international problem.
Liberal Idealism as to manage access to common resources such as fisheries and river water.
Fueled by the recent history that suggested that international relations can change and that increased interdependence can lead to higher levels of cooperation, neoliberalism emerged in the last decade of the twentieth century to challenge realism and neorealism.
Like realism and neorealism, neoliberalism does not represent a consistent intellectual movement or school of thought.
Whatever the differences that divide them, however, all neoliberals share an interest in probing the conditions under which the convergent and overlapping interests among otherwise independent transnational actors may result in cooperation.
In particular, neoliberalism focuses on the ways in which influences such as democratic governance, public opinion, mass education, free trade, liberal commercial enterprise, international law and organization, arms control and disarmament, collective security, multilateral diplomacy, and ethically inspired statecraft can improve life on our planet.
Because they perceive change in global conditions as progressing over time, haltingly but still in the same trajectory through cooperative efforts, neoliberal theorists maintain that the ideas and ideals of the liberal legacy could describe, explain, predict, and prescribe international conduct in ways that they could not during the conflict-ridden Cold War.
The Limitations of Liberalism Liberal theorists share an interest in probing the conditions under which similar interests among actors may lead to cooperation.
Taking heart in the international prohibition, through community consensus, of such previously entrenched practices as slavery, piracy, dueling, and colonialism, they emphasize the prospects for progress through institutional reform.
Studies of European integration during the 1950s and 1960s paved the way for the liberal institutionalist theories that emerged in the 1990s.
Whereas everyone recognizes that the global system is anarchical because effective institutions for global governance are lacking, neorealists argue that anarchy does not matter much and in fact may be preferable to the restraints of world government.
Neoliberals see anarchy as a big problem that can be reformed through the creation of strong global institutions.
Although neorealists and neoliberals agree that international cooperation is possible, neorealists think cooperation is difficult to sustain, whereas neoliberals believe cooperation can be expected because collaboration produces rewards that reduce the temptation to selfishly compete.
Both neorealists and neoliberals are concerned with relative gain as well as absolute gain.
Neorealists believe that the desire to get ahead of their competitor by obtaining relative gains is the primary motive, whereas neoliberals believe that states are motivated by the search for opportunities to cooperate that will produce absolute gains for all parties to the cooperative exchange.
Both national seurity and national economic prosperity are seen as important state goals by neorealists and neoliberals.
However, neorealists stress security as the most important goal, and neoliberals believe states place a greater priority on economic welfare.
Contemporary neorealists maintain that the distribution of states’ capabilities is the primary determinant of their behavior and international outcomes.
Neoliberals maintain that states’ intentions, interests, information, and ideals are more influential than is the distribution of capabilities.
Neoliberals believe that institutions such as the World Trade Organization create norms that are binding on their members and that change patterns of international politics.
These developments were outside of realism’s worldview, creating conditions that made the call for a theory grounded in the liberal tradition convincing to many who had previously questioned realism.
In the words of former United States President Bill Clinton, “In a world where freedom, not tyranny, is on the march, the cynical calculus of pure power politics simply does not compute.
Yet, as compelling as contemporary liberal institutionalism may seem at the onset of the twenty-first century, many realists complain that it has not transcended its idealist heritage.
They charge that just like the League of Nations and the PCIJ, institutions today exert minimal influence on state behavior.
International organizations cannot stop states from behaving according to balance-of-power logic, calculating how each move they make affects their relative position in a world of relentless competition.
Critics of liberalism further contend that most studies supportive of international institutions appear in the low politics arena of commercial, financial, and environmental affairs, not in the high politics arena of national defense.
National survival hinges on the effective management of security issues, insist realists.
Chapter 2 45 Because power-lusting states are unlikely to see their vital interests in this light, global institutions cannot provide timely, muscular responses to aggression.
On security issues, conclude realists, states will trust in their own power, not in the promises of supranational institutions.
A final realist complaint lodged against liberalism is an alleged tendency to turn foreign policy into a moral crusade.
Whereas realists claim that heads of state are driven by strategic necessities, many liberals believe moral imperatives can guide and constrain leaders.
Consider the 1999 war in Kosovo, which pitted the North Atlantic Treaty Organization against the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia.
Pointing to Yugoslav leader Slobodan Milosevic’s repression of ethnic Albanians living in the province of Kosovo, NATO Secretary General Javier Solana, British Prime Minister Tony Blair, and United States President Bill Clinton all argued that humanitarian intervention was a moral necessity.
Although nonintervention into the internal affairs of other states had long been a cardinal principle of international law, they saw military action against Yugoslavia as a duty because human rights were an international entitlement and governments that violated them forfeited the protection of international law.
The international community has an obligation to use armed force to stop flagrant violations of human rights.
To sum up, realists remain skeptical about liberal claims of moral necessity.
On the one hand, they deny the universal applicability of any single moral standard in a culturally pluralistic world.
On the other hand, they worry that adopting such a standard will breed a self-righteous, messianic foreign policy.
If there are no universal standards covering the many situations in which moral choice must occur, then policy decisions can be judged only in terms of their consequences in particular circumstances.
Prudent leaders recognize that competing moral values may be at stake in any given situation, and they must weigh the trade-offs among these values, as well as how pursuing them might impinge on national security and other important interests.
It’s important that we take a hard clear look . . . not at some simple world, either of universal goodwill or of universal hostility, but the complex, changing, and sometimes dangerous world that really exists. —Jimmy Carter, United States President consequentialism an approach to evaluating moral choices on the basis of the results of the action taken.
Theories of International Relations: Realism v Liberalism Animated Learning Module: Realism v Liberalism 46 Theories of World Polities constructivism a paradigm based on the premise that world politics is a function of the ways that states construct and then accept images of reality and later respond to the meanings given to power politics; as consensual definitions change, it is possible for either conflictual or cooperative practices to evolve.
CONSTRUCTIVIST THEORY Since the end of the Cold War, many students of international relations have turned to constructivism in order to understand world politics.
With intellectual roots in the twentieth-century Frankfurt School of critical social theory, contemporary scholars who have influenced the theoretical development of this perspective include Alexander Wendt, Friedrich Kratochwil, and Nicholas Onuf, among others.
Constructivism merits careful consideration because awareness of how our understandings of the world are individually and socially constructed, and of how prevailing ideas mold our beliefs about what is unchangeable and what can be reformed, allows us to see world politics in a new and critical light.
Like the institutions of slavery and even war, these practices are mere ideational constructs that depend on human agreement for their existence.
Although constructivism is “a loose paradigm of related interpretations share certain assumptions with realists and liberals” , it departs from realism and liberalism in important ways.
In contrast to realism and liberalism, which emphasize how material factors such as military power and economic wealth affect relations among states, constructivism emphasizes how ideas define identities, which in turn impart meaning to the material capabilities and behavior of actors.
As discussed in the previous chapter, international reality is defined by our images of the world.
Constructivists stress the intersubjective quality of these images—how perceptions are shaped by prevailing attitudes.
That is to say, material conditions acquire meaning for human action only through the shared knowledge that circulating ideas ascribe to them.
Hence, the meaning of a concept such as “anarchy” depends on underlying shared knowledge.
Thus, British nuclear weapons are less threatening to the United States than the same weapons in North Korean hands, because shared Anglo-American expectations about one another differ from those between Washington and Pyongyang.
The nature of international life within an anarchy, in other words, is not a given.
The Evolution of Constructivist Thought The unraveling of the Warsaw Pact and subsequent disintegration of the Soviet Union stimulated scholarly interest during the 1990s in constructivist interpretations of world politics.
Constructivists attributed this to the material and individualist orientation of realism and liberalism, and argued that an explanation that addressed the role of changing ideas and identities provided for superior explanation of this systemic change.
There are several strands of thought within the constructivist perspective.
One of the most prominent is social constructivism, which emphasizes collective identity formation.
Alexander Wendt, who is widely credited with the contemporary application of social constructivism to world politics, challenges the material and individualist foundations of realism and liberalism.
Likewise, interests and identities stem from shared ideas and are not reducible to individuals.
So, for example, social constructivists see the structure of the international system in terms of the distribution of ideas, whereas neorealists view systemic structure within the context of the distribution of material capabilities and neoliberals see it as the distribution of capabilities within an institutional superstructure.
According to social constructivism, all of us are influenced by collective conceptions of world politics that are reinforced by social pressures from the reference groups to which we belong.
A second strand of constructivism, agent-oriented constructivism, takes a different approach by emphasizing individualist influences on identities.
An actor can hold both an internal and external identity, which is shaped by respective dialogue at home and within the international community.
Social constructivists attribute the shaping of ideas and identities to repetitive social practices and view most identity as shared or collective.
Agent-oriented constructivists allow for individual or autonomous identity and credit the development of ideas in part to individual actors with the capacity for independent and critical thinking.
It is possible to construct new ideas and change existing social structures.
Accordingly, agent-oriented constructivists pointed to the challenge that Mikhail Gorbechev’s “new thinking” posed to traditional ideas about national security.
New thinking, they suggested, led to the rise of new norms governing the relations between Moscow and Washington.
Chapter 2 49 For constructivists, the game of international power revolves around actors’ abilities, through debate about values, to persuade others to accept their ideas.
People and groups become powerful when their efforts to proselytize succeed in winning converts to those ideas and norms they advocate, and a culture of shared understandings emerges.
The capacity of some activist transnational nongovernmental organizations, such as Human Rights Watch or Greenpeace, to promote global change by convincing many people to accept their ideas about political liberties and environmental protection are examples of how shared conceptions of moral and legal norms can change the world.
The Limitations of Constructivism The most common criticism of constructivism concerns its explanation of change.
If changes in ideas through discussions and discourses lead to PIONEERING INFLUENCES ON CONSTRUCTIVIST THOUGHT Many constructivists have been influenced by critical theory, especially as it was developed by Max Horkheimer , left, and Jurgen Habermas , right.
The roots of critical theory can be traced to the Frankfurt School in Germany during the 1920s.
The aims of critical theory were to critique and change conditions, not merely understand them.
Moreover, critics charge that constructivists remain unclear about what factors cause particular ideas to become dominant whereas others fall by the wayside.
Constructivists, he continues, have excessive faith in the ability of ideas that seem self-evident today to replicate and sustain themselves; however, future generations who live under different circumstances and who may think differently could easily reject these ideas.
Although constructivists recognize that shared identities are not predetermined and can change over time, critics submit that constructivists cannot explain why and when they dissolve.
And though the constructivist approach is increasingly viewed as a vital perspective for understanding world politics, it is still criticized for its limited attention to methodological issues.
In other words, such a pluralistic methodology would help us to consider both the material and ideational factors that shape the world politics.
Despite these criticisms, constructivism is a very popular theoretical approach in world politics.
By highlighting the influence that socially constructed images of the world have on your interpretations of international events, and by making you aware of their inherent subjectivity, constructivism can remind you of the contingent nature of all knowledge and the inability of any theory of world politics to fully capture global complexities.
Although realism, liberalism, and constructivism dominate thinking about international relations in today’s academic and policy communities, these schools of thought have been challenged.
Two of the most significant critiques have come from radicalism and feminism.
The very idea that there is another idea is something gained. —Richard Jeffries, English author The Radical Critique For much of the twentieth century, socialism was the primary radical alternative to mainstream international relations theorizing.
Although there are many strands of socialist thought, most have been influenced by Karl Marx’s argument that explaining events in world affairs requires understanding capitalism as a global phenomenon.
Capitalism, they argued, has given rise to two antagonistic classes; a ruling class that owns the means of production and a subordinate class that sells its labor but receives little compensation.
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin in the Soviet Union extended Marx’s analysis to the study of imperialism, which he interpreted as a stage in the development of capitalism when monopolies overtake free-market competition.
Drawing from the work of British economist John Hobson (18581940), Lenin maintained that advanced capitalist states eventually face the twin problems of overproduction and underconsumption.
They respond by seeking foreign markets and investments for their surplus goods and capital, and by waging wars to divide the world into spheres of influence that they can exploit.
Though his assertions have been heavily criticized on conceptual and empirical grounds (see Dougherty and Pfaltzgraff imperialism the policy of expanding state power through the conquest and/or military domination of foreign territory.
His revolutionary theory of the economic determinants of world history inspired the spread of communism to overcome the class struggles so pronounced in most countries.
The target of his critique was the compulsion of the wealthy great powers to subjugate foreign people by military force and to create colonies for purposes of financial exploitation.
Imperial conquest of colonial peoples could only be prevented, Marx warned, by humanity’s shift from a capitalist to a socialist economy and society. 2001), the attention given to social classes and uneven development stimulated several new waves of theorizing about capitalism as a global phenomenon.
As expressed in the writings of Andre Gunder Frank , Amir Samin , and others (Dos Santos 1970; see Chapter 4), dependency theorists claimed that much of the poverty in Asia, Africa, and Latin America stemmed from the exploitative capitalist world economy.
As they saw it, the economies of less developed countries had become dependent on exporting inexpensive raw materials and agricultural commodities to advanced industrial states, while simultaneously importing expensive manufactured goods from them.
Within the core, a state may gain economic primacy by achieving productive, commercial, and financial superiority over its rivals.
The diffusion of technological innovations and the flow of capital to competitors, plus the massive costs of maintaining global order, all erode the dominant state’s economic advantage.
Thus, in addition to underscoring the exploitation of the periphery by the core, world-system theory calls attention to the cyclical rise and fall of hegemonic superpowers at the top of the core hierarchy.
Whereas the various radical challenges to mainstream theorizing enhance our understanding of world politics by highlighting the roles played by corporations, transnational religious movements, and other nonstate actors, they overemphasize economic interpretations of international events and consequently omit other potentially important explanatory factors.
According to feminist theorists, one such factor is gender. world-system theory a body of theory that treats the capitalistic world economy originating in the sixteenth century as an interconnected unit of analysis encompassing the entire globe, with an international division of labor and multiple political centers and cultures whose rules constrain and share the behavior of all transnational actors.
The Feminist Critique Beginning in the late 1980s, feminism began challenging conventional international relations theory.
In particular, feminist theory was concerned with the gender bias inherent in both mainstream theory and the practice of international affairs, and sought to demonstrate how a gendered perspective is relevant to understanding and explaining world politics.
According to the feminist critique, the mainstream literature on world politics dismisses the plight and contributions of women and treats differences in men’s and women’s status, beliefs, and behaviors as unimportant.
Spike Petersen, a prominent feminist theorist, notes that there was an explicit masculine bias in the scientific revolution of the seventeenth century, with science and reasoning attributed as a “male” trait and emotion and rationality as a “female” one.
Somewhat similar to social constructivism, the feminist critique emphasizes the role of identity in the construction of knowledge, and contends that the study of international relations draws heavily on male experiences to explain international affairs, largely dismissing the feminine dimension.
Feminism notes that the basic assumptions of the mainstream theoretical literature, as well as the practice of foreign policy, are heavily colored by a masculinist tradition of thought.
Yet feminism challenges the heavy reliance on such assumptions, and posits that characteristics dismissed due to their “feminine” quality play an important role as well.
Indeed, for life to have persisted in the state of nature, cooperative activities such as child rearing must have occurred.
Feminists call for a closer examination of key concepts in world politics—such as state, power, interest, and security—and ask whether a “masculine” conceptualization of these ideas shapes the conduct of foreign policy.
Realism, for instance, attributes to the state masculine characteristics of sovereignty that emphasize a hierarchical leader, the capacity to wage war, desirability of wealth and reputation, and the conduct of international affairs as separate from the domestic concerns of its populace.
Feminist scholars such as Cynthia Enloe , however, argue that power relations are influenced by gender in ways that shape practices of war and diplomacy, and that alternative formulations of key concepts allow for the relevance of a wide range of other issues and structures, including social and economic ones, in world politics.
Historically, the role of women has been marginalized in most societies.
In order to understand how unequal gender relations have excluded women from foreign policy, perpetuated injustice and oppression, and shaped state interests and behavior, it is critical to purposively examine the female experience.
Christine Sylvester’s examination of women’s cooperatives in Zimbabwe and women’s peace activism at Greenham Common reflects a feminist commitment to a more flexible understanding of security that expands upon the traditional state-centric conceptualization as protection from external aggressors to include threats to economic and family concerns as well.
Regardless of the position taken on the issue of gender differences, feminist scholars demonstrate that many women have proven to be very capable leaders who have left deep footprints on international affairs.
More than simply acknowledging the impact of female leaders such as Britain’s Margaret Thatcher, Indonesia’s Megawati Sukarnoputri, Israel’s Golda Meir, the Philippines’ Corazon Aquino, Pakistan’s Benazir Bhutto, Germany’s Angela Merkel, Argentina’s Christina Fernandez de Kirchner, or Chile’s Michelle Bachelet, they urge us to examine events from the personal perspectives of the countless women who have been involved in international affairs as caregivers, grassroots activists, and participants in the informal labor force.
The feminist critique continues to expand across a range of issues, from foreign policy to humanitarian intervention to terrorism, and a variety of actors, from states to nongovernmental organizations.
They saw peace as a feminist issue, and asserted their power by hoiding hands and creating a fourteen-mile chain around the airbase with their bodies.
Not only did they see nuciear weapons as a direct threat to themseives and their children, they protested that trillions were being spent on weapons of mass destruction while so many around the world suffered from a lack of food and water, inadequate heaithcare, and underfunded schoois.
Their neariy two-decade demonstration attracted woridwide media attention and generated the support of miliions throughout the world. worldviews rest.
Although grand theories fade with the passage of time, they often regain their attractiveness when global transformations make them useful once again.
In fact, world politics is so resistant to clear, comprehensive, and convincing analysis that some advocates of so-called deconstructivism contend that international change and complexity defy description, explanation, and prediction.
Deconstructionists share the philosophical view that all peoples’ conceptions of global realities are relative to their understandings.
Thus, biased interpretation is inevitable and “objectivity” a myth, so that the validity of all conceptions is dependent on one’s own personal point of view , and there is no point in attempting to develop a shared conception of the world.
The vast majority of scholars rejects this defeatist deconstructivist posture to understanding and continues to struggle in the pursuit of theory and knowledge about international affairs.
As you review various theoretical interpretations of global circumstances, it is important to evaluate the premises on which each contending account is based. epistemology the philosophical examination of the ways in which knowledge is acquired and the anaiytic principies governing the study of phenomena.
INTERNATIONAL THEORY AND THE GLOBAL FUTURE As you seek to understand changing global conditions, it is important to be humble in recognizing the limitations of our understandings of world politics and at the same time inquisitive about its character.
The task of interpretation is complicated because the world is itself complex.
Donald Puchala theoretically framed the challenge in 2008 by observing; Conceptually speaking, world affairs today can be likened to a disassembled jigsaw puzzle scattered on a table before us.
Each piece shows a fragment of a broad picture that as yet remains indiscernible.
Some pieces depict resurgent nationalism; others show spreading democracy; some picture genocide; others portray prosperity through trade and investment; some picture nuclear disarmament; others picture nuclear proliferation; some indicate a reinvigorated United Nations; others show the UN still enfeebled and ineffective; some describe cultural globalization; others predict clashing civilizations.
The answer to that question has never been satisfactorily resolved, and the long-standing debate about how best to construct theories ot international relations continues today.
Some scholars, known as advocates of “postmodern deconstructivism,"" challenge the ability ot intellectuals to provide a satisfactory theoretical account of why states and people act as they do in international relations.
These scholars devote their efforts to criticizing and “deconstructing"" the theories of world politics to expose their inherent limitations.
Most scholars, however, remain motivated by the theoretical quest to interpret and comprehend the complexities of international relations, and they challenge the pessimistic view that world politics defies meaningful understanding, despite the obstacles and limits to knowledge.
This evolving epistemological controversy took an important step in the 1960s when a movement known as behavioralism arose to challenge interpretations of international relations that were based more on speculative assessment than on systematic observable evidence.
Behavioralism advances principles and procedures tor formulating and stringently testing hypotheses interred from theories to reach generalizations or statements about international regularities that hold true across time and place.
Science, the behavioralists claim, is primarily a generalizing activity.
From this perspective, a theory of international relations should state the relationship between two or more variables that specifies the conditions under which a relationship holds and explain why the relationship should hold.
To uncover such theories, behavioralists lean toward using comparative cross-national analyses rather than case studies of particular countries at particular times.
Behavioralists also stress the need for data about the characteristics of transnational actors and how they behave toward one another.
Behavioralism is predicated on the belief that the pursuit of knowledge about the world through systematic analytic methodologies is possible and productive.
In place otthe self-proclaimed and often mistaken opinions of “experts"" , behavioral scientists seek to acquire knowledge cumulatively by suspending judgments about truths or values until they have sufficient evidence to support them.
They attempt to overcome the tendency of traditional inquiry to select facts and cases to tit preexisting hunches.
Instead, all Chapter 2 available data, those that contradict as well as those that support existing theoretical hypotheses, are to be examined.
Knowledge, they argue, would advance best by theorists assuming a cautious, skeptical attitude toward any empirical statement.
The slogans “Let the data, not the armchair theorist, speak,” and “Seek evidence, but distrust it"" represent the behavioral posture toward the acquisition ot knowledge.
Theories can guide us in fitting the pieces together to form an accurate picture.
However, in evaluating the usefulness of any theory to interpret global conditions, the historical overview in this chapter suggests that it would be wrong to oversimplify or to assume that a particular theory will remain useful in the future.
So in our theoretical exploration of world politics, we must critically assess the accuracy of our impressions, avoiding the temptation to embrace one worldview and abandon another without any assurance that their relative worth is permanently fixed. behavioralism the methodological research movement to incorporate rigorous scientific analysis into the study of world politics so that conclusions about patterns are based on measurement, data, and evidence rather than on speculation and subjective belief.
Although realism, liberalism, and constructivism are the dominant ways of thinking about world politics today, none of these theories is completely satisfactory.
Recall that realism is frequently criticized for relying on ambiguous concepts, liberalism is often derided for making naive policy recommendations based on idealistic assumptions, and constructivism is charged with an inability to explain change.
BO Theories of World Politics radicalism and feminism suggest, these three mainstream theories overlook seemingly important aspects of world politics, which limits their explanatory power.
Despite these drawbacks, each has strengths for interpreting certain kinds of international events and foreign policy behaviors.
Because we lack a single overarching theory able to account for all facets of world politics, we will draw on realist, liberal, and constructivist thought in subsequent chapters.
Moreover, we will supplement them with insights from radicalism and feminism, where these theoretical traditions can best help to interpret the topic covered.
Contrast and Continuity in Feminist International Relations,” Millennium-journal of International Studies 37:97-105.
Maoz, Zeev, Alex Mintz, T Clifton Morgan, Glenn Palmer, and Richard J Stoll, eds.
But that still implies that change is like death and taxes—it should be postponed as long as possible and no change would be vastly preferable.
But in a period of upheaval, such as the one we are living in, change is the norm.
People, like states and international organizations, are transnational actors.
Shown here are about 100,000 Buddhist monks marching to protest Myanmar’s military government, which has crushed pro-democracy uprisings and neglected the welfare of its people.
Despite widespread sentiment among Burmese that electoral exercises scheduled for 2010 will face severe obstacles and may be useless as an instrument of electoral freedom, there is nonetheless hope for the possibility of change.
When it comes to world politics, not just people but also organizations, groups, and countries have a variety of roles to play on the global stage.
Chapter 3 opens by giving you a view of the great powers—the actors with the greatest military and economic capabilities.
Chapter 4 compares the great powers with the weaker, economically less developed countries now known as the Global South, whose fates are powerfully shaped by others.
The rise of the Global East to its new status as rival to the traditional great powers is also covered.
Chapter 5 examines the role of intergovernmental organizations, such as the United Nations and the European Union, and nongovernmental organizations, such as Greenpeace and Amnesty International, whose members actively work for global change.
A window is opened for you to also explore the activities of other nonstate global actors, including multinational corporations, ethnic groups, and religious movements.
Einally, Chapter 6 explains how states and all other transnational actors go about the task of making foreign policy decisions.
It also identifies the intellectual and political barriers that often reduce the ability of transnational actors to make rational choices about their interests, policy goals, and workable paths for promoting them.
The “Big Three” meet at Yaita as victorious great power aliies to establish rules for all states to follow in the postWorid War il giobai order, but that cooperation wouid soon be replaced by bitter competition.
These are the kinds of questions sports fans often ask when the rankings of the top teams are adjusted after the preceding week’s competition.
And many people throughout the world habitually make comparisons of countries, asking which states are the biggest, strongest, wealthiest, and most militarily powerful and evaluating which states are rising and which are falling relative to one another.
When making such rankings, both groups are looking at world politics through the lens of realism.
They see a globe of competitors, with winners and losers in an ancient contest for supremacy.
Cycles of war and peace colored twentieth-century world politics, with three global wars breaking out.
World Wars I and II were fought with fire and blood; the Cold War was fought without the same magnitude of destruction but with equal intensity.
This chapter explores the causes and consequences of great power rivalries.
By understanding the origins and impact of these three struggles over world leadership, you will be better positioned to anticipate whether the great powers will be able to avoid yet another global war in the twenty-first century.
THE QUEST FOR WORLD LEADERSHIP Rivalry between great powers has long characterized world politics, and there is a strong probability that this historical pattern is cyclical and unfolds through a series of distinct phases.
According to long-cycle theory, over the past five centuries, periods of global war have been followed by periods of international rule-making and institution building.
With its unrivaled power, the hegemon has reshaped the rules and institutions of the global system to preserve its preeminent position.
A hegemon must bear the costs of maintaining political and economic order while protecting its position and upholding its dominion.
Over time, as the weight of global engagement takes its toll, every previous hegemon has overextended itself.
As challengers have arisen, the security agreements so carefully crafted after the last global war have come under attack.
Historically, this struggle for power has set the stage for another global war, the demise of one hegemon and the ascent of another.
Critics note that long-cycle theorists disagree on whether economic, military, or domestic factors produce these cycles.
They also express frustration with the deterministic tone of the theory, which to them implies that global destiny is beyond policy makers’ control.
Still, long-cycle theory suggests you should consider how shifts in the relative strength of great powers affect world politics.
It rivets attention on hegemonic transitions, the rise and fall of leading states in the global system, and in so doing provokes questions about whether this long cycle can be broken in your future.
Longcycle theory also forces you to evaluate hegemonic stability theory and that theory’s predictions.
To underscore the importance of struggles over world leadership and their impact on trends and transformations in world politics, this chapter accordingly asks you to inspect the three great power wars of the twentieth century, as well as the lessons these clashes suggest for the twenty-first century.
THE FIRST WORLD WAR World War I rumbled onto the global stage when a Serbian nationalist seeking to free his ethnic group from Austrian rule assassinated Archduke Ferdinand, heir to the Hapsburg throne of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire, at Sarajevo in June 1914.
This assassination sparked a series of great power actions and reactions in the five weeks that followed, shattering world peace.
By the time the first major European war in the previous century had ended, nearly ten million people had died, three empires had crumbled, new states 68 Great Power Rivalries and Relations MIGHT MAKES FRIGHT Shown here is one example of resistance to United States global preeminence; In September 2008, protesters in Sadr City in Baghdad held “Go Out USA” signs.
Home to two million Shia and the anti-American cleric Muqtada al-Sadr, Sadr City had been one of the most dangerous areas of Iraq and was the site of intense fighting between the United States and insurgents earlier in the year.
Following American construction of a wall across the district, a tenuous calm emerged that was nonetheless regularly interrupted by protests and bombings. had been bom, seven decades of communist rule in Russia had begun, and the world geopolitical map had been redrawn in ways that paved the way for the rise of Adolf Hitler in Nazi Germany.
The Causes of World War I structuralism the neorealist proposition that states’ behavior is shaped primarily by changes in the properties of the global system, such as shifts in the balance of power, instead of by individual heads of states or by changes in states’ internal characteristics.
Most popular are structural neorealist explanations, which hold that World War I was inadvertent, not the result of anyone’s master plan.
Neorealists believe that it was a war bred by circumstances beyond the control of those involved, one that people neither wanted nor expected.
Structuralism Framed at the global level of analysis, structuralism, postulates that the changing distribution of power within the anarchical global system is the primary factor determining states’ behavior.
Looking at the circumstances Chapter 3 69 on the eve of World War I, many historians hypothesize that the way in which the great powers were aligned against one another created an environment conducive to an armed conflict.
This structural explanation concentrates attention on the nineteenth century, when Britain dominated world politics.
Britain was an island country isolated from continental affairs by temperament, tradition, and geography.
Britain’s sea power gave it command of the world’s shipping lanes and control over a vast empire stretching from the Mediterranean to Southeast Asia.
After becoming a unified country in 1871, Germany prospered and used its growing wealth to create a formidable army and navy.
With this strength came ambition and resentment of British preeminence.
As the predominant military and industrial power on the European continent, Germany sought to compete for international position and status.
With Germany ascendant, Germany’s rising power and global aspirations altered the European geopolitical landscape.
Germany was not the only newly emergent power at the turn of the century, however.
The decline in power of the Austrian-Hungarian Empire, Germany’s only ally, heightened Germany’s fear of Russia, which was reflected in Germany’s strong reaction to the assassination of Archduke Eerdinand.
Eearing that a long war might result in an unfavorable shift in the balance of power, Germany sought a short localized war with a more favorable outcome.
Germany thus supported Austria-Hungary’s unrestrained assault on Serbia.
While the logic behind Germany’s calculation was clear—a victorious war would bolster Austria-Hungary and hamper Russian influence—it turned out to be a serious miscalculation.
Erance and Russia joined forces to defend Serbia, and were soon joined by Britain in an effort to oppose Germany and defend Belgian neutrality.
In April 1917, the war became truly global in scope when the United States, reacting to German submarine warfare, entered the conflict.
Here we observe, again at the global level of analysis, the dynamics of shifts in the balance of power as a causal factor; the historic tendency for opposed 70 Great Power Rivalries and Relations conditions to form so that the distribution of military power is “balanced” to prevent any single power or bloc from seriously threatening others.
And that is what did happen in the decade prior to Archduke Ferdinand’s assassination.
European military alignments had become polarized, pitting the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and the Ottoman Empire against the Triple Entente of Britain, France, and Russia.
According to this structural interpretation, after Russia mobilized its armies in response to Austria’s attack on Serbia, cross-cutting alliance commitments pulled one European great power after another into the war. nationalism a mind-set glorifying a particular state and the nationality group living in it, which sees the state’s interest as a supreme value.
Nationalism As an alternative interpretation of the origins of World War I at the state level of analysis, many historians view the growth of nationalism, especially in southeastern Europe, as having created a climate of opinion that made war likely.
Domestic unrest inflamed these passions, making it hard to see things from another point of view.
Believing that they were upholding their national honor, the Austrians could not comprehend why Russians labeled them the aggressors.
With each side belittling the national character and ethnic attributes of the other, diplomatic alternatives to war evaporated.
The people gathered at the Imperial Palace in Berlin are seen as having pushed Europe over the brink.
The rational choice model of decision making suggests that World War I is best seen as a consequence of the purposive goal of rival great powers to Chapter 3 71 compete against one another for global power.
As these rival interpretations suggest, the causes of World War I remain in dispute.
Structural explanations emphasize the global distribution of power, domestic interpretations look at causal factors within states, and rational choice explanations direct attention to the calculations and goals of particular leaders.
All partially help us to understand the sequences that produced the world’s first truly global war.
In its wake, three multi-ethnic empires—the AustrianHungarian, Russian, and Ottoman —collapsed, and in their place the independent states of Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Yugoslavia emerged.
In addition, the countries of Finland, Estonia, Eatvia, and Eithuania were born.
The war also contributed to the independence of the Republic of Ireland from Britain in 1920 and the overthrow of the Russian czar in 1917 by the Bolsheviks.
The emergence of communism under the leadership of Vladimir Eenin produced a change in government and ideology that would have geopolitical consequences for another seventy years.
Moreover, the war set the stage for a determined effort to build a new global system that could prevent another war.
When it was all over, few remained to be convinced that such a war must never happen again.
For the first time in history, broad publics and the peacemakers shared a conviction that war was a central problem in international relations.
Previously, hegemony, the aggressive activities of a particular state, or revolution had been the problem.
In 1648,1713, and 1815, the peacemakers had tried to resolve issues of the past and to construct orders that would preclude their 72 Great Power Rivalries and Relations Text not available due to copyright restrictions reappearance.
World War I evoked revulsion for war and theories of realism that justified great power competition, armaments, secret alliances, and balance-of-power politics.
The staggering human and material costs of the previous four years led many of the delegates to the 1919 peace conference convened at Versailles, outside Paris, to reevaluate their convictions about statecraft.
Disillusioned with realism, many turned to liberalism for guidance on how to manage the global future.
The decade following World War I was the high point of liberal idealism.
Wilson’s chief proposal was to construct a League of Nations that allegedly would guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of all states.
His other recommendations included strengthening international law, settling territorial claims on the basis of self-determination, and promoting democracy, disarmament, and free trade.
However, once the peace conference began, the knives of parochial national interest began whittling away at the liberal philosophy underpinning Wilson’s proposals.
Many European leaders had been offended by the pontificating American president.
As negotiations at the conference proceeded, hard-boiled power politics prevailed.
Ultimately, the delegates were only willing to support those elements in the Fourteen Points that served their national interests.
The rest of the treaty was punitive, aimed at stripping the country of its great power status.
Similar treaties were later forced on Austria-Hungary and Germany’s other wartime allies.
In brief, Germany’s military was drastically cut; it was forbidden to possess heavy artillery, military aircraft, or submarines, and its forces were banned from the Rhineland.
Germany also lost territory in the west to France and Belgium, in the south to the new state of Czechoslovakia, and in the east to the new states of Poland and Lithuania.
Finally, in the most humiliating clause of the treaty, Germany was assigned responsibility for the war and charged with paying heavy financial reparations for the damages.
THE SECOND WORLD WAR Germany’s defeat in World War I and its humiliation under the Treaty of Versailles did not extinguish its hegemonic aspirations.
Thus conditions were ripe for the second great power war of the twentieth century, which pitted the Axis trio of Germany, Japan, and Italy against an unlikely “grand alliance” of four great powers who united despite their incompatible ideologies—communism in the case of the Soviet Union and democratic capitalism in the case of Britain, France, and the United States.
Case Study; Liberal Idealism 74 Great Power Rivalries and Relations The world’s fate hinged on the outcome of this massive effort to defeat the Axis threat.
To understand the origins of this devastating conflict, we will once again examine causal factors operating at different levels of analysis.
The Causes of World War II Following Germany’s capitulation in 1918, a democratic constitution was drafted by a constituent assembly meeting in the city of Weimar.
Not only was the new government linked in their minds to the humiliating Versailles Treaty, but it also suffered from the 1923 French occupation of the industrial Ruhr district, various political rebellions, and the ruinous economic collapse of 1929.
By the parliamentary elections of 1932, over half of the electorate supported extremist parties that disdained democratic governance.
The largest of these was the Nazi, or National Socialist German Workers, party.
Proximate Causes on the Road to War On January 30, 1933, the Nazi leader, Adolf Hitler, was appointed chancellor of Germany.
Less than a month later, the Reichstag building burned down under mysterious circumstances.
Hitler used the fire to justify an emergency edict allowing him to suspend civil liberties and move against communists and other political adversaries.
Once all meaningful parliamentary opposition had been eliminated, Nazi legislators passed an enabling act that suspended the constitution and granted Hitler dictatorial power.
In his 1924 book Mein Kampf , Hitler urged Germany to recover territories taken by the Treaty of Versailles, absorb Germans living in neighboring lands, and colonize Eastern Europe.
During his first year in power, however, he cultivated a pacifist image, signing a nonaggression pact with Poland in 1934.
In 1935, he repudiated the military clauses of the Versailles Treaty; in 1936, he ordered troops into the demilitarized Rhineland; in March 1938, he annexed Austria; and in September 1938, he demanded control over the Sudetenland, a region of Czechoslovakia containing ethnic Germans.
To address the Sudeten German question, a conference was convened in Munich, attended by Hitler, British prime minister Neville Chamberlain, and leaders of France and Italy (ironically.
Convinced that appeasement would halt further German expansionism, Chamberlain and the others agreed to Hitler’s demands.
Rather than satisfying Germany, appeasement whetted its appetite and that of the newly formed fascist coalition of Germany, Italy, and Japan, which aimed to overthrow the international status quo.
Japan, disillusioned with Western liberalism and the Paris settlements, and suffering economically from the effects of the Great Depression of the 1930s, embraced militarism.
In the might-makes-right climate that Germany’s imperialistic quest for national aggrandizement helped to create, Japanese nationalists led their country on the path to imperialism and colonialism.
Japan’s invasions of Manchuria in 1931 and China proper in 1937 were followed by Italy’s absorption of Abyssinia in 1935 and Albania in 1939, and both Germany and Italy intervened appeasement a strategy of making concessions to another state in the hope that, satisfied, it wili not make additionai claims. colonialism the rule of a region by an external sovereign power.
Text not available due to copyright restrictions 76 Great Power Rivalries and Relations in the 1936-1939 Spanish civil war on the side of the fascists, headed by General Francisco Franco, whereas the Soviet Union supported antifascist forces.
After Germany occupied the rest of Czechoslovakia in March 1939, Britain and France formed an alliance to protect the next likely victim, Poland.
They also opened negotiations with Moscow in hopes of enticing the Soviet Union to join the alliance, but the negotiations failed.
Then, on August 23,1939, Hitler, a fascist, and the Soviet dictator, Joseph Stalin, a communist, stunned the world with the news that they had signed a nonaggression pact, promising not to attack one another.
However, Britain and France honored their pledge to defend Poland, and two days later declared war on Germany.
Hitler next turned his forces to the Balkans, North Africa, and westward, as the mechanized German troops invaded Norway and marched through Denmark, Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands.
The German army swept around the Maginot line, the defensive barrier on the eastern frontier that France boasted could not be breached.
Within six weeks France surrendered, even though Germany’s forces were measurably inferior to those of France and its allies.
The alarming and nearly bloodless German victory forced the British to evacuate a nearly 340,000-strong expeditionary force from the French beaches at Dunkirk.
Meanwhile, to deter the United States from participating in the looming war, in September 1940 Japan forged the Tripartite Pact with Germany and Italy that pledged the three Axis powers to come to one another’s aid if attacked by another nonbelligerent great power, such as the United States. isolationism a policy of withdrawing from active participation with other actors in world affairs and instead concentrating state efforts on managing internal affairs.
In the months that followed, the German air force, the Luftwaffe, pounded Britain in an attempt to force it into submission as well.
Instead of invading Britain, however, the Nazi troops launched a surprise attack on the Soviet Union, Hitler’s former ally, in June 1941.
On December 7th of that same year, Japan launched a surprise assault on the United States at Pearl Harbor.
The unprovoked Japanese assault and the German challenge ended United States aloofness and isolationism, enabling President Franklin Roosevelt to forge a coalition with Britain and the Soviet Union to oppose the fascists. multipolarity the distribution of global power into three or more great power centers, with most other states allied with one of the rivals.
Underlying Causes at Three Analytic Levels At the global level of analysis, many historians regard the reemergence of multipolarity in the global power distribution as a key factor in the onset and expansion of World War 11.
The postWorld War I global system was precarious because the number of sovereign states increased at the same time the number of great powers declined.
In 1914, Europe had only twenty-two key states, but by 1921 the number had nearly Chapter 3 77 doubled.
The 1930s collapse of the global economic system also contributed to the war.
Great Britain found itself unequal to the leadership and regulatory roles it had performed in the world political economy before World War I Although the United States was the logical successor, its refusal to exercise leadership hastened the war.
In this depressed global environment, heightened by deteriorating economic circumstances at home, Germany and Japan sought solutions through imperialism abroad.
For example, domestically, German nationalism inflamed latent irredentism and rationalized the expansion of German borders both to regain provinces previously lost in wars to others and to absorb Germans living in Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Poland.
The rise of fascism —the Nazi regime’s ideology championing anti-Semitic racism against the Jews, flag, fatherland, nationalism, and imperialism—animated this renewed imperialistic push and preached the most extreme version of realism, matchpolitik , to justify the forceful expansion of the German state and other Axis powers that were aligned with Germany.
The importance of leaders at the individual level of analysis stands out.
The war would not have been possible without Adolf Hitler and his plans to conquer the world by force.
Topham/lmage Works 78 Great Power Rivalries and Relations virulent anti-Semitism and anticommunism, Hitler chose to wage war to create an empire that he believed could resolve once and for all the historic competition and precarious coexistence of the great powers in Europe by eliminating Germany’s rivals.
The broad vision of the Thousand-Year Reich was ... of a vastly expanded— and continually expanding—German core, extending deep into Russia, with a number of vassal states and regions, including France, the Low Countries, Scandinavia, central Europe, and the Balkans, that would provide resources and labor for the core.
On the contrary, the lesser peoples were to be taught only to do menial labor or, as Hitler once joked, educated sufficiently to read the road signs so they wouldn’t get run over by German automobile traffic.
To Hitler . . . the purpose of policy was to destroy the system and to reconstitute it on racial lines, with a vastly expanded Germany running a distinctly hierarchical and exploitative order.
Vestiges of sovereignty might remain, but they would be fig leaves covering a monolithic order.
German occupation policies during the war, whereby conquered nations were reduced to satellites, satrapies, and reservoirs of slave labor, were the practical application of Hitler’s conception of the new world order.
THE RISE OF HITLER AND GERMAN NATIONALISM Consistent with the realist view that states have an inherent right to expand, Adolf Hitler’s propaganda experts staged dramatic political rallies to glorify the German Fuhrer , persuade the German people of the need to persecute the Jews, and expand German borders by armament and aggression.
The Consequences of World War II Having faced ruinous losses in Russia and a massive Allied bombing campaign at home, Germany’s Thousand-Year Reich lay in ruins by May 1945.
By August, the United States atomic bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki forced Chapter 3 79 Japan to end its war of conquest as well as well as brace itself, after its shattering defeat followed by six years of United States military occupation, to meet the challenge of socially constructing acceptance of new values.
The Allied victory over the Axis redistributed power and reordered borders, resulting in a new geopolitical terrain.
The Soviet Union absorbed nearly 600,000 square kilometers of territory from the Baltic states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania, and from Linland, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and Romania— recovering what Russia had lost in the 1918 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk after World War I Poland, a victim of Soviet expansionism, was compensated with land taken from Germany.
Germany itself was divided into occupation zones that eventually provided the basis for its partition into East and West Germany.
In the Ear East, the Soviet Union took from Japan the four Kurile Islands—or the “Northern Territories,” as Japan calls them—and Korea was divided into Soviet and United States occupation zones at the Thirty-Eighth Parallel.
With the defeat of the Axis, one global system ended, but the defining characteristics of the new system had not yet become clear.
Although the United Nations was created to replace the old, discredited League of Nations, the management of world affairs still rested in the hands of the victors.
The “Big Three” leaders—^Winston Churchill, Eranklin Roosevelt, and Joseph Stalin—met at the Yalta Conference in Eebruary 1945 to design a new world order.
But the vague compromises they reached concealed the differences percolating below the surface, hollowing Germany’s unconditional surrender in May, the Big Three (with the United States now represented by Harry Truman) met again in July 1945 at Potsdam.
The meeting ended without agreement, and the facade of Allied unity began to disintegrate.
In the aftermath of the war, the United States and the Soviet Union were the only two great powers that were still strong and had the capacity to impose their will.
The other major-power victors, especially Great Britain, had exhausted themselves and slipped from the apex of the world-power hierarchy.
The vanquished, Germany and Japan, also fell from the ranks of the great powers.
Thus, as Alexis de Tocqueville had foreseen in 1835, the Americans and Russians now held in their hands the destinies of half of Yalta Conference the 1945 summit meeting of the Allied victors to resolve postwar territorial issues and voting procedures in the United Nations to collectively manage world order. humankind.
Cold War the forty-two-year rivalry between the United States and the Soviet Union, as well as their competing coalitions, which sought to contain each other’s expansion and win worldwide predominance. power transition a narrowing of the ratio of military capabilities between great power rivals that is thought to increase the probability of war between them. sphere of influence a region of the globe dominated by a great power. it caused, after a short interlude, in the distribution of global power from multipolarity to bipolarity.
In what in 1949 became known as the Cold War, Washington and Moscow used the fledgling United Nations not to keep the peace but to pursue their competition with each other.
As the third and last hegemonic struggle of the twentieth century, the Cold War and its lessons still cast shadows over today’s geostrategic landscape.
The United States should take the lead in running the world in the way that the world ought to be run. —Harry S Truman, United States President THE COLD WAR The second great war of the twentieth century, without parallel in the number of participants and destruction, brought about a global system dominated by two superstates whose nuclear weapons radically changed the role that threats of warfare would play in world politics.
Out of these circumstances grew the competition between the United States and the Soviet Union for hegemonic leadership.
At the global level of analysis, the first is advanced by realism; the Cold War resulted from the power transition that propelled the United States and the Soviet Union to the top of the international hierarchy and made their rivalry inescapable.
Circumstances gave each superpower reasons to fear and to struggle against the other’s potential global leadership and encouraged each superpower competitor to carve out and establish dominant influence in its own sphere of influence, or specified area of the globe.
A second interpretation, at the state level of analysis, holds that the Cold War was simply an extension of the superpowers’ mutual disdain for each other’s professed beliefs about politics and economics.
American fears of Marxism stimulated the emergence of anticommunism as an opposing ideology.
Accordingly, the United States embarked on a missionary crusade of its own to contain and ultimately remove the atheistic communist menace from the face of the Earth.
Similarly, Soviet policy was fueled by the belief that capitalism could not coexist with communism.
The purpose of Soviet policy, therefore, was to push the pace of the historical process in which communism eventually would prevail.
However, Soviet planners did not believe that this historical outcome was guaranteed.
They felt that the capitalist states, led by the United States, sought to encircle the Soviet Union and smother communism in its cradle, and that resistance by the Soviets was obligatory.
Additional factors, beyond those rooted in g divergent interests, ideologies, and images, § c undoubtedly combined to produce this | explosive Soviet-American hegemonic “ rivalry.
A third explanation, rooted in decision making at the individual level of analysis, sees the Cold War as being fueled by the superpowers’ misperceptions of each other’s motives.
Erom this constructivist perspective, conflicting interests were secondary to misunderstandings and ideologies.
Mistrustful actors are prone to see only virtue in their own actions and only malice in those of their adversaries.
This tendency to see one’s opponent as the complete opposite, or mirror image, of oneself makes hostility virtually inevitable.
Moreover, when perceptions of an adversary’s evil intentions are socially constructed and become accepted as truth, a self-fulfilling prophecy can develop and the future can be affected by the way it is anticipated.
Thus, viewing each other suspiciously, each rival giant acted in hostile ways that encouraged the very behavior that was suspected.
Senator Joseph IVIcCarthy led the most infamous hunt for communist sympathizers in government, Hollywood production companies blacklisted supposed communist sympathizers, and average American citizens were often required to take loyalty oaths at their offices.
Everywhere, communism became synonymous with treasonous, un-American activity.
As the nuclear arms race escalated and the United States government took military action to contain the Soviet Union, its justification was almost always expressed in terms of ideology.
The threat, as the population learned to perceive it, was that of an atheistic, communistic system that challenged the fundamental American principles of democratic capitalism.
Also, according to the domino theory, which states that communism was driven to knock over one country after another, Soviet communism was inherently expansionistic.
The other side also couched its Cold War rhetoric in terms of ideology, objecting to the imperialistic, capitalist system that the Soviets said America planned to impose on the whole world.
Some would argue that fear of the other side’s world dominance may have been more important in the Cold War than pure ideology.
Both the American and the Soviet governments may have entered the Cold War to secure their relative power in the world order as much as to protect pure principles.
After World War II, however, a power vacuum created by the demise of Europe’s traditional great powers drew them into conflict with each other, and as they competed, ideological justifications surfaced.
Liberalism, communism, socialism, and capitalism are examples of ideologies of international politics.
Ideologies help us to interpret life and its meaning and are for that reason indispensable for organizing thought and values.
As social constructivism suggests, ideology provides meaning within a social context and enables a society to use its domestic values and norms to frame its interests and convictions.
Institutional proponents of particular ideologies are prone to perceive other ideologies competitively—as challenges to the truth of their own ideology’s core beliefs.
Although scholars are still debating the causes of the Cold War, we need to ask whether it was, in fact, an ideological contest over ideas, or a more general contest for power.
The character of the Cold War shifted in three phases over its long history , and several distinct patterns emerged that not only provide insights into the impetus behind the Cold War but also illustrate the properties of other great power rivalries.
Confrontation, 1947-1962 Though a brief period of wary Soviet-American cordiality prevailed in the immediate aftermath of World War II, this goodwill rapidly vanished as the two giants’ vital interests collided.
At this critical juncture, George F Kennan, then a diplomat in the American embassy in Moscow, sent to Washington his famous “long telegram” assessing the sources of Soviet conduct.
Published in 1947 by the influential journal Foreign Affairs, and signed as “X” to conceal his identity, Kennan argued that Soviet leaders would forever feel insecure about their political ability to maintain power against forces both within Soviet society and in the outside world.
Their insecurity would lead to an activist—and perhaps aggressive— Soviet foreign policy.
However, the United States had the power to increase the strains under which the Soviet leadership would have to operate, which could lead to a gradual mellowing or final end of Soviet power.
KEY EVENTS IN THE EVOLUTION OF THE U.S.-SOVIET RELATIONSHIP DURING THE COLD WAR, 1947-1991 The evolution of U.S.-Soviet relations during the Cold War displays a series of shifts between periods of conflict and cooperation.
As this figure shows, each superpower’s behavior toward the other tended to be reciprocal, and, for most periods before 1983, confrontation prevailed over cooperation.
Truman Doctrine the declaration by President Harry S Truman that United States foreign policy would use intervention to support peopies who ailied with the United States against communist external subjugation. containment a strategy to prevent a great power rival from using force to alter the balance of power and increase its sphere of influence.
Soon thereafter, President Harry S Truman made Kerman’s assessment the cornerstone of American postwar foreign policy.
Eventually known as the Truman Doctrine, this statement defined the strategy that the United States would pursue for the next forty years, over Kennan’s objections.
This strategy, called containment, sought to prevent the expansion of Soviet influence by encircling the Soviet Union and intimidating it with the threat of a military attack.
They included the communist coup d’ etat in Czechoslovakia in 1948; the Soviet Chapter 3 85 blockade of West Berlin in June of that year; the communist acquisition of power on the Chinese mainland in 1949; the outbreak of the Korean War in 1950; the Chinese invasion of Tibet in 1950; and the on-again, off-again Taiwan Straits crises.
Thereafter, the risks of massive destruction necessitated restraint and changed the terms of the great powers’ rivalry.
Because the Soviet Union remained strategically inferior to the United States, Nikita Khrushchev pursued a policy oi peaceful coexistence with capitalism.
Even so, the Soviet Union at times cautiously sought to increase its power in places where opportunities appeared to exist.
As a result, the period following Stalin’s death saw many Cold War confrontations, with Hungary, Cuba, Egypt, and Berlin becoming the flash points.
This painful learning experience both reduced enthusiasm for waging the Cold War by military means and expanded awareness of the suicidal consequences of a nuclear war.
From Coexistence to Detente, 19G3-1978 The growing threat of mutual destruction, in conjunction with the approaching parity of American and Soviet military capabilities, made coexistence or nonexistence appear to be the only alternatives.
We are both caught up in a vicious and dangerous cycle in which suspicion on one side breeds suspicion on the other and new weapons beget counterweapons.
So let us not be blind to our differences, but let us also direct attention to our common interests and to the means by which those differences can be resolved.
And if we cannot end now our differences, at least we can help make the world safe for diversity.
Kennedy signaled a shift in how the United States hoped thereafter to bargain with its adversary, and the Soviet Union reciprocally expressed its interest in more cooperative relations.
That movement took another step forward following Richard Nixon’s election in 1968.
The Cold War peaceful coexistence Soviet leader Nikita Krushchev’s 1956 doctrine that war between capitalist and communist states is not inevitable and that inter-bloc competition could be peaceful.
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks two sets of agreements reached during the 1970s between the United States and the Soviet Union that established limits on strategic nuclear delivery systems. adviser, Henry A Kissinger, President Nixon initiated a new approach to Soviet relations that in 1969 he officially labeled detente.
The Strategic Arms Limitation Talks , initiated in 1969, sought to restrain the threatening, expensive, and spiraling arms race by limiting the deployment of antiballistic missiles.
Visits, cultural exchanges, trade agreements, and joint technological ventures replaced threats, warnings, and confrontations.
From Renewed Confrontation to Rapprochement, 1979-1991 Despite the careful nurturing of detente, its spirit did not endure.
When the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan in 1979 led to detente’s demise.
In retaliation, he declared America’s willingness to use military force to protect its access to oil supplies from the Persian Gulf, suspended United States grain exports to the Soviet Union, and attempted to organize a worldwide boycott of the 1980 Moscow Olympics.
President Ronald Reagan and his Soviet counterparts exchanged a barrage of confrontational rhetoric.
The arms race resumed feverishly, at the expense of addressing domestic economic problems.
The superpowers also extended the confrontation to new territory, such as Central America, and renewed their public diplomacy efforts to extol the virtues of their respective systems throughout the world.
Reagan pledged United States support for anticommunist insurgents who sought to overthrow Soviet-supported governments in Afghanistan, Angola, and Nicaragua.
In addition, American leaders spoke loosely about the “winability” of a nuclear war through a “prevailing” military strategy that included the threat of a “first use” of nuclear weapons in the event of conventional war.
Relations deteriorated as these moves and countermoves took their toll.
U.S.-SOVIET DETENTE Pictured here, President Richard Nixon, one of the architects of the United States “linkage” strategy a\ong with Secretary of State Henry Kissinger, toasts Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev and fellow dignitaries at their meeting to discuss approaches to relaxing tensions between the superpowers. of superpower relations by fretting that “The situation is very complex, very tense.
Instead, prospects for a more constructive phase improved greatly following Gorbachev’s advocacy of “new thinking” in order to achieve a rapprochement, or reconciliation, of the rival states’ interests.
He sought to settle the Soviet Union’s differences with the capitalist West in order to halt the deterioration of his country’s economy and international position.
Shortly thereafter, Gorbachev embarked on domestic reforms to promote democratization and the transition to a market economy, and proclaimed his desire to end the Cold War contest.
Surprisingly, to many adherents of realism who see great power contests for supremacy as inevitable and strategic surrender or acceptance of defeat as impossible, the Soviets did what they promised; they began to act like an ally instead of an enemy.
The Soviet Union agreed to end its aid to and support “linkage"" strategy a set of assertions claiming that leaders should take into account another country's overall behavior when deciding whether to reach agreement on any one specific issue so as to link cooperation to rewards. rapprochement in diplomacy, a policy seeking to reestablish normal cordial relations between enemies.
Great Power Rivalries and Relations for Cuba, withdrew from Afghanistan, and announced unilateral reductions in military spending.
Gorbachev also agreed to two new disarmament agreements; the START treaty for deep cuts in strategic arsenals and the Conventional Forces in Europe treaty to reduce the Soviet presence in Europe.
In 1989, the Berlin Wall came down, and by 1991 the Cold War had truly ended when the Soviet Union dissolved, accepted capitalist free-market principles, and initiated democratic reforms.
The conclusion of the enduring rivalry between East and West, and with it the end of the seventy-year ideological dispute as well, was a history-transforming event.
The collapse of the Cold War suggested something quite different from the lesson of the twentieth century’s two world wars, which had implied that great power rivalries are necessarily doomed to end in armed conflict.
The Cold War was different; it came to an end peacefully, as a combination of factors contributed at various stages in the Cold War’s evolution to transform a global rivalry into a stable, even cooperative, relationship.
This suggests that it is sometimes possible for great power rivals to reconcile their competitive differences without warfare.
The Consequences of the Cold War Although they were locked in a geostrategic rivalry made worse by antagonistic ideologies and mutual misperceptions, the United States and the Soviet Union avoided a fatal showdown.
In accepting the devolution of their empire, Russian leaders made the most dramatic peaceful retreat from power in history.
The end of the Cold War altered the face of world affairs in profound and diverse ways.
With the dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991, no immediate great power challenger confronted American hegemonic leadership.
However, a host of new security threats emerged, ranging from aspiring nuclear powers such as North Korea and Iran to terrorist networks such as A1 Qaeda.
As the turbulent twentieth century wound down, the simple Cold War world of clearly defined adversaries gave way to a shadowy world of elusive foes.
How history is remembered is important because those memories shape tuture decisions about the management of great power rivairies.
That question remains a puzzie that stiii provokes much controversy, in part because the Coid War’s abrupt end came as such a surprise to most observers.
The transformations ... would not have begun were it not for him.”—James A Baker III, United States Secretary of State “Reagan’s ‘tough’ policy and intensified arms race [did not persuade] communists to ‘give up.’ sheer nonsense.
State Economic Mismanagement Grassroots Movements Ideas and Ideals “Soviet militarism, in harness with communism, destroyed the Soviet economy and thus hastened the self-destruction of the Soviet empire.”—Fred Charles Ikle, United States Deputy Secretary of Defense “The Soviet Union collapsed at the hands of its own people.”— Thomas L Friedman, political journalist “[The many Russian demonstrators] who sought to reject communist rule looked to the American system for inspiration.
By 1987, Gorbachev made it clear that he would not interfere with internal experiments in Soviet bloc countries_Once communism fell in Eastern Europe, the alternative in the Soviet Union became civil war or dissolution.”—Daniel Klenbort, political journalist Evaluate the validity of these contending hypotheses about the causes of the Cold War’s peaceful end.
THE POST-COLD WAR ERA Rapid, unanticipated changes in world politics create uncertainty about the global future.
To pessimists, these sea changes suggested not history’s end but the resumption of contests for hegemonic domination and opposition over contested ideas and ideologies.
Both groups recognized that, in the years immediately following the end of the Cold War, bipolarity was superseded by unipolarity —a hegemonic configuration of power with only one predominant superstate.
As time passed, however, other great powers began to vie for increased influence and visibility in world politics, and there is ongoing debate as to whether multipolarity better describes the emerging distribution of power today.
Of interest is what this might mean for relations among the great powers in meeting the new and difficult challenges in world politics in the post—Cold War era.
America’s Unipolar Moment Unipolarity refers to the concentration of power in a single preponderant state.
With the end of the Cold War, in a historical “moment” in world history , the United States stood alone at the summit of the international hierarchy.
Its military is not just stronger than anybody else’s; it is stronger than everybody else’s, with defense expenditures in 2010 larger than nearly all other countries combined.
Complementing America’s military might is its awesome economic strength.
With less than 5 percent of the global population, the United States accounts for a fifth of global income and two-fifths of the entire world’s combined spending on research and development.
This rare confluence of military, economic, and cultural power gives the United States what might appear to be an extraordinary ability to shape the global future to its will.
This is why America’s unique superpower position atop the global pyramid of power seemingly allows it to act independently without worries about resistance from weaker powers.
Rather than working in concert with others, a strong and dominant hegemon can address international problems without reliance on global organizations and can “go it alone,” even in the face of strident foreign criticism.
Such unilateralism derives from the desire for control over the flexible conduct of a great power’s foreign relations, independent of control by or pressure from other great powers.
Acting alone may appear expedient, but it erodes international support on issues such as combating terrorism, on which the United States is in strong need of cooperation from others.
At the extreme, unilateralism can lead the global leader to play the role of international bully, seeking to run the world.
The status of being a superpower, the single “pole” or center of power, without a real challenger, has fated the United States with heavy and grave responsibilities.
Although the United States may hold an unrivaled position in the world today, in the long run, unipolarity is very unlikely to endure.
Throughout history, hegemons repeatedly have defined their security interests more broadly than other states, only to slip from the pinnacle of power by reaching beyond their grasp.
For fiscal year 2009, Defense Secretary Robert Gates conservatively estimated that those operations would cost $136 billion more.
The trade-offs posed by allocating enormous national resources to military preparedness are reflected in former United States President Dwight Eisenhower’s warning that “the problem in defense spending is to figure out how far you should go without destroying from within what you are trying to defend from without.” imperial overstretch the historic tendency for hegemons to sap their own strength through costly imperial pursuits and military spending that weaken their economies in relation to the economies of their rivals.
From Unipolarity to Multipolarity Yet it is not only the financial cost of expansive military commitments that has some worried about America’s ability to sustain its predominant position in the international system; there are political costs to United States assertiveness as well.
The United States’ predominance in the world has been further eroded by the financial crisis of 2008, which originated in the United States and spread throughout the global financial system.
The rise of the rest is at heart an economic phenomenon, but the transition we are witnessing is not just a matter of dollars and cents.
There is growing recognition that the distribution of power in the international system is shifting to what political scientist Samuel Huntington has described as uni-multipolar.
According to this perspective, while the United States continues to be the only superpower, other states are not easily dominated.
United States involvement remains critical in addressing key international issues, but resolution of transnational problems also requires action by some combination of other major states.
This map pictures the proportionate economic clout of the leading great powers , showing the United States, Europe, and China as today’s leading economic powerhouses.
If some combination of United States imperial overstretch alongside rising economic and political influence by America’s chief challengers transforms the current distribution of global power, many scholars and policy makers predict that a multipolar global system with more than two dominant centers of power will emerge.
Because multipolar systems include several comparatively equal great powers, they are complex.
The interplay of military and economic factors, with great powers competing as equals, is fraught with uncertainty.
Differentiating friend from foe becomes especially difficult when allies in military security may be rivals in trade relationships.
The Future of Great Power Relations There is a deepening sense that shifts in the global distribution of power are underfoot.
Of current debate is the extent to which the United States will continue to hold its position as the principal global leader.
Eeslie Gelb, a renowned foreign policy expert, rejects the idea that we are moving into a period where the United States will be no more significant than the other great powers.
He shares the view that the United States will remain an indispensable leader for years to come; The shape of global power is decidedly pyramidal—with the United States alone at the top, a second tier of major countries (China, Japan, India, Russia, the United Kingdom, France, Germany, and Brazil), and several tiers descending below.
Even the smallest countries now occupy a piece of the international pyramid and have, particularly, enough power to resist the strong.
But RIA-Novosti, Mikhail Klimentyev, Presidential Press Service/AP Photo 96 Great Power Rivalries and Relations FIGURE 3.
Using purchasing power parities to remove differences in countries’ price levels, the Economist forecasts the probable size of the largest economies in 2020.
Others see the world from a somewhat different perspective, perceiving a great transformation marked by the ascendance of other great powers in what has been coined a “post-American” world where many other state and nonstate actors help to define and direct how we respond to global challenges.
Predicting what cleavages and partnerships will develop among the great powers in the future twenty-first-century system will be difficult because it will be hard to foresee what will become the next major axis of conflict.
Competition could emerge from any pair of great powers, but it may be restricted to one sphere of interaction.
Such cross-cutting axes of conflict and cooperation will affect the stability of relations among the great powers.
Throughout history, different types of power structures have existed in the international system, some of which have experienced more stability than others.
When great powers compete in one sphere of activity but cooperate elsewhere, the potential increases that any given issue will divide them in opposing coalitions.
Great power conflict would be frequent, but as long as security and economic disputes did not overlap, they would not necessarily divide the system into two antagonistic camps.
Under these circumstances, the danger of polarization could be managed if the great powers develop international rules and institutions to manage their fluid, mixed-motive relationships.
China’s status as an economic powerhouse has generated fears elsewhere that as China becomes a modern military power, it will seek hegemony and eventually use force to cause trouble abroad.
In Beijing, China’s rise to great power status is seen as helpful to maintaining peace.
Shown here are Chinese People’s Liberation Army soldiers marching with bayoneted rifles while performing official honor guard duties at a welcoming ceremony in Beijing—a show of strength at Tiananmen Square by the Chinese army, and a symbol of China’s potential to project power.
However, this kind of armed rivalry need not develop; cooperation could increase instead.
Quite different and inconsistent political types of great power relations could emerge in the economic and military spheres.
There is the probability of economic rivalry growing as global trade expands the integration of states’ economies in an ever-tightening web of interdependence.
However, the likelihood of security cooperation for many of these same relationships is also high.
It estimates the probability of military cooperation and economic conflict between any pair of the five major powers.
Today the paradox prevails that many pairs of great powers that are the most active trade partners are also the greatest military rivals, but the key question is whether economic cooperation will help to reduce the potential for military competition in the future.
Chapter 3 99 we face in the world today call for a multilateral approach, with all of the great powers working cooperatively to achieve global solutions.
One possibility along these lines is the development of a concert, or a cooperative agreement, among the great powers to manage the global system jointly and to prevent international disputes from escalating to war.
The Concert of Europe, at its apex between 1815 and 1822, is the epitome of previous great power efforts to pursue this path to peace.
The effort to build a great power coalition to wage a war against global terrorism following 9/11 is a more recent example of multilateralism to construct a concert through collective approaches.
Some policy makers also recommend that today’s great powers unite with the lesser powers in constructing a true system of collective security.
The formation of the League of Nations in 1919 is the best example of this multilateral approach to peace under conditions of multipolarity, and despite Russia’s invasion of neighboring Georgia in 2008, some believe Russia’s pledge to cooperate with NATO is representative of a collective security quest to maintain peace through an alliance of powerful countries. concert a cooperative agreement in design and plan among great powers to manage jointly the global system. multilateralism cooperative approaches to managing shared problems through collective and coordinated action.
Challenge and opportunity always come together—under certain conditions one could be transformed into the other. —Hu Jintao, Chinese President Of course, we have no way of knowing what the future holds.
Patterns and practices can change, and it is possible for policy makers to learn from previous mistakes and avoid repeating them.
What is crucial is how the great powers react to the eventual emergence of a new global system where power and responsibility are more widely distributed.
It is clear that the choices the great powers make about war and peace will determine the fate of the world.
In Chapter 4, we turn your attention from the rich, powerful, and commercially active great powers at the center of the world system to the poorer, weaker, and economically dependent states in the Global South and the rising powers in the Global East.
Pictured here with schoolchildren in indonesia, recognition of this is reflected in Hiiiary Ciinton’s decision to make Asia the destination of her first trip as Secretary of State—something that had not been done since Dean Rusk's 1961 visit.
Not only does Southeast Asia want American engagement as a counterbalance to Cbina’s expanding military might, but the United States sees its future shaped by Asia as weil.
E arth is divided into two hemispheres, north and south, at the equator.
This artificial line of demarcation is, of course, meaningless except for use by cartographers to chart distance and location on maps.
However, this divide also represents a popular way of describing the inequalities that separate rich and poor states.
Global South a term now often used instead of “Third World"" to designate the less developed countries located primarily in the Southern Hemisphere.
Life for most people in the Northern Hemisphere is very different from that in the Southern Hemisphere.
The division in power and wealth characterizing the Global North and Global South poses both moral and security problems.
While poverty and inequality have existed throughout recorded history, today the levels have reached extremes.
The poor countries find themselves marginalized, in a subordinate position in the global hierarchy.
THE GLOBAL NORTH, GLOBAL SOUTH Global North countries are wealthy and democratic.
As shall be seen, into this picture should now be placed “the Global East,” countries that have arisen from the former Global South and are now positioned to rival the levels of prosperity that the Global North has enjoyed in the last two decades.
THE COLONIAL ORIGINS OF THE GLOBAL SOUTH’S CURRENT CIRCUMSTANCES Many analysts trace the roots of today’s inequalities among states at the global level of analysis because they believe that the global system has properties built into it that account for the inability of most poor countries to close the gap with the wealthy countries.
Taking their hypothesis that prevailing worldwide conditions are part of a much longer historical pattern, they note that the rules governing international politics today were constructed in the 1648 Peace of Westphalia following Europe’s Thirty Years’ War.
The origins and persistence of the inequalities of states stem in part from the fact that today’s modern global system was initially, and remains, a socially constructed reality by, of, and for the most powerful states.
The powerful did not design a global system for equals; the great powers followed the prescription of realist thought to always seek self-advantage.
Accordingly, they did not build the global system with an eye to preventing the victimization of the weak and the disadvantaged.
So, a good starting place is to begin your inquiry by taking into consideration the legacy of this seedbed for today’s global system.
Many analysts see the history of colonialism, the European conquest of indigenous peoples and the seizure of their territory for exclusively European gain, as the root source of the problem.
They note that almost all of the independent sovereign states in the Southern Hemisphere were at one time colonies.
These analysts argue that today’s inequalities are a product of this past colonization.
During the Cold War, the term Third World was used to distinguish the growing number of newly independent but economically less developed states that, for the most part, shared a colonial past with those states aligned with either the communist East or the capitalistic West.
However, indigenous peoples the native ethnic and cultural inhabitant populations within countries, referred to as the “Fourth World.
Third World a Cold War term to describe the less developed countries of Africa, Asia, the Caribbean, and Latin America.
The so-called Second World, consisting of the Soviet Union and its allies in other communist countries, was distinguished by a communist ideological commitment to planned economic policies rather than reliance on free-market forces.
The terms Second World and Third World carry obsolete Cold War baggage.
Today the term Global North, which refers to what was previously known as the First World, and Global South, which refers to the less developed countries in the Southern Hemisphere, are now commonplace.
The placement of particular states within these categories is not easy.
Although journalists, policy makers, and scholars frequently generalize about the Global South, considerable diversity exists within this grouping of states.
For example, it includes low-income countries such as Ghana and Haiti, where a majority of the population tries to survive through subsistence agriculture; middle-income countries such as Brazil and Malaysia, which produce manufactured goods; and some countries such as Kuwait and Qatar, whose petroleum exports have generated incomes rivaling those of Global North countries.
Included among their ranks is Indonesia, an archipelago of more than seventeen thousand islands scattered throughout an oceanic expanse larger than the United States, and Burundi, a landlocked state slightly smaller than Maryland.
In addition to these geographic and demographic differences, Global South countries also vary politically and culturally, ranging from democratic Costa Rica to autocratic Myanmar.
The emergence of the Global South as an identifiable group of states is a distinctly contemporary phenomenon.
Although most Fatin American countries were independent before World War II, not until then did other countries of the Global South gain that status.
In 1947, Great Britain granted independence to India and Pakistan, after which decolonization —the freeing of colonial peoples from their dependent status—gathered speed.
Since then, a profusion of new sovereign states has joined the global community, nearly all carved from the British, Spanish, Portuguese, Dutch, and French empires built under colonialism four hundred years ago.
Most of the ethnic national conflicts that are now so prevalent have colonial roots, as the imperial powers drew borders within and between their domains with little regard for the national identities of the indigenous peoples.
The First Wave of European Imperialism The first wave of European empire building began in the late fifteenth century, as the Dutch, English, Erench, Portuguese, and Spanish used their naval power to militarily conquer territories for commercial gain.
Scientific innovations made the European explorers’ adventures possible, and merchants followed in their wake, “quickly seizing upon opportunities to increase their MAP 4.
A LEGACY OF MISTRUST Spurred by the quest for labor in the New World (Africans proved much more resistant than the indigenous peoples to the diseases brought over by Europeans), the expanding colonial powers eagerly participated in a transatlantic slave trade from the mid-1500s through the late 1700s.
In turn, Europe’s governments perceived the possibilities for increasing their own power and wealth.
The economic strategy underlying the relationship between colonies and colonizers during this era of “classical imperialism” is known as mercantilism —an economic philosophy advocating government regulation of economic life to increase state power.
European rulers believed that power flowed from the possession of national wealth measured in terms of gold and silver, and that cultivating mining and industry to attain a favorable balance of trade was the best way to become rich.
States wedded to realist justifications of the competitive drive for global power saw the imperial conquest of foreign territory by war as a natural by product of active government management of the economy.
By the end of the eighteenth century, the European powers had spread themselves, although thinly, throughout virtually the entire world.
Britain’s thirteen North American colonies declared their independence in 1776, and most of Spain’s possessions in South America won their freedom in the early nineteenth century.
As Europe’s colonial empires dissolved, belief in the mercantilist philosophy also waned.
The Wealth of Nations, national wealth grew not through the accumulation of precious metals but rather from the capital and goods they could buy.
Smith’s ideas about the benefits of the “invisible hand” of the unregulated marketplace laid much of the intellectual foundation for classical liberal economic theory.
Henceforth, European powers continued to seek colonies, but the rationale for their imperial policies began to change.
Men have struggled for power over their fellow men in order that they might win the joys of Earth at the expense of others, and might shift the burdens of life from their own shoulders upon those of others. —William Graham Summer, American realist economic-sociologist The Second Wave of European Imperialism From the 1870s until the outbreak of World War I, a second wave of imperialism washed over the world as Europe, joined later by the United States and Japan, aggressively colonized new territories.
As illustrated in Map 4.3, in the last twenty years of the nineteenth century Africa fell under the control of seven European powers (Belgium, Britain, France, Germany, Italy, Portugal, and Spain), and in all of the Far East and the Pacific, only China, Japan, and Siam were not conquered.
However, the foreign great powers carved China into separate zones of commerce, which they each individually controlled and exploited for profit.
Elsewhere, the United States expanded across its continent, acquired Puerto Rico and the Philippines in the 1898 Spanish-American War, extended its colonial reach westward to Hawaii, leased the Panama Canal Zone “in perpetuity” from the new state of Panama , and exercised considerable control over several Caribbean islands, notably Cuba.
As British imperialists were proud to proclaim, it was an empire on which the sun never set.
With the Industrial Revolution, capitalism grew—emphasizing the free market, private ownership of the means of production, and the accumulation of wealth.
Radical theorists following Karl Marx and Vladimir Lenin, who called themselves adherents of communism, saw imperialism’s aggressive competition as caused by capitalists’ need for profitable overseas outlets for their surplus capital.
Sharing a critical perspective of the capitalist world communism the radical ideology maintaining that if society is organized so that every person produces according to his or her ability and consumes according to his or her needs, a community without class distinctions will emerge, sovereign states will no longer be needed, and imperial wars of colonial conquest will vanish from history.
Guiana sierra Leone A □ Belgian possessions □ British possessions □ French possessions □ German possessions □ Dutch possessions □ Italian possessions 1 1 Portuguese possessions □ Spanish possessions ■ United States possessions 1 1 Japanese possessions Portug^P^ .;jgr0^X*^ttoman Moroocoy 'ersia(Afa Rio de Oiw French West Africa Gambia Gold Port.
Union of ^th AMca Japan Pacific Ocean ich I COlndo(Phiiippine Atiantic indian Mocambique Australia New Zeaiand ; Antarctica MAP 4.
GLOBAL IMPERIALISM 1914 The ten major imperial powers competed for colonies throughout the globe in the presentday Global South, and on tbe eve of World War I, their combined territories covered much of the world. economy, world-system theory saw a world division of labor where the “core” areas exploit the “periphery,” and colonization provided a means for imperial control over foreign lands.
Liberal economists, by contrast, regarded the new imperialism not as a product of capitalism but, rather, as a response to certain maladjustments that, given the proper will, could be corrected.
Another explanation emphasizes purely political factors as the source of the second wave of imperialism.
Imperialism, jockeying for power and prestige between competitive empires had always characterized the great powers’ behavior in the European balance-of-power system.
By the 1800s, Britain emerged from Europe’s perpetual conflict as the world’s leading power.
Germany emerged as a powerful industrial state, as did the United States.
Understandably, Britain tried to protect its privileged global position in the face of growing competition from the newly emerging core states.
Its efforts to maintain the status quo help to explain the second wave of imperial expansion, especially in Africa, where partition served the imperial powers at the expense of local populations.
Self-Determination and Decolonization in the Twentieth Century The climate of opinion turned decidedly against imperialism when the 1919 Versailles peace settlement that ended World War I embraced liberalism —the body of theoretical thought that stresses the importance of ideas, ideals, and institutions to generate progress, prosperity, and peace.
Self-determination advocated that indigenous nationalities should have the moral right to decide which authority would rule them.
However, disappointingly little has been done thus far to alleviate poverty and repression, and despite a purge of eleven government ministers, it is expected that under Raul's leadership the radical perspective of Marxist-Leninism will persist and there will be “continued one-party rule and a state-run economy that will be tweaked, rather than radically reformed” Wilson and other liberal theorists reasoned that freedom would lead to the creation of states and governments that were content with their territorial boundaries and therefore less inclined to make war.
Other territorial adjustments also were made in Europe, but the proposition that self-determination should be extended to Europe’s overseas empires did not receive serious support. realpolitik the theoretical outlook prescribing that countries shouid increase their power and weaith in order to compete with and dominate other countries.
Still, the colonial territories of the powers defeated in World War I were not simply parceled out among the victorious allies, as had typically happened in the past.
Instead, the territories controlled by Germany and the Ottoman Empire were transferred under Eeague of Nations auspices to countries that would govern them as “mandates” until their eventual self-determination the iiberai doctrine that people should be able to determine the government that will rule them.
Many of these territorial decisions gave rise to subsequent conflicts such as in the Middle East and Africa.
For example, the League of Nations called for the eventual creation of a Jewish national homeland in Palestine and arranged for the transfer of control over Southwest Africa to what would become the white minority regime of South Africa.
This set an important precedent after World War II, when the defeated powers’ territories placed under the United Nations trusteeship system were not absorbed by others but were promised eventual selfrule.
The decolonization process accelerated in 1947, when the British consented to the independence of India and Pakistan.
War eventually erupted between these newly independent states as each sought to gain control over disputed territory in Kashmir in 1965, in 1971, and again as the nuclear-armed states clashed in 2002.
Violence also broke out in Vietnam and Algeria in the 1950s and early 1960s when the French sought to regain control over their preWorld War II colonial territories.
Similarly, bloodshed followed closely on the heels of independence in the Congo when the Belgians granted their African colony independence in 1960, and it dogged the unsuccessful efforts of Portugal to battle the winds of decolonization that swept over Africa as the 1960s wore on.
Despite these political convulsions, decolonization for the most part was not only extraordinarily rapid but also remarkably peaceful.
This may be explained by the fact that World War II sapped the economic and military vitality of many of the colonial powers.
In a world increasingly NEW STATES After the decolonization process runs its compiete course, more new countries can be expected because many existing states are fragmenting.
When World War I broke out, only sixty-two independent countries existed; now there are more than two hundred.
Pictured here is the “micro” state of Nauru, which has a president, a supreme court, and the fuii apparatus of government to ruie its tiny popuiation.
Haif the giobe’s countries have populations less than that of the United States state of Massachusetts.
Many Global South countries feared, however, that they would become entrapped in the Cold War and that their right to self-determination would be compromised, so they adopted foreign policies based on nonalignment.
The strategy energized both the United States and the Soviet Union to renew their efforts to attract the uncommitted Global South countries to their own network of allies, often offering economic and military aid as an inducement.
Some states aligned themselves with either the United States or the Soviet Union; others avoided taking sides in the Cold War.
The latter approach gathered momentum in 1955, when twenty-nine nonaligned states from Asia and Africa met in Bandung, Indonesia, to construct a strategy to combat colonialism.
The membership of this coalition would later grow to more than one hundred countries.
The Cold War’s end eroded the bargaining leverage nonalignment had provided the Global South.
But the passion of Global South leaders to eradicate global inequities lives on, as can be seen in the 2003 Non-Aligned Kuala Lumpur Summit Declaration, which raised questions about the inability of many Global South countries to advance.
Thus, the Global South worries that in the future, even newer forms of great power imperialism might continue to destroy any Global South hopes for progress.
Nonaligned Movement a group of more than one hundred newly independent, mostly less developed, states that joined together as a group of neutrals to avoid entanglement with the superpowers’ competing alliances in the Cold War and to advance the Global South’s primary interests in economic cooperation and growth.
WORLDS APART The Global South is sometimes described today as a “zone of turmoil” or an “axis of upheaval,” in large measure because, in contrast with the peaceful and democratic Global North, most of the people in the Global South face chronic poverty amidst war, tyranny, and anarchy.
Democracy has spread rapidly and widely since the 1980s, becoming the preferred mode of governance throughout much of the Global South as a means of promoting both economic development and peace.
Because the Global North’s history suggests that “economic and technological development bring a coherent set of social, cultural, and political changes . . . and they also bring growing mass demands for democratic institutions and for more responsive behavior on the part of elites” (Inglehart and Welzel 2009, 39), the continuing expansion of Global South market economies under capitalism appears likely to hasten democratization.
Even so, the continued enlargement of the liberal democratic community is not guaranteed, with some seeing democracy as failing even while elections become more commonplace.
As Oxford economist Paul Collier points out In the average election held among the bottom billion poorest of the world’s population, despite the fact that voters usually have many grounds for complaint, the incumbent “wins” a healthy 74 percent of the vote.
In elections with particularly weak restraints, it is an even healthier 88 percent.
Somehow or other, incumbents in these societies are very good at winning elections.
Furthermore, many Global South countries lack well-developed domestic market economies based on entrepreneurship and private enterprise.
The fact that 84 percent of the world’s population is poor is both a reflection and cause of these unequally distributed resources.
Numbers paint pictures and construct images, and the data on the division between the Global North and Global South point to brutal disparities and inequalities.
When we compare the differences on some key indicators differentiating lowand middle-income countries from high-income countries (at the peak of development), we discover huge gaps . developed countries a category used by the World Bank (WDI 2009) to identify Giobal North countries, with a GNI per capita of $11,456 or more annuaily.
As this information shows, the situation is much more favorable—and the quality of life is relatively advantageous—in the developed countries of the Global North than it is in the Southern Hemisphere, where nearly all the Global South countries are located.
Reproduced by permission. least developed of the less developed countries the most impoverished countries in the Global South.
This picture darkens even more when the focus shifts to the plight of the poorest in the low-income developing countries.
Sometimes described as the “Third World’s Third World,” these countries are the very poorest, with little economic growth and rapid population growth that is increasingly straining their overtaxed society and environment.
These countries are not emerging or reemerging to break the chains of their destitution; they are falling behind the other Global South countries.
A daunting scale of misery and marginalization is thus evident across the Global South, from which only a fraction of its countries have begun to escape.
For most Global South countries, the future is bleak, and the opportunities and choices most basic to freedom from fear and poverty are unavailable.
The aggregate pattern underlying global trends in the last twenty years shows that more than sixty countries today are worse off than they were and are falling ever further behind the levels achieved by the countries in the Global North.
When we consider that nearly all the population growth in the twenty-first century will occur in the Global South, the poorest countries cut off from circulation in the globalized marketplace, it is hard to imagine how the gap can close and how the soil of poverty can be prevented from producing terrorism and civil war.
The diversity evident in the Global South invites the conclusion that underdevelopment is explained by a combination of factors.
Some theorists explain the underdevelopment of most developing economies by looking primarily at internal causes within states.
Other theorists focus on international causes such as the position of developing countries in the global political economy.
Classical Economic Development Theory’s Interpretation Liberal economic development theories of modernization first emerged in the early post-World War II era.
They argued that major barriers to development were posed by the Global South countries’ own internal characteristics.
To overcome these barriers, most classical theorists recommended that the wealthy countries supply various “missing components” of development, such as investment capital through foreign aid or private foreign direct investment.
Once sufficient capital was accumulated to promote economic growth, these liberal theorists predicted that its benefits would eventually “trickle down” to broad segments of society.
Everyone, not just a privileged few, would begin to enjoy rising affluence.
He predicted that traditional societies beginning the path to development would inevitably pass through various stages by means of the free market and would eventually “take off” to become similar to the mass-consumption societies of the capitalist Global North.
Even though the rich are likely to get richer, it was argued, as incomes in the world as a whole grow, the odds increase that a preindustrialized economy will grow faster and eventually reduce the gap between it and richer countries.
The Global South was instead persuaded by the rival theory that attributed their lack of development to the international links between developing countries and the Global North’s leadership in the global political economy. import-substitution industrialization a strategy for economic development that centers on providing investors at home incentives to produce goods so that previously imported products from abroad will decline. export-led industrialization a growth strategy that concentrates on developing domestic export industries capable of competing in overseas markets.
Dependency Theory’s Interpretation whereas classical theory attributes the causes of most developing countries’ underdevelopment to internal conditions within states, dependency theory emphasizes international factors in general and the Global South’s dependence on the dominant great powers in particular.
As noted in Chapter 2, dependency theory builds on Vladimir Lenin’s radical critique of imperialism, but it goes beyond it to account for changes that have occurred in recent decades.
Its central proposition is that the structure of the capitalist world economy is based on a division of labor between a dominant core and a subordinate periphery.
As a result of colonialism, the Global South countries that make up the periphery have been forced into an economic role whereby they export raw materials and import finished goods.
Whereas classical liberal theorists submit that specialization in production according to comparative advantage will increase income in an unfettered market and therein help close the gap between the world’s haves and have-nots, dependency theorists maintain that global inequalities cannot be reduced so long as developing countries continue to specialize in producing primary products for which there are often numerous competing suppliers and limited demand.
Breaking out of their dependent status and pursuing their own industrial development remains the greatest foreign policy priority for countries in the Global South.
To this end, some countries (particularly those in Latin America) have pursued development through an import-substitution industrialization strategy designed to encourage domestic entrepreneurs to manufacture products traditionally imported from abroad.
Governments became heavily involved in managing their economies and, in some cases, became the owners and operators of industry.
Import-substitution industrialization eventually fell from favor, in part because manufacturers often found that they still had to rely on Global North technology to produce goods for their domestic markets.
The preference now is for export-led industrialization, based on the realization that “what had enriched the rich was not their insulation from imports (rich countries do.
Dependency theorists also argue that countries in the Global South are vulnerable to cultural penetration by multinational corporations and other outside forces, which saturate them with values alien to their societies.
Once such penetration has occurred, the inherently unequal exchanges that bind the exploiters and the exploited are sustained by elites within the penetrated societies, who sacrifice their country’s welfare for personal gain.
The argument that a privileged few benefit from dependency at the expense of their societies underscores the dual nature of many developing countries.
Dualism refers to the existence of two separate economic and social sectors operating side by side.
Dual societies typically have a rural, impoverished, and neglected sector operating alongside an urban, developing, or advanced sector—but with little interaction between the two.
MNCs contribute to dualism by favoring a minority of well-compensated employees over the rest that increases gaps in pay and by widening differences between rural and urban economic opportunities.
Although dependency theory has great appeal within the Global South, it cannot easily explain the rapid economic development of what many people refer to as the newly industrialized countries in the Global East.
Neither does it do a good job of explaining the lack of sustained development of countries such as Cuba, Myanmar, and North Korea that focused their economic growth efforts inwardly and have had little involvement in global trade.
THE GLOBAL SOUTH’S PROSPECTS IN A WORLD OF GREAT POWERS The vast political, economic, and social differences separating the Global North and the Global South suggest that the remaining countries in the Global South are increasingly vulnerable, insecure, and defenseless, and that these conditions are products of both internal and international factors.
Global East the rapidly growing economies ot East and South Asia that have made those countries competitors with the traditionally dominant countries of the Global North.
During its heyday in the 1960s, classical theory prescribed countries to emulate the path of industrial democracies in order to develop.
However, it was apparent by the 1970s that such efforts had not resulted in widespread prosperity or democracy.
For example, many countries in Latin America, such as Chile, Argentina, and Brazil, suffered from authoritarian rule and abject poverty.
Dependency theory grew in popularity at this time, with its focus on the global capitalist system—rather than the internal problems of the Global South countries—as the reason for persistent underdevelopment.
Yet the relevance of this theoretical explanation came to be questioned as well, particularly in light of the success of the Global East countries that experienced meaningful growth by participating in the global market and pursuing export-oriented strategies.
As both perspectives fell out of vogue, critics suggested that modernization theory was dead.
However, since the end of the Cold War, a nuanced version of modernization theory has emerged and is gaining credibility.
Like earlier incarnations of modernization theory, this more recent version similarly sees economic development as eliciting important and predictable changes in politics, culture, and society.
As constructivists would argue, a society’s beliefs, values, and traditions shape its larger worldview and its engagement with the forces ot modernization.
The success of industrialization in the Global East, and the role of countries other than the United States as models for development, challenges earlier ethnocentric assumptions of modernization theory.
While economic development tends to produce certain societal changes linked to modernization, increases in per capita GDP do not automatically result in democracy, as seen in the case of Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates.
There are multiple inflection points, as individual phases of modernization tend to be associated with particular changes in society; industrialization tends to be linked to bureaucratization, hierarchy, and secularization while post-industrialization tends to emphasize individual autonomy and selfexpression values.
This debate over the sources ot modernization provides us ideas about why some countries develop to a greater extent than others.
It also illustrates a feedback loop between real-world events and trends and the construction and testing ot theory.
Your choices would undoubtedly benefit by considering the different approaches Global South countries have taken to pursue their objectives, particularly in their relationships with the Global North.
Fueling Growth through Oil and Technology Consider one category of Global South states whose relative wealth contrasts sharply with the LLDCs’ poverty; those Global South states that have fossil fuels to consume and export.
The sixteen developing-country exporters of oil and other fuels, and especially the twelve members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries , have escaped the EEDCs’ grim fate.
Notably, OPEC members Kuwait, Qatar, and the Elnited Arab Emirates have risen to the high-income group’s standards of living, rivaling or exceeding some Global North countries.
Differences in technological capabilities also separate the Global North and Global South.
Typically, Global South countries have been unable to evolve an indigenous technology appropriate to their own resources and have been dependent on powerful Global North multinational corporations to transfer technical know-how.
This means that research and development expenditures are directed toward solutions of the Global North’s problems, with technological advances seldom meeting the needs of the Global South.
And in the information age, technology has not been multinational corporations business enterprises headquartered in one state that invest and operate extensively in many other states.
The Global East EMERGING MARKET GIANTS Launched in March 2009, the Tata Nano is the worid’s cheapest car and is the innovation of an emerging muitinationai in Mumbai, india.
With iow-cost production modeis based on inexpensive iocal iahor and growing domestic markets, companies in the Globai South are competing with the richcountry muitinationais in the Glohai North.
Another group of countries that inspires hope and awe is the “middle-income” and rapidly rising newly industrialized countries in East and Southern Asia.
This new contingent of countries, called “the Global East,” has semiperiphery to world-system theorists, countries midway between the rich “core,” or center, and the poor “periphery"" In the global hlerarcy, at which foreign investments are targeted when labor wages and production costs become too high in the prosperous core regions.
They are experiencing even greater success than the oil-exporting countries.
Their achievement lies in moving beyond the export of simple unfinished goods such as crude oil to the export of manufactured goods and to providing service and expertise in the digital revolution of the information age.
Today, the NICs are among the largest exporters of manufactured goods and are leaders in the information processing industry.
They have climbed from the periphery into the semiperiphery and beyond to rival the Global North.
South Korea, Singapore, Taiwan, and Hong Kong engineered export-led growth through aggressively so-called neomercantilist policies aimed at protecting infant industries from foreign competition and subsidizing their manufacturers.
Following the lead paved by Japan in developing new products for export, China, India, Malaysia, and Thailand next followed this route toward joining the ranks of the wealthiest states.
Their growth has been energized by the outsourcing of jobs from the labor-costly Global North to the skilled Asian workers capable of performing the same labor at less expense to the multinational corporation MNCs headquartered in the Global North.
Rising oil prices have created a boom that is transforming this Arab kingdom into a zone of prosperity, as exemplified by the construction of the world’s largest shopping mall with the world’s largest aquarium and a five-story underwater hotel.
Not to be outdone, Saudi and Kuwaiti investors have developed a huge financial center in war-torn but oil-rich Sudan, Africa’s largest country.
Pictured are Sudanese crossing the bridge to witness the inauguration ceremony for the financial center on March 21,2009. also China, India, Malaysia, and Thailand.
Both China and India are already commercial giants and have set their sights on being the globe’s next great powers. purchasing power parity an index that calculates the true rate of exchange among currencies when parity—when what can be purchased is the same—is achieved; the index determines what can be bought with a unit of each currency.
The success of the NICs in elevating themselves above the rest of the Global South has inspired faith in the neoclassical theorists’ export-led strategies and now encourages other Global South countries to copy them by removing still other obstacles standing in the way of economic growth, such as speeding up transitions toward fuller economic liberalization and democratic governance.
Military Security Global South countries must face the fateful question of whether they dare to call for help from the great powers and dominating international organizations when violence, terrorism, and anarchy prevail.
On top of this concern is another; the threat of great power indifference or inability to agree about when, where, why, and how they should collectively become involved within Global South borders where violence, ethnic cleansing, and terrorism occur.
Faced with seemingly endless conflict at home or abroad, and a desire to address military insecurity on their own terms, it is not surprising that the Global South countries have joined the rest of the world’s quest to acquire modern weapons of war—including nuclear weapons, as in the cases of China, India, North Korea, and Pakistan.
In the Global South, military spending typically exceeds expenditures on health and education; impoverished states facing ethnic, religious, or tribal strife at home are quite prepared to sacrifice expenditures for economic development in order to acquire weapons.
Weak Global South governments, paralyzed by fears of separatist revolts, have invested increased proportions of their country’s modest national budgets in arms rather than seek to reduce poverty by reallocating scarce revenues from the military to social and economic development.
Thus, in responding to a world of powers, the Global South appears to be increasing its dependence for arms purchases on the very same rich states whose military and economic domination they historically have most feared and resented.
Reform of the Economic Order Although some Global South countries benefit from global economic integration and prosper, others remain immune to the alleged benefits of globalization and are especially vulnerable to recessions in the global economy.
How to cope with dominance and dependence thus remains a key Global South concern.
The emerging Global South countries were born into a politicaleconomic order with rules they had no voice in creating.
In order to gain control over their economic futures, they began coordinating their efforts within the United Nations, where their growing numbers and voting power gave them greater influence than they could otherwise command.
UNCTAD later became a permanent UN organization through which the Global South would express its interests concerning development issues.
Motivated by the oil-exporting countries’ rising bargaining power, the Global South sought to compel the Global North to abandon practices perceived as perpetuating their dependence.
Not surprisingly, the Global North rebuffed many of the South’s proposals, although some of the issues that were raised remain on the global agenda.
At the 2003 World Trade Organization meeting in Cancun, Mexico, for example, the poor countries united to demand major concessions from the wealthy countries, especially with regard to foreign subsidies.
In 2008 another step was taken when “Banco del Sur” was launched by founding members Brazil and Argentina to compete directly with the World Bank and thereby fund big infrastructure projects through the region’s new oil wealth to go around Global North interference.
Group of 77 the coalition of Third Worid countries that sponsored the 1963 Joint Declaration of Developing Countries calling for reform to allow greater equality in North-South trade.
New International Economic Order the 1974 UN policy resolution that called for a North-South dialogue to open the way for the less developed countries of the Global South to participate more fully in the making of international economic policy.
Regional Trade Regimes With the failure of reform envisioned by the NIEO, the integration of Global South countries into the globalization process will occur according to the rules dictated by the Global North.
To promote growth through regional economic agreements, in the 1990s the global economy began to subdivide into three “trade blocs”—one in Europe, with the European Union as its hub; a second in the Americas, with the United States at the center; and a third in the Global East, with Japan and China dominant.
The Central America-Dominican Republic Eree Trade Agreement aims to emulate NAETA and create a free-trade zone that includes the United States, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras, and Costa Rica.
Mercosur, commonly referred to as the “Common Market of the South,” is the largest trading bloc in South America and aims for full economic integration of the region.
Full members include Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay, and Venezuela, with Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Chile holding associate membership status.
In addition, the members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations , first established in 1967 by Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand and now including Vietnam, agreed to set up a free-trade area.
The Southern African Development Community is the largest of twelve regional free-trade areas in the region.
In the past, political will and shared visions have proven to be indispensable elements in successful regional trade regimes that set rules for members’ collaboration.
Economic complementarity is another essential component, as the goal is to stimulate greater trade among the members of the free-trade area, not simply between it and other regions.
Foreign Aid and Remittances One approach for closing the gap between the Global South and the Global North is through the distribution of foreign assistance.
Some foreign aid consists of outright grants of money, some of loans at concessional rates, and some of shared technical expertise.
However, security objectives traditionally have figured prominently as motives of donors’ allocations of both economic aid and military assistance, and still do.
For example, the United States continues to target Israel and Egypt as major recipients to symbolize friendship, maintain a balance of power, and tilt the scales toward peace in the Middle East.
Also, security was the primary motive behind the doubling of the United States foreign assistance budget following 9/11 to provide funds for allies’ use in the global war on terrorism.
The assumption that development will support other goals, such as fostering solidarity among allies and promoting commercial advantage, free markets, or democratization, still underpins most donors’ assistance programs.
The general trend for the past fifteen years in foreign aid allocations has been toward slowly rising increases.
This represented the largest increase in United States development assistance since the Marshall Plan in 1948.
Critics particularly resent what they perceive to be an entrenched state of mind in many Global South cultures that stands in the way of development, which—while bemoaning poverty—at the same time condemns the profit motive, competition, and consumerism at the heart of capitalism’s spirit.
Donors are especially resentful that the countries seeking aid do not value the core Western values of hard work, economic competition, and entrepreneurial creativity believed to be crucial for progress and prosperity.
Donors also persist in their habit of making development assistance “tied” to the donors for their benefit, such as requiring purchases from the donors, even though the World Bank estimates this practice reduces the value of aid by 15 to 30 percent, decreases its efficiency, and violates the same free-market principles that the Global North promotes.
Recently, however, many Global South leaders have joined Global North critics of foreign aid, interpreting it as an instrument of neocolonialism and neoimperialism and resenting the conditionality criteria for receiving aid imposed by the International Monetary Fund and other multilateral institutions.
BROKEN PROMISES With UN Resolution 2626, the weaithy countries of the Global North agreed in 1970 to allocate 7 percent of their GNP as aid for the long-term development of the poorer countries of the Global South.
Much more money—more than double the global total in foreign aid—is primarily funneled into Global South economies through the remittances that migrant laborers working in the Global North earn each paycheck and faithfully send home to their families.
Global remittances rose steadily each year since the 1970s, and reached $305 billion in 2008 from only $170 billion in 2002.
SENDING MONEY BACK HOME The billions of dollars that migrant workers send home each year is vital to developing countries.
For example, in Tajikistan, remittances amount to almost 36 percent of the gross domestic product.
As the global economy continues to struggle at the start of 2010, the stream of revenue may slow.
This concerns governments such as Mexico’s, where fewer Latin American immigrants in the United States are sending money back home.
Trade and Foreign Direct Investment The developing countries have long pleaded for “trade, not aid” to improve their global position, turning to the NIC’s and the Global East experience to support the view that access to the Global North’s markets is critical to Global South economic growth.
Indeed, many countries of the Global South have benefited from a “virtuous cycle” (Blanton and Blanton 2008), wherein trade leads to improved domestic conditions that in turn facilitate trade.
Trade may be preferred to aid, but political barriers often interfere with free trade.
Another tactic sitting center stage in the Global South’s strategies for escaping destitution and stagnant economic growth has been to encourage MNCs to funnel an increasing share of their foreign direct investment into its countries, thereby increasing its export earnings to gain a greater share of global trade.
This strategy for economic growth has always been the target of critics who question whether the investment of capital by MNCs into local or domestic business ventures is really a financial remedy.
The strategy has always been controversial, because there are many hidden costs, or externalities, associated with permitting corporations controlled from abroad to set up business within the host state for the purpose of making a profit.
The primary danger with this strategy is the potential for foreign investments to lead to foreign control and the erosion of sovereign governments’ capacities to regulate the economy within their borders.
An additional danger is the probability that the multinational foreign investors will not invest their profits locally but channel them abroad for new investments or disburse them as dividends for their wealthy Global North shareholders.
However, despite the risks, many developing countries have relaxed restrictions in order to attract foreign investors, with less emphasis placed on liberalizing investment restrictions and encouraging open domestic economic competition than on offering tax and cash enticements and opportunities for joint ventures.
Net private-capitai fiows have increasingiy poured into the Giobai South, reaching a record $1.03 trillion in 2007, Developing countries in East and Centrai Asia, as weil as Europe, have seen an investment contribution to overail growth of roughly 4 percentage points, which has far surpassed the contributions from trade.
It has paved the way for emerging markets to expand their rates of economic development—despite the resistance of local industries that are threatened by the competition and the critics who complain about the income inequalities that the investments are causing.
Debt Management The prospects for either foreign aid, trade, or foreign direct investments to contribute to the future development of, and relief of poverty in, the Global South will depend on a number of other factors.
Foremost is the extent to which the staggering level of debt facing many Global South countries can be managed.
This is unsustainable and threatens their economic health and future growth.
In an effort to provide debt relief within a framework of poverty reduction, the joint IMF-World Bank “Initiative for Heavily Indebted Poor Countries” coordinated efforts through multilateral organizations and governments to reduce the severe external debt of HIPCs to a level that they could sustain.
To provide even further debt relief, a group of Global North great powers proposed the “Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative” in 2005.
Under this program, four multilateral lending institutions—the International Development Association , International Monetary Fund , African Development Fund , and Inter-American Development Bank —provide 100% debt relief on eligible debts owed to them by HIPCs once thoses countries have completed key structural reforms as required by the “HIPC Initiative” process and have already received the initial HIPC Initiative assistance.
MNCs can either promote or inhibit development, depending on how they channel investments and, when they do, how they operate in the host country.
Despite these concerns about MNCs as powerful, potentially neocolonial, nonstate actors that may compromise national sovereignty and undermine local prosperity, many Global South countries have overcome their fears and now welcome global companies to stimulate rapid growth despite the many potential risks and costs that MNC penetrations often incur.
MNCs continue to be alternately praised and condemned, depending on how their performance is viewed.
The following “balance sheet” summarizes the major arguments for and against MNCs.
Using this summary of contending interpretations, you can easily see why the role and impact of MNCs is so controversial.
On the one hand, China and Singapore have enjoyed rapid economic growth without undertaking significant political liberalization.
Indeed, Joseph Stiglitz, a Nobel Laureate in economics and former chief economist of the World Bank, complains that the policies produce disappointing results because they are anchored in a freemarket dogma that ignores the unique sociocultural contexts of the countries where they are applied.
Given the diversity of the Global South, development strategies for the future should avoid grandiose claims of universality and one-size-flts-all policies.
What works in one country may be impractical or undesirable in another.
The twenty-first century is going to be about more than great power politics. —Bill Clinton, United States President THE GLOBAL SOUTH’S FUTURE It is useful to remember the historical trends underlying the emergence of the Global South as an actor on the global stage.
Those states that came to regard themselves as its members share important characteristics.
Most were colonized by people of another race, experienced varying degrees of poverty and hunger, and felt powerless in a world system dominated by the affluent countries that once controlled them and perhaps still do.
Considerable change occurred among the newly emergent states as post-World War II decolonization took place, but much also remained the same.
The relationships between the world’s great and small powers will no doubt continue to change—exactly how remains uncertain.
However, the future of Global South development is certain to depend in the near term on the activities of the Global North.
A turn inward toward isolationist foreign policies in the Global North could lead to a posture of “benign neglect” of the Global South.
International Organizations and Transnational Actors Relations between the Global South and the Global North remain dominated by the great powers.
That domination is funneled in part through the powerful international organizations, such as the United Nations and the World Bank, that the great powers have created.
At the same time, intergovernmental organizations provide an opportunity for the small powers of the Global South to exert influence on world politics.
To understand world politics and the roots of changes in international affairs, it is important to inspect the impact of these influential IGOs as actors in the global arena.
To complete the picture, you also need to inspect the thousands of nongovernmental organizations , whose presence and pressure as nonstate actors are also transforming international politics, for both the Global North and the Global South.
The answer for centuries has been reliance primarily on sovereign territorial states.
As realism posits, countries remain the most influential actors on the world stage.
It is states’ foreign policy decisions and interactions that, more than any other factor, give rise to trends and transformations in world politics.
Today, however, as liberal theory observes, the extraordinary power of states over global destiny is eroding as our world becomes increasingly complex and interdependent, and nonstate actors continue to multiply and seek greater influence in the global community.
A critical question to consider, then, is if the predicted decline of states’ sovereign authority and independence will ultimately prove to be a cure for global problems or a curse, by reducing states’ ability to rely on self-help measures to address problems unilaterally as each state seeks solutions that best serve its own self-interests. responsible sovereignty a principle that requires states to protect not only their own people but to cooperate across borders to protect global resources and address transnational threats.
This chapter provides information and insight that can help you evaluate this question.
There have arisen impressive numbers of nonstate actors on the world stage that are increasingly flexing their political muscle in efforts to engineer adaptive global changes.
This chapter will explore two broad types of nonstate actors—international organizations that carry out independent foreign policies as transnational actors and NGOs made up of individual people who band together in coalitions of private citizens to exercise international influence.
To introduce this, we begin with a look at the general characteristics of both types of nonstate actors.
NONSTATE ACTORS IN WORLD POLITICS what distinguishes the two principal types of nonstate actors is that intergovernmental organizations are international organizations whose members are states, whereas nongovernmental organizations are associations comprised of members who are private individuals and groups.
Intergovernmental Organizations IGOs are purposely created by states to solve shared problems.
This gives IGOs whatever authority they possess for the purposes states assign them, and IGOs are generally regarded as more important than NGOs.
In part, this is because IGOs are defined by the fact that their members are the governments of states and also by the permanence of their institutions.
IGOs meet at regular intervals, and they have established rules for making decisions and a permanent secretariat or headquarters staff.
Only thirty-three IGOs qualify as “intercontinental organizations” and only thirty-four are, like the UN, “universal membership” IGOs.
The rest, accounting for more than 72 percent of the total, are limited in their scope and confined to particular regions.
The variation among the organizations in each subcategory is great, particularly with single-purpose, limited-membership IGOs.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization , for example, is primarily a military alliance, whereas others, such as the Organization of American States , promote both economic development and democratic reforms.
Still, most IGOs concentrate their activities on specific economic or social issues of special concern to them, such as the management of trade or transportation.
TRENDS IN THE NUMBER OF IGOs, NGOs, AND STATES SINCE 1900 Since 1900 the number of independent states has increased dramaticaiiy, and that growth acceierated especialiy after Worid War II when the decolonization movement began.
But note that the number of NGOs has grown even more rapidly in this period, declining only since the late 1980s when a number of formerly independent IGOs began to merge with one another.
The number of NGOs has grown even more rapidly, with almost 8,000 NGOs in existence worldwide.
They support one another to work, for example, on issues as varied as trade, defense, disarmament, economic development, agriculture, health, culture, human rights, the arts, illegal drugs, tourism, labor, gender inequality, education, debt, the environment, crime, humanitarian aid, civilian crisis relief, telecommunications, science, globalization, immigration, and refugees.
Nongovernmental Organizations The term NGO can be applied to all nonstate and nonprofit organizations that operate as intermediaries to build transnational bridges between those with resources and a targeted group in order to address global problems.
Thus, it is also customary to think of NGOs as intersocietal organizations that contribute to negotiations between and among states in the hope of reaching agreements for global governance on nearly every issue of international public policy.
For example, some are small with membership in the hundreds; others are huge, with the biggest being Amnesty International, which in 2009 included 2. million members spread across one hundred fifty countries and regions.
Functionally, NGOs span virtually every facet of political, social, and economic activity in an increasingly borderless globalized world, ranging from earth sciences to ethnic unity, health care, language, history, culture, education, theology, law, ethics, security, and defense.
The long list of acronyms that has accumulated around NGOs can be used to illustrate this.
People speak of NGOs, INGOs , BINGOs , RINGOs , ENGOs , QUANGOS (Quasi-Non-Governmental Organizations—i.e., those that are at least partially created or supported by states), and many others.
In general, the socially constructed image of NGOs widely accepted throughout the world is very positive—most pursue objectives that are highly respected and therefore do not provoke much opposition.
For example, NGOs such as Amnesty International, the International Chamber of Commerce, the International Red Cross, Save the Children, and the World Wildlife Federation enjoy widespread popular support.
For instance, more than three thousand NGOs actively consult with various agencies of the extensive UN system, maintain offices in hundreds of cities, and hold parallel conferences with IGO meetings to which states send representatives.
Such partnerships between NGOs and IGOs enable both types to work together in pursuit of common policies and programs.
As IGOs and NGOs rise in numbers and influence, a key question to contemplate is whether a “global society” will materialize to override the traditional global system centered on sovereign states, and, if so, whether this structural transformation will democratize or disrupt global governance.
As we do so, ask yourself whether IGOs’ activities are adequate for dealing with the pressing threats to human welfare, whether these IGOs are undermining states’ continuing autonomy, and, if so, whether an erosion of state power will prove helpful or harmful.
The United Nations The United Nations is the best-known global organization.
Pictured left are suspected pirates in the Gulf of Aden in February 2009 as they are being seized by the United States Navy.
Protecting the more than 23,000 merchant vessels that sail near the Horn of Africa each year from this “new kind of bad actor” is a challenging task—the pirates appear to be motivated by monetary gain rather than ideology.
The UN’s nearly fourfold growth from the fifty-one states that joined it at the UN’s birth in 1945 has been spectacular, but the admission process has from the start been governed by political conflicts that show the extent to which the organization reflects the relationships of the five great powers that created it and govern it through veto authority in the Security Council.
In principle, any sovereign state that accepts the UN’s goals and regulations can join, but the great powers have often let realpolitik —the belief that countries should put their own national interest above concern for the global community—guide their decision making about which new countries should be admitted.
This was especially true during the Cold War, when both the United States and the Soviet Union prevented countries aligned with their adversary from joining.
The UN’s Agenda Peace and security figured prominently in the thinking of the great powers responsible for creating the UN and its predecessor, the League of Nations.
These institutional reforms were inspired by the liberal conviction that both war and the management of other global problems can best be controlled by removing global anarchy —the absence of supranational authority to regulate relations between states—from the international scene.
The League of Nations sought to prevent a recurrence of the catastrophic World War I by replacing the balance-of-power system with one based on the construction of a collective security regime made up of rules for keeping peace, guided by the principle that an act of aggression by any state would be met by a collective retaliatory response from the rest.
When the League failed to restrain expansionistic aggression by Germany, Japan, and Italy during the 1930s, it collapsed.
At the start of World War II, the U.S., British, and Russian allies began planning for a new international organization, the United Nations, to preserve the postwar peace because it was believed that peace could not be maintained unilaterally by any one great power acting alone.
Though faith in the UN’s ability eroded when it soon became paralyzed by the unforeseen Cold War conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union, in the post-Gold War era it was freed from paralysis and returned to its original mission.
To assess the capacity of the United Nations to fulfill its growing responsibilities, let us consider how it is organized.
THE UN'S HEADQUARTERS AND GLOBAL NETWORK Since its creation the UN has sought to address the continuously expanding problems on the global agenda.
To reduce the gap between aspiration and accomplishment, the UN has spread its administrative arm to every corner of the globe in order to fulfill its primary purpose of spearheading international cooperation.
To service its worldwide missions, in 2009 the UN continued its search for addifional cheap office space, including islands, cruise ships, and large tents.
Organizational Structure The UN’s limitations are perhaps rooted in the ways it is organized for its wide-ranging purposes.
Established as the main deliberative body of the United Nations, all members are equally represented according to a one-state/one-vote formula.
Decisions are reached by a simple majority vote, except on so-called important questions, which require a two-thirds majority.
Given primary responsibility by the Charter for dealing with threats to international peace and security, the Security Council consists of five permanent members with the power to veto substantive decisions (the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Russia, and the People’s Republic of China), and ten nonpermanent members elected by the General Assembly for staggered two-year terms.
This body has been particularly active in addressing economic development and human rights issues.
Charged with supervising the administration of territories that had not achieved self-rule, the Trusteeship Council suspended operation in 1994, when the last remaining trust territory gained independence.
The competence of the Court is restricted to disputes between states, and its jurisdiction is based on the consent of the disputants.
The Court may also give nonbinding advisory opinions on legal questions raised by the General Assembly, Security Council, or other UN agencies.
It is exclusively permitted by the UN Charter to initiate actions, especially the use of force.
However, despite the intentions of the founders of the UN, the General Assembly has assumed wider responsibilities as countries in the Global South—seizing advantage of their growing numbers under the one-state/one-vote rules of the General Assembly—have guided UN involvement in directions of particular concern to them.
Today, a coalition of Global South countries constituting three-fourths of the UN membership seeks to resist domination by the Global North.
This coalition directs the UN to address economic and social needs and protests when it fails to respect the Global South’s special interests.
The growth of the General Assembly’s power may not be sufficient to ensure the Global South’s control of the agenda, however, as the original five great powers in the Security Council continue to run the show—with the United States hegemon in a pivotal position of preeminent influence.
The United States resisted the 2005 proposal to expand the Security Council to twenty-four members because it would dilute American power, and it announced that it would not support extension of the veto power held by the big five permanent members to other members.
In a similar move to maintain power within the UN, in 2008 China surprised many with its refusal to support an Indian bid for a permanent seat.
States contribute to the voluntary programs and some of the peacekeeping activities as they see fit.
The core budget and other peacekeeping activities are subject to assessments.
The precise mechanism by which assessments have been determined is complicated, but, historically, assessments have been allocated according to states’ capacity to pay.
Yet, the poorest 28 percent of the UN’s members, or a total of fifty-four member states, pay the minimum , contributing only $24,363 annually, which accounts for less than 1 percent of the Ban Ki-Moon, 2007-present With a global reputation as someone who will do the right thing, he is one of the most popular leaders of the world.
Kofi Annan, 1996-2006 He had a quiet charisma, but the Iraq war and the oil-for-food scandal marred his second term.
Boutros Boutros-Ghali, 1992-1996 The United States dumped the acerbic and undiplomatic Egyptian after one turbulent term.
Javier Perez de Cuellar, 1982-1991 He quietly guided the organization out of Cold War paralysis and back into business.
Kurt Waldheim, 1972-1981 An effective bureaucrat, Waldheim is now remembered mainly for his Nazi past.
U Thant, 1961-1971 The placid Thant had a low profile but got flak for pulling United Nations peacekeepers from Sinai.
Trygve Lie, 1946-1952 The gruff politician helped create the organization but accomplished little in office.
LEADERS OF THE UN The Secretary-Generals of the UN have had a big influence in shaping the UN’s response to an array of global problems.
In comparison, the richest 28 percent of states were assessed to pay more than 97 percent of the UN’s 2008-2009 budget.
Although this formula is under attack in many wealthy states, it still governs.
Resistance to this budgetary formula for funding UN activities has always existed.
It has grown progressively worse in large part because when the General Assembly apportions expenses, it does so according to majority rule.
The problem is that those with the most votes do not have the money, and the most prosperous countries do not have the votes.
This deep imbalance contributes to the great powers' concern about the UN’s priorities, administrative efficiency, and expenses, and has led to many fierce disputes with the small powers over which issues should be the focus of the UN’s attention and resources.
The wealthy members charge that the existing budget procedures institutionalize a system of taxation without fair representation.
The critics counter with the argument that, for fairness and justice, the great power members should bear financial responsibilities commensurate with their wealth and influence.
Differences about what is important and which states should have political influence are the real issues.
Poor states argue that need should determine expenditure levels rather than rich countries’ interests, while major contributors do not want to pay for programs they oppose.
For years, the United $tates has been the most vocal about its dissatisfaction and since 2000 has been in arrears, or behind in its payments, an average of $1.35 billion each year.
Of course, this must be viewed in light of the heavy portion of payments that the United $tates is assessed.
Yet even this formula understandably upsets other major contributors who pay large sums but are still excluded from $ecurity Council participation as permanent members, such as Japan, which paid 16. percent of the UN budget in 2009.
A Ticking Bomb Future Challenges The UN’s future remains uncertain, and its persistent financial troubles leave it without the resources to combat global problems and carry out the responsibilities assigned to it.
Doubts about its viability and value to the global community have been exacerbated by a string of scandals including charges of mismanagement in the 1990s Iraqi “Oil-for-Food” program, sexual abuse of women in the Congo by UN peacekeepers, and inaction until late 2007 in response to years of mass genocide in the Darfur region of Sudan.
However, given the UN’s successful history of organizational adaptation to challenges, supporters have reasons to be optimistic about the organization’s long-term prospects to live up to its creators’ bold mandate to attack world problems.
Despite some resistance by members of the Global South that feared that new Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon might bend to big-donor pressure and compromise the interests of small powers, since 2006 the UN has undertaken a series of reforms to change its management procedures and bring its recruitment, contracting, and training responsibilities into line with its vast new responsibilities.
These reforms include protection for “whistleblowers” who report scandals, an antifraud and anticorruption policy, a unified standard of conduct for peacekeepers to prevent sexual abuse, and expanded financial disclosure requirements for senior officials.
These massive reforms also cut the Secretariat’s administrative costs by one-third, from 38 percent of the core budget to 25 percent, and put the savings into a development fund for poor countries.
The UN will likely remain an arena for heated jockeying among member states and hemispheric blocs, a fact bound to undermine its capacity to solve new global problems.
The United Nation In the final analysis, the UN can be no more than the mandates and power that the member states give to it.
Other Prominent Global IGOs Beyond the UN, literally hundreds of other IGOs are active internationally.
Note that each of these IGOs was created by the great powers for the purposes of their sponsors in response to the great powers’ need for a stable international economic order, even at the voluntary sacrifice of sovereignty.
The primary reason is that multilateral cooperation enables those cooperating states to receive benefits that they would not otherwise receive.
The creation of international regimes (rules agreed to by a set of states to regulate cooperative ventures) as well as authoritative IGO institutions for global governance can pay dividends.
Shared problems often cannot be managed without multilateral cooperation.
Unilateral measures on many issues by even the most powerful great power acting independently simply will not work.
The World Trade Organization Remembering the hardships caused by the Great Depression of 1929, after World War II the United States sought to create international economic institutions that would prevent another depression by facilitating the expansion of world trade.
While negotiations for the anticipated ITO were dragging on, many people urged immediate action.
These treaties were written into a final act called the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , which originally was thought of as a temporary arrangement until the ITO came into operation.
When a final agreement on the ITO proved elusive, GATT provided a mechanism for continued multilateral negotiations on reducing tariffs and other barriers to trade.
Over the next several decades, eight rounds of negotiations were held to liberalize trade.
Under the principle of nondiscrimination, GATT members were to give the same treatment to each other as they gave to their “most favored” trading partner.
Although it was not exactly what the ITO envisaged immediately following World War II, it nevertheless represents the most ambitious tariff-reduction undertaking yet.
Unlike GATT, the WTO was and still is a full-fledged IGO with formal decision-making procedures.
Mandated to manage disputes arising from its trading partners, the WTO was given authority to enforce trading rules and to adjudicate trade disputes.
The WTO now seeks to transcend the existing matrix of free-trade agreements between pairs of countries and within particular regions or free-trade blocs and replace them with an integrated and comprehensive worldwide system of liberal or free trade.
At the heart of their complaint is the charge that the WTO undermines the traditional rule of law prohibiting interference in sovereign states’ domestic affairs, including management of economic practices within the states’ territorial jurisdiction.
However, it should be kept in mind that the WTO developed as a result of voluntary agreements states reached to surrender some of their sovereign decision-making freedom, under the conviction that this pooling of sovereignty would produce greater gains than losses.
Many of its policies are orchestrated by its most powerful members during informal meetings that do not include the full WTO membership.
Now, with increasing criticism of the globalization of national economies, these meetings are convenient targets for protesters.
Over the next decade, the Bank shifted its attention from reconstruction to developmental assistance.
Because Global South countries often have difficulty borrowing money to finance projects aimed at promoting economic growth, the Bank offers them loans with lower interest rates and longer repayment plans than they could typically obtain from commercial banks.
A governor customarily is a member country’s minister of finance or an equivalent official.
The board meets annually in the Bank’s Washington, DC, headquarters to set policy directions and delegate responsibility for the routine operations of the Bank to the twenty-four directors of its executive board.
The five countries with the largest number of shares in the World Bank’s capital stock (the United States, Germany, Japan, France, and the United Kingdom) appoint pOV-VCt.
This weighted voting system recognizes the differences among members’ holdings system and protects the interests of the great powers that make more substantial contributions to the World Bank’s resources.
If a country’s economic situation changes over time, its quota is adjusted and its allocation of shares and votes changes accordingly.
Over the years, both the self-image and operations of the World Bank have changed—from a strictly financial IGO to now assisting states’ development planning and training.
The World Bank also has participated increasingly in consortium arrangements for financing private lending institutions while insisting that democratic reforms are made a condition for economic assistance.
Additionally, with charges of bribery, kickbacks, and embezzlement being levelled against World Bank projects from road building in Kenya to dam construction in Lesotho, the last three bank presidents (James Wolfensohn, Paul Wolfowitz, and Robert Zoellick) have insisted on anticorruption reforms as well.
Despite its increased pace of activity and its goal for members to pledge nearly $20 billion for three years starting in mid-2008 [The Economist, April 21, 2007, 70), the World Bank is poorly prepared to meet all the needs for financial assistance of developing states.
The repayment of loans in hard currencies has imposed serious burdens on impoverished and indebted Global South states.
The deficiencies of the World Bank, however, have been partly offset by the establishment of another lending IGO, the International Monetary Fund.
The International Monetary Fund Before World War II, the international community lacked institutional mechanisms to manage the exchange of money across borders.
At the 1944 Bretton Woods Conference, the United States was a prime mover in creating the International Monetary Fund , a truly global IGO designed to maintain currency-exchange stability by promoting international monetary cooperation and orderly exchange arrangements and by functioning as a lender of last resort for countries experiencing financial crises.
The IMF is now one of the sixteen specialized agencies within the UN system.
Each IMF member is represented on its governing board, which meets annually to fix general policy.
Contributions are based on a quota system set according to a state’s national income, monetary reserves, and other factors affecting each member’s ability to contribute.
In this way, the IMF operates like a credit union that requires each participant to contribute to a common pool of funds from which it can borrow when the need arises.
The IMF’s voting is weighted according to a state’s monetary contribution, giving a larger voice to the wealthier states.
Push for IMF reform has become prevalent following the Asian financial crisis in the late 1990s, as many argued that IMF intervention was counterproductive.
REGIONAL INTERGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS The tug of war between individual states and groups of states within the UN, the WTO, the World Bank, and the IMF are reminders of an underlying principle that IGOs are run by the states that join them.
This severely inhibits the IGOs’ ability to rise above interstate competition and independently pursue their organizational purposes.
Because they cannot act autonomously and lack the legitimacy and capability for independent global governance, universal IGOs are often viewed, from a realist perspective, more as instruments of their state members’ foreign policies and arenas for debate than as independent nonstate actors.
When states dominate universal international organizations like the UN, the prospects for international cooperation can decline because, as realism emphasizes, states are fearful of multilateral organizations that compromise their vital national interests.
This limits IGOs’ capabilities for multilateral decision making to engineer global change.
A rival hypothesis—that cooperation among powerful states is possible and that international organizations help produce it—emerges from liberal theory.
The EU serves as a model for other regional IGOs to emulate as the globe’s greatest example of peaceful cross-border cooperation producing an integrated security community with a single economy.
In addition, the EU’s dedication to liberal democratic governance and capitalist free markets, as well as its emphasis on the search for a Third Way to alleviate human suffering, is paving an approach that other regional IGOs are pursuing.
The European Union The EU is not, strictly speaking, a freestanding supranational organization for the collective management of European domestic and foreign affairs.
The EU coexists with a large number of other European IGOs, in which it is nested and with which it jointly makes decisions.
Of these, the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe stand as regional institutions of equal European partners, free of dividing lines, designed to manage regional security and promote the human rights of minorities through democratization.
In this overlapping network of European IGOs, the EU nonetheless is prominent as the primary example of a powerful organization that has transformed itself from a singleto a multiple-purpose nonstate actor.
EU Expansion and Political Integration As constructivism argues, ideas have consequences.
Big ideas often come from painful experiences and crises, such as devastating wars.
European leaders conceived of a bold plan to remove the curse of war by attacking the incentives for war.
Their reform program aimed at the political integration of Europe to build a new supranational institution that transcended individual European states—to seek nothing less than the transformation of international relations from instruments of states to institutions over them.
The process of European integration began with the creation of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, the European Atomic Energy Community in 1957, and the European Economic Community in 1957.
This bold enlargement added seventy-five million people to create the globe’s biggest free-trade bloc, and it transformed the face of Europe by ending the continent’s division.
Further expansion is also conceivable because the admission procedures for possible new membership are currently under way for Croatia and Turkey, and other countries in the western Balkans are lobbying for future membership.
Recently, on July 16, 2009, Iceland applied for membership with a targeted date of 2011 for acceptance into the bloc.
In particular, the prospect of a populous Muslim Turkey joining the EU raises fundamental questions about Europe’s identity.
As constructivist theorists point out, identities shape how agents envision their interests and, in turn, how they act.
The possible entry of Turkey and, perhaps, more remote and different countries would have major implications for the way many people, especially within the six Western founders of the EU, conceive of Europe.
Nevertheless, the idea of a single, integrated Europe is compelling for those who are haunted by the specter of European nationalities and states that have been fighting each other ever since the Pax Romana collapsed eighteen hundred years ago.
EU enlargement through eastward expansion has presented the organization with a host of troublesome questions, compounded by the fact that the twelve newest members, whose combined economies are less than 10 percent of that of the entire EU, have poorer economies and smaller populations than the previous fifteen EU members.
These new members, therefore, have different needs and interests that can make reaching agreement on policy decisions increasingly difficult.
The distinction made by former United States Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld between the “old” Europe and the “new” Europe underscored the probability of some EU divisions on the horizon, with the new members originally supporting the American war in Iraq and the Western members, with the exception of Great Britain, opposing the military invasion.
If Germany, France, and the other Benelux countries join together to oppose the smaller, less developed new members, a “club within a club” could split the EU into two opposed coalitions.
And if East-West frictions coincide with new tensions between the big and small EU members, collective decision making will be immeasurably more complicated.
It has grown in seven expansions from six members in 1951 to twenty-seven in 2009, as shown here, and waiting in the wings are Ukraine, Turkey, and others.
The EU’s central administrative unit, the Council of Ministers, represents the governments of the EU’s member states and retains final authority over the policy making decisions.
Commissioners are nominated by EU member governments and must be approved by the European Parliament.
Headquartered in European Commission the executive organ administratively responsible for the European Union.
The European Parliament represents the political parties and public opinion within Europe.
It has existed from the beginning of Europe’s journey toward political unification, although at its creation this legislative body was appointed rather than elected and had little power.
The European Parliament is now chosen in a direct election by the citizens of the EU’s member states.
Its more than six hundred deputies debate issues at the monumental glass headquarters in Brussels and at its lavish Strasbourg palace in the same way that democratic national legislative bodies do.
The European Parliament shares authority with the Council of Ministers, but the Parliament’s influence has increased over time.
The elected deputies pass laws with the council, approve the EU’s budget, and oversee the European Commission, whose decisions they can overturn. pooled sovereignty legal authority granted to an IGO by its members to make collective decisions regarding specified aspects of public policy heretofore made exclusively by each sovereign government.
The European Court of Justice in Euxembourg has also grown in prominence and power as European integration has gathered depth and breadth.
Erom the start, the court was given responsibility for adjudicating claims and conflicts among EU governments as well as between those governments and the new institutions the EU created.
The court interprets EU law for national courts, rules on legal questions that arise within the EU’s institutions, and hears and rules on cases concerning individual citizens.
The fact that its decisions are binding distinguishes the European Court of Justice from most other international tribunals.
In 2008, the Court rendered a landmark decision widely seen as a victory for the Internet surfer in ruling that EU law does not compel Internet service providers to disclose customers’ names if subpoenaed in copyright infringement file-sharing cases.
Debate continues also over how far and how fast such a process of pooled sovereignty should proceed.
It would also discard national vetoes in a number of areas, change members’ voting weights, and give the European Parliament additional powers.
While proponents argued that institutional reform is critical if expansion is to continue and Europe is to be a unified global power that can balance other major powers, resistance within the EU (reflected in Ireland’s rejection of the treaty in a national referendum in June 2008) indicated that many are satisfied with the status quo, reluctant to pursue deeper political integration and further constrain the pursuit of individual national self-interest, and are concerned about the extent to which EU decision making is democratic.
As essentially the fourth treaty rejection on institutional reform—the Erench and Dutch rejected the EU Constitution in 2005, the Irish rejected the Nice Treaty in 2001, and the Danes rejected the Maastricht Treaty in 1992—the rejection of the Eisbon Treaty by the Irish calls into question whether there is sufficient popular support for a federal Europe.
While some European leaders such as Italian president Giorgio Napolitano have called for a “two-speed Europe” that would leave those who did not agree behind, others such as German chancellor Angela Merkel and Erench president Nicolas Sarkozy do not support the idea and argue that consensus is needed to proceed.
These issues will be debated in the future, and only time will tell how they will be resolved.
That said, the EU represents a remarkable success story in international history.
Other Regional IGOs Since Europe’s 1950s initiatives toward integration, more than a dozen regional IGOs have been created in various other parts of the world, notably among states in the Global East and Global South.
Most seek to stimulate regional economic growth, but many have expanded from that original single purpose to pursue multiple political and military purposes as well.
APEC plans to establish free and open trade and investments in the region for developed countries by 2010 and for developing member countries by 2020.
In 1999, it created a free-trade zone among its ten Southeast Asian members as a counterweight outside the orbit of Japan, China, the United States, and other great powers so that ASEAN could compete as a bloc in international trade.
The security ICO has expanded its membership to twenty-six countries and broadened its mission to promote democratization and to police civil wars and terrorism outside its traditional territory within Europe.
As these examples illustrate, most IGOs are organized on a regional rather than global basis.
The governments creating them usually concentrate on one or two major goals (such as liberalizing trade or promoting peace within the region) instead of attempting to address at once the complete range of issues that they face in common, such as environmental protection, democratization, and economic and security cooperation.
Alongside these are many smaller organizations such as the Economic Community of the Great Eakes Countries and the Mano River Union.
The particular reasons why many regional IGOs sometimes fail and are often ineffective vary.
Evidence suggests that the factors promoting successful integration efforts are many and their mixture complex.
It is not enough that two or more countries choose to interact cooperatively.
The substantial difficulty that most regions have experienced in achieving a level of institution building similar to that of the EU suggests the enormity of the obstacles to creating new political communities out of previously divided ones.
All IGOs are limited by national leaders’ reluctance to make politically costly choices that would undermine their personal popularity at home and their governments’ sovereignty.
Nonetheless, regional ventures in cooperation demonstrate that many states accept the fact that they cannot individually manage many of the problems that confront them collectively.
Because the state is clearly failing to manage many transnational policy problems, collective problem solving through IGOs is likely to continue.
In turn, IGOs’ expanding webs of interdependence are infringing on the power of states and changing the ways in which they network on the global stage.
IGOs are not the only nonstate actors leading the potential transformation of world politics.
They include not only transnational humanitarian organizations such as Amnesty International but also multinational corporations, transnational religions and ethnic groups, and global terrorist networks.
Such NGOs are growing in number and roaring in voices too loud to ignore, making them increasingly influential in world politics.
In the emerging global politics, however, state sovereignty and authority are withering and no alternative, such as some system of world government, is about to fill the vacuum. —Samuel P Huntington, realist theoretician PROMINENT TYPES OF NONGOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS Increasing numbers of people have found that through joining nongovernmental organizations , they can lobby to influence international decision making.
They have chosen to become international decision makers themselves by electing to join one or more NGOs, and these tens of thousands of “transitional activists” are influencing the policies of state governments and intergovernmental organizations through a variety of strategies.
NGO activism is transcending the traditional distinctions between what is local and what is global . nonstate nations national or ethnic groups struggling to obtain power and/or statehood.
Today, a small subset of increasingly active and self-assertive NGOs receives the most attention and provokes the most controversy.
The nineteenth-century French political philosopher Auguste Comte argued that all institutions form in order to address problems and meet human needs, and that when those IGOs are no longer able to perform these functions, they disappear.
Today, the managerial capabilities of states are failing to inspire confidence.
That question has become a hot topic about which heated controversies now center.
In formulating your assessment, consider not only what you have learned about IGOs and their power and limits in this chapter, but also the range of theoretical opinion percolating about this question.
Theoretical Perspective Realism Liberalism “Institutions are basically a reflection of the distribution of power in the world.
They are based on the self-interested calculations of the great powers, and they have no independent effect on state behavior.”—Jon Mearsheimer, political realist “We are at present embarked on an exceedingly dangerous course, one symptom of which is the erosion of the authority and status of world and regional intergovernmental institutions.
Such a trend must be reversed before once again we bring upon ourselves a global catastrophe and find ourselves without institutions effective enough to prevent it.”—Javier Perez De Cuellar, UN Secretary General “States retain many of their present functions effective governance of a partially—and increasingly—globalized world will require more extensive international institutions to promote cooperation and resolve conflict.""—Robert 0.
Keohane, international relations scholar “A wide variety of forces has made it increasingly difficult for any state to wield power over its peoples and address issues it once considered its sole prerogative.”—^The Stanley Foundation The task of inquiry for you to face is to weigh the evidence behind these rival theoretical interpretations.
Ethnic Groups and Indigenous Peoples Realists often ask us to picture the all-powerful state as an autonomous ruler of a unified nation, that is, as a unitary actor.
Most states are divided internally and are highly penetrated from abroad, and few states are tightly unified and capable of acting as a single body with a common purpose.
Although the state unquestionably remains the most visible global actor, as constructivism emphasizes, ethnic nationalism (people’s loyalty to and identification with a particular ethnic nationality group) reduces the relevance of the unitary state.
Many states are divided, multiethnic and multicultural societies made up of a variety of politically active groups that seek, if not outright independence, a greater level of regional autonomy and a greater voice in the domestic and foreign policies of the state.
Individuals who think nationalistically are very likely to pledge their primary allegiance not to the state and government that rules them but, rather, to a politically active ethnic group whose members identify with one another because they perceive themselves as bound together by kinship, language, and a common culture.
Ethnicity is socially constructed, in that members of an ethnic or racial group learn to see themselves as members of that group and accordingly perceive their identity as determined by their inherited membership at birth.
That perception is likely to be strongly reinforced when recognized by other ethnic groups.
In 2008, China came under intense international criticism for its crackdown on ethnic Tibetan groups following rioting in Lhasa, the Tibetan capital.
Ethnic divisions such as these challenge the realist “billiard ball” conception of international relations as homogeneous interactions between unified states.
Dedicated to locating remote tribes and protecting them, this aerial picture was released in 2008 by activists with the Brazilian Indian Protection Agency, Funai, and Survival International m an effort to generate international concern for the threat posed by the logging industry to “uncontacted” indigenous tribes in the area.
Through these actions, these NGOs claimed success in pressuring Peru to reexamine its logging policy.
Indigenous peoples are ethnic and cultural groups that are native populations to a particular area.
In most cases, indigenous people were at one time politically sovereign and economically self-sufficient, but are now controlled by a state govenment.
As Edward Sapir and Benjamin Lee Whorf hypothesized in the 1930s, different languages reflect different views of the world that predispose their speakers toward different ways of thought.
What this means is that indigenous peoples are at risk, with high percentages nearing extinction.
Though indigenous peoples are located within many of the globe’s pluralistic states, they also display a transnational face because they are geographically spread across existing state boundaries.
This dispersion has increased as indigenous peoples have migrated across borders from their ancestral homelands.
For example, indigenous peoples such as the sizable Kurdish minorities of Turkey, Iraq, Iran, and Syria have members living in more than one of the globe’s existing independent states, but as yet there is no single sovereign country the Kurds can call their home.
ETHNOLINGUISTIC DIVISIONS Differences in language often reflect differences in interests and attitudes.
As shown here, the diversity of ethnic language groups in Africa is very high.
The consequences are not certain, but some possibilities for world politics are alarming.
Samuel P Huntington pessimistically predicts the most troubling outcome; that a clash of civilizations is probable between some of these universalistic civilizational identities and that armed conflict is especially likely between the West and Islam.
That prediction proved rather prophetic on September 11, 2001, when the A1 Qaeda terrorist network attacked the United States to vent the anger of its extremist Islamic members against the West.
For that reason, we now turn from ethnic group NGOs to an examination of the ways religious movements may operate as transnationally active NGOs as well.
I I African □ □ □ n Buddhist Hindu Hindu/lsiamic isiamic I I Japanese I I Latin American I I Orthodox I I Sinic I I SinicA/Vestern I I Western MAP 5.
Similarly, the religious conflicts during the Thirty Years’ War between Catholics and Protestants killed nearly one-fourth of all Europeans. transnational religious movements a set of beliefs, practices, and ideas administered politicaily by reiigious organizations to promote the worship of their conception of a transcendent deity and its principies for conduct.
Many of the world’s more than 6. billion people are affiliated at some level with transnational religious movements —politically active organizations based on strong religious convictions.
At the most abstract level, a religion is a system of thought shared by a group that provides its members an object of devotion and a code of behavior by which they can ethically judge their actions.
This definition points to commonalities across the great diversity of organized religions in the world, but it fails to capture that diversity.
The world’s principal religions vary greatly in the theological doctrines or beliefs they embrace.
They also differ widely in the size of their followings, in the geographical locations where they are most prevalent , and in the extent to which they engage in political efforts to direct international affairs.
Those who study religious movements comparatively note that a system of belief provides religious followers with their main source of identity, and that this identification with and devotion to their religion springs from the natural human need to find a set of values with which to evaluate the meaning of life and the consequences of choices.
This need sometimes leads believers of a religious creed to perceive the values of their own religion as superior to those of others, which sadly often results in intolerance.
The proponents of most organized religious movements believe that their religion should be universal—that is, accepted by everyone throughout the world.
To confirm their faith in their religious movement’s natural superiority, many organized religions actively proselytize to convert nonbelievers to their faith, engaging in evangelical crusades to win over nonbelievers and followers of other religions.
Conversion is usually achieved by persuasion through missionary activities.
MAJOR RELIGIONS OF THE WORLD This map shows where the world’s major religious affiliations have attracted a dominant following.
The chart on the bottom right predicts the number of people who will adhere to the four largest religious groups by the year 2050.
In evaluating the impact of religious movements on international affairs, it is important to distinguish carefully the high ideals of doctrines from the activities of the people who head these religious bodies.
The two realms are not the same, and each can be judged fairly only against the standards they set for themselves.
To condemn what large-scale religious movements sometimes do administratively when they abuse their own religion’s principles does not mean that the principles themselves deserve condemnation.
Consider the Hindu ideology of tolerance of different religions, which teaches that there are many paths to truth and accepts pluralism among diverse populations.
The relationship between transnational religions and states’ governments is a major issue in the global community.
But in many other countries, religion and state are tightly linked and almost indistinguishable.
In such a country, that is, in a theocracy, religious institutions submissively subordinate their religion to state control in order to survive, grow, receive state subsidies, and cement political influence.
In these countries, crown and church protect and preserve each other through an alliance.
The leaders of extreme militant religious movements are convinced that those who do not share their convictions must be punished and that compromise is unacceptable.
In many cases the religious movement substitutes itself for the government at the local level and is involved in education, health, and other social welfare programs.
This generally means that government and all of its domestic and foreign activities must be in the hands of believers or subject to their close oversight.
This tends to give them a trans-state motivation, a factor that then translates their views on legitimacy of political authority into a larger context for action.
In some cases, this means that international boundaries are not recognized as barriers to the propagation of the faith, even if this means they resort to violence.
Militant religious movements tend to stimulate five specific types of international activities.
ARE RELIGIOUS MOVEMENTS CAUSES OF WAR OR SOURCES OF TRANSNATIONAL HARMONY^ After 9/11, debate about the impact ot religion on international conflict intensified because many believed that the terrorist attacks were motivated by religious fanatics in the Islamic Al Qaeda global terrorist organization.
Yet it is difficult to understand the religious origins of violence because most people equate religion with peace, compassion, and forgiveness, not hatred or intolerance.
Indeed, because high ideals inspire the believers ot nearly all the world’s major religious movements, many of the principles religions espouse are very similar and conducive to peaceful relations between people.
They all voice respect and reverence for the sanctity of life and acceptance of all people as equal creations ot a deity, regardless of race or color.
Religions speak to universal principles, across time and place—to enduring values in changing times.
However, in an age of religious conflict and political violence, the role ot religious NGOs in international affairs is controversial.
The virtues that religions uphold ironically can become weapons against those who do not hold such views.
Followers of a religion may conceive the world and history through an ideological lens that views one deity protecting a chosen people against inferior others.
In an effort to believe in unshakable doctrines, they reject the attempt to separate what they wish to be true from what they or other religions think to be true.
This constructed reality inspires an ethic that justifies violence, plunder, and conquest.
In part, they tend to see outsiders as threatening rivals whose loyalty and allegiance to other deities represents a challenge to their own religion’s claim of universal worldwide applicability.
In a word, religious movements often practice intolerance—disrespect for diversity and the right of people to freely embrace another religion’s beliefs.
The next logical step is for fanatics to paint these imagined enemies as evil, unworthy of mercy, and to justify brutal violence against them.
Yet it is dangerous to accept stereotypes of religious groups as responsible for relentless barrages of terrorism.
Paganistic and atheistic societies recognizing no higher deity have equally long histories of waging violent wars against external enemies and their own people.
Meanwhile, many religions ably perform the mission of peace making, and in fact most religious bodies have historically coexisted peacefully for centuries.
The second is secession, or separative revolts —the attempt by a religious minority to revolt and break away from an internationally recognized state.
Third, militant religions tend to incite migration, the departure of religious minorities from their countries of origin to escape persecution.
In sum, transnational religious movements not only bring people together but also divide them.
This consequence notwithstanding, transnational religions compete with one another, and this tends to divide humanity and breed separatist efforts that can tear countries apart.
Many people now think so, even if these groups can hardly be considered conventional NGOs, given their use of violence.
Even if you recognize the existence of terrorist groups as a virulent type of NGO conducting its lethal trade across borders, it is very difficult to identify these terrorist groups, and you would make a big mistake if you lumped all terrorist movements together.
Today, terrorism is a strategy practiced by a very diverse group of nonstate actors.
While terrorism has plagued world politics for centuries, with some historians placing the beginnings of terrorism in the first century BCE with the Sicarii Zealots (who violently targeted Jewish high priests, whom they saw as collaborating with the Romans in violation of Jewish religious law), terrorism today is arguably much different than in the past.
Renowned historian and terrorism expert Walter Laqueur sees a future of postmodern terrorism that poses great threat to technologically advanced societies, where terrorists tend to be less ideological, more likely to hold ethnic grievances, and increasingly difficult to distinguish from other criminals.
So-called postmodern terrorism is likely to expand because the globalized international environment, without meaningful barriers separating countries, allows terrorists to practice their ancient trade by new rules and methods.
The information age facilitates transnational networking among terrorists, and has made available a variety of new methods such as electronic “cyberterrorism” and “netwar” strategies.
Moreover, this new global environment encourages the rapid spread of new weapons and technology across borders, which provides unprecedented opportunities for terrorists to commit atrocities and to change their tactics in response to successes in countering them.
The growing difficulty of detecting and deterring the attacks of disciplined globalized terrorist networks is further exacerbated by their ties to international organized crime syndicates and internationally linked networks of thousands of gangs that facilitate their profit in the narcotics trade and provide resources to support terrorist activities.
The activities of nonstate terrorist organizations are likely to remain a troubling feature of world politics also because every spectacular terrorist act generates a powerful shock effect and gains worldwide publicity through the global news media.
As you can see, there is diversity in the primary goals of various groups.
Some, such as FARC and ETA, focus on secular nonreligious objectives such as ethnic selfdetermination or overthrow of a government.
Others, most notably A1 Qaeda, are driven by religious convictions and have more sweeping goals.
There is also variation in the manner in which their organizations are structured, with some having a hierarchical structure and newer groups tending to favor a networked form with insulated cells dispersed across the globe.
Though terrorists are popularly portrayed as “madmen” bent on death and destruction, as terrorist expert Bruce Hoffman has noted, “Terrorism has a purpose.
Primary Location and Goals Name Primary Location Goal Al Qaeda A global network with cells in a number of countries and tied to Sunni extremist networks.
Bin Laden and his top associates are suspected to reside in Afghanistan or the border region in Pakistan, and the group maintains terrorist training camps there.
To establish pan-lslamic rule throughout the world by working with allied Islamic extremist groups to overthrow regimes it deems “nonIslamic” and expel V)/esterners and nonMuslims from Muslim countries.
Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia Colombia with some activities (extortion, kidnapping, logistics) in Venezuela, Panama, and Ecuador.
Islamic Jihad, Revolutionary Justice Organization, Organization of the Oppressed on Earth, and Islamic Jihad for the Liberation of Palestine In the Bekaa Valley, the southern suburbs of Beirut, and southern Lebanon.
Has established cells in Europe, Africa, South America, North America, and Asia.
To increase its political power in Lebanon, and opposing Israel and the Middle East peace negotiations.
To establish an Islamic Palestinian state in place of Israel, and gain international aoceptanoe of its rule in Gaza.
Interahamwe, Former Armed Forces Primarily in the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Rwanda, but a few may operate in Burundi.
To topple Rwanda’s Tutsi-dominated government, reinstitute Hutu control, and, possibly, complete the genocide begun in 1994.
To topple the current government of Sierra Leone and retain control of the lucrative diamond-producing regions of the country.
Euzkadi Ta Askatasuna Primarily in the Basque autonomous regions of northern Spain and southwestern Franoe.
To establish an independent homeland based on Marxist principles in the Basque autonomous regions.
Egyptian Islamic Jihad, Jihad Group, Islamic Jihad Primarily Cairo, but has a network outside Egypt, including Yemen, Afghanistan, Pakistan, Sudan, Lebanon, and the United Kingdom.
To overthrow the Egyptian government and replace it with an Islamic state; attack United States and Israeli interests in Egypt and abroad.
On May 19, 2009, the Sri Lankan government declared an end to the 25-year civil war and a defeat of what had been characterized as the fiercest terrorist force in the world.
Aum Shinrikyo, Aleph Principal membership is located only in Japan, but a residual branch comprising an unknown number of followers has surfaced in Russia.
To destroy existing Peruvian institutions and replace them with a communist peasant revolutionary regime.
Abu Sayyaf Group Primarily the southern Philippines, with members occasionally traveling to Manila.
To promote an independent Islamic state in western Mindanao and the Sulu Archipelago, areas in the southern Philippines heavily populated by Muslims.
Take care to consider how your value judgments can affect your image and interpretation of the identity and purpose of any group you may believe belongs in this menacing category of NGO actors.
Constructing a valid account will be a challenge especially in regard to such a controversial topic.
The cliche “one person’s terrorist is another person’s freedom fighter” springs from the hold of prior and subjective perceptions on many people’s definitions of objective realities.
Like transnational terrorist groups, MNCs are both praised and condemned because different people ascribe to them different attributes.
This makes MNCs increasingly influential as nonstate actors—connecting cash flows and people globally in ways that may be eroding the sovereignty that states have previously taken as an unchanging fact.
As a result of their immense resources and power, MNCs have provoked both acceptance and animosity.
As advocates of liberal free trade and as active contributors to the globalization of world politics, MNCs generate both credit for the positive aspects of free trade and globalization as well as blame for their costs.
In the past, MNCs were headquartered almost exclusively in the United States, Europe, and Japan, and their common practice was to make shortterm investments in the Global South’s plants, sales corporations, and mining operations.
At the start of the twenty-first century, about 80 percent of all MNCs’ employees worked in the developing countries, where wages were lower, to bolster corporate profits at the parent headquarters in the Global North.
This outsourcing is now eagerly welcomed by the Global South’s developing countries as a means to economic growth, where once MNC domination was resisted.
Nonetheless, wealth and power remain highly concentrated; the big seem to get bigger and bigger.
MNCs are increasingly influential NGOs because the world’s giant producing, trading, and servicing corporations have become the primary agents of the globalization of production.
The profile shows that of the world’s top thirty-five economic entities, multinationals account for only four; but in the next thirty, they account for nineteen.
Altogether, MNCs comprise over a third of the top sixty-five economic entities, illustrating that MNCs’ financial clout rivals or exceeds that of most countries.
In part due to their global reach and economic power, MNCs’ involvement in the domestic political affairs of local or host countries is controversial.
In some instances this concern has extended to MNCs’ involvement in the domestic politics of their home countries, where they actively lobby their governments for more liberal trade and investment policies to enhance the profitability of their business.
In turn, both host and home governments have sometimes used MNCs as instruments in their foreign policy strategies.
Perhaps the most notorious instance of an MNC’s intervention in the politics of a host state occurred in Chile in the early 1970s when International Telephone and Telegraph tried to protect its interests in the profitable Chiltelco telephone company by seeking to prevent the election of Marxist-oriented Salvador Allende as president and, once Allende was elected, pressured the United States government to disrupt the Chilean economy.
More recently, the huge profits and activities of corporate giant Halliburton to rebuild the infrastructure of Iraq after the 2003 United States occupation provoked widespread complaints that this MNC was exploiting the circumstances to line its pockets, at United States taxpayers’ expense.
As a sign of the times, in 2007 the corporate giant Halliburton moved its headquarters from Texas to Dubai.
This global penetration positions the biggest MNCs to propel changes in relations between countries and within them, as well as in the global marketplace.
A Ranking by Size of Economy and Revenues Rank Country/Corporation GNI/Revenues 1 United States 13,886. 2 lapan 4,828.
For example, the MNCs have recently taken steps toward engineering a “social responsibility revolution” by “making products and delivering services that generate profits and also help the world address challenges such as climate change, energy security, healthcare, and poverty.
In the interest of corporate social responsibility, MNCs in many sectors are also increasingly sensitive to human rights conditions in potential host countries, as well as the impact MNCs themselves may have upon human rights.
MNCs assist in promoting free trade and are active participants in the process by which governments have reached agreements on rules liberalizing economic transactions in the global marketplace.
Thus, as another consequence of their growing wealth and power, it is tempting to conclude that MNCs are a threat to state power.
However, this interpretation overlooks the fact that, as MNCs have grown in size, the regulatory power of states has also grown.
Only the state can defend corporate interests in international negotiations over trade, investment, and market access.
Agreements over such things as airline routes, the opening of banking establishments, and the right to sell insurance are not decided by corporate actors who gather around a table; they are determined by diplomats and bureaucrats.
Still, the blurring of the boundaries between internal and external affairs adds potency to the political role that MNCs unavoidably play as nonstate actors at the intersection of foreign and domestic policy.
The symbolic invasion of national borders by MNCs can be expected to arouse the anger of many local nationalists who fear the loss of income, jobs, and control to foreign corporate interests.
Because multinationals often make decisions over which leaders of states have little control , MNCs’ growing influence appears to contribute to the erosion of the global system’s major organizing principle—that the state alone should be sovereign.
MNCs’ awesome financial resources are much greater than the official statistics suggest.
And in fact, in some respects states are losing control of their national economies as MNCs merge with one another and, in the process, cease to remain tied to any one parent state or region.
This is because many MNCs are now globally integrated enterprises that produce the same goods in different countries so that their horizontal organization no longer ties them to any single country.
More than 50 percent of IBM’s revenues originate overseas; the same is true for Citigroup, ExxonMobil, DuPont, Procter & Gamble, and many other corporate giants.
Controlling the webs of corporate interrelationships, joint ventures, and shared ownership for any particular state purpose is nearly impossible.
In the past twenty years the number of MNCs has increased ninefold and MNCs are playing a correspondingly larger and larger role in world politics.
Assessing the future requires a theoretical examination of contemporary thinking regarding MNCs and other types of NGOs.
Greenpeace, Amnesty International, and Doctors Without Borders are just a few examples of nongovernmental issue-advocacy groups that actively seek to influence and change global conditions.
Many people now see NGOs as a vehicle empowering individuals to engineer transformations in international affairs.
What is clear is that networks of transnational activists have formed NGOs at an accelerating rate, and through their leverage have performed an educational service that has demonstratively contributed to the emergence of a global civil society.
The growth of transnational activism by NGOs “is leading to a diffusion of power away from central governments” , and these networks a; When the Supreme Court handed down its historic decision on global warming, it wasn’t just a bunch of lawyers who won When the Supreme Court delivered the landmark ruling that gave the EPA the power to fight global warming, it was just one in a long line of court victories that Earthjustice has helped win across the country.
From Alaska to California to West Virginia, good lawyers are making the difference.
And Earthjustice is putting more lawyers on the ground where they are needed most.
In this advertisement, the Earthjustice Legal Defense Fund promotes the fight against global warming.
Single-issue NGO interest groups have more influence than large general-purpose organizations.
For this reason NGOs are often generally seen as agents of policy continuities.
The foregoing characteristics of NGO efforts to redirect global policy suggest that the mere presence of such groups, and the mere fact they are organized with the intent of persuasion, does not guarantee their penetration of the global policy-making process.
On the whole, NGOs have participation without real power and involvement without real influence, given that the ability of any one to exert influence is offset by the tendency for countervailing powers to materialize over the disposition of any major issue.
That is, when any coalition of interest groups seeks vigorously to push policy in one direction, other nonstate actors—aroused that their established interests are being disturbed—are stimulated to push policy in the opposite direction.
The result is usually a continuous battleground over the primary global issues from which no permanent resolution of the struggle materializes.
The debate and contests between those wishing to make environmental protection a global priority and those placing economic growth ahead of environmental preservation provide one example among many.
Were not asking you to put your hand in your pockets, but we are asking people to put their fist in the air.
Make history by making poverty history. — Bono, lead singer of the rock band U2 NONSTATE ACTORS AND THE FUTURE OF WORLD POLITICS As the world grows more interdependent and transactions across state borders increase through the movement of people, information, and traded products, it is likely that world politics nonetheless will be increasingly affected by the activities of both IGO and NGO nonstate actors.
The idea of sovereign equality reflected a conscious decision governments made 60 years ago that they would be better off if they repudiated the right to meddle in the internal affairs of others.
In an era of rapid globalization, internal developments in distant states affect our own well-being, even our security.
Today respect for state sovereignty should be conditional on how states behave at home, not just abroad.
Sovereignty carries with it a responsibility to protect citizens against mass violence and a duty to prevent internal developments that threaten others.
As you contemplate these questions, keep in mind one clear lesson; It is misleading to think that politics is only about territorial states in interaction with each other, exercising supreme authority within their own borders.
The outlines of a future type of dual global system may be coming into view, driven simultaneously both by the continuing importance of relations between states and by the growing impact of multiple cross-border transactions and channels of communication among nonstate actors.
To be sure, transnational NGOs are putting increasing pressure on states and, in the process, may truly be paving the path for a possible transformation of world politics.
This change would lead to a hybrid or two-tiered world in which the clout and authority of the governments that rule countries decline while the relative power of nonstate actors rises.
Seen through realist theory, the critical choices that direct global destiny are ultimately made by the most powerful states.
Relations between global actors, as well as broader developments in world politics, are the consequence of innumerable decisions made by states, transnational organizations, and individuals.
In the next chapter, we will look at the processes by which both state and nonstate actors make international decisions in an effort to further enhance your understanding of the challenges of world politics.
That was the question put to former United States Secretary of State Henry A Kissinger in an interview with one of your text’s authors, Charles Kegley.
Your employment steps allowed you to apply your acquired knowledge to help make the world a better place.
Your challenge is to make decisions, based on your organization’s values, about the foreign policy goals your NGO should pursue as well as the means by which those international goals might best be realized.
Now your task is to make critical choices that are destined to determine whether or not your foreign policies will succeed.
As an international decision maker, your approach will partly depend on your preferences and priorities.
But there is no sure path as to how to make foreign policy decisions that are workable, moral, and successful.
You will face many obstacles and constraints on your ability to make informed choices.
What is more, any choice you might make is certain to carry with it costs that compromise some values you hold dear and undermine some of the other goals you would like to pursue.
So you now face the kind of challenge that throughout history has befuddled every decision maker who has had the power to make foreign policy decisions on behalf of the transnational actor he or she led.
FOREIGN POLICY MAKING IN INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS The purpose of this chapter is to introduce you to the lessons that history provides about the patterns, pitfalls, and payoffs that surround alternative approaches for making international decisions.
This introduction opens a window to rival ways of describing the processes by which transnational actors make foreign policy decisions.
Thus, it will not only cover countries but also take into view at the same time the decision-making practices of international organizations such as the Nordic Council; nongovernmental organizations such as the World Wildlife Federation; multinational corporations such as Wal-Mart; indigenous nationalities such as Kurds in Iran, Iraq, and Turkey; and terrorist networks such as A1 Qaeda.
In addition, it is important to reflect on how each and every one of us—all individual people—are part of the equation because we are all in a sense transnational actors capable of making free choices that contribute in countless ways to the direction of trends in world politics.
When mobilized and inspired by a sense of agency, individuals can make a difference in the course of world history; indeed, the decisions that we make every day and the groups that we join are reflections of our own personal “foreign policy,” whether or not we are aware of the consequences of our daily choices.
As American anthropologist Margaret Mead advised, “Never doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed citizens can change the world.
To stimulate your thinking about international decision making by all types of transnational actors.
World Politics provides a framework for analyzing and explaining the processes by which foreign policies are made.
Influences on the Making of Foreign Policy Decisions To structure theoretical thinking about international decision making, it is useful to think in terms of the factors or causes that influence the ways in which foreign policy decisions are made by all transnational actors.
For starters, it would be an error to assume that international decisions and behaviors are influenced solely by the choices of global leaders.
This kind of single-factor explanation will not work because no decision maker (not even the most authoritarian in a dictatorship) can act alone in terms of his or her whims and fancies.
The leaders of all groups are constrained by various pressures and circumstances that restrict free choices.
So to cut into the question of how international decision making unfolds, we must go beyond a single-factor explanation and think in terms of multiple causes.
For that, it is useful to identify the various clusters of variables that exert an influence on the choices that all types of transnational actors make when they formulate a foreign policy.
Similar to the level-of-analysis distinction introduced in Chapter 1 , we can construct an image of the determinants of decision making in the foreign-policy-making process by reference to three major sets of causal variables.
These are the global conditions that prevail at the time of decision, the internal characteristics of the transnational actor making foreign policy choices, and the leaders who head the transnational actor making the decision.
This three-part framework encourages you to think in causal terms about classes of phenomena that explain why particular decisions are made.
Global conditions at the time of the decision color the degree to which both an actor’s internal attributes and individual leader preferences can account for the choices made.
The internal characteristics of the transnational actor heavily constrain the range of choice open to the individual decision maker.
The characteristics of the leaders are important as well, because their individual values, personalities, beliefs, intelligence, and prior experiences not only define the kind of people they are but also predispose them to take certain kinds of positions on global issues.
The three categories of influences serve as “inputs” that shape the policy-making process.
They ultimately lead to foreign policy decisions and outcomes, or foreign policy “outputs,” that in turn provide “feedback” that may subsequently affect the inputs themselves.
Let’s take a closer look at these three categories of causation, beginning with the most comprehensive, global conditions, and working to the most specific, individual leaders.
Global Conditions What is happening in world politics provides the setting for international decision making.
The changing state of the world—everything that occurs beyond the actor—affects the decisions of transnational actors.
The prevailing global circumstances define the decisional situation, provoking the need to make decisions and restricting policy options available to the actor.
Take any global trend highlighted in World Politics and we can easily visualize how changes in the state of the world condition the issues on the global agenda; global warming, nuclear proliferation, international trade, the AIDS/HIV crisis, international terrorism, and civil wars—you name it.
All shifts in global circumstances give rise to crucial decisions by transnational actors.
Internal Characteristics As important as the global environment is, it would be mistaken to think it alone is the sole source driving international decision making.
Every actor on the global stage is defined by their own attributes, which also act to determine the actor’s foreign policy choices.
All transnational actors organized to take action abroad are composed of a collection of individuals.
How these group actors are governed, and the processes and procedures they follow to reach foreign policy decisions, are forces of their own that structure and determine the kinds of decisions that are reached.
The size of the organization, its power relative to the other actors with which it interacts, the financial resources, and the distribution of opinion within the actor all affect the capacity of the actor to make foreign policy choices in response to changes in global circumstances.
With respect to states, for example, the rise of “bureaucratic politics” among competing agencies seeking to direct the course of a country’s foreign policy now heavily influences the choices that will be made.
Choices about ends and means in foreign policies, therefore, are molded by transformations in international relations and by the impact of these global changes on the characteristics of transnational actors.
Actor Leadership The personal characteristics of the leaders heading transnational actors assume great importance in the making of international decisions.
Leaders are influential because “factors external to the actor can become determinants only as they affect the mind, the heart, and the will of the decision maker.
A human decision to act in a specific way necessarily represents the last link in the chain of antecedents of any act of policy.
Thus, changes in global conditions and actors’ collective internal characteristics may influence the costs and benefits of particular foreign policy options and stimulate the need for choice.
As constructivist theory argues, ideas and expectations within the heads of leaders are the intellectual filters through which objective realities are interpreted.
The framework provides clues as to where to look when asking why a foreign policy decision has been reached.
Each policy decision can be viewed as the result of the multiple prior causal events taking place in the funnel.
Observe as well that our framework implies a temporal or time sequence in the transition from inputs to outputs in the foreign-policy-making process.
Moreover, these policy outcomes have consequences for the input factors themselves at a later time [t + 3) because they exert “feedback” on these causal factors as the foreign policy decisions alter the conditions that influence subsequent policy making.
For example, a cluster of factors at some point in time led the United States to make the decision in March 2003 to invade Iraq o o Q Q < OJ X 2 ro OJ CJ CHOICE AND CONSEQUENCE The Bush Administration’s March 2003 decision to invade Iraq generated a hostile public reaction on the four-year anniversary of that decision.
Shown here on March 17,2007, are thousands of protestors voicing their rage against the war near the Pentagon, the headquarters and symbol of United States military power.
It can be used to account for past policy decisions and behaviors as well as for the effects of those outcomes on later policy decisions.
This way of tracing the determinants and consequences of international decisions provides you, the analyst, with a lens with which to view and explain theoretically the foreign policy of transnational actors in historical perspective, because the model is not tied analytically to any one time period or actor.
With this analytic framework in mind, you are armed intellectually to probe international decision making in greater depth.
In the episodic and visual comprehension of our foreign policy, there is serious danger that the larger significance of developments will be lost in a kaleidoscope of unrelated events.
THREE PROFILES Realism assumes that foreign policy making consists primarily of adjusting a transnational actor to the pressures of an anarchical global system whose essential properties will not vary.
From this assumption can be derived the expectation that transnational actors can and do make decisions by rational calculations of the costs and benefits of different choices.
Decision Making as Rational Choice The decision-making processes of unitary actors that determine national interests are typically described as rational.
The need to decide begins when policy makers perceive an external problem and attempt to define objectively its distinguishing characteristics.
Objectivity requires full information about the actions, motivations, and capabilities of other actors as well as the character of the global environment and trends within it.
The search for information must be exhaustive, and all the facts relevant to the problem must be gathered.
Next, those responsible for making foreign policy choices must determine what they want to accomplish.
It requires the identification and ranking of all values in a hierarchy from most to least preferred.
Rationality also requires the compilation of an exhaustive list of all available policy options and an estimate of the costs associated with each alternative.
Finally, rationality requires selecting the single alternative with the best chance of achieving the desired goal.
For this purpose, policy makers must conduct rigorous means-ends, cost-benefit analysis guided by an accurate prediction of the probable success of each option.
Policy makers often describe their own behavior as resulting from a rational decision-making process designed to reach the “best” decision possible, which employs the logic of consequentialism to estimate the results that can be expected from the decision taken.
They claimed that they were faithfully following the rules for rational choice in their declared war against “global terrorism” following 9/11 and in their decision to attack the dictator Saddam Hussein’s Iraq.
The message was clothed in the language of deliberate rational choice to convince skeptics that the costs and benefits of all options had been carefully weighed.
However, like beauty, rationality often lies in the eye of the beholder, and reasonable, clear-thinking people can and often do disagree about the facts and about the wisdom of foreign policy goals.
This debate demonstrated that while rationality is a decision-making goal to which all transnational actors aspire, it is difficult to determine when the criteria for rational choice have been met.
It is doubtful that decision makers hear arguments on the merits and weigh them judiciously before choosing a course of action. —Daniel Kahneman and Jonathan Renshon, decision-making theorists Impediments to Rational Choice Despite the apparent application of rationality in these crises, rational choice is often more an idealized standard than an accurate description of real-world behavior.
He described an eight-step process for policy making that is consistent with the rational model we have described; agreeing on the facts; agreeing on the overall policy objective; precisely defining the problems; canvassing all possible solutions; listing the consequences that flow from each solution; recommending one option; communicating the option selected; and providing for its execution.
There may be many interpretations of what is right, what is possible, and what is in the national interest . bounded rationality the concept that decision maker’s capacity to choose the best option is often constrained by many human and organizationai obstacies.
Despite the virtues rational choice promises, the impediments to its realization in foreign policy making are substantial.
Some of the barriers that make errors in foreign policy so common are human, deriving from deficiencies in the intelligence, capability, and psychological needs and aspirations of foreign policy decision makers.
Others are organizational, because most decisions require group agreement about the actor’s best interests and the wisest course of action.
Reaching agreement is not easy, however, as reasonable people with different values often disagree about goals, preferences, and the probable results of alternative options.
Thus, the impediments to rational policy making are not to be underestimated.
Scrutiny of the actual process of decision making reveals other hindrances.
Available information is often insufficient to recognize emergent problems accurately, resulting in decisions made on the basis of partial information and vague memories.
Moreover, the available information is often inaccurate because the bureaucratic organizations that political leaders depend upon for advice screen, sort, and rearrange it.
In April 2009, Obama attended a summit in Prague with 27 members of the European Union.
Obama is pictured here with Czech President Vaciav Klaus at a welcome ceremony at the Prague Castle. game theory shows , leaders are limited in their capacity to process information and avoid biases; preoccupied with preventing losses, leaders are also prone to “wishful thinking” and “shooting from the hip,” which results in frequently making irrational decisions.
These intellectual propensities explain why policy makers sometimes pay little heed to warnings, overlook information about dangers, and repeat their past intellectual mistakes.
To better capture the way most leaders make policy decisions, Robert Putnam coined the phrase two-level games.
At the national level, domestic groups pursue their interests by pressuring the government to adopt favorable policies, and politicians seek power by constructing coalitions among these groups.
At the international level, national governments seek to maximize their own ability to satisfy domestic pressures, while minimizing the adverse consequences of foreign developments.
Neither of the two games can be ignored by central decision makers so long as their countries remain interdependent, yet sovereign . game theory mathematical model of strategio Interaction where outcomes are determined not only by a single actor’s preferences, buf also by the choices of all actors involved. two-level games a concept referring to the growing need for national policy makers to make decisions that will meet both domestic and foreign goals.
Most leaders must meet the often incompatible demands of internal politics and external diplomacy, and it is seldom possible to make policy decisions that respond rationally to both sets of goals.
This is why many leaders are likely to fuse the two sectors in contemplating policy decisions.
States are administered by individuals with varying beliefs, values, preferences, and psychological needs, and such differences generate disagreements about goals and alternatives that are seldom resolved through orderly, rational processes.
Moreover, these individuals are greatly shaped by the socially accepted shared understandings within their own policy-making community and culture.
Yet there seldom exists a confident basis for making foreign policy decisions.
Decision making often revolves around the difficult task of choosing among values, so that the choice of one option means the sacrifice of others.
Indeed, many decisions tend to produce negative unintended consequences— what economists call externalities.
Especially in the realm of foreign policy where risk is high and there is much uncertainty, decision makers’ inability to rapidly gather and digest large quantities of information constrains their capacity to make informed choices.
Because policy makers work with an overloaded policy agenda and short deadlines, the search for policy options is seldom exhaustive.
In the choice phase, then, decision makers rarely make value-maximizing choices.
Instead of selecting the option with the best chance of success, they typically end their evaluation as soon as an alternative appears that seems superior to those already considered.
Rather than “optimizing” by seeking the best alternative, decision makers are routinely content to choose the first option that meets minimally acceptable standards.
In short, decision makers are prone to rapidly estimate whether rival options are good or bad, react to these hastily constructed classifications, and then are content to settle with the relatively good alternative as opposed to the best.
Rooted in the experiments of Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, who won the 2002 Nobel Prize in economics, prospect theory similarly challenges the idea that decision makers behave rationally.
Prospect theory looks at how people perceive and misperceive risks when making choices under conditions of uncertainty, and posits that there are consistent and predictable biases in the way that people depart from rational decision making.
Like people everywhere, leaders tend to overvalue certainty and “peace of mind,” even to their detriment.
They do not calculate the consequence of choices, and are more concerned with the potential losses that may result from a change than with the potential gains.
As critics lament of George W Bush’s refusal to acknowledge decision-making failures regarding the Iraq war (Draper 2008; Goldsmith 2008), leaders are prone to cling to failed policies long after their deficiencies have become apparent.
Similar criticisms were also made regarding both the Johnson and Nixon administrations’ decisions to keep the United States mired in the unpopular war in Vietnam.
Yet while decision making that departs from rationality can be problematic, irrationality can still produce “good” decisions.
Along these lines, experimental literature indicates that people tend to incorporate a sense of fairness into their decision making even if it is contrary to their own rational self-interest. prospect theory a social psychological theory explaining decision making under conditions of uncertainty and risk that looks at the relationship between individual risk propensity and the perceived prospects for avoiding losses and realizing big gains.
Yet while rational foreign policy making is more an ideal than a reality, we can still assume that policy makers aspire to rational decision-making behavior, which they may occasionally approximate.
The Bureaucratic Politics of Foreign Policy Decision Making To make the right choices, leaders must seek information and advice, and must see that the actions their decisions generate are carried out properly.
Out of necessity, leaders must turn to those with the expertise they lack.
In today’s world, leaders must depend on large-scale organizations for information and advice as they face critical foreign policy choices.
Bureaucratic Efficiency and Rationality Bureaucracies, according to the theoretical work of the German social scientist Max Weber, are widely believed to increase efficiency and rationality by assigning responsibility for different tasks to different people.
They define rules and standard operating procedures that specify how tasks are to be performed; they rely on record systems to gather and store information; they divide authority among different organizations to avoid duplication of effort; and they often lead to meritocracies by hiring and promoting the most capable individuals.
Bureaucracies also permit the luxury of engaging in forward planning to determine longterm needs and the means to attain them.
Unlike leaders, whose roles require attention to the crisis of the moment, bureaucrats are able to consider the future as well as the present.
The presence of several organizations also can result in multiple advocacy of rival choices , thus improving the chance that all possible policy options will be considered.
The Limits of Bureaucratic Organization What emerges from our description of bureaucracy is another idealized picture of the policy-making process.
Before jumping to the conclusion that bureaucratic decision making is a modern blessing, however, we should emphasize that the foregoing propositions tell us how bureaucratic decision making should occur; they do not tell us how it does occur.
The actual practice and the foreign policy choices that result show that bureaucracy produces burdens as well as benefits.
The method that United States policy makers used in orchestrating a response is often viewed as having nearly approximated the ideal of rational choice.
From another decision-making perspective, however, the missile crisis reveals how decision making by and within organizational contexts sometimes compromises rather than facilitates rational choice.
The bureaucratic politics model emphasizes how large-scale bureaucratic organizations contribute to the policy-making process by devising standard operating procedures —established methods to be followed in the performance of designated tasks.
Not surprisingly, participants in the deliberations that lead to policy choices also often define issues and favor policy alternatives that serve their organization’s needs.
Consider why professional diplomats typically favor diplomatic approaches to policy problems, whereas military officers routinely favor military solutions.
Rather than being a value-maximizing process, then, policy making is itself an intensely competitive game of politics.
Splits among key advisers over important foreign policy choices have been frequent.
For example, under Presidents Nixon and Ford, Secretary of State Henry Kissinger fought often with James Schlesinger and Donald Rumsfeld, who headed the Department of Defense, over strategy regarding the Vietnam War; Jimmy Carter’s national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski, repeatedly engaged in conflicts with Secretary of State Cyrus Vance over the Iran hostage crisis; and under Ronald Reagan, Caspar Weinberger at Defense and George Shultz at State were famous for butting heads on most policy issues.
Such conflicts are not necessarily bad because they force each side to better explain its viewpoint, and this allows heads of state the opportunity to weigh their competing advice before making decisions.
However, battles among advisers can lead to paralysis and to rash decisions that produce poor results.
That possibility became evident in the fall of 2002, when serious divisions within George W Bush’s administration developed over how and why the president’s goal was to wage war against Saddam Hussein in Iraq.
Fissures became apparent as key officials publicly debated the wisdom of diplomacy versus invasion, and then how best to conduct the invasion.
One view proposes that bureaucratic agencies are parochial and that every administrative unit within a transnational actor’s foreign-policy-making bureaucracy seeks to promote its own purposes and power.
Organizational needs, such as large staffs and budgets, come before the actor’s needs, sometimes encouraging the sacrifice of group interests to bureaucratic interests, as bureaucrats come to see their own interests as the same as the group’s.
The growth and thickening of bureaucratic government are associated with competition among the growing number of overlapping agencies charged with foreign policy responsibilities.
Far from being neutral or impartial managers, desiring only to carry out orders from the leaders, bureaucratic organizations frequently take policy positions designed to increase their own influence relative to that of other agencies.
Characteristically, they are driven to enlarge their prerogatives and expand the conception of their mission, seeking to take on other units’ responsibilities and powers.
The tragic surprise terrorist attack on September 11, 2001, provides a telling example of these ascribed characteristics of bureaucratic politics.
The attacks on 9/11 were regarded by many as the worst intelligence failure since Pearl Harbor.
The answer at first accepted by most analysts was that America’s chaotic system of intelligence was paralyzed by the morass of cross-cutting bureaucracies responsible.
They engaged in turf battles with one another and did not share the vital information that arguably could have identified the A1 Qaeda plot and prevented it.
The problem was miscommunication and noncommunication; the signals about the attack were not forwarded to the executive branch in time.
These problems exist in every administration, but are particularly problematic when intense ideological perspectives are in play.
As the horror of 9/11 persisted, so did interest in and concern about who did what prior to September 11,2001, to disrupt the A1 Qaeda terrorist network operation.
The 9/11 Commission produced a new set of explanations for why so many opportunities to head off the 9/11 disaster were missed.
Instead, the Commission pointed its criticism at the growing complaints about the White House’s inaction and pre9/11 downplaying or ignoring of the loud and clear warnings submitted by United States intelligence bureaucracies of the true, imminent dangers of a likely terrorist attack.
In this case, the failure of the United States government to protect its citizens might have been more due to the unwillingness of American leadership to listen to the warnings of its national security bureaucracies than to the crippling effects of bureaucratic struggles.
Each agency competes with its rivals and engages in finger-pointing and scapegoating as a blood sport.
Moreover, as FBI Special Agent Coleen Rowley testified, “There’s a mutual-protection pact in bureaucracies.
Mid-level managers avoid decisions out of fear a mistake will sidetrack their careers while a rigid hierarchy discourages agents from challenging superiors.
The idea that inaction is the key to success manifests itself repeatedly” . groupthink the propensity for members of a group to accept and agree with the group’s prevailing attitudes, rather than speaking out for what they believe.
This results in policy decisions that rarely deviate from conventional preferences.
In your future employment, you are likely to directly observe the efforts of your employer to make rational decisions.
You also are bound to notice firsthand within your organization both the advantages of bureaucratic administration and its liabilities.
Many students before you have entered the workforce and found that the payoffs of rational choice and the pitfalls of bureaucratic politics surrounding actual practice described here were not figments of scholars’ imagination.
Rather, these properties and propensities of decision making speak to the real experiences of professionals who have entered into policy-making positions.
COLLECTIVE DECISION MAKING Policy decisions are often made in small groups.
Pictured here is United States President Barack Obama meeting with his cabinet in June 2009 to discuss the global economic crisis and recovery efforts in the United States.
From left are Chairman of the Recovery Act Earl Devaney, United States Vice President Joe Biden, Obama, United States Attorney General Eric Holder, and United States Secretary for Housing and Urban Development Shaun Donovan.
The Leverage and Impact of Leaders The course of history is determined by the decisions of political elites.
Leaders and the kind of leadership they exert shape the way in which foreign policies are made and the consequent behavior of the actors in world politics.
Bush Doctrine the unilateral policies of the George W Bush Administration proclaiming that the United States will make decisions to meet America’s perceived national interests, not to concede to other countries’ complaints or to gain their acceptance. roles the constraints written into law or custom that predispose decision makers in a particular governmental position to act in a manner and style that is consistent with expectations about how the role is normally performed.
Leaders as Movers of World History This history-making individuals model of policy decision making perceives world leaders as the people whose initiatives create global changes.
We expect leaders to lead, and we assume new leaders will make a difference.
We reinforce this image when we routinely attach the names of leaders to policies—as though the leaders were synonymous with major international developments—as well as when we ascribe most successes and failures in foreign affairs to the leaders in charge at the time they occurred.
The equation of United States foreign policy with the Bush Doctrine in the 2000s is a recent example.
Citizens are not alone in thinking that leaders are the decisive determinants of states’ foreign policies and, by extension, world history.
Leaders themselves seek to create impressions of their own self-importance while attributing extraordinary powers to other leaders.
All are influenced by the roles or expectations that by law and tradition steer the decision maker to behave in conformity with prevailing expectations about how the role is to be performed.
Most people submissively act in accordance with the customary rules that define the positions they hold, behaving as their predecessors tended to behave when they held the same position.
Others, however, are by personality or preference more bold and ambitious, and they seek to decisively escape the confines of their new role by redefining how it will be performed.
The classic example is Adolf Hitler, whose ruthless determination to seek military conquest of the entire European continent proved disastrous for Germany.
That theory says that survival is the paramount goal of all states and that all leaders engage in rational calculations that advance their countries’ aspirations for self-advantage.
But this theory cannot account for the times when the choices leaders make ultimately prove counterproductive.
If the realists are correct, even defects in states’ foreign-policy-making processes cannot easily explain such wide divergences between the decisions leaders sometimes make and what cold cost-benefit calculations would predict.
Realism discounts leaders by assuming that global constraints “limit what leaders can do.
Because the systemic imperatives of anarchy or interdependence are so clear, leaders can only choose from a limited range of alternatives.
They are instrumentally rational because they have preferences on which they choose.
When faced with two or more alternative options, they can rationally make the choice that they believe will produce their preferred outcome. instrumental rationality a conceptualization of rationality that emphasizes the tendency of decision makers to compare options with those previously considered and then select the one that has the best chance of success.
It also suggests that an individual’s actions may be rational even though the process of decision making and its product may appear decidedly irrational.
Because, we can postulate, Qaddafi’s actions were consistent with his preferences, regardless of how “irrational” it was for a fourth-rate military power to take on the world’s preeminent superpower.
This and many other examples serve as a reminder of the importance of the human factor in understanding how decisions are made.
Factors Affecting Leadership Despite the popularity of the history-making individuals model, we must be wary of ascribing too much importance to individual leaders.
Their influence is likely to be subtler, a probability summarized by United States President Bill Clinton in 1998 when he observed, “Great presidents don’t do great things.
Tensions... must have some objective causes, and unless we can remove these causes, no personal relationship can possibly deal with them.
We are doing . . . ourselves a favor by reducing the issues to a contest of personalities.
The question at issue is not whether political elites lead or whether they can make a difference.
But leaders are not in complete control, and their influence is severely constrained.
Thus, personality and personal political preferences do not determine foreign policy directly.
The relevant question, then, is not whether leaders’ personal characteristics make a difference, but rather under what conditions their characteristics are influential.
Moreover, certain circumstances enhance individuals’ potential influence.
For example, when public opinion strongly favors a powerful leader, and when the head of state has an exceptional need for admiration, foreign policy will more likely reflect that leader’s inner needs.
Thus, Kaiser Wilhelm II’s narcissistic personality allegedly met the German people’s desire for a symbolically powerful leader, and German public preferences in turn influenced the foreign policy that Germany pursued during Wilhelm’s reign, ending in World War I . political efficacy the extent to which policy makers' seifconfidence instiils in them the belief that they can effectiveiy make rationai choices.
Feminism suggests that men and women tend to see issues such as war, peace, security, and the use of military force in different ways, and this may influence the way in which they make decisions and interact with the world around them.
Similarly, social constructivism considers the existence of different values and views between women and men as a product of distinct socialization experiences.
It is likely, therefore, that gender influences the decisionmaking process, even if it does not make a difference in terms of the final decision outcome.
For instance, when leaders believe that their own interests and welfare are at stake, they tend to respond in terms of their private needs and psychological drives.
When circumstances are stable, however, and when leaders’ egos are not entangled with policy outcomes, the influence of their personal characteristics is less apparent.
When an individual first assumes a leadership position, the formal requirements of that role are least likely to restrict what he or she can do.
That is especially true during the “honeymoon” period routinely given to newly elected leaders, during which time they are relatively free of criticism and excessive pressure.
A national crisis is a potent circumstance that increases a leader’s control over foreign policy making.
Decision making during crises is typically centralized and handled exclusively by the top leadership.
Crucial information is often unavailable, and leaders see themselves as responsible for outcomes.
Not surprisingly, great leaders (e.g., Napoleon Bonaparte, Winston Churchill, and Franklin D Roosevelt) customarily emerge during periods of extreme tumult.
A crisis can liberate a leader from the constraints that normally would inhibit his or her capacity to control events or engineer foreign policy change.
History abounds with examples of the seminal importance of political leaders who emerge in different times and places and under different circumstances to play critical roles in shaping world history.
Mikhail Gorbachev dramatically illustrates an individual’s capacity to change the course of history.
Having said that the history-making individuals model may be compelling, we must be cautious and remember that leaders are not all-powerful determinants of states’ foreign policy behavior.
Poiiticai psychoiogy and constructivism teii us that the same option is iikeiyto have different vaiue to different ieaders.
Consider the exampie of Richard Nixon, in 1971, Americans took to the streets outside the White House to protest the immoraiity of Nixon’s massive bombing of Vietnam.
His reaction to this perceived threat was to shieid himseif from the voice ot the peopie, without success, as it happened.
Nixon compiained that “nobody can know what it means for a president to be sitting in that White House working iate at night and to have hundreds of thousands of demonstrators charging through the streets.
Eariier, on a rainy afternoon in 1962, John F Kennedy faced a similar citizen protest.
Americans had gathered in front of the White House tor a “Ban the Bomb"" demonstration.
His response was to send out urns ot coffee and doughnuts and invite the leaders of the protest to come inside to state their case, believing that a democracy should encourage dissent and debate.
This comparison suggests that the type of leader can make a difference in determining the kinds of choices likely to be made in response to similar situations.
More important than each president’s treatment of the protesters, however, was whether he actually changed his policy decisions based on the protests.
Although Kennedy was hospitable to protesters, he did not ban nuclear weapons; in fact, military spending under Kennedy grew to consume half of the federal budget.
Many would protest that Kennedy alone could not be expected to eliminate nuclear weapons—^that the zeitgeistms dominated by tear ot the Soviet Union and intense concern tor national security.
The protesters in 1971, however, were more in keeping with the spirit of the times.
United States troops, ending American participation in the Vietnam war.
These outcomes suggest that leaders are captive to Zeitgeist, or larger forces that drive international relations in their times.
Zeitgeist the ""spirit of the times,” or the dominant cultural norms assumed to influence the behavior of people living in particular periods. versus Zeitgeist {“ spirit of the times”) debate is pertinent here, as constructivist theorists like to observe.
That question may be unanswerable, but at least it reminds us that multiple factors affect states’ foreign policy decisions.
The history-making individuals model alone appears too simple an explanation of how transnational actors react to external challenges.
THE GLDBAL AND DDMESTIC DETERMINANTS DF STATES’ INTERNATIDNAL DECISIDNS We have discussed alternative ways of thinking about international decision making, and it is very important now to look at the factors that apply exclusively to the most important actors—states.
States have the most power, and by international law are the only transnational actors with the capacity to possess territory, to exercise control over activities within borders, and to monopolize the use of military force.
States comprise a special category of player on the world stage and respond to global trends and transformations in ways that are arguably unique.
States’ foreign policy decisions are the most consequential, and the factors that influence their capacity to make decisions to adapt to changes in world politics are different from many of those that impact other transnational actors’ decisions.
Geostrategic location, military might, economic prowess, and system of government are all variables that affect state foreign policy choices.
Still, because of the diversity of states as well as their different locations and positions within the contemporary global system, it is difficult to generalize about the influence of any one factor or combination of factors.
Recall that states and the global system make up two distinct levels; the state level encompasses domestic characteristics, and the global or international system level encompasses all actors’ relationships and the changes in these relations over time.
Global or “external” influences on foreign policy include all activities occurring beyond a state’s borders that affect the choices its officials and the people they govern make.
Such factors as the number of military alliances and the changing levels of international trade sometimes profoundly affect the choices of decision makers.
Internal or “domestic” influences, on the other hand, are those that exist at the level of the state, not the global system.
Here, attention focuses on variations in states’ attributes, such as military capabilities, level of economic development, and types of government, that may influence different countries’ foreign policy choices.
Examples of both types of influences are discussed in the sections that follow. international Influences on Foreign Policy Choice The global environment within which states operate shapes opportunities for action.
Among the most significant factors of the international environment that make possible certain courses of action but not others are the distribution of power among states and the pattern of the alliances around the most powerful. states’ attributes state characteristics that shape foreign policy behavior, such as its size, wealth, and the extent to which its leaders are accountable to its citizens in comparison with other states.
Scholars use the term polarity to describe the distribution of power among members of the global system.
As explained in Chapter 4, unipolar systems have one dominant power center, bipolar systems contain two centers of power, and multipolar systems possess more than two such centers.
Closely related to the distribution of power is the pattern of alignments among states.
The term polarization refers to the degree to which states cluster around the powerful.
For instance, a highly bipolarized system is one in which small and medium-size states form alliances with one of the two dominant powers.
The network of alliances around the United States and Soviet Union during the Cold War exemplified such a system.
Polarity and alliance polarization influence foreign policy by affecting the decision latitude possessed by states.
To illustrate this point, let’s consider two examples of how these global properties influence the freedom that states have in their international behavior.
As we shall see in Chapters 3 and 9, when power is concentrated in the hands of a single state in a unipolar system, it can more easily choose to use military force and intervene in the affairs of others than it would in a system characterized by a distribution of shared power, where rivals might obstruct its actions.
When alliances are tight military blocs, the members of each alliance will feel compelled to conform to the dictates of the alliance’s leader.
Conversely, when alliances are loosely shifting with fluid membership, smaller states can more readily choose to craft foreign policies that are independent of the wishes of the powerful.
Of course, you could think of other examples to show how the structural properties of the global system affect decision latitude.
What they would show is that the foreign policy impact of polarity and polarization hinges on the geostrategic position of a given state.
Geostrategic Position Some of the most important influences on a state’s foreign policy behavior are its location and physical terrain.
Consider the United States, which was secure throughout most of its early history because vast oceans separated it from potential threats in Europe and Asia.
I I Ice cap: Lowland Terrain New Guinea Coral Sea Pacific Ocean Argentina iJTasman ^ Sea ^ Tasman I I Flatlands I I Rolling plains I I Hilly plains MAP 6.
GEOGRAPHIC INFLUENCES ON FOREIGN POLICY How countries act toward others is shaped by the number of neighboring states on their borders and whether they are protected from invasion by natural barriers such as mountains and oceans.
This map suggests how, until recently, the separation of the United States from Eurasia encouraged an isolationist policy during many periods in United States history.
Consider also mountainous Switzerland, whose easily defended topography has made neutrality a viable foreign policy option.
Similarly, maintaining autonomy from continental politics has been an enduring theme in the foreign policy of Great Britain, an island country whose physical detachment from Europe long served as a buffer separating it from entanglement in major power disputes on the Continent.
Most countries are not insular, however; they have many states on their borders, denying them the option of noninvolvement in world affairs.
Germany, which sits in the geographic center of Europe, historically has found its domestic political system and foreign policy preferences shaped by its geostrategic position.
Each of these governments was preoccupied with its relations with neighbors but responded to the opportunities and challenges presented by Germany’s position in the middle of the European continent with very different foreign policy goals.
In no case, however, was isolationistic withdrawal from involvement in continental affairs a practical geostrategic option. geopolitics the theoretical postulate that states’ foreign policies are determined by their location, natural resources, and physical environment.
History is replete with other examples of geography’s influence on states’ foreign policy goals.
Illustrative of early geopolitical thinking is Alfred Thayer Mahan’s The Influence of Sea Power in History , which maintains that control of the seas shaped national power and foreign policy.
States with extensive coastlines and ports enjoyed a competitive advantage.
Later geopoliticians, such as Sir Halford Mackinder and Nicholas Spykman , argued that not only location but also topography, size (territory and population), climate, and distance between states are powerful determinants of individual countries’ foreign policies.
Geopolitics is only one aspect of the global environment that may influence foreign policy.
The Domestic Sources of Foreign Policy Decisions Various domestic factors and national attributes affect the capacity of states to act when foreign policy decisions must be made.
To illustrate the impact of internal factors, consider next the three regarded by scholars as the most influential.
Thus, although most states may seek similar goals, their ability to realize them will vary according to their military capabilities.
For instance, in the 1980s, Libyan leader Muammar Qaddafi repeatedly provoked the United States through anti-American and anti-Israeli rhetoric and by supporting various terrorist activities.
Qaddafi was able to act as he did largely because neither bureaucratic organizations nor a mobilized public existed in Libya to constrain his personal whims.
However, Qaddafi was doubtlessly more highly constrained by the outside world than were the leaders in the more militarily capable countries toward whom his anger was directed.
Limited military muscle compared with the United States precluded the kinds of belligerent behaviors he threatened to practice.
Conversely, Saddam Hussein made strenuous efforts to build Iraq’s military might and by 1990 had built the world’s fourth-largest army.
Thus, invading Kuwait to seize its oil fields became a feasible foreign policy option.
In the end, however, even Iraq’s impressive military power proved ineffective against a vastly superior coalition of military forces, headed by the United States.
The 1991 Persian Gulf War forced Saddam Hussein to capitulate and withdraw from the conquered territory.
Twelve years later, the United States invaded Iraq and finally ousted Saddam Hussein from office.
The lessons; what states believe about their own military capabilities and those of their adversaries guide their decisions about war and peace.
Economic Conditions The level of economic and industrial development a state enjoys also affects the foreign policy goals it can pursue.
Generally, the more economically developed a state, the more likely it is to play an activist role in the global political economy.
Rich states have interests that extend far beyond their borders and typically possess the means to pursue and protect them.
Not coincidentally, states that enjoy industrial capabilities and extensive involvement in international trade also tend to be militarily powerful—in part because military might is a function of economic capabilities.
Although economically advanced states are more active globally, this does not mean that their privileged circumstances dictate adventuresome policies.
As a result, they usually perceive the status quo as serving their interests and often forge international economic policies to protect and expand their envied position at the pinnacle of the global hierarchy.
Influencing Foreign Policy in Darfur Levels of productivity and prosperity also affect the foreign policies of the poor states at the bottom of the global hierarchy.
Some economically weak states respond to their situation by complying subserviently with the wishes of the rich on whom they depend.
Others rebel defiantly, sometimes succeeding in resisting the efforts by great powers and powerful international organizations to control their behavior.
Thus, generalizations about the economic foundations of states’ international political behavior often prove inaccurate.
Although levels of economic development vary widely among states in the global system, they alone do not determine foreign policies.
Instead, leaders’ perceptions of the opportunities and constraints that their states’ economic resources provide may more powerfully influence their foreign policy choices.
Type of Government A third important attribute affecting states’ international behavior is their type of political system.
Although realism predicts that all states will act similarly to protect their interests, a state’s type of government demonstrably constrains important choices, including whether threats to use military force are carried out.
Here the important distinction is between constitutional democracy , at one end of the spectrum, and autocratic rule at the other.
In neither democratic nor autocratic political systems can political leaders survive long without the support of organized domestic political interests, and sometimes the mass citizenry.
But in democratic systems, those interests are likely to spread beyond the government itself.
Public opinion, interest groups, and the mass media are a more visible part of the policy-making process in democratic systems.
Similarly, the electoral process in democratic societies more meaningfully frames choices and produces results about who will lead than the process used in authoritarian regimes, where the real choices are made by a few elites behind closed doors.
In a democracy, public opinion and preferences may matter, and therefore differences in who is allowed to participate and how much they exercise their right to participate are critical determinants of foreign policy choices.
The proposition that domestic stimuli, and not simply international events, are a source of foreign policy is not novel.
In ancient Greece, for instance, the realist historian Thucydides observed that what happened within the Greek city-states often did more to shape their external behavior than did the interactions between them.
Similarly, leaders today sometimes make foreign policy decisions for domestic political purposes—as, for example, when bold or aggressive acts abroad are intended to influence election outcomes at home or to divert public attention from economic woes.
The impact of government type on foreign policy choice has taken on great significance following the rapid conversion of many dictatorships to democratic rule.
The first wave occurred between 1878 and 1926, and the second between 1943 and 1962.
The third wave began in the 1970s when a large number of nondemocratic countries began to convert their governments to democratic rule.
In a remarkable global transformation from past world history, the once radical idea that democracy is the ideal form of decision making has triumphed.
This recent growth of democracy has emboldened many liberals to predict that the twenty-first century will be safer than its predecessor.
Their reasons for predicting the onset of a democratic peace vary, but rely on the logic that Immanuel Kant outlined in his 1795 treatise Perpetual Peace.
A considerable body of empirical evidence supports the proposition that democracies do not wage war against each other (Rasler and Thompson 2005; Russett 2001; Ray 1995). diversionary theory of war the hypothesis that leaders sometimes initiate conflict abroad as a way of increasing national cohesion at home by diverting national public attention away from confroversial domestic issues and internal problems. democratic peace the theory that although democratic states sometimes wage wars against nondemocratic states, they do not fight one another.
THE BURDEN OF FOREIGN POLICY CHOICE FOR The type of government and, more specifically, whether leaders are accountable to opposition groups through multiparty elections strongly influence foreign policy goals.
Political scientists David Lektzian and Mark Souva attribute the democratic GLOBAL LEADERSHIP The United States is called upon to provide visionary leadership for the world, and this entails a careful assessment of priorities and strategies.
Barack Obama declared that “I will strengthen our common security by investing in our common humanity.
Our global engagement cannot be defined by what we are against; it must be guided by a clear sense of what we stand for.
The World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators ranks countries by the level of freedom citizens have to voice opinions and choose their government.
Liberal democratic peace theory predicts that as freedom across countries increases, so will peaceful relations among these democracies.
The United States’ rank fell to thirty-fifth “because of a decreased trust in public officials and restrictions on the freedom of the press” {Time, September 17,2007, 16). peace to democracies’ “greater ability to more credibly reveal information” than other regime types.
One realist thesis argues that democracies are decidedly inferior to nondemocratic governance.
Dictators and despots such as Adolf Hitler, Joseph Stalin, and Mao Zedong can embark as warmongers on grand international missions and be hailed as great unifiers and the builders of grandiose projects, whereas democratic politicians are “by nature mediocre.
The great dictators... give the people a destiny, whereas democrats can only promise happiness. under the spell of absolute power.
Because classical realism follows Machiavelli by honoring strong rulers who are able to convince subjects of their need to be ruled by them for the glory of the state, these realists prefer the capacity of nondemocratic governments to forge foreign policies freely in pursuit of national interests.
I sometimes wonder whether a democracy is not uncomfortably similar to one of those prehistoric monsters with a body as long as this room and a brain the size of a pin.
He lies there in his comfortable primeval mud and pays little attention to his environment; he is slow to wrath—in fact, you practically have to whack his tail off to make him aware that his interests are being disturbed; but, once he grasps this, he lays about him with such blind determination that he not only destroys his adversary but largely wrecks his native habitat.
A crisis sufficient enough to arouse the attention and activity of a large proportion of the population may need to erupt in order for large changes in policy to come about.
As French political sociologist Alexis de Tocqueville argued in 1835, democracies may be inclined to “impulse rather than prudence” because they overreact to perceived external dangers once they recognize them.
In short, the concentration of power and the suppression of public opposition can be both advantageous and disadvantageous.
Foreign policy choice takes place in an environment of uncertainty and multiple competing interests.
On occasion, it is also made in situations where policy makers are caught by surprise and a quick decision is needed.
Specifically, we will consider the concerns that decision makers must wrestle with in confronting armed aggression.
In Chapter 7, you will have an opportunity to examine the global character and consequences of violent threats to security.
In Chapters 8 through 11, we will weigh the rival ideas presented by the realist road to security and the liberal path to peace.
You will also be invited to consider the insights that alternative constructivist, radical, and feminist theories provide in grappling with the challenge of finding solutions to the grave threat of armed aggression.
Shown here is a United States test of a nuclear bomb in 1954, when only the United States and the Soviet Union had nuclear capabilities.
Today the capacity to wage war with weapons of mass destruction has spread to many countries, and the diffusion is transforming the global balance of power.
What to do with such weapons for war and for peace is the central concern of realist theorizing, which looks on the acquisition of military power and its consequences as the most important dimension of world politics.
For many people, world politics is about arms, alliances, and the exercise by military means of political influence over rivals and other actors on the global stage.
Indeed, many people equate world politics with war and its threat to their nation, city, and the world at large.
An attack by an enemy is the most dangerous direct threat to survival, and preventing such death and destruction is a precondition for the attainment of aU other important values, such as food, water, freedom, and the possession of a territory on which to live safely and without foreign domination.
Yet war is a problem, and changes are required in the practices of states toward one another if we are to control armed aggression and reduce its frequency and destructiveness.
Chapter 7 looks at the military threats to international security posed by wars between states, wars within states, and international terrorism.
In Chapter 8, the pursuit of national interest defined in terms of military power is examined through the lens of realist approaches to national and international security, with consideration of trends in weapons of war and alternative military methods.
Chapter 9 provides an overview of the various roles that realists envision for alliances in international politics, including the attractive purposes that realists ascribe to alliances as a method for increasing the power of a state against its competitors and their allies, as well as an account of the risk and costs that realists warn can result from the formation of alliances.
In Chapter 10, you will look at liberal ideas for negotiating at the bargaining table rather than fighting on the battlefield to settle international disputes, as well as subjecting inter-state relations to a true system of international law with strong sanctions for noncompliance with rules.
Chapter 11 introduces the liberal proposal to “beat swords into plowshares” through disarmament of the weapons of war, empowering international organizations for maintaining the collective security of all countries, and the use of economic sanctions as a nonmilitary method of punishment for aggressors.
Shown here are Sunni Muslim insurgents celebrating their attack of an American military convoy outside Fallujah, Iraq.
The 9/11 attack and the United States war in Afghanistan, the terrorist attacks in Madrid in 2004 and London in 2005, the continuing U.S.-led military struggle against insurgents in Iraq, the 2006 Israeli-Hezbollah War in Lebanon, and a wave of civil wars dashed all prior hopes for peace.
It is understandable why so many people think that armed aggression is the essence of world politics.
In On War, Prussian strategist Karl von Clausewitz advanced his famous dictum that war is merely an extension of diplomacy by other means, albeit an extreme form.
This insight underscores the realist belief that war is a policy instrument transnational actors use to resolve their conflicts.
War, however, is the deadliest instrument of conflict resolution, and its onset usually means that persuasion and negotiations have failed.
In international relations, conflict regularly occurs when actors interact and disputes over incompatible interests arise.
In and of itself, conflict (like politics —activities aimed at getting another actor to do something it would not otherwise do) is not necessarily threatening, because war and conflict are different.
Conflict may be seen as inevitable and occurs whenever two parties perceive differences between themselves and seek to resolve those differences to their own satisfaction.
Some conflict results whenever people interact and may be generated by religious, ideological, ethnic, economic, political, or territorial issues; therefore, we should not regard it as abnormal.
However, the costs of conflict do become threatening when the parties take up arms to settle their perceived irreconcilable differences or use force to settle old scores.
When that happens, violence occurs, and we enter the separate sphere of warfare.
This chapter presents information and ideas so you can explore the nature of armed aggression in your world—its types, frequency, and changing characteristics and causes.
And you will be forced to confront the ethical dilemmas that these military threats create—about when it is moral or immoral to take up arms.
World Politics puts into the spotlight three primary ways that war a condition arising within states (civil war) or between states when actors use violent means to destroy their opponents or coerce them into submission. conflict discord, often arising in international relations over perceived incompatibilities of interest. armed aggression combat between the military forces of two or more states or groups.
As words are never enough, on February 26,2009, Defense Secretary Robert Gates announced that the ban on taking pictures of service members’ coffins returning home would be lifted, with their famiiies’ consent.
You will have the opportunity to review the leading theories that explain the causes of these three types of armed aggression in world politics.
The belief that “only the dead will see the end of war” is based on the fact that warfare has been an ugly, almost constant factor in a changing world.
Scientists who study war quantitatively through the scientific methodologies of behavioralism have attempted to estimate the frequency of armed conflicts and to measure trends and cycles in the global system’s level of violent conflicts.
Nonetheless, various measures converge on the basic trends and patterns, from different periods of measurement.
In the long term , armed aggression has been continual, with a general trend toward rising incidence.
In the relative short term (since 1950), however, the pattern has shown fewer, but more deadly, armed conflicts.
These inventories report in different ways what the mass media tell us—that violence and global insecurity are entrenched properties of world politics.
The wars in 2009 in Afghanistan, Iraq, Sri Lanka, and Gaza cast a dark shadow.
In the past, when people thought about armed conflicts, they thought primarily about wars between states and secondarily about civil wars within existing sovereign states.
However, that began to change thereafter, with internal wars increasingly defining the global landscape.
This new pattern of civil wars and armed conflicts that does not involve government forces on at least one side has become especially entrenched since 1990.
The conflicts between Eritrea-Ethiopia and India-Pakistan concerned territory, while the war between Iraq and the United States and its allies was fought over governmental power.
The other thirty-three conflicts were waged within states, with nine involving disputes over territory and twenty-two over government.
Four of the major intrastate armed conflicts that were active as 2009 began were internationalized, where troops from states that were not primary parties to the conflict aided the side of the government.
CHANGING FREQUENCY AND TYPE OF ACTS OF ARMED AGGRESSION Measuring the frequency of armed conflicts each year since 1946, the figure depicts a gradual increase in the frequency of conflicts untii the peak in 1992, after which a deciine transpired that lasted roughly a decade before, in 2003, the number of conflicts again began to rise.
Throughout this period, the type of conflict has changed, with extrasystemic armed aggression becoming, it is hoped, extinct and interstate conflict between countries becoming very rare.
At the same time, however, the occurrence of armed conflict within states has grown, as has the number of internal conflicts where there is intervention from third-party states on one side or the other. insurgency groups; and the Transitional Federal Government in Somalia and the al-Shabab militia . civil wars wars between opposing groups within the same country or by rebeis against the government.
Until 9/11, most security analysts expected civil wars to remain the most common type of global violence.
However, they have had to revise their strategies and thinking to accommodate changing realities.
The characteristics of contemporary warfare appear to be undergoing a major transformation, even though many of the traditional characteristics of armed conflict continue.
Although the disappearance of armed aggression between states may be possible in the long-term future, armed aggression and violence persist, and their frequency is growing inside established states.
Next we examine this second face of military threats to the world; armed aggression within states.
ARMED AGGRESSION WITHIN STATES Large-scale civil strife is bred by the failure of state governments to effectively govern within their territorial borders.
Mismanagement by governments lacking authority and unable to meet the basic human needs of their citizens is a global trend.
Governmental incompetence has led to an epidemic of failed states throughout the globe.
Sometimes the armed aggression is confined to local regions that seek secession and independence, and other times failing states are victims of widespread but episodic fighting by insurgents and warlords.
The proliferation of failing states is a growing global danger, because the civil wars percolated by state failure lead to waves of immigrants, famine, disease, drug trafficking, environmental degradation, and terrorism. long peace long-lasting periods of peace between any of the militarily strongest great powers. failed states countries whose governments have so mismanaged policy that their citizens, in rebellion, threaten revolution to divide the country into separate independent states.
THE THREAT OF FAILED STATES This map identifies the world’s thirty-eight weakest countries whose governments are most in danger of failing and most likely to collapse in civil war and anarchy.
Also identified are an additional ninety-three countries at a “warning” level, and thirty-three at a “moderate” threshold, where some significant element of their societies and institutions are vulnerable to failure.
These potential “failed states” threaten the progress and stability of tbe other sustainable countries.
State failure and civil war are particularly evident in tbe higb-risk, weak, and impoverisbed states in Africa.
The causes of state failure and civil disintegration are multiple, but failed states share some key characteristics that make them vulnerable to disintegration, civil war, and terrorism.
In general, studies of this global trend suggest the following ; ■ A strong predictor of state failure is poverty, but extreme income and gender inequality within countries are even better warning signs.
Inasmuch as most of the sovereign states in the world have one or more of these attributes, it is likely that failed states will grow as a problem in the globalized twenty-first century.
The globe is speckled with many dangerous flash points where countries are highly vulnerable to dissolution as a result of state failure, mismanagement, civil revolt, and violent government takeovers.
To add to the grim picture, there are a number of disputed regions poised to declare independence.
Among them are the Kurdish region of Turkey on the Iraqi border, Nagaland in India, the Cabinda exclave in Angola, and Baida in southern Somalia.
Intrastate Conflict Armed conflicts within states have erupted far more frequently than have armed conflicts between states.
Between 1989 and 2009, internal armed conflict over government or territory has been the most common by far.
In this period, ninety-three armed conflicts within states took place in comparison to only eight between states.
As 2009 began, thirty-six armed conflicts were raging in twenty-six locations around the world.
However, this accelerating trend is, in part, a product of the increased number of independent states in the global system, which makes the incidence of civil war statistically more probable.
Moreover, while the number of internal armed conflicts has risen by almost twenty-five percent since 2003, the number of civil wars with more than 1000 battle-related deaths is comparatively modest, with five taking place in 2008 (Harbom and Wallensteen 2009). enduring internal rivalry protracted violent conflicts between governments and insurgent groups within a state.
Consider examples of long-lasting and resumed civil wars in Afghanistan, Burundi, Chad, Colombia, Congo, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ivory Coast, Lebanon, Liberia, Myanmar, Peru, the Philippines, Rwanda, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Turkey, and Uganda.
The number of lives lost in civil violence has always been very high, and casualties from civil wars since World War II have increased at alarming rates.
The cliche that “the most savage conflicts occur in the home” captures the ugly reality, as genocide and mass slaughter aimed at depopulating entire regions have become commonplace in recent civil wars.
That grim reality was illustrated in Rwanda, where the Hutu government orchestrated a genocidal slaughter resulting in the murder of about eight hundred thousand predominantly Tutsi and moderate Hutu people in a matter of weeks.
Sudan provides another horrifying example of the mass slaughter of civilians that often occurs when governments seek to keep power by destroying minority opposition groups.
The Arab-controlled Sudanese government that seized power in 1989 suspended democracy and undertook a divide-and-destroy campaign of state-sponsored terrorism against the black Christian and animist peoples living in the southern Darfur region.
By 2008, at least 2. million were slaughtered and another 4 million became displaced refugees.
The bloodbath and mass exodus made this tragic place of death the worst since World War II, but the great powers—preoccupied with the Iraq and Afghanistan wars— were very late in authorizing UN or African peacekeepers in late 2007 to intervene to stop the killing. state-sponsored terrorism formal assistance, training, and arming of foreign terrorists by a state in order to achieve foreign policy goals.
Another salient characteristic of civil wars is their resistance to negotiated settlement.
Making peace is difficult among rival factions that are struggling for power, driven by hatred and poisoned by the inertia of prolonged killing that has become a way of life.
Few domestic enemies fighting in a civil war have succeeded in ending the combat through negotiated compromise at the bargaining table.
Most civil wars end on the battlefield but rarely with a decisive victory of one faction over another.
They join for many reasons—some are kidnapped and forced to join, others are lured by promises of money, others have lost loved ones and seek vengeance.
Here we see an eleven year old boy standing on the roadside at a Sierra Leone military checkpoint.
The International Dimensions of Internal Conflict The rise of failing states and their frequent fall into intrastate conflict may make it tempting for you to think of armed aggression within states as stemming exclusively from conditions within those countries.
It is a conflict both between and within political systems; a conflict that is both external and internal. internal wars affect the international system the international system affects internal wars” . coup d’etat a sudden, forcible takeover of government by a small group within that country, typically carried out by violent or illegal means with the goal of Installing their own leadership in power.
Take, for example, the consequence of violent government takeover through a coup d’etat.
Historically, successful coups tended to result in authoritarian regimes seizing power, such as Pinochet in Chile or Suharto in Indonesia.
Between 1960 and 1990, an average of six coups occurred somewhere around the globe every year and 80 percent of the leaders held onto power for at least five years.
Political scientists Hein Groemans and Nikolay Marinov attribute this changed pattern, in part, to an external factor; “Since the end of Cold War rivalry for spheres of influence.
Because the great powers have global interests, they have played roles “behind the scenes,” not only in the occurrence of coup d’etats, but also militarily in intrastate conflict to support friendly governments and to overthrow unfriendly ones.
But today it is often difficult to determine where an internal war ends and another begins.
In the aftermath of external intrusions, the targets’ domestic societies have been transformed.
At times, external actors have sent interventionary armed forces into failed states to contain and control the civil conflict causing violence and attempt to reestablish governing authority.
There is another dimension to the internationalization of intrastate conflict.
Many analysts believe that domestic insurrections become internationalized when leaders experiencing internal opposition within their state intentionally seek to provoke an international crisis in the hope that their citizens will become less rebellious if their attention is diverted to the threat of aggression from foreign countries.
This theory draws a direct connection between civil strife and foreign aggression.
It maintains that when leaders sense their country is suffering from conflict at home, they are prone to attempt to contain that domestic strife by waging a war against foreigners—hoping that the international danger will take citizens’ attention away from their dissatisfaction with their home leadership.
It gives him his only chance of being a tyrant and being loved for it at the same time.
He can introduce the most ruthless forms of control and send thousands of his followers to their deaths and still diversionary theory of war the hypothesis that leaders initiate conflict abroad as a way of increasing their citizens’ approval of them and national cohesion at home.
Indeed, many political advisers have counseled this strategy, as realist theorist Niccolo Machiavelli did in 1513 when he advised leaders to undertake foreign wars whenever turmoil within their state became too great.
He was echoed by Hermann Goering, the Nazi adviser to German dictator Adolf Hitler, who asserted “voice or no voice, the people can always be brought to do the bidding of the leaders.
Whether leaders actually start wars to offset domestic conflict and heighten public approval remains a subject of debate.
Unpopular leaders may instead be highly motivated to exercise caution in foreign affairs and to avoid the use of force overseas in order to cultivate a reputation as a peacemaker.
It may be better for leaders facing opposition to avoid further criticism that they are intentionally manipulative by addressing domestic problems rather than engaging in reckless wars overseas— especially unpopular wars that trigger protest demonstrations and reduce leaders’ public opinion approval ratings.
Hence, there is reason to question the link between civil unrest and the initiation of interstate war.
ARMED AGGRESSION’S PAINFUL LEGACY Armed struggles within countries occur more frequently than those between states, though many have repercussions for world politics more broadly.
Pictured here are residents of the Pakistani district of Dir fleeing the fighting between Taliban militants and government in April 2009.
In noncrisis times, however, when people take to the streets to protest a leader’s domestic policies, most leaders are more inclined to concentrate on the internal disturbances than to manufacture threats of a foreign war.
Intrastate conflict can become internationalized through both the tendency for them to incite external intervention as well as the propensity for leaders of governments that are failing to wage wars abroad in order to try to control rebellion at home.
These two trends both are making for the globalization of armed aggression.
And that globalization is evident in yet another, third type of armed aggression that brings violence to world politics; the threat of global terrorism that knows no borders and that is spreading worldwide.
TERRORISM Since the birth of the modern state system some three and a half centuries ago, national leaders have prepared for wars against other countries.
Throughout this period, war has been conceived as large-scale organized violence between the regular armies of sovereign states.
Although leaders today still ready their countries for such clashes, increasingly they are faced with the prospect of asymmetric warfare —armed conflict between terrorist networks and conventional military forces.
Terrorism was well known even in ancient times, as evident in the campaign of assassinations conducted by the Sicarii (named after a short dagger, or sica) in Judea during the first century bce.
In 2010 the United States National CounterTerrorism Center identified dozens of different transnational actors as worldwide terrorist groups.
Political terrorism is the deliberate use or threat of violence against noncombatants, calculated to instill fear in an audience beyond the immediate victims.
Because perpetrators of terrorism often strike symbolic targets in a horrific manner, the psychological impact of an attack can exceed the physical damage.
A mixture of drama and dread, terrorism is not senseless violence; it is a premeditated political strategy that threatens people with a coming danger that seems ubiquitous, unavoidable, and unpredictable. asymmetric warfare armed conflict between belligerents of vastly unequal military strength, in which the weaker side is often a nonstate actor that relies on unconventional tactics.
TFIE CFIANGING TFHREAT OF GLOBAL TERRORISM Terrorist attacks worldwide returned to approximately the same level in 2008 as they were in 2005, hut the distrihution has changed dramatically.
Altogether, the United States reported that 11,770 terrorist attacks against noncomhatants occurred in 2008, and these strikes claimed a total of almost 16,000 lives.
Yet, as the figure on the left depicts, in Iraq terrorist attacks decreased hy about 50 percent and deaths by over 60 percent from what they had been in both 2006 and 2007.
As shown in the figure on the right, countries such as Pakistan and Afghanistan in South Asia now bear approximately the same burden of terrorist attacks as Iraq and the Near East, but South Asia has now surpassed the Near East in terrorist-related deaths.
Terrorism can be employed to support or to change the political status quo.
Repressive terror, which is wielded to sustain an existing political order, has been utilized by governments as well as by vigilantes.
From the Gestapo (secret state police) in Nazi Germany to the “death squads” in various countries.
Dissidents who use terrorism to change the political status quo vary considerably.
Some groups, like the MPLA (Popular Movement for the Liberation of Angola), used terrorism to expel colonial rulers; others, such as ETA (Basque Homeland and Liberty), adopt terrorism as part of an ethnonational separatist struggle; still others, including the Islamic Jihad, the Christian Identity Movement, the Sikh group Babbar Khalsa, and Jewish militants belonging to Kach, place terror in the service of what they see as religious imperatives.
Finally, groups such as the Japanese Red Army and Italian Black Order turn to terrorism for leftor right-wing ideological reasons.
Dissident terror may be grounded in anticolonialism, separatism, religion, or secular ideology.
Bombing alone accounts for roughly one-third of all recorded terrorist incidents.
Hijacking and hostage taking generally involve more complex operations than planting a bomb in a crowded department store or gunning down travelers in a train station.
TOOLS OF TERRORIST WARFARE The figure on the left records the major methods used by terrorists worldwide in 2008, and the number of deaths caused by each.
As the third most frequently used tactic, suicide attacks are carried out by peopie wiiling to kiii enemy targets with methods sucb as wearing a conceaied vest carrying explosives or driving a car bomb.
The picture on the right is Raed Abdui Hamid Misk and his children days before he blew himself up on a Jerusalem hus.
To be successful, these kinds of seizures require detailed preparation and the capacity to guard captives for long periods of time.
Among the payoffs of such efforts is the opportunity to articulate the group’s grievances.
The Lebanese group behind the 1985 hijacking of TWA Flight 847, for instance, excelled at using United States television networks to articulate its grievances to the American public, which reduced the options that the Reagan administration could consider while searching for a solution to the crisis.
Beyond the conventional tactics of bombings, assaults, hijacking, and hostage taking, two other threats could become part of the terrorist repertoire.
First, dissidents may acquire weapons of mass destruction to deliver a mortal blow against detested enemies.
Nuclear armaments are the ultimate terror weapons, but radiological, chemical, and biological weapons also pose extraordinary dangers.
Crude radiological weapons can be fabricated by combining ordinary explosives with nuclear waste or radioactive isotopes, stolen from hospitals, industrial facilities, or research laboratories.
Rudimentary chemical weapons can be made from herbicides, pesticides, and other toxic substances that are available commercially.
Biological weapons based on viral agents are more difficult to produce, although the dispersal of anthrax spores through the mail during the fall of 2001 illustrated that low-technology attacks with bacterial agents in powder form are a frightening possibility. information warfare attacks on an adversary's telecommunications and computer networks to degrade the technological systems vital to its defense and economic well-being.
Not only can the Internet be used by extremists as a recruiting tool and a means of coordinating their activities with like-minded groups, but it also allows them to case potential targets by hacking into a foe’s computer system.
Viruses and other weapons of information warfare could cause havoc if they disable financial institutions.
The New Global Terrorism The conventional view of terrorism as a rare and relatively remote threat was challenged by the events of September 11, 2001.
Terrorists were capable of executing catastrophic attacks almost anywhere, even without an arsenal of sophisticated weapons.
Not only did groups like A1 Qaeda have global reach, but stealth, ingenuity, and meticulous planning could compensate for their lack of firepower.
Previously, terrorism was regarded as political theater, a frightening drama where the perpetrators wanted a lot of people watching, not a lot of people dead.
Driven by searing hatred, annihilating enemies appears more important to global terrorists than winning sympathy for their cause.
Another feature of this new strain of terrorism is its organizational form.
Instead of having a hierarchical command structure, for example, A1 Qaeda possesses a decentralized horizontal structure.
Loosely tied together by the Internet, e-mail, and cellular telephones, A1 Qaeda originally resembled a hub-and-spoke organization; Osama bin Laden and a small core of loyalists provided strategic direction and aid to a franchise of affiliated terrorist cells.
Rather than serving as a commander, bin Laden functioned as a coordinator who, in addition to planning dramatic, high-casualty attacks, provided financial and logistical support to extremist groups fighting those whom he perceived as archenemies.
Following the demise of the Taliban regime in Afghanistan after the U.S.-led military intervention, A1 Qaeda underwent a structural change.
Combined with its loss of a safe haven in Afghanistan, the killing or capture of roughly one-third of A1 Qaeda’s leadership transformed the organization into an entity that resembled a chain.
Bin Laden and his close associates continued offering ideological inspiration to small, disparate cells scattered around the world, but they no longer were directly involved in the planning and execution of most of the attacks undertaken in A1 Qaeda’s name.
Operating independently, without the training, financing, and logistical infrastructure previously available through a central headquarters, A1 Qaeda’s diffuse underground cells began to concentrate on “soft” targets, sometimes attacking in conjunction with sympathetic local forces.
What makes the new breed of terrorists who belong to organizations such as A1 Qaeda more lethal than previous terrorists is their religious fanaticism, which allows them to envision acts of terror on two levels.
At one level, terrorism is a means to change the political status quo by punishing those culpable for felt wrongs.
Looking like self-funded criminal gangs with no ranks and uncertain allegiances, many terrorist groups hide their identity and report to no superiors.
Counterterrorism Bush Doctrine the declaration that the United States intended to behave globally in terms of its perceived national self-interests, without the necessary approval of others, and, as a corollary, would consider taking unilateral preemptive military action against any perceived security threat to defeat it before it could attack the United States.
The threat facing civilization after September 11, 2001, was described by then United States President George W Bush as a network of terrorist groups and rogue states that harbored them.
As you learned in Chapter 5, terrorist groups are a type of transnational nonstate actor , distinguished by the fact that they use violence as their primary method of exercising influence.
States have often financed, trained, equipped, and provided sanctuary for terrorists whose activities serve their foreign policy goals.
The practice of such state-sponsored terrorism is among the charges that the United States leveled against Iraq prior to toppling Saddam Hussein in 2003, and continues to apply to Cuba, Iran, Sudan, and Syria.
However, disagreement about the character and causes of global terrorism remain pronounced, and, without agreement on these preUminaries, a consensus on the best response is unlikely.
Much like a disease that cannot be treated until it is accurately diagnosed, so the plague of the new global terrorism cannot be eradicated until its sources are understood.
Those persuaded by one image of terrorism are drawn to certain counterterrorism policies, whereas those holding a different image recommend contrary policies.
As constructivist theorists remind us, what we see depends on what we expect, what we look at, and what we wish to see.
Consider the diametrically opposed views of whether repression or conciliation is the most effective counterterrorist policy.
Rather than condoning military strikes aimed at exterminating the practitioners of terrorism, they endorse conciliatory policies designed to reduce terrorism’s appeal.
Terrorism The history of terrorism indicates that there is no single counterterrorist orthodoxy on strategic questions, no canon with strict guidelines running from ultimate goals to intermediate objectives to specific tactics.
Though “groups whose attacks on civilian targets outnumbered attacks on military targets systematically failed to achieve their policy objectives” (Abrahms 2008, 424), strategic thinking about the use of terrorism in asymmetric warfare has evolved in response to new technologies, new targets of opportunity, and new counterterrorist policies.
The perpetrators of terrorism are not mindless; they have shown that they have long-term aims and rationally calculate how different operations can accomplish their purposes.
Indeed, it is their ability to plan, execute, and learn from these operations that makes today’s terrorists so dangerous.
Moreover, exposure to terrorism can encourage political exclusionism and threaten the principles of democratic governance.
Alongside the heavy losses and fear, terror creates an enormous challenge to the fabric of democratic societies.
In many cases, there is a difficult inner tension between the fundamental need to feel secure and the aspiration to sustain democratic values and preserve democratic culture.
More specifically, in times of terrorist threat and severe losses, when direct confrontation with the perpetrators of terrorism is either impossible or does not guarantee public safety, rage is frequently aimed at minority groups and their members.
This rage can be easily translated into support for nondemocratic practices in dealing with minorities.
Armed aggression poses a threat of huge proportions to the global future.
Having examined trends in the frequency and changing character of armed aggression between states, within them, and in global terrorism, it is difficult not to recognize that warfare in all its forms is an extremely dangerous threat to the world.
The magnitude of armed aggression raises questions about why wars occur.
The question provokes a more fundamental set of related questions about the causes of aggression generally.
Accordingly, consider some of the major contending hypotheses and theories about the sources from which armed conflicts arise.
There’s nothing quite like a protracted war to shift the landscape of existence.
In the wake of 9/11, a new conventional wisdom arose—as then United States Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld put it, “if the learned a single lesson from 9/11, it should be that the only way to defeat terrorists is to attack them.
You simply cannot defend in every place at every time against every technique.
This statement reflects the view that even if appeasement is tempting, the only way to respond is relentlessly and thoroughly.
Others argue that to truly undermine terrorism, we must address the underlying conditions that give it appeal.
Efforts to defeat Al Qaeda in Afghanistan must include the establishment of a government that can meet the needs of the people, and jobs that provide security and an alternative to fighting.
Exactly what approach to take to control the new global terrorism remains controversial.
Many experts question the United States characterization of the problem and the ambitious crusade it undertook, including skeptical allies on whom the United States depends if the antiterror war is to be won.
To conduct a worldwide war requires an enduring commitment at high costs.
That is why proposals tor an effective and just response to the new global terrorism differ, as do recommendations about how the world can most effectively reduce the probability that 9/11 will be repeated.
What makes counterterrorism so problematic is that strategists often fail to distinguish different types of terrorist movements and their diverse origins.
Therefore they construct counterterrorist strategies in the abstract—with a single formula—rather than tailoring approaches for dealing with terrorism’s alternate modes.
Your search tor solutions will necessarily spring from incompatible assumptions you make about terrorism’s nature and sources, and these assumptions will strongly affect your conclusions about the wisdom or futility of contemplated remedies.
A counterterrorist program that may succeed in one location may backfire in another.
Threats Throughout history, efforts have been made to explain why people engage in organized violence.
Some causes directly influence the odds of war; others are remote and indirect, creating explosive background conditions that enable any one of a number of more proximate factors to trigger violence.
Likewise, in a sense, all wars originate from the decisions of the leaders of states or transnational nonstate actors such as terrorist organizations.
So a good starting point for explaining why warfare occurs is to consider the relationship of armed aggression to the choices of individual leaders.
The repeated outbreak of war has led some, such as psychiatrist Sigmund Freud, to conclude that aggression is an instinctive part of human nature that stems from humans’ genetic psychological programming.
Ethologists are joined in their interpretation by adherents of realist theory who believe that all humans are born with an innate drive for power that they cannot avoid, and that this instinct leads to competition and war.
They therefore accept the sociological premise suggested by Charles Darwin’s theories of evolution and natural selection.
Life entails a struggle for survival of the fittest, and natural selection eliminates the traits that interfere with successful competition.
To realists, pacifism is counterproductive because it is contrary to basic human nature, which they see as aggressive and power seeking.
Additionally, by ruling out military action, pacifism rejects the primary realist policy instrument for ensuring state security.
Most people, of course, do not on ethical grounds, rejecting killing as evil, and neither murdering nor accepting others’ killing on behalf of the state or any other cause.
In fact, at some fundamental genetic level, human beings are wired to seek consensus, not conflict.
In addition, liberal theory and behavioral social science research suggest that genetics fails to explain why individuals may be belligerent only at certain times.
Social Darwinism’s interpretation of the biological influences on human behavior can be countered by examining why people cooperate and act morally.
Although the nature versus nurture debate regarding the biological bases of aggression has not been resolved , most social scientists now strongly disagree with the realist premise that because humans are essentially selfish, they are also aggressive and murder and kill because of their innate genetic drives to act aggressively.
Aggression is a propensity acquired early in life as a result of socialization.
Individuals’ willingness to sacrifice their lives in war out of a sense of duty to their leaders and country is one of history’s puzzles.
Clearly, this self-sacrifice stems from learned beliefs that some convictions are worth dying for, such as loyalty to one’s own country.
But this does not make human nature a cause of war, even if learned habits of obedience taught in military training are grounds for participation in aggression authorized by others, and even if at times the mass public’s chauvinistic enthusiasm for aggression against foreign adversaries encourages leaders to start wars.
This suggests that factors beyond national character (the inborn collective traits of particular peoples) better explain why certain countries tend to engage in organized violence.
Rather, armed aggression occurs most often as a result of the choices leaders make, and not because of the popular preferences of their entire societies.
To generalize from the whole to the part is to commit what demographers and statisticians call a logical ecological fallacy.
Likewise, the opposite, what logicians call the individualistic fallacy, is also a mental error.
We cannot generalize safely about the beliefs or behavior of individual leaders (Adolf Hitler of Nazi Germany, Joseph Stalin of the Soviet Union, Barack Obama of the United States, Gordon Brown of Great Britain, or Dmitry Medvedev of Russia) and ascribe them to the prevailing preferences of the collective cultures and states that each of them headed.
What should be obvious is that some of the foreign policy decisions by leaders are immoral.
Moreover, many of those decisions by countries’ leaders are the outcome of flawed decision-making processes; they fail to form to the rational choice model of foreign policy decision making that operates from the assumption that decision makers make choices through cool-headed calculations of cost and benefits in order to select the option that has the best chance of accomplishing preferred goals.
In addition, even intelligent and moral leaders are sometimes prone to make unnecessarily high-risk decisions to wage war because they are pressured through groupthink by influential advisers within their decision-making group rather than acting on what they personally believe would be the most rational choice.
This observation about the determinants of leaders’ choices about war and peace directs attention to the domestic factors that encourage some states to engage in foreign aggression. individualistic fallacy the logical error of assuming that an individual leader, who has legal authority to govern, represents the people and opinions of the population governed, so that all citizens are necessarily accountable for the vices and virtues (to be given blame or credit) of the leaders authorized to speak for them.
States’ Internal Characteristics Conventional wisdom holds that variations in states’ governments, sizes, ideologies, geographical locations, population dynamics, ethnic homogeneity, wealth, economic performance, military capabilities, and level of educational attainment influence whether they will engage in war.
We next examine some theories about the internal characteristics of states that influence leaders’ choices regarding the use of force.
Implicit in this approach to explaining armed aggression at the state level of analysis is the assumption that differences in the types or categories of states determine whether they will engage in war.
Duration of Independence Armed aggression has often been an instrument through which states have been given—or denied—birth.
New states, not long-lasting ones, are the most likely to experience civil wars and also to initiate foreign wars.
Newly independent countries usually go through a period of political unrest following their acquisition of sovereignty and independence as members in the community of states.
Such foreign disputes frequently expand into larger wars because throughout history they have frequently provoked great power intervention, or external interference by other states or nonstate IGOs into the opposed countries’ internal affairs.
The high levels of civil wars and wars between neighboring states throughout the Global South may be explained by the fact that nearly all of these less developed countries have recently gained independence from colonialism, many through revolutions.
Cultural Traditions and Nationalism Countries’ behavior is strongly influenced by the cultural and ethical traditions of their peoples.
Instead, most governments encourage their populations to glorify the state and to accept whatever decisions their leaders claim are necessary for national security, including warfare against adversaries.
Advocates of the cultural origins of war argue that most people in most societies live an everyday experience of disengagement, or “numbness,” that disinclines them to oppose their leaders’ decisions to wage war.
This leads many to critique nationalism, although many defend it as a virtue that makes for unity and solidarity within a country.
Whatever its consequences, nationalism is widely seen as perhaps the most powerful force in today’s world, an idea and ideology that animates the constructed images of many.
Hitler's Rise to Power and Its Lessons NATIONALISM’S DARK AND DEADLY PAST Under the fascist dictatorship of Adolf Hitler , the Nazi government glorified the state and claimed that the German people were a superior race.
What followed from this extreme form of nationalism was a ruthless German world war and campaign of genocide that exterminated six miilion Jews and other ethnic minorities.
United States troops under the command of General George Patton liberated the concentration camp at Buchenwald in May 1945, but not in time to save the lives of the prisoners whom the Nazi guards had put to death in the gas chambers.
Gender roles supported by realist values, feminist theory contends, contribute to the prevalence of militarism and warfare.
To feminists and other constructivist theorists who embrace a cultural interpretation, the penchant for warfare does not evolve in a vacuum but is produced by the ways in which societies shape their populations’ beliefs and norms.
Many governments, through the educational programs they fund in schools and other institutions, indoctrinate militaristic values in their political culture that condone the practice of war.
Ironically, in a world of diverse national cultures, the messages of obedience and of duty to make sacrifices to the state through such cultural conditioning are common.
States disseminate the belief that their right to make war should not be questioned and that the ethical principles of religious and secular philosophies prohibiting violence should be disregarded.
Consequently, critics stress the existence of powerful institutions that prepare individuals to subconsciously accept warfare as necessary and legitimate.
It accounts for the fact that the probability of violence increases in cultures in which gender discrimination, inequality, and violence toward women are an accepted way of life.
Poverty and Relative Deprivation A country’s level of economic development affects the probability of its involvement in war and armed revolution.
Indeed, “underdevelopment is a statistically significant predictor of war” , and discontent with globalization and foreign economic liberalization can result in violent protest and civil war (Bussmann and Schneider 2007). relative deprivation inequality between the wealth and status of individuals and groups, and the outrage of those at the bottom about their perceived exploitation by those at the top.
Armed aggression, often an angry response to frustration, is a product of relative deprivation —people’s perception that they are unfairly deprived of the wealth and status that they rightly deserve in comparison with advantaged others.
Violence erupts so frequently because hundreds of millions “belong to groups that face some form of cultural exclusion and are disadvantaged or discriminated against relative to others in their country,” the United Nations observes.
The same is true for national images of relative deprivation between countries.
This is why the probability of armed aggression is the highest in the Global South, where peoples’ expectations of what they deserve are rising more rapidly than their material rewards, and the existing gap in the distribution of wealth and opportunities is widening.
This relationship between poverty and armed aggression is all the more pronounced in countries where there is a “youth bulge,” where a large portion of the population is young and cannot secure jobs, provide for families, and achieve economic security.
Before concluding that poverty always breeds armed aggression, note that the most impoverished countries have been the least prone to start wars with their neighbors.
The poorest countries cannot vent their frustrations aggressively because they lack the military or economic resources to do so.
This does not mean that the poorest countries will always remain peaceful.
If the past is a guide to the future, then impoverished countries that develop economically will be the most likely to acquire arms and engage in future external wars.
This signals looming dangers if the most rapidly growing Global South economies direct their growing resources toward armaments rather than investing in sustainable development.
The decision in 1998 by both Pakistan and India to acquire nuclear weapons could be followed by other restless countries, such as oil-rich Iran.
Indeed, the likelihood that a country will undergo armed aggression is strongly affected by key characteristics of its geographic circumstances, such as low supplies of cropland, fresh water, and treasured natural resources such as oil and gas reserves.
DEMOGRAPHIC STRESS AND THE LIKELIHOOD OF CIVIL WAR Where there are large numbers of unemployed youth concentrated in large cities and a lack of environmentally sustainable growth, the odds of civil war increase dramatically.
Shown here are the projected locations of such demographic stress where the likelihood of civil war is expected to be high through the year 2010. under way then were fought in mountainous areas.
Demographic Stress A number of demographic factors contribute to the onset of armed aggression.
Map 7. shows that the risk of civil war is the greatest in those countries in which population dynamics impact heavily on living conditions.
For example, such variables as the rate of urban population growth and the rate of death among working-age adults are predictors of the outbreak of armed rebellion.
It is questionable whether the acquisition of military power leads to peace or to war, but clearly most Global South countries agree with the realists’ thesis that weapons contribute to their security.
As Global South countries concentrate their budgets on equipping their militaries, many worry that war will become more frequent before it becomes less so.
One clue comes from examination of the relationship between changes in military capabilities and war that occurred over centuries in Europe.
During its transition to the peak of development, Europe was the location of the world’s most frequent and deadly wars.
Not coincidentally, this happened when the developing states of Europe were most energetically arming in competition with one another.
Perhaps as a consequence, the great powers—those with the largest armed forces—were the most involved in, and most often initiated, war.
Since 1945, however, with the exception of war among the now-independent units of the former Yugoslavia and between Russia and Georgia, interstate war has not occurred in Europe.
As the European countries moved up the ladder of development, they moved away from war with one another.
If, in the immediate future, the Global South follows the model of Europe before 1945, we are likely to see a sea of Global South violence surrounding a European island of peace and prosperity.
Revolution in 1917, communist theoreticians claimed that capitalism was the primary cause of imperialistic wars and colonialism.
They were fond of quoting Vladimir Lenin’s 1916 explanation of World War I as a war caused by imperialistic capitalists’ efforts “to divert the attention of the laboring masses from the domestic political crisis” of collapsing incomes under capitalism.
According to the communist theory of imperialism, capitalism produces surplus capital.
The need to export it stimulates wars to capture and protect foreign markets.
Thus laissez-faire economics —based on the philosophical principle of free markets with little governmental regulation of the marketplace—rationalized militarism and imperialism for economic gain.
Citing the demonstrable frequency with which wealthy capitalist societies militarily intervened on foreign soil for capital gain, Marxists believed that the best way to end international war was to end capitalism.
Contrary to Marxist theory, commercial liberalism contends that free-market systems promote peace, not war.
Defenders of capitalism have long believed that free-market countries that practice free trade abroad are more pacific.
The reasons are multiple, but they center on the premise that commercial enterprises are natural lobbyists for world peace because their profits depend on it.
War interferes with trade, blocks profit, destroys property, causes inflation, consumes scarce resources, and necessitates big government, counterproductive regulation of business activity, and high taxes.
By extension, this reasoning continues, as government regulation of internal markets declines, prosperity increases and fewer wars will occur.
Conclusions depend in part on perceptions regarding economic influences on international behavior, in part because alternative perspectives focus on different dimensions of the linkage.
This controversy was at the heart of the ideological debate between East and West during the Cold War, when the relative virtues and vices of two radically different economic systems—communism and capitalism—were uppermost in people’s minds.
The end of the Cold War did not end the historic debate about the link between economics and war.
Type of Government Realist theories discount the importance of government type as an influence on war and peace.
As Immanuel Kant in 1795 argued in Perpetual Peace, when citizens are given basic human rights such as choosing their leaders through ballots as well as civil liberties such as free speech and a free press, these democracies would be far less likely to initiate wars than would countries ruled by dictators and kings.
This is because a government accountable to the people would be constrained by public opinion from waging war.
Kant was joined by other liberal reformers, such as Thomas Jefferson, James Madison, and Woodrow Wilson in the United States.
They all believed that an “empire of liberty” (as Madison pictured a growing community of liberal democracies) would be one freed of the curse of war and that, if democratic institutions spread throughout the world, the entire past pattern of belligerent international relations would be replaced by a new pacific pattern.
These liberal predictions have been fulfilled by the passage of time since they were first advanced.
This pattern provides the cornerstone for the democratic peace proposition (Ray 1995; Sobek 2005) holding that, as Bruce Russett summarizes; Democracies are unlikely to engage in any kind of militarized disputes with each other or to let any such disputes escalate into war.
Pairs of democratic states have been only one-eighth as likely as other kinds of states to threaten to use force against each other, and only one-tenth as likely actually to do so.
Established democracies fought no wars against one another during the entire twentieth century.
The more democratic each state is, the more peaceful their relations are likely to be.
Democracies are more likely to employ “democratic” means of peaceful conflict resolution.
They are readier to reciprocate each other’s behavior, to accept third-party mediation or good offices in settling disputes, and to accept binding third-party arbitration and adjudication.
Careful statistical analyses of countries’ behavior have shown that democracies’ relatively peaceful relations toward each other are not spuriously caused by some other influence such as sharing high levels of wealth, or rapid growth, or ties of alliance.
The phenomenon of peace between democracies is not limited just to the rich industrialized states of the Global North.
The fact that leaders in elective democracies are accountable to public approval and electoral rejection does not guarantee that they will not use force to settle disputes with other democracies.
In 2009 the fragility of democratic institutions was illustrated by the sham reelection of President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in Iran.
Though analysts had predicted a close race between Ahmadinejad and challenger Mir Hosein Mousavi, the official result claimed a margin of 63 percent for the incumbent.
Most Iranians believe that electoral fraud occurred on an enormous scale, and three days after the election, on June 15, 2009, hundreds of thousands of Iranians took to the street in protest.
The pillars of the Islamic Republic’s pretensions of democracy were shaken as the government responded with a brutal crackdown that crushed dissent and restricted the opposition.
After more than two weeks of protest, the government succeeded in quelling the massive demonstrations that challenged Ahmadinejad’s legitimacy, with hardliners calling for demonstrators to be shown no mercy for their defiance.
That has changed in a major giobal transformation, occurring in three “waves” in the growth of “electoral democracy” worldwide, with competitive and regular multi-party elections conducted openly without massive voting fraud (see Cederman and Gleditsch 2004), as this figure shows.
Whether this dramatic transformation will produce peace is being tested.
Shown here are supporters of leading opposition presidential candidate Mir Hossein Mousavi protesting at a mass rally in Azadi square in Tehran.
The government enacted a clampdown on protesters by the army and police, leaving the opposition with few options and widespread discontent.
This discussion of the characteristics of states that influence their proclivity for war does not exhaust the subject.
But, however important domestic influences might be as a source of war, many believe that the nature of the global system is even more critical.
The Global System Realism emphasizes that the roots of armed conflict rest in human nature.
For realists, wars can occur not only because some states prefer war to peace, but also because of unintended consequences of actions by those who prefer peace to war and are more interested in preserving their position than in enhancing it.
Even defensively motivated efforts by states to provide for their own security through armaments, alliances, and deterrent threats are often perceived as threatening and lead to counteractions and conflict spirals that are difficult to reverse.
International anarchy, or the absence of institutions for global governance, may promote war’s outbreak.
However, anarchy fails to provide a complete explanation of changes in the levels of war and peace over time or why particular wars are fought.
To capture war’s many global determinants, consider also how and why global systems change.
This requires exploring the impact of such global factors as the distribution of military capabilities, balances of power, the number of alliances and international organizations, and the rules of international law.
At issue is how the system’s characteristics and institutions combine to influence changes in war’s frequency.
For example, World War II was an outgrowth of World War I, the United States attack of Iraq in 2003 was an extension of the 1990 Persian Gulf War, and the successive waves of terrorism and war in the Middle East were little more than one war, with each battle stimulated by its predecessor.
Because the frequency of past wars is correlated with the incidence of wars in later periods, war appears to be contagious and its future outbreak inevitable.
Those believing in war’s inevitability often cite the historical fact that war has been so repetitive.
The fact that a war precedes a later one does not mean that it caused the one that followed.
Thus, many scholars reject the deterministic view that history is destiny, with outcomes caused by previous events.
Instead, they embrace the bargaining model of war, which sees war as a product of rational choice weighing anticipated costs against benefits.
War’s recurrence throughout history does not necessarily mean we will always have it.
War is not a universal institution; some societies have never known war and others have been immune to it for prolonged periods.
Moreover, since 1945 the outbreak of armed aggression between states has greatly declined, despite the large increase in the number of independent countries.
This indicates that armed conflict is not necessarily inevitable and that historical forces do not control people’s freedom of choice or experiences. bargaining modei of war an interpretation of war’s onset as a choice by the initiator to bargain through aggression with an enemy in order to win on an issue or to obtain things of value, such as territory or oii.
Power Transitions These trends notwithstanding, when changes have occurred in the major states’ military capabilities, war has often resulted.
Although not inevitable, war has been likely whenever competitive states’ power ratios have narrowed.
As Michelle Benson explains, “this theory has proven itself to be the most successful structural theory of war that three simple conditions—power transition, relative power parity, and a dissimilarity of preferences for the status quo— are necessary for great power war.” power transition theory the theory that war is likely when a dominant great power is threatened by the rapid growth of a rival’s capabilities, which reduces the difference in their relative power.
Conversely, established powers ruled by risk-acceptant leaders are often willing to employ force to put the brakes on their relative decline.
Thus, when advancing and retreating states seek to cope with the changes in their relative power, war between the rising challenger and the declining power has become especially likely.
For example, the rapid changes in the power and status that produced the division of Europe among seven great powers nearly equal in military strength are often (along with the alliances they nurtured) interpreted as the tinderbox from which World War I ignited.
Rapid shifts in the global distribution of military power have often preceded outbursts of aggression, especially when the new distribution nears approximate equality and thereby tempts the rivals to wage war against their hegemonic challengers.
Moreover, transitions in states’ relative capabilities can potentially lead the weaker party to start a war in order to either overtake its rival or protect itself from domination.
Presumably, the uncertainty created by a rough equilibrium prompts the challenger’s effort to wage war against a stronger opponent.
The absence of a clear trend in its frequency since the late fifteenth century, and its periodic outbreak after intermittent stretches of peace, suggests that world history seesaws between long cycles of war and peace.
Long-cycle theory seeks to explain how an all-powerful invisible hand built into the global system’s dynamics causes peaks and valleys in the frequency with which major wars have erupted periodically throughout modern history.
Long-cycle theory draws its insights from the observation that a great power has risen to a hegemonic position about every eighty to one hundred years.
THE LONG CYCLE OF GLOBAL LEADERSHIP AND GLOBAL WAR, 1494-2020 Over the past five hundred years, five great powers have risen to controi the giobal system, but in time each former hegemonic ieader's top status eventuaiiy siipped and a new rivai surfaced and waged a globai war in an effort to become the next giobal leader.
Portugal and the Netherlands rose at the beginning of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, respectively; Britain climbed to dominance at the beginning of both the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries; and the United States became a world leader at the end of World War II and regained its position of global supremacy after the Cold War ended in 1991.
During their reigns, these hegemonic powers monopolized military power and trade and determined the system’s rules.
In each cycle, overcommitments, the costs of empire, and ultimately the appearance of rivals led to the delegitimation of the hegemon’s authority and to the deconcentration of power globally.
As challengers to the hegemon’s rule grew in strength, a “global war” has erupted after a long period of peace in each century since 1400.
At the conclusion of each previous general war, a new world leader emerged dominant, and the cyclical process began anew.
As Brock Tessman and Steve Chan summarize and explain; The theory of power cycles contends that the growth and decline of national power holds the key to understanding the occurrence of extensive wars.
Changes in national power tend to follow a regular pattern of ascendance, maturation, and decline and... these trajectories reflect the major states’ relative competitiveness in the international system.
When these states encounter an unexpected reversal in the direction or rate of change in their power trajectory, they are subject to various psychological impulses or judgmental challenges that increase the danger of extensive wars.
The larger the number of major states that And themselves under the duress of such reversals, the greater the tendency for their disputes to become extensive wars . war weariness hypothesis the proposition that fighting a major war is costly in terms of iost iives and income, and these costs greatly reduce a country’s tolerance for undertaking another war until enough time passes to lose memory of those costs.
It seems plausible, for instance, that just as long-term downswings and recoveries in business cycles profoundly affect subsequent behaviors and conditions, wars will produce after effects that may last for generations.
Because it takes time to move through these stages, alternating periods of enthusiasm for war and weariness of war appear to be influenced by learning and forgetting over time.
War between states is disappearing, and this inspires hope among optimists that it will vanish from human history.
As security studies experts hopefully predict, “War may well be ceasing to commend itself to human beings as a desirable or productive, let alone rational, means of reconciling their discontents” ; “Unlike breathing, eating or sex, war is not something that is somehow required by the human condition or by the forces of history.
However, that threat remains, and because another major war between states could occur again, all of humanity is endangered.
And, of course, the specter of international terrorism casts a very dark shadow over the world’s future.
But the sad news is that your life and livelihood are certain to be threatened by the continuing onset of armed aggression.
That threat imperils the future and affects all other aspects of world politics—which is why much of world history is written about the causes and consequences of armed aggression from the vantage point of all peoples’ and professions’ perspectives.
And, to those royal murderers, whose mean thrones Are brought by crimes of treachery and gore.
Yet in order for us to reduce and possibly eliminate, the plague of armed aggression in the world, it is necessary for us to first understand what drives the occurrence of violent conflict.
Thus, in this chapter you also have been given the opportunity to examine the many leading causes of armed aggression that theorists have constructed to explain why armed aggression in its various forms erupts.
It is the alternative potential paths to peace, security, and world order that you will next consider.
In Chapters 8 and 9, we examine the vision realism advances about dealing with the threat of war, specifically as it deals with arms, military strategy, alliances and the balance of power.
Throughout history, countries have been beguiied by bombs as a method for backing their enemies into surrender.
Reaiists regard the prudent use of armed force as a powerfui instrument for waging war and projecting military power in world politics.
This method was successfully used by the United States and NATO against Serbia in 1999 and unsuccessfully by Israel in its 2006 war against Hezbollah terrorists in Lebanon.
You would face the awesome responsibility for fulfilling the UN’s Charter to preserve world peace.
But looking at the globe, you would likely see that many countries are experiencing armed aggression, and that those wars are highly destructive of life and property.
Moreover, you undoubtedly would be distressed by the fact that many countries and possibly some transnational terrorist groups now have the capacity to annihilate their enemies with new weapons of mass destruction.
And you shudder at the realization that many states are living in constant fear of threats to their security while at the same time these armed actors are increasing the military power in their arsenals.
As a result of the escalating destructive power of modern weapons, you cannot help but to wonder about a globe in which the UN members that are most feverishly arming to increase their capacity to resist external and internal threats to their physical survival and core values are the same countries whose national security, or psychological freedom from fear of foreign aggression, seems to be the most rapidly declining.
Taking a picture of the pregnant fears circulating the globe, you conclude that as a consequence a true security dilemma has been created; The armaments amassed by each state for what they claim to be defensive purposes are seen by others as threatening, and this has driven the alarmed competitors to undertake, as counter-measures, additional military buildups—with the result that the arming states’ insecurities are increasing even though their arms are increasing.
Because when the topic of war and peace is debated, and in periods when international tension is high, policy makers turn to realist theory for guidance.
The adversaries of the world are not in conflict because they are armed.
They are armed because they are in conflict and have not yet learned peaceful ways to resolve their conflicting interests. — Richard M Nixon, United States President REALIST APPROACHES TO WAR AND PEACE Nearly all states continue to conclude that the anarchical global system requires them, of necessity, to rely on self-help to depend only on themselves for security.
For this reason, most states follow the realist roads to national and international security.
In this chapter, you will explore states’ efforts to follow the realist recipes for reducing threats to their national security.
In the spirit of seventeenth-century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes, who viewed the natural human condition as one of “war of all against all” and advised that successful states are those that hold the “posture of Gladiators; having their weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one another,” this chapter introduces the major trends in military spending, the arms trade, and weapons technology that countries are relying on to militarily exercise influence and deter attacks from potential enemies.
The place to begin is to underscore the high place of power that realists put in the equation that they believe has, throughout history, driven world politics.
National security is truly a paramount priority for the policy makers responsible for constructing their country’s foreign policy agendas.
Because the threat of armed aggression is ever present, realism recommends that war be placed at the very top of a state’s concerns, and that to contain dangers, the pursuit of power must be prioritized above all others.
POWER IN WORLD POLITICS Realist theorists far back in antiquity have based their thinking and policy recommendations on the belief that all people and states seek power.
Premises and Policy Recommendations Premises Policy Prescriptions If you want peace, prepare for war.
Prepare for war No state is to be trusted further than its national interest.
Remain vigilant Standards of right and wrong apply to individuals but not states; in world affairs amoral actions are sometimes necessary for security.
Avoid moralism Isolationism is not an alternative to active global involvement.
Remain involved and actively intervene Strive to increase military capabilities and tight rather than submit to subordination.
Protect with arms Do not let any other state or coalition of states become predominant.
Preserve the balance of power Negotiate agreements with competitors to maintain a favorable military balance.
That said, this abstraction called power, which realists assume to be humans’ and states’ primary objective, defies precise definition.
Constructivists recognize that in the broadest sense, power is usually interpreted as the political capacity of one actor to exercise influence over another actor to the first actor’s benefit.
Most leaders follow realpolitik and operate from the traditional construction that conceives of power as a combination of factors that gives states the capability to promote national interests, to win in international bargaining, and to shape the rules governing interaction in the global system.
However, beyond the semantic definition of power as politics —the exercise of influence to control others—power is an ambiguous concept (see Kadera and Sorokin 2004), and difficult to measure.
The answer to this question may predict which party will get its way and which will be forced to make concessions.
The Elements of State Power To estimate the comparative power of states, analysts usually rank countries according to the capabilities or resources presumed necessary to achieve influence over others.
For such purposes, multiple factors measure countries’ relative power potential.
If we could compare each state’s total capabilities, according to this logic, we could then rank them by their relative ability to draw on these resources to exercise influence.
Such a ranking would reveal the global system’s hierarchy of power, differentiating the strong from the weak, the great from the marginal. power potential the capabilities or resources held by a state that are considered necessary to its asserting influence over others.
Of all the components of state power potential, realists see military capability as the central element.
Realist theory maintains that the ability to coerce militarily is more important than the ability to reward favors or to buy concessions.
Following traditional thinking, one way to estimate the power potential of states is to compare the extent to which they spend money on acquiring military capabilities.
On this index, the United States is the undisputed military powerhouse in the world, spending for defense at a feverish pace that is leaving all other countries far behind.
Power potential also derives from factors other than military expenditures.
Among the so-called elements of power, analysts also consider such capabilities as the relative size of a state’s economy, its population and territorial size.
SIX DECADES OF United States MILITARY SPENDING America's military expenditures have been rising rapidly since 1999, putting the United States far ahead of all other powers.
This commitment to militarization is the principle reason the United States is regarded as a true hegemonic superpower, without rival.
In 2010, United States military spending is scheduled to climb again, and includes over $534 billion in base budget, which excludes nuclear expenditures, plus $130 billion in supplemental appropriations for the war in Iraq and Afghanistan and security-related spending for such programs as Homeland Security, foreign military aid, and international peacekeeping . geographic position, raw materials, technological capacity, political culture and values, efficiency of governmental decision making, volume of trade, educational level, national morale, and internal solidarity.
For example, if power potential is measured by territorial size, Russia, which is twice as large as its closest rivals (Canada, China, the United States, Brazil, and Australia, in that order), would be the globe’s most powerful country.
Likewise, if power is measured by the UN’s projections for countries’ populations by the year 2025, China, India, the United States, Indonesia, Pakistan, Nigeria, and Brazil, in that order, would be the most powerful.
The leading countries in some dimensions of power potential are not leaders in others because power comes in many forms.
Thus, there is little consensus on how best to weigh the various factors that contribute to military capability and national power.
That is, there is no agreement as to what their relative importance should be in making comparisons, or what conditions affect the power potential of each factor.
Such judgments are subjective, as power ratios are not strictly products of measured capabilities.
In addition, power is not a tangible commodity that states can acquire.
Power is relational; A state can have power over some other actor only when it can prevail over that actor.
Both actual and perceived strength determine who wins a political contest.
To make a difference, an adversary must know its enemy’s capabilities and its willingness to mobilize those capabilities for coercive purposes.
Intentions—especially perceptions of them—are critically important when making threats.
The mere possession of weapons does not increase a state’s power if its adversaries do not believe it will use them or if they are willing to suffer huge damages to prevail.
Historically, those with the largest arsenals have not necessarily triumphed in political conflicts.
Weaker states often successfully resist pressure from their military superiors.
In fact, since 1950 weak states have won more than half of all asymmetric wars between belligerents of vastly unequal military strength.
There are many examples of weak transnational actors prevailing in armed conflicts with significantly stronger opponents.
Another measure of power projection is the number of uniform personnel in sfates’ armies, navies, and air forces.
The map on the bottom classifies the varying size of each country’s armed forces available for milifary operations.
Similarly, United States superior military power did not prevent North Korea’s seizure of the USS Pueblo in 1968, Iran’s taking of American diplomats as hostages a decade later, or the A1 Qaeda terrorist network’s 9/11 attack.
The Soviet Union’s inability, prior to its disintegration, to control political events in Afghanistan, Eastern Europe, or even among its own constituent republics shows that the impotence of military power is not particular to the United States.
History is replete with examples of small countries that won wars or defended their independence against much more militarily powerful enemies.
Consider the seventeenth century, for example, with Switzerland against the Hapsburg Empire, the Netherlands against Spain, and Greece against the Ottomans.
In each case, intangible factors such as the will of the target population to resist a more powerful army and their willingness to die to defend the homeland were key elements in the capacity of each of these weaker countries to defend itself against a much stronger military force.
Great Britain reluctantly recognized this factor in 1781 when it concluded that the price of reclaiming the far-weaker American colonies was too great.
Nonetheless, the quest for security through arms and the realist belief in military force remain widespread.
Most security analysts believe that this is because military capability is a prerequisite to the successful exercise of coercive diplomacy through the threat of limited force.
Perhaps this conviction is what inspired former United States President George W Bush to assert that “a dangerous and uncertain world requires America to have a sharpened sword.” coercive diplomacy the use of threats or limited armed force to persuade an adversary to alter its foreign and/ or domestic policies.
The world is spending over $2,785,000 each minute for military preparations.
Historically, rich countries have spent the most money on arms acquisitions, and this pattern has continued.
Thus, the high-income developed countries’ share of the world total was about 78 percent.
However, when measured against other factors, the differences became clearer.
In addition, these two groups’ military spending levels are converging over time.
This trend indicates that poor states are copying the past costly military budget habits of the wealthiest states.
Since 1945, only a handful of states have borne crushing military costs.
The others have gained a relative competitive edge by investing in research on the development of goods to export abroad, while conserving resources by relying on allies and global institutions to provide defense against potential threats.
CHANGES IN THE LEVEL OF MILITARY EXPENDITURES SINCE 1960 Global military budgets have fluctuated since 1960, with totai expenditures woridwide peaking in 1987, after which they feil about a third until the 9/11 terrorist attacks.
As the trend shows, the miiitary budget of the Giobal South’s developing countries peaked in a 1982-1986 plateau, then declined before rising again to about 14 percent of the world total by the start of 2009.
In comparative terms, the United States is slipping by not keeping up with its great power competitors and is now facing a “creativity crisis” in education and science.
The Changing Character of Power Military expenditures incur opportunity costs —when what is gained for one purpose is lost for other purposes—so that any particular choice means that the cost of some lost opportunity must be paid.
Military spending, for example, retards economic growth and creates fiscal deficits.
The substantial costs of defense can erode national welfare—what policy makers hope to defend with military might.
Many analysts now argue that “the sources of power are, in general, moving away from the emphasis on military force and conquest that marked earlier eras.
In part, this shift is because military force has often proven ineffectual, notably against revisionist states and violent transnational terrorist groups resisting pressure from abroad.
Arguably, intelligence and communications are more critical in fighting counterterrorism than are a country’s military capabilities.
Moreover, awareness of the importance of economic competitiveness, environmental protection, and human development to a country’s standing in the world has directed increased attention to the nonmilitary underpinnings of national security.
These resources provide what is known as soft power —the ability to exercise international influence that is increased when a country’s values and conduct are respected throughout the world.
Unlike so-called hard power associated with military capabilities, soft power is “the ability to achieve goals through attraction rather than coercion ... by convincing others to follow or getting soft power the capacity to command global influence when a country’s culture, ideas, and institutions are valued by most other countries. hard power the ability to exercise international influence by means of a country’s military capabilities.
Politics requires making hard choices about priorities and about how public tunds should be spent.
One such difficult choice is between “guns versus butter”—how to allocate scarce finances for military preparedness as opposed to meeting the human needs of citizens and enabling them to live a secure and long life.
The former category looks to arms for national security, and the latter stresses human security.
Neither goal can be pursued without making some sacrifice for the realization of the other.
The relative burden of military spending, the ratio of defense spending to GDP, is the customary way to measure the sacrifices required by military spending.
As the map shows, wide variations exist, with many countries allocating high proportions of their total GDP to defense and others spending their wealth to enhance human security.
Indeed, some comparatively wealthy states bear a heavy burden, whereas other states that provide a high average income for their citizens have a low High I I Low I I No data MAP 8.
Likewise, the citizens of some very poor countries are heavily burdened, whereas those of others are not.
It is therefore difficult to generalize about the precise relationship between a country’s defense burden and its citizens’ standard of living, human development, or stage of development.
These skeptics of high military spending believe the high costs can easily reduce citizens’ human security.
These rankings raise serious questions about the true costs of national security.
The choices in balancing the need for defense against the need to provide for the common welfare are difficult because they entail a necessary tradeoff between competing values.
For this reason, military-spending decisions are highly controversial everywhere.
In today’s so-called information age, the relative importance of soft power is growing.
Similarly, how governments allocate their revenues reveals their priorities.
Examination of national budgets discloses an unmistakable pattern; Although the sources of global political power may be changing, many states continue to seek security by spending substantial portions of their national treasures on arms.
The problem in drfense spending is to figure out how far you should go without destroying from within what you are trying to dfiendfrom without. —Dwight D Eisenhower, United States President CHANGES IN MILITARY CAPABILITIES The growing militarization of the United States, the other great powers, and now mobilized nonstate terrorist movements has altered the global distribution of military capabilities.
Furthermore, as a trend in the arms industry, which has increased dramatically as a result of the Iraq war, the growth of private military services enhances military capabilities, as it allows governments to conduct operations with fewer troops than would otherwise be needed.
Trends in the Weapons Trade During the Cold War, many states sought to increase their security through the purchase of arms produced by suppliers eagerly seeking allies and profits from exports.
Since 1991, when the Cold War ended, and continuing throughout the era of global terrorism that began on 9/11, the total value of all international arms deliveries was $551 billion ). private military services the outsourcing of activities of a miiitaryspecific nature to private companies, such as armed security, equipment maintenance, iT services, iogistics, and inteiligence services.
A persistent trend in a changing world, therefore, has been for the least stable Global South states to spend the largest percentages of their relatively small economies for the purchase of weapons of war.
The global arms trade has fueled the dispersion of military capability worldwide.
The major recipients of all global arms shipments remain heavily concentrated in a subset of Global South arms purchasers.
In 2008, weapon deliveries to the top ten recipients accounted for two-thirds of all deliveries in the Global South.
The stream of weapons to these insecure and eager buyers with money to spend is not likely to end soon.
ARMS DELIVERIES TO THE GLOBAL NORTH AND THE GLOBAL SOUTH, 2001-2008 The continuing global arms trade has led to the globalization of military capabilities throughout the Global North and especially the Global South.
Between 2001 and 2008, arms shipments worldwide were a staggering $285 billion, but as this figure shows, the total value of all arms deliveries by all suppliers has modestly declined since 2004.
In 2008, arms deliveries to the Global South accounted for 57 percent of all worldwide arms deliveries . arms race the buildup of weapons and armed forces by two or more states that threaten each other, with the competition driven by the conviction that gaining a lead is necessary for security.
The regional distribution of arms deliveries seems to follow trends in the location of the world’s flash points.
With its numerous pairs of competitive states, the Near East is experiencing an intense arms race.
Countries in the Middle East accounted for only 11 percent of world arms imports in 1967, but that share rose to 18 percent between 2004 and 2008.
However, the Middle East is not alone as a troubled and insecure region.
Each state’s proportionate share of total weapons purchases is likely to change, depending on the location of the globe’s next hot spots and each country’s involvement in them.
Weapon imports fluctuate sharply from year to year—not only in unstable regions where the risks of civil war and terrorism are high and where pairs of enemy states are engaged in arms races, but also in countries where periods of economic growth make financial resources available for arms purchases.
Along with changing demands of arms importers, changes in the activities of arms suppliers are also important.
In the post-9/11 global war on terrorism, the United States increased its worldwide supply of weapons to countries that agreed to be partners in the “coalition of the willing” in wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Interestingly, it is still these two superpowers, the United States and Russia, that dominate the arms export market, supplying 31 and 25 percent of all conventional weapons exports, respectively.
While the United States has focused approximately one-third of its exports to the Middle East as a whole, it has maintained a fairly even distribution among recipient states, with the highest shares of state transfers varying by year but not exceeding 15 percent for any individual state.
The threat of terrorists acquiring nuclear, ballistic missile, and chemical weapons of mass destruction on the black market through covert suppliers poses a real danger.
The extent of the threat is impossible to gauge, however, because this flow of the arms trade is invisible.
Terrorists are widely believed to be actively searching for weapons of mass destruction.
Another development in the post-Cold War era, which has been likened to modern-day mercenaries, is the growth in companies that provide private military services for hire on the global market.
This dilemma was evident during the war in Iraq when employees of the Blackwater security firm killed seventeen Iraqi civilians and did not appear to be subject to either Iraqi, U.S., civilian, or military law.
Motives for the Arms Trade As Assistant Defense Secretary during the Reagan administration, Lawrence Korb lamented that “The brakes are off_There is no coherent policy on the transfer of arms.
Economic gain continues to be an important rationale for foreign military sales because producers sell arms abroad to subsidize their arms production at home.
For example, the United States uses arms exports to offset its chronic balance-of-trade deficits and to ensure its lead in the lucrative arms business.
The United States government routinely assigns thousands of full-time federal employees to promote United States arms deals, spending half a billion dollars annually to A WORLD AWASH WITH GUNS The sale of arms is a big trans-border business.
The military-industrial complex is widely believed to exercise enormous power over United States defense budgets and arms sales agreements.
One symptom of the influence of defense contractors is their ability to charge the Pentagon inflated prices for their products.
It is hardly surprising that arms manufacturers seek to increase their profits, but their corporate greed alarms critics, who worry about the manufacturers’ success in lobbying Congress and the Pentagon for high military spending to gain government permission to sell new weapons worldwide.
What is more, as a sign of the globalization of arms transfers, defense contractors increasingly sell their products everywhere and push their production into other countries’ markets as they consolidate their operations and ownership.
The Strategic Consequences of Arms Sales The transfer of arms across borders has produced some unintended and counterproductive consequences.
For example, during the Cold War the United States and the Soviet Union thought they could maintain peace by spreading arms to pivotal recipients.
Yet many of the recipients went to war with their neighbors or experienced internal rebellion.
The toll in lives from the wars in the Global South since 1945 exceeds tens of millions of people.
Undoubtedly, the import of such huge arsenals of weapons aided this level of destruction.
As the arms exporters “peddle death to the poor,” they seldom military-industrial complex a combination of defense estabiishments, contractors who suppiy arms for them, and government agencies that benefit from high military spending, which acts as a lobbying coalition to pressure governments to appropriate large expenditures for military preparedness.
Since 2001, less than three-fifths of United States arms have been exported to governments classified by Freedom House as “free” , and now four-fifths of the countries that receive United States arms are classified by the United States State Department as either being undemocratic or having a poor human rights record . blowback the propensity for actions undertaken for national security to have the unintended consequence of provoking retaliatory attacks by the target when relations later sour.
The inability of arms suppliers to control the uses to which their military hardware will be put is troubling.
This also happened when the Stinger missiles the United States supplied to Taliban forces resisting the Soviet Union’s 1979 invasion in Afghanistan fell into the hands of terrorists later opposing the United States.
Such developments have long-term consequences and are particularly alarming, as in the case of Pakistan, where there is grave concern about the ability of the state to ensure the security of nuclear material.
According to Graham Allison, a leading nuclear expert, “The nuclear security of the arsenal is now a lot better than it was.
Trends in Weapons Technology The widespread quest for armaments has created a potentially “explosive” global environment.
The description is especially apt when we consider not only trends in defense expenditures and the arms trade but also in the destructiveness of modern weapons.
Nuclear Weapons Technological research and development has radically expanded the destructive power of national arsenals.
Albert Einstein, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist whose ideas were the basis for the development of nuclear weapons, was alarmed by the threat they posed.
The use of such weapons could not only destroy entire cities and countries but also, conceivably, the world’s entire population.
Most have been dismantled since the 1986 peak, but 8,392 worldwide remained operational at the start of 2009—with a combined explosive force of at least 1,300,000 Hiroshima atomic bombs.
Nth country problem the expansion of additionai new nuciear weapon states. horizontal nuclear proliferation an increase in the number of states that possess nuclear weapons. vertical nuclear proliferation the expansion of the capabilities of existing nuciear powers to inflict increasing destruction with their nuclear weapons.
Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty an international agreement that seeks to prevent horizontal proliferation by prohibiting further nuclear weapons sales, acquisitions, or production.
In addition, as many as twenty-one other states or NGO terrorist organizations are widely believed to be seeking to join the nuclear club.
The proliferation of arms is a serious global concern, because the so-called Nth country problem is expected to become an increasing likelihood.
Both horizontal nuclear proliferation (the increase in the number of nuclear states) and vertical nuclear proliferation are probable.
Consider the successful acquisition of nuclear weapons by India and Pakistan, the conduct of nuclear tests by North Korea, and Iran and Syria’s self-proclaimed aims to acquire nuclear weapons.
Nuclear proliferation is likely to continue as the incentives to join the nuclear club and acquire missiles and bombers for their delivery are strong, which is why the threat remains that Argentina, Brazil, Libya, and Taiwan, which once had active nuclear weapons programs, could revive these capabilities to manufacture nuclear weapons.
Likewise, there is widespread international concern regarding a previously undisclosed uranium enrichment site in Iran that was revealed in 2009.
Though Iran professes that it is pursuing a peaceful nuclear program, the ability for uranium to be enriched from a low level nuclear fuel to one that provides weapons-grade material is seen by many as a serious threat to global and regional security.
This sentiment continues to be reflected today by aspiring nuclear powers.
Because of the widespread conviction rooted in realism that military power confers political stature, many countries, such as Iran and North Korea, regard the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty as hypocrisy because it provides a seal of approval to the United States, Russia, China, Britain, and France for possessing nuclear weapons while denying it to all others.
While the underlying demand for nuclear weapons is rather straightforward, aside from economic motivations, it is less clear why nuclear-capable states themselves have contributed to the global spread of nuclear weapons by providing sensitive nuclear assistance to other non-nuclear states.
Consider, for example, that Israel built its first nuclear weapon just two years after receiving sensitive nuclear assistance from France in the early 1960s.
Similarly, after receiving assistance from China in the early 1980s with its nuclear program, Pakistan constructed its first nuclear weapon.
Khan operated a black market nuclear proliferation ring in the late 1990s, and this is thought to have aided Libya, Iran, and North Korea in their efforts to develop nuclear weapons.
First, the more powerful a state is relative to a potential nuclear recipient, the less likely it is to provide sensitive nuclear assistance.
Second, states are more likely to provide sensitive nuclear assistance to states with which they share a common enemy.
These strategic characteristics of the supplier provide some insight into the nuclear proliferation problem, which is also exacerbated by the widespread availability of materials needed to make a nuclear weapon.
This is partly because of the widespread use of nuclear technology for generating electricity.
The number of new operational nuclear reactors is certain to increase because almost eighty new nuclear reactors are now under construction or planned.
In addition to spreading nuclear know-how, states could choose to reprocess the uranium and plutonium, which power plants produce as waste, for clandestine nuclear weapons production.
Commercial reprocessing reactors are producing enough plutonium to make as many as 40,000 nuclear weapons.
Conversion of peacetime nuclear energy programs to military purposes can occur either overtly or, as in the case of India and Pakistan, covertly.
The safeguards built into the nonproliferation regime are simply inadequate to detect and prevent secret nuclear weapons development programs.
A few weeks later, on May 25, North Korea conducted its second nuclear test in defiance of the United Nations.
The United States, along with Russia, China, and other leading nations, called on North Korea to resume the so-called six-party talks that aimed to provide fuel and other benefits to North Korea if it dismantled its nuclear program.
As Matthew Bunn, editor of Arms Control Today explains, “There’s not a snowball’s chance in hell we’ll eliminate all nuclear weapons from the face of the earth.
The Revolution in Military Technology and Weapons Delivery Capabilities Another trend that is making the weapons of war increasingly deadly has been the rapidity of technological refinements that increase the capacity of states to send their weapons great distances with ever-greater accuracy.
This allows these Cold War enemies to launch many warheads on a single missile toward different targets simultaneously and accurately.
One MIRV United States MX Peacekeeper missile could carry ten nuclear warheads— enough to wipe out a city and everything else within a fifty-mile radius.
Because the supermultiple independently targetable reentry vehicles a technological innovation permitting many weapons to be delivered from a singie missiie. powers achieved MIRV capability before completing the START II treaty to ban them, the world’s combined nuclear inventory grew nearly three times larger than the number of nuclear warheads previously in existence in spite of ongoing efforts to limit it.
Other technological improvements have led to steady increases in the speed, accuracy, range, and effectiveness of weapons.
Laser weapons, nuclear-armed tactical air-to-surface missiles , stealth air-launched cruise missiles , and antisatellite weapons that can project force in and wage war from outer space have become a part of the military landscape.
Hexagons represent states that have abandoned their nuclear v/eapons programs.
Aspiring states Squares represent states that have embryonic nuclear weapons programs.
A CHAIN REACTION OF PROLIFERATION Since the dawn of the nuclear age, the secrets for making nuclear weapons have spread through either intended transfer, leak, or espionage.
Many others are poised to join the club of nuclear weapon powers, as this figure shows.
The connections depicted above indicate the flow of information and technology, through either one-way or two-way transfers.
Nuclear proliferation means that nuclear weapons will continue as a key ingredient of national security strategies. fires from racing out of control.
In the context of modern weaponry, it is a psychological barrier whose purpose is to prevent even the most intensive forms of conventional combat from escalating into nuclear war.
The danger is growing that the firebreak is being crossed from both directions—by a new generation of near-nuclear conventional weapons capable of levels of violence approximating those of a limited nuclear warhead and by a new generation of near-conventional strategic weapons capable of causing destruction similar to that of the most powerful weapons of mass destruction. firebreak the psychological barrier between conventional wars and wars fought with nuclear weapons as well as weapons of mass destruction.
Another example is the United States Air Force’s “active denial technology” using electromagnetic radiation that penetrates clothing, causing water molecules to vibrate and burn skin tissue.
And it’s humorous, but true, that the Pentagon has considered various nonlethal chemical weapons to disrupt enemy discipline and morale, including an aphrodisiac chemical weapon “that would make enemy soldiers sexually irresistible to one another” . nonlethal weapons the wide array of “soft kill,” low-intensity methods of incapacitating an enemy's people, vehicles, communications systems, or entire cities without killing either combatants or noncombatants.
The precision and power of today’s conventional weapons have expanded exponentially, at precisely the moment when the revolution in military technology is leading to “the end of infantry” in the computer age.
They are turning to virtual nuclear arsenals for deterrence of an adversary’s attack.
Examples include such futuristic weapons as the electromagnetic pulse bomb, which can be hand-delivered in a suitcase and can immobilize an entire city’s computer and communications systems; computer viruses of electronic-seating microbytes that can eliminate a country’s telephone system; and logic bombs that can confuse and redirect traffic on the target country’s air and rail system.
One example of these is the United States Air Force’s Commando Solo psychological operations plane, which can disrupt signals and insert in their place a “morphed” TV program, in which the enemy leader makes unpopular announcements on the screen to alienate the leader from the population.
By the end of 2005 it was 2,400 and it more than doubled the next year.
All together, twenty-two different robot systems are now in use on the ground, with prototypes for a variety of others from automated machine guns to robotic stretcher bearers to lethal robots the size of insects.
The Pentagon is enthusiastic, in part because weapons that are symbols of military might like stealth bombers and nuclear submarines are of little use in today’s “asymmetric” conflicts, in which individual soldiers equipped with the latest technologies are needed for search-and-destroy missions against guerrilla militias.
Gordon Johnson, of the Pentagon’s Joint Forces Command, notes the appeal of robotic forces, “They’re not afraid.
Technological advances thus may make obsolete orthodox ways of classifying weapons systems as well as prior equations for measuring power ratios.
At the same time, while the creation of a whole range of robotic armed forces to carry out dangerous missions and do the fighting without risk of soldiers being killed is heralded as a breakthrough in the way weapons are being used, there are concerns about long-term implications.
Some worry that times are changing, and that war waged by remote control will become too easy and irresistibly tempting as a means to resolve conflicts.
Biological and Chemical Weapons Biological and chemical weapons pose a special and growing threat, particularly in the hands of terrorists aiming for mass destruction rather than influencing public opinion.
These unconventional weapons of mass destruction are sometimes regarded as a “poor man’s atomic bomb” because they can be built at comparatively little cost deterrence preventive strategies designed to dissuade an adversary from doing what it wouid otherwise do. infowar tactics attacks on an adversary's telecommunications and computer networks to penetrate and degrade an enemy whose defense capabilities depend heavily on these technological systems.
The United States is building a new generation of technologically sophisticated weapons.
Shown here, United States soldiers with land mine detectors wait as another soldier maneuvers a robot into a cave to check for mines, traps, and other weapons that may have been hidden by Taliban or Al Qaeda fugitives in the eastern border town of Qiqay, Afghanistan.
The war in Afghanistan is the first time that robots have been used by tbe United States military for combat purposes.
They are intended to help prevent United States casualties. and cause widespread injury and death.
Following the 9/11 terrorist attacks on the United States, for example, there were fears that the spread of anthrax through the United States mail system was the first step in an endless series of future biological warfare by terrorist networks.
As of May 21, 2009, only Syria, North Korea, Angola, Egypt, and Somalia declined to sign or accede to the Chemical Weapons Convention.
However, Iran and Iraq’s use of gas in their eight-year 1980s war against each other, and Iraq’s 1989 use of chemical weapons against its own Kurdish population, demonstrate the weaknesses of these legal barriers.
Pervasive insecurity haunts much of the world because there do not exist real supranational controls over the proliferation of biological and chemical weapons.
The twenty-first century has not become the peaceful and prosperous period many people expected.
In August 2009, the famous “Doomsday Clock” of the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists estimated that the world was only five minutes from nuclear Armageddon—two minutes closer than when the clock was originally set in 1947 when the threat of the end of the world loomed large.
However, because the possession of overpowering military capabilities does not automatically result in their wise use, realists council that what matters greatly in the pursuit of national security are the methods on which states rely to use the capabilities they have acquired.
This question underscores the vital importance of choices about the types of military strategies employed.
Military Strategies The dropping of the atomic bomb on Japan on August 6, 1945, is the most important event distinguishing prefrom post-World War II world politics.
In the blinding flash of a single weapon and the shadow of its mushroom cloud, the world was transformed from a “balance of power” to a “balance of terror” system.
The search for answers was critical because the immediate and delayed effects of a nuclear war were terrifying to contemplate.
Even a short war using a tiny fraction of any great power’s nuclear arsenal would destroy life as we know it.
It has been estimated that “the missiles on board a single SLBM submarine may be enough to initiate nuclear winter” —enough to end human existence.
Weapons of mass destruction have grown since World War II, and strategies have changed with changes in technologies, defense needs, capabilities, and global conditions.
United States nuclear superiority was the dominant characteristic of this period.
The second then began and lasted until the 1991 collapse of the Soviet Union.
Growing Soviet military capability was the dominant characteristic of this period, which meant that the United States no longer stood alone in its ability to annihilate another country without fear of its own destruction.
The third phase began after the breakup of the Soviet Union that ended the Cold War, after which the great powers began to revise their strategic doctrines in the light of new global threats.
Compellence Countries that possess military preeminence often think of weapons as instruments in diplomatic bargaining.
The United States, the world’s first and for many years unchallenged nuclear power, adopted the strategic doctrine of compellence when it enjoyed a clearcut superiority over the Soviet Union.
Military capabilities did not have to be used for them to be useful; the United States could exercise influence over enemies simply by demonstrating the existence of its powerful weapons and signalling its willingness to use those weapons.
The United States doctrine of compellence used nuclear weapons as tools of political influence, not for fighting but for convincing others to do what they might not otherwise do.
The United States sought to gain bargaining leverage by conveying the impression that it would actually use nuclear weapons.
This posture was especially evident during the Eisenhower administration, when Secretary of State John Foster Dulles practiced brinkmanship, deliberately threatening United States adversaries with nuclear destruction so that, at the brink of war, they would concede to United States demands.
Brinkmanship was part of the overall United States strategic doctrine known as massive retaliation.
To contain communism and Soviet expansionism, this doctrine called for a countervalue targeting strategy, that is, aiming United States nuclear weapons at what the Soviets most valued—their population and industrial centers.
The alternative is a counterforce targeting strategy, which targets an enemy’s military forces and weapons, thus sparing civilians from immediate destruction.
This demonstrated Moscow’s ability to deliver nuclear weapons beyond the Eurasian landmass.
Thus, the superpowers’ strategic competition took a new turn, and the United States for the first time faced a nuclear threat to its homeland.
Deterrence As United States nuclear superiority eroded, American policy makers began to question the usefulness of weapons of mass destruction as tools in political bargaining.
They were horrified by the destruction that could result if compellence should provoke a nuclear exchange.
Whereas compellence relies on an offensive coercive threat aimed at persuading an adversary to relinquish something without resistance, deterrence seeks to dissuade an adversary from undertaking some future action.
At the heart of deterrence theory is the assumption that the defender has the ability to punish an adversary with unacceptably high costs if it launches an attack.
The key elements of deterrence are; capabilities —the possession of military resources that signal to the adversary that threats of military retaliation are possible; credibility —the belief that the actor is willing to act on its declared threats; and communication —the ability to send a potential aggressor the clear message that the threat will be carried out.
Ironically, the shift from a strategy of compellence to deterrence sped rather than slowed the arms race.
A deterrent strategy depends on obtaining the unquestionable ability to inflict intolerable damage on an opponent.
This means that an arming state seeking to deter an enemy must build its weapons to acquire a second-strike capability —sufficient destructive weapons to ensure that the country can withstand an adversary’s first strike and still retain the capacity to retaliate with a devastating counterattack.
To guarantee that an adversary was aware that a second-strike capability existed, deterrence rationalized an unrestrained search for sophisticated retaliatory capabilities.
Under these circumstances, initiating a nuclear war was not a rational choice; the frightening costs outweighed any conceivable benefits.
Strategic Defense Initiative the so-called Star Wars plan conceived by the Reagan administration to deploy an antiballistic missile system using space-based lasers that would destroy enemy nuclear missiles before they could enter Earth’s atmosphere.
As U.S.-Soviet relations evolved, another shift in strategic thinking occurred in 1983 when United States President Reagan proposed building a space-based defensive shield against ballistic missiles.
The Strategic Defense Initiative , or “Star Wars” as it is now labeled, called for the development of a defense against ballistic missiles using advanced space-based lasers to destroy weapons launched in fear, anger, or by accident.
Despite protest from Russia, where President Medvedev threated to point missiles at Europe in retaliation for the further development of the United States system, in 2008 the United States moved forward with a controversial plan in which Poland agreed to host ten United States two-stage ground-based missile defense interceptors and the Czech Republic agreed to host a ballistic missile defense radar site.
However, in September 2009, the United States reversed course with its decision to scrap the missile defense shield program in Eastern Europe.
Citing advances in missile technology and new evidence regarding Iranian missile capabilities as reasons for the change in policy, it was also widely seen as an effort by the United States to improve relations with Russia.
AN EXPANDING MISSILE GAP The United States plans to spend in excess of $60 billion on missile defense over the next six years.
This is an unprecedented sum, the wisdom of which is questionable as the direct threat of ballistic missiles is limited and far less than it was twenty years ago.
The number of medium-range ballistic missiles pointed at United States allies in Europe and Asia has fallen 80 percent.
The strategy of compellence conceived of arms as a means for putting enemies in a defensive position and pushing them to make changes in their policies that they did not want to undertake; the strategy of deterrence conceived of using weapons for defense to prevent an attack.
Both strategies worked in some ways but failed in others, and both dealt with the problem of armed force by preserving the reliance on arms rather than trying to eliminate the threat.
Preemption The end of the Cold War and with it the huge reduction in the total number of nuclear warheads today has not spelled a relaxation of tension.
Strategic planning continues to find new ways of dealing with the constant danger of emergent military threats.
As in the past, the United States hegemon has led the way in forging new strategies to deal with the post-9/11 threats of global terrorism and belligerent enemies.
From that threat has come the radical new strategy of preemptive warfare.
On the one hand, modern technology allows shadowy terrorist networks to launch catastrophic attacks against the United States.
On the other hand, these networks cannot be dissuaded by the threat of punishment because they have no fixed territory or populace to protect.
Building on the proposition that “nations need not suffer an attack before they can lawfully take action to defend themselves against forces that present an imminent danger,” the strategic document argued that the acquisition of weapons of mass destruction by global terrorists provided the United States with a compelling case for engaging in anticipatory self-defense.
This requires, the 2002 NSS security strategy affirmed, the case for preemptive war —to coerce rather than deter enemies.
The 2002 national security strategy was the most sweeping reformulation of United States defense policy since the 1947 National Security Act at the start of the Cold War.
Although under international law states have a legal right to defend themselves against aggression as well as imminent attacks, critics charge that beneath the language of military preemption lies a more radical policy of preventive war.
A preemptive military attack entails the use of force to quell or mitigate an impending strike by an adversary.
A preventive attack entails the use of force to eliminate any possible future strike, even if there is no reason to believe that the capacity to launch an attack currently exists.
Indeed, ethicists and legal experts, ever mindful of just war theory, question the morality and legality of preemptive war for preventive purposes.
According to critics, preventive uses of military force set a dangerous precedent.
Predicting an adversary’s future behavior is difficult because its leadership’s intentions are hard to discern, information on long-term goals may be shrouded in secrecy, and signals of its policy direction may be missed in an oversupply of unimportant intelligence information.
If suspicions about an adversary become a justifiable cause for military action, then every truculent leader would have a rough-and-ready pretext for ordering a first strike.
In 2009, President Barack Obama signaled a shift from the “unapologetic and implacable demonstrations of will” that had characterized the preemptive and unilateral policies of the prior administration.
Instead, he called for an approach that maintained America’s military strength but also sought to move beyond a single-minded focus on Iraq and broaden engagement with the global community.
Among his priorities are reducing the threat of nuclear proliferation, securing all nuclear weapons and materials from terrorists and rogue states, and developing new defenses to protect against the threat of cyberterrorism and biological weapons.
To achieve this, he pledged to renew American diplomacy, with a willingness to engage in dialogue with friend and foe without precondition in order to advance United States interests.
The ever present threat of nuclear aggression raises anew timeless questions about the conditions under which, and the purposes for which, military force is justifiable.
What does prudent precaution require when ruthless countries just war theory the theoretical criteria under which it is morally permissible, or “just,"" for a state to go to war and the methods by which a just war might be fought.
COERCIVE DIPLOMACY THROUGH MILITARY INTERVENTION The strategy of coercive diplomacy is used in international bargaining to threaten or use limited force to persuade an opponent to stop pursuing an activity it is already undertaking.
Often, threats to use arms are made to force an adversary to reach a compromise or, even better, to reverse its policies.
The goal is to alter the target state’s calculation of costs and benefits, so that the enemy is convinced that acceding to demands will be better than defying them.
Coercive diplomacy’s reliance on the threat of force is designed to avoid the bloodshed and expense associated with traditional military campaigns.
Orchestrating the mix of threats and armed aggression can be done in various ways.
The methods range from traditional gunboat diplomacy to threaten an enemy by positioning navies and/or armies near its borders to “tomahawk diplomacy” by striking an adversary with precision-guided cruise missiles.
These are among the instruments of coercive diplomacy in the arsenal of military options envisioned by realist policy makers to pursue power.
To explore this strategy, this chapter looks next at military intervention, the oldest and most widely used approach to military coercion.
States can intervene physically through direct entry of their armies into another country, indirectly by broadcasting propaganda to the target’s population, or through covert operations.
Overt military intervention is the most visible method of interference inside the borders of another country.
THE CHANGING INCIDENCE OF UNILATERAL MILITARY INTERVENTION FOR COERCIVE DIPLOMATIC PURPOSES SINCE 1945 As this evidence shows, states have frequently sent their troops into the sovereign territory of other states in order to influence the target, even though military intervention has been traditionaiiy prohibited hy internationai iaw.
The frequency of this forceful coercive dipiomacy fluctuates from year to year, and suggests that the fluctuations are dependent on the personal choices of the ieaders authorizing their country’s use of national armed forces for military engagement outside their borders. suggests that military interventions rise and fall in response to both changing global circumstances and also in response to shifting perceptions of the advantages and disadvantages of intervention as an effective method of coercive diplomacy.
Each act of military intervention had a different rationale and produced different results.
Past cases raise tough questions about the use of military intervention for coercive diplomacy.
These questions are hotly debated international issues now because of the wave of failed states.
Primarily because such interventions undercut the principles of state sovereignty and the nonintervention norm in international law.
The UN’s call for a “new commitment to intervention” stirred up the percolating existing debate about military intervention, even in the name of morality, justice, and human rights.
Today, policy makers disagree about the appropriate use of military coercion.
Research on coercive diplomacy suggests that its success depends upon the context of each specific situation.
The coercing power’s demands must be clearly understood by the target state.
The coercing power must be more highly motivated than the target by what is at stake.
Military coercion tends to be effective when it occurs prior to the target making a firm commitment on the issue at hand, and when factions exist within the target state’s government.
It is far more difficult for a coercing power to reverse something that has already been accomplished by the target state.
The coercing power must create in the adversary’s mind a sense of urgency for compliance with its demand.
Coercion generally fails when the target has the ability to absorb the punishment delivered by the coercing state.
In addition to having political support at home, the coercing power is helped when it can also count on support from key states and international organizations.
The coercing power must be able to articulate the specific conditions for ending the crisis, as well as to give assurances that it will not formulate new demands for greater concessions once the target capitulates.
Although these conditions improve the odds of successful coercive diplomacy, they do not guarantee success.
History teaches that leaders who rely on military intervention for coercive diplomacy often start a process that they later find they cannot control.
In the aftermath of unsuccessful interventions, confidence in this military method of coercive diplomacy has frequently vanished, and the search for other means to exercise power in world politics has intensified.
RIVAL REALIST ROADS TO SECURITY Since the beginning of history, preparations for war often have been chosen as a path to security.
The realist call for “peace through strength” is certainly understandable in a world where fear of national vulnerability in an anarchic, self-help environment requires defense planners to assume the worst about other states’ capabilities and intentions.
Even if the military capabilities accumulated by an enemy are defensively motivated, they usually trigger a strong reaction.
The state “always feels itself weak if there is another that is stronger,” observed eighteenth-century Erench political philosopher JeanJacques Rousseau.
Efforts to obtain absolute security by one state tend to be perceived as creating absolute insecurity for others, with the result that everyone becomes locked into an upward spiral of countermeasures that diminishes the security of all.
Scholars refer to this as a security dilemma, a condition that results when each state’s increase in military capabilities is matched by the others, and all wind up with no more security than when they began arming.
Many scholars also describe the dynamics of this arms competition as the spiral model.
The imagery captures the tendency of defense-enhancing efforts to result in escalating arms races that diminish the security of all.
Sir Edward Grey, British foreign secretary before World War I, described this process well; The increase in armaments, that is intended in each nation to produce consciousness of strength and a sense of security, does not produce these effects.
On the contrary, it produces a consciousness of the strength of other nations and a sense of fear.
Fear begets suspicion and distrust and evil imaginings of spiral model a metaphor used to describe the tendency of efforts to enhance defense to result in escalating arms races.
Although the security dilemma confronts all states’ decisions, most leaders still refuse to accept vulnerability.
Searching for strength, they often proceed from the assumptions that; security is a function of power; power is a function of military capability; and military might is a measure of national greatness.
Most realists and many others continue to put lasting faith in the realist premise that it is safer to rely on the force of arms than on the force of arguments to successfully resolve disputes.
Yet security may depend as much on the control of force as on its pursuit.
At issue is whether traditional realist emphasis on arms and military strategies that require either the threat or actual use of weapons for coercive diplomacy is the best and safest route to national and international security.
To be sure, the traditional realist reliance on military capabilities to increase national security continues to resonate in world capitals.
However, other realists recommend an alternative path—one that sees national interests served most, not by the acquisition and use of arms, but rather by the acquisition of allies in order to maintain a balance of power among rivals that will prevent any transnational actor from the temptation to use force against the others.
This, these other realists believe, provides the safest path to security.
The next chapter reviews realist ideas about alliances, arms control, and their impact in creating a balance of power to keep the peace.
Thus you can evaluate next the prospects, payoffs, and pitfalls of this other primary realist road to international and national security.
Grimmett, Richard E Conventional Arms Transfers to Developing Nations, 1999-2006.
In June 2009, the BRICs met in an inaugural summit to discuss, among other things, a greater say in global policy making and a plan to convert some of their foreign-currency reserves out of dollars and into IMF bonds.
This picture shows, from left, Brazil’s President Luiz Inacio da Silva, Russia’s President Dmitry Medvedev, Chinese President Hu Jintao, and India’s Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
You make the sad discovery that the person you thought was your best friend has been flirting with your girlfriend or boyfriend.
Strange as it may seem, these kinds of hypothetical circumstances and choices for people have a powerful parallel in the real world of international politics.
Countries, like individuals, make decisions that create friends and enemies.
These decisions are based on converging and clashing interests and values.
As realist theoretician Thucydides counseled, “One has to behave as friend or foe according to the circumstances,” and these choices are made on a complex geo-strategic playing field in which today’s enemy may be tomorrow’s ally and where fears of entrapment, abandonment, or betrayal are ever present.
Alliances, like some personal friendships, are often against rather than for someone or something.
And when relationships and conditions change, new alliances form and established alliances dissolve as transnational actors—all obsessed with the power of their rivals—realign.
Alliances in world politics require agreements between parties in order for them to cooperate.
For that reason, it may seem that liberal theory, with its emphasis on the possibility of self-sacrifice for mutual gain, might provide a key to understanding why and how states join together in alliances.
However, realism provides the dominant lens through which the dynamics of alliance formation and decay, and the impact of these dynamics on global security, are most often interpreted.
International politics, to realism, is a war of all against all, fought to increase national power and national security by preparing for war and seeking advantages over rivals such as by acquiring superior military capabilities.
Realists picture alliances as temporary, opportunistic agreements to cooperate.
Realism provides the most compelling explanation of the coldly calculating motives underlying decisions about alliances, which realists see driven first and foremost as a method for protecting allies from threats posed by predatory common enemies.
Realist theory is the best paradigm for thinking about the calculations actors make regarding their security and how it might be maximized.
Instead, realist theory posits that military alliances are forged when the parties perceive that the advantages of an alliance outweigh the disadvantages.
This chapter looks at alliances in world politics from the account of realist theory, because realism is above all an interpretation of the preconditions for global security, or how military threats to international stability are best managed.
As you shall see, realism maintains that alliances are the mechanism by which a “balance of power” can be maintained to prevent an aspiring hegemon from waging imperial wars to achieve world domination.
You might have already guessed that the basis for international stability and security is more complicated than this introduction implies.
Realpolitik may be the most compelling theory of alliances discussed in government chambers.
So take a look at the leading hypotheses before considering the balance of power that is affected by alliance politics in theory and how that theory applies to trends in contemporary global circumstances.
Warfare is not a question of brute strength, but rather of winning and losing friends. —Count Diego Sarmiento Gondomar, Spanish Ambassador to London in 1618 REALIST INTERPRETATIONS OF ALLIANCES IN WORLD POLITICS when threats to international peace surface, policy makers adhering to the liberal theoretical tradition recommended, almost as a knee-jerk reaction, that the disputants open negotiations to settle their differences at the bargaining table.
However, those abiding by realist foreign policy recommendations see countries’ interests as best served by either unilaterally arming themselves sufficiently to contain an emergent threat or combining their strength with the other threatened states in an alliance to contain and combat the common danger.
To the realist frame of mind, alliances predictably come into being when two or more states face a common security threat.
By acquiring allies, states increase their mutual military capabilities.
When facing a common threat, alliances provide their members with the means of reducing their probability of being attacked {deterrence), obtaining greater strength in case of attack , and precluding their allies from alliance with the enemy . alliances coalitions that form when two or more states combine their military capabilities and promise to coordinate their policies to increase mutual security.
Their only duty is to follow their interests and whenever possible to rely on self-help by depending only on their own state for defense, because under anarchy no state can really count on allies to come to its defense if attacked.
Shown is Saudi Arabia’s King Abdullah with Crown Prince Sultan Hashem, Mahmoud Ahbas, Khaled Meshaal , Ismail Haniyeh, and Meshaal’s deputy, Mussa Abu Marzuk.
Illustrated is the historical tendency for countries to come together in alliances in order to counter common security threats.
The greatest risk to forming alliances is that they bind a state to a commitment that may later become disadvantageous.
Because conditions are certain to change sooner or later and the usefulness of all alliances is certain to change once the common threat that brought the allies together declines, the realist tradition advises states not to take a fixed position on temporary convergences of national interests and, instead, to forge alliances only to deal with immediate threats.
The posture ot leaders about the advantage or disadvantage of alliances has depended on their personal philosophy and the country’s circumstances.
Despite their uncertain usefulness, many states throughout history have chosen to ally because, the risks notwithstanding, the perceived benefits to security in a time of threat justified that decision.
To best picture how alliances affect global security, it is instructive to move from the state level of analysis, which views alliance decisions from the perspective of an individual state’s security, to the global level of analysis (recall Chapter 1) by looking at the impact of alliances on the frequency of interstate war.
This view focuses attention on the possible contribution of alliance formation to maintaining the balance of power.
REALISM AND THE BALANCING DF PDWER The concept of a balance of power has a long and controversial history.
Critics deny the effectiveness of the balance of power, arguing that it breeds jealousy, intrigue, and antagonism.
Whereas “balance of power” may be widely used in everyday discourse, there is confusion over precisely what it entails. alignments the acceptance by a neutral state threatened by foreign enemies of a special relationship short of formal alliance with a stronger power able to protect it from attack.
At the core of nearly all the various meanings of “balance of power” is the idea that national security is enhanced when military capabilities are distributed so that no one state is strong enough to dominate all others.
If one state gains inordinate power, balance-of-power theory predicts that it will take advantage of its strength and attack weaker neighbors, thereby giving compelling incentive for those threatened to align and unite in a defensive coalition.
According to the theory, the threatened states’ combined military strength would deter the state harboring expansionist aims.
Thus, for realists, laissez-faire competition among states striving to maximize their national power yields an international equilibrium, ensuring the survival of all by checking hegemonic ambitions.
Balance-of-power theory is also founded on the realist premise that weakness invites attack and that countervailing power must be used to deter potential aggressors.
Realists assume that the drive for expanded power guides every state’s actions.
It follows that all countries are potential adversaries and that each must strengthen its military capability to protect itself.
Invariably, this reasoning rationalizes the quest for military superiority, because others pursue it as well.
The reasons spring from the realist belief that a system revolving around suspicion, competition, and anarchy will breed caution; uncertainty creates restraints on the initiation of war.
When all states are independent and, as sovereign actors, free to make rational choices designed to protect their national security interests in a climate of fear and mistrust, they have powerful incentives to realign and form coalitions that would lead to an approximately even distribution of power, curbing the natural temptation of any great power to imperialistically attempt to conquer the others.
In classic balance-of-power theory, fear of a third party will encourage alignments, because those threatened would need help to offset the power of the common adversary.
An alliance would add the ally’s power to the state’s own and deny the addition of that power to the enemy.
Therefore, aggression would appear unattractive and would be averted. free riders those who obtain benefits at others' expense without the usual costs and effort. nonalignment a foreign policy posture in which states do not participate in military alliances with either of two rival blocs for fear that alliance will lead to involvement in an unnecessary war.
To deter an aggressor, counteralliances are expected to form easily, because free riders, states sitting on the sidelines, cannot, as rational actors, risk nonalignment.
If they refuse to ally, their own vulnerability will encourage an expansionist state to attack them sooner or later.
To balance power against power in opposed coalitions approximately equal in strength, realists recognize that what is required is for national actors to see the value of rapidly shifting alliances.
Rules for Rivals in the Balancing Process Although balancing is occasionally described as an automatic, self-adjusting process, most realists see it as the result of deliberate choices undertaken by national leaders to maintain an equilibrium among contending states.
It is necessary for all leaders to constantly monitor changes in states’ relative capabilities so policies about arms and allies can be adjusted to rectify imbalances of power.
Choices must be made by rational, self-interested actors that recognize the trade-off of costs and benefits between strategic options.
For example, some options, such as expanding military capabilities through armaments and alliances, attempt to add weight to the lighter side of the international balance.
Others, such as negotiating limits on weaponry and on a great power’s sphere of influence to reduce the size of the geographical region under the domination of a great power, attempt to decrease the weight of the heavier side.
Various theorists have attempted to specify a set of rules that must be heeded in this constructed security regime in order for the balancing process to function effectively.
Constantly watch foreign developments in order to identify emerging threats and opportunities.
Because international anarchy makes each state responsible for its own security and because states can never be sure of one another’s intentions, self-interest encourages them to maximize their relative power.
States align with each other when they adopt a common stance toward some shared security problem.
An alliance is produced when they formally agree to coordinate their behavior under certain specified circumstances.
Because alliances are instrumental, short-term adjustments aimed at rectifying imbalances in the distribution of military capabilities, past experiences should not predispose states to accept or reject any potential partner.
Nowhere is this better seen than in the balancer role Great Britain once played in European diplomacy.
As described by Winston Churchill, Britain’s goal was to “oppose the strongest, most aggressive, most dominating power on the continent.... joined with the less strong powers, made a combination among them, and thus defeated and frustrated the continental military tyrant whoever he was, whatever nation he led.” balancer under a balance-ofpower system, an influential global or regional great power that throws its support in decisive fashion to a defensive coalition.
The purpose of engaging in balance-of-power politics is to survive in a world of potentially dangerous great powers.
If any state achieves absolute mastery over everyone else, it will be able to act freely.
Under such circumstances, the territorial integrity and political autonomy of other states will be in jeopardy.
By joining forces with the weaker side to prevent the stronger side from reaching preponderance, states can preserve their independence.
For this reason, when a single superpower attains preponderant status, the usual reaction at first of other major powers is to engage in “soft balancing” by using “nonmilitary tools to delay, frustrate, and undermine” the hegemon’s “military policies.
In the event of war, the winning side should not eliminate the defeated.
Looking forward rather than backward, it should do as little damage as possible to those it has vanquished because yesterday’s enemy may be needed as tomorrow’s ally.
Similarly, states that win at the bargaining table can stabilize the balance of power by granting the other side compensation in return for its concessions.
These realist policy prescriptions urge states to check the ambitions of any great power that threatens to amass overwhelming power, because aspiring hegemons are a potential threat to everyone.
Human beings and states, they argue, are by nature selfish, but balancing rival interests stabilizes their interactions.
The alarmed response by China and Russia to the United States 2002 National Security Strategy , which announced that the United States would do everything within its power to preserve forever America’s supreme global primacy, illustrates the balancing process.
Also illustrative was the resistance of Germany, France, and many other countries to the 2003 United States decision to launch a war of preemption to prevent Iraq from acquiring and using weapons of mass destruction—especially as evidence of Iraq’s possession of such weapons, ties to the 9/11 terrorist attacks, or intention to wage war were highly questionable.
Critics of balance-of-power theory raise several objections to the proposition that balancing promotes peace; band wagoning the tendency for weak states to seek alliance with the strongest power, irrespective of that power’s ideology or type of government, in order to increase their security.
On the other hand, they are told to oppose anyone seeking preponderance.
Yet sometimes bandwagoning with (rather than balancing against) the dominant state can increase a weaker country’s capabilities by allowing it to share in the spoils of a future victory.
History suggests that states that are most content with the status quo tend to balance against rising powers more than do dissatisfied states.
Balance-of-power theory assumes policy makers possess accurate, timely information about other states.
As discussed in the previous chapter, the concept of “power” has multiple meanings.
Tangible factors are hard to compare, such as the performance capabilities of the different types of weapons found in an adversary’s arsenal.
An ally who is being counted on to balance the power of an opponent may have secretly agreed to remain neutral in the event of a showdown.
Consequently, the actual distribution of power may not resemble the constructed distribution imagined by one side or the other.
The intense, reciprocal anxiety that shrouds balance-of-power politics fuels exaggerated estimates of an adversary’s strength.
This, in turn, prompts each side to expand the quantity and enhance the quality of its weaponry.
Critics of realism warn that if a serious dispute occurs between states locked in relentless arms competition under conditions of mutually assured suspicions, the probability of war increases.
Yet, as prospect theory illuminates, national leaders evaluate risks differently.
Rather than being deterred by equivalent power, they prefer gambling on the chance of winning a victory, even if the odds are long.
Marshaling comparable power against adversaries with a high tolerance for risk will not have the same effect as it would on those who avoid risks.
If the theory’s assumptions are correct, historical periods during which its rules were followed should also have been periods in which war was less frequent.
After the 1648 Peace of Westphalia created the global system of independent territorial states, the great powers participated in a series of increasingly destructive general wars that threatened to engulf and destroy the entire multistate global system.
As Inis L Claude soberly concludes, it is difficult to consider these wars “as anything other than catastrophic failures, total collapses, of the balance-ofpower system.
Indeed, the historical record has led some theorists to construct hegemonic stability theory as an alternative to the balance of power.
A significant problem with the balance-of-power system is its haphazard character.
To bring order to the global system, the great powers have occasionally tried to institutionalize channels of communication.
The Concert of Europe that commenced with the Congress of Vienna in 1815 exemplified this strategy.
It is predicated on the belief that the leading centers of power will see their interests advanced by collaborating to prevent conflict from escalating into war in those regions under their collective jurisdiction.
Although it is assumed that the great powers share a common outlook, concerts still allow “for subtle jockeying and competition to take place among them.
Power politics is not completely eliminated; members may turn to internal mobilization and coalition formation to pursue divergent interests.
A common sense of duty is the glue that holds great-power concerts together.
Overcoming this friction requires continuous consultation in order to reinforce expectations of joint responsibilities.
Although a concert framework can help manage relations among counterpoised great powers, the normative consensus underpinning this arrangement is fragile and can erode easily.
And this potential for great power harmony to be replaced by great power rivalry is what alarms many realist observers.
These difficulties in preserving the balance of power lead most realists to conclude that international conflict and competition is permanent in world politics and, therefore, that the best hope is to count on the emergence of a stable balance of power to preserve peace.
Next, take a look at trends in the historical record and projections for the future about how the balance of power is likely to function.
BALANCING POWER IN THE CONTEMPORARY GLOBAL SYSTEM The use of alliances to balance power has shifted over time in a series of redistributions.
At one extreme have been periods in which a powerful state has tried to prevail over another state, which in response usually has built additional arms or sought allies to offset its adversary’s strength.
At the other extreme, at times a more fluid competition has emerged, with encroachments by one state against another also precipitating a quest for arms and allies.
But rather than resulting in the formation of rigid, counterbalanced blocs, this kind of military confrontation has triggered many shifts by others to produce a kaleidoscope of overlapping alliances—a checkerboard of multiple great powers competing in balance-of-power politics.
Having examined how the balance of power is supposed to operate, the chapter next considers how it actually has functioned in world politics.
To visualize these potential types of global structure and their causes and consequences, the chapter now considers several models of balance-of-power distributions that have arisen since World War II, with an eye to the kinds of power divisions that may develop in the twenty-first century’s age of globalization now dominated by American military supremacy.
Models of the Balance of Power—Past and Present global structure the defining characteristics of the global system—such as the distribution of military capabilities —that exist independently of all actors but powerfully shape the actions of every actor.
Historically, these have ranged from highly concentrated power on one end of the continuum to highly dispersed power distributions on the other.
The former has included regional empires , and an example of the latter is the approximate equality of power held by the European powers at the conclusion of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815.
Balance-of-power systems evolve in a cyclical fashion— after four transformations, the system concludes the same way it began; unipolarity, 1945-1949; bipolarity, 1949-1991; multipolarity 1991-2001; and another unipolar system today with the United States again an unchallenged hegemon.
The United States was also the only country with the atomic bomb and had demonstrated its willingness to use the new weapon.
This underscored to others that it was without rival and incapable of being counterbalanced.
The United States was not just stronger than anybody —it was stronger than everybody.
In the period immediately following World War II, a unipolar distribution of power materialized, because power was concentrated in the hands of a single hegemon able to exercise overwhelming influence over all other states, either through leadership or through domination.
So supremely powerful was the United States at that time that people spoke of a new “American Empire” ruling over an impoverished world ravaged by war.
That hegemonic status was short lived, however, as an ascendant challenger to United States preponderance, the Soviet Union, soon began to undermine America’s supremacy and hegemonic status.
The United States capacity to act unilaterally in pursuit of its interests and ideals underwent a decline over the next four decades, as the United States grip on global developments and its ability to influence others eroded.
Bipolarity—The United States and Russia The recovery of the Soviet economy, the growth of its military capabilities, its maintenance of a large army, and growing SovietUnited States rivalry less than five years after the end of World War II gave rise to a new distribution of world power.
The Soviets broke the United States monopoly on atomic weapons in 1949 and exploded a thermonuclear device in 1953, less than a year after the United States.
This achievement symbolized the creation of global bipolarity —the division of the balance of power into two coalitions headed by rival military powers, each seeking to contain the other’s expansion.
Military capabilities became concentrated in the hands of two competitive “superpowers,” whose capacities to massively destroy anyone made comparisons with the other great powers meaningless.
In interpreting these dynamics, it is important not to use the concepts of polarity and polarization interchangeably.
They refer to two distinct dimensions of the primary ways in which military power is combined at any point in time in the global system.
In contrast, when states combine their arms through alliance formation, the aggregation of power through polarization changes the system’s balance of power.
Polarization increases when the number of cross-cutting alignments declines.
The concept of polarization is especially apt in this context because a pole suggests the metaphor of a magnet—it both repels and attracts.
The formation of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , linking the United States to the defense of Western Europe, and the Warsaw Pact, linking the former Soviet Union in a formal alliance with its Eastern European clients, occurred due to this polarization process.
The opposing blocs formed in part because the superpowers competed for allies and in part because the less powerful states looked to one superpower or the other for protection.
Correspondingly, each superpower’s allies gave it forward bases from which to carry on the competition.
In addition, the involvement of most other states in the superpowers’ struggle globalized the East-West conflict.
Eew states remained outside the superpowers’ rival alliance networks as neutral or nonaligned countries.
By grouping the system’s states into two blocs, each led by a superpower, the Cold War’s bipolar structure bred insecurity among all.
Each bloc leader, fearing that its adversary would attain hegemony, viewed every move, however defensive, as the first step toward world conquest.
Zero-sum conflict prevailed as both sides viewed what one side gained as a loss for the other.
Bipolarity left little room for compromise or maneuver and worked against the “normalization” of cooperative superpower relations . polarization the degree to which states cluster in alliances around the most powerful members of the global system.
North Atlantic Treaty Organization a military alliance created in 1949 to deter a Soviet attack on Western Europe that since has expanded and redefined its mission to emphasize not only the maintenance of peace but also the promotion of democracy.
Shifting Alliances in Iran Bipolarity first began to disintegrate in the 1960s and early 1970s when the opposed coalitions’ internal cohesion eroded and new centers of power emerged.
At the same time, weaker alliance partners were afforded more room for maneuvering, as illustrated by the friendly relations between the United States and Romania and between France and the Soviet Union.
The superpowers remained dominant militarily, but this less rigid system allowed other states to act more independently.
Rapid technological innovation in the superpowers’ major weapons systems was a catalyst in the dissolution of the Cold War blocs and the national strategic doctrines that the adversaries had constructed.
Intercontinental ballistic missiles , capable of delivering nuclear weapons through space from one continent to another, lessened the importance of forward bases on allies’ territory for striking at the heart of the adversary.
Furthermore, the narrowed differences in the superpowers’ arsenals loosened the ties that had previously bound allies to one another.
The uncertainty became pronounced as the pledge to protect allies through extended deterrence seemed increasingly insincere.
The movement toward democracy and market economies by some communist states in the late 1980s further eroded the bonds of ideology that had formerly helped these countries face their security problems from a common posture.
The 1989 dismantling of the Berlin Wall tore apart the Cold War architecture of competing blocs.
With the end of this division, and without a Soviet threat, the consistency of outlook and singularity of purpose that once bound NATO members together disappeared.
For example, in 2002 the NATO-Russia Council was established to provide a framework for consultation and cooperation between the twentyeight allies and Russia on current security issues and a wide range of issues of mutual interest.
Though NATO froze formal relations between the alliance and Russia in late 2008 due to what the allies saw as disproportionate military action by Russia in Georgia, in June 2009 NATO-Russia talks resumed in the interest of maintaining a forum for productive dialogue, cooperation, and problem solving.
RIVALRY AND MUTUAL NEED Relations within NATO have long been marked by disputes.
United States actions in Iraq and plans for missile defense systems in tbe region have generated a great degree of controversy within many European societies.
However, the resurgence of Russia, as demonstrated by its actions in Georgia, bas driven some of tbe new NATO members even closer toward tbe United States.
Following the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, a power transition —a change in the ratio of military capabilities between great power rivals that produces tensions and increases the probability of war between them—occurred.
This prompted many analysts to conclude that a new era of unipolarity had arisen, with the United States emerging as the world’s only superpower.
The question remains as to whether United States predominance will prove beneficial or damaging.
Against this optimistic view runs a strong suspicion about the future stability of a unipolar world under United States management.
Fears rose in reaction to the assertive Bush Doctrine pledging that the United States would unilaterally act however it wishes abroad, without the approval of others.
Throughout the world, United States leadership was condemned for its shortsightedness and willingness to put narrow self-interests ahead of ideals by seeking to preserve America’s position as world leader without working through multilateral cooperation with others for peace and prosperity.
However, there may be winds of change, for the global public is optimistic that under President Barack Obama, United States relations with the rest of the world will improve.
Constructivists suggest that the resistance faced by the United States, particularly with regard to the premises embodied by the Bush Doctrine, is not surprising, as a unipolar system depends heavily upon the social system in which it is embedded.
Instead of through material capabilities that are considered important by realists, constructivists argue that by leading the way as the champion of universal values with widespread appeal and by investing in the development of norms or institutions from which they benefit, a dominant state can greatly enhance its power and induce cooperation or acquiescence from others.
The United States had great success at this in the period following World War II when it was an ardent promoter of democracy, human rights, and freedom and was the primary architect behind an array of international institutions that reflected its values and shaped world politics.
Time will tell, but one trend is certain to influence what unfolds; the eventual erosion of today’s United States preponderance.
A POWER TRANSITION IN THE GLOBAL HIERARCHY Where countries sit in the world pyramid of power predicts their posture toward global change.
As this figure suggests, the more favorable a country’s position is in the world hierarchy, the more satisfied it is with the international status quo; conversely, states lower in the hierarchy are more dissatisfied and therefore promote change.
As the figure on the left suggests, the power transition theory provides leverage for “anticipating when and where great power and regional wars most likely will occur.
The photo on the right captures the cross-cutting combination of anger and allegiances that surfaces during power transitions—a mural with a ghostly Statue of Liberty on a wall facing the United States Embassy in Tehran. is unlikely to last long.
This power transition will occur sooner rather than later if the United States fails to reduce the heavy financial burden of the American global empire.
Sooner or later, America’s unipolar period in the sun will inevitably fade, and some new distribution of power will develop.
The probable consequences of such a transformation in world politics are not clear.
Others see the emergence of a more complex multipolar pattern of balance-of-power competition, where the United States, China, Japan, Russia, India, and the European Union would constitute six centers of global power.
According to this image of the future, as power becomes more equally distributed, each player will be increasingly assertive, independent, and competitive, leading to confusion about the identity of friends and foes.
The search for the capacity to compete on an equal footing with the other centers of power is characteristically strong when power becomes spread across three or more poles.
With the effort by the European Union to enter the playing field alongside the United States, China, Japan, Russia, and other regional players like Brazil and India, the game of rivalry and balancing is becoming much different from the strategies and alignments that tend to materialize in unipolar and bipolar systems.
As power becomes increasingly equally distributed, each leading power suspiciously confronts the other; diplomacy displays a nonideological, chesslike character; and conflict intensifies as each contender fears the power of its rivals.
An enlarged global chessboard of multiple geostrategic relationships develops.
The major players align together against others on particular issues, as their interests dictate.
Behind the diplomatic smiles and handshakes, one-time friends and allies begin to grow apart, formally “specialized” relations begin to dissolve, and former enemies forge friendly ties and begin making a common cause against other centers of power that threaten them.
This competition under conditions of multipolarity is already unfolding.
For example, at times the United States can be observed casting itself in the role of balancer, positioned in the middle of disputes between China and Russia.
At other times, the United States finds itself opposed by these two neighboring great powers, such as in August 2007 when China and Russia signed a new friendship treaty calling for a new “multipolar world” to oppose American global domination and cemented their alleged allied solidarity by creating the Shanghai Cooperation Organization and staging joint military exercises with four other bordering states.
As a measure of how sensitive particular issues can be among great powers, both the European Union’s foreign affairs commissioner, Christopher Pattern, and the German foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, castigated President Bush for treating America’s coalition partners as subordinate “satellites,” and Russia’s Vladimir Putin quickly joined their criticism of unilateral United States disregard of the interests of America’s would-be partners in the antiterrorist coalition.
In an effort to renew partnerships that had been strained because of the Iraq War, United States President Barack Obama acknowledged in an April 2009 visit to Europe that “there have been times where America’s shown arrogance and been dismissive, even derisive” toward Europe.
Another indicator of continuing balance-of-power jockeying for global position and independence typical of emergent multipolarity is the renewed emphasis on the geopolitics of the Eurasian region of the world.
With Russia’s show of strength in Georgia in 2008, its opposition to the expansion of NATO, and its perception of the missile defense agreement between the United States and Poland as a direct threat to Russian security, many felt a Cold War chill in the air and speculated about a changing tide of strength and strategic interest.
However, it is difficult to confidently predict what the twenty-first century will look like and whether it will be chaotic or stable.
Should a new multipolar world develop in the mid-twenty-first century, the probable consequences are unclear.
Because there is no real consensus on whether systems with a certain number of poles are more war prone than others, it would be imprudent to conclude that a new multipolar system will necessarily produce another period of warfare or of peace.
Consider the divided opinions about this issue, as represented by the arguments in three contending schools of thought.
One interpretation holds that peace will occur when one hegemonic state acquires enough power to deter others’ expansionist ambitions.
This view maintains that the concentration of power reduces the chances of war because it allows a single superpower to maintain peace and manage the global system.
In contrast, a second school of neorealisttUougUt maintains that bipolar systems are the most stable.
Under such stark simplicities and balanced symmetries, the two leading rivals have incentives to manage crises so that they do not escalate to war.
Those who believe that a bipolar world is inherently more stable than either its unipolar or multipolar counterparts draw support from the fact that in the bipolar environment of the 1950s, when the threat of war was endemic, major war did not occur.
A third school of thought argues that multipolar systems are the least war prone.
The peace-through-multipolarity school perceives multipolar systems as stable because they encompass a larger number of autonomous actors, giving rise to more potential alliance partners.
Abstract deductions and historical analogies can lead to contradictory conclusions, as the logic underlying these three inconsistent interpretations illustrates.
The future will determine which of these rival theories is the most accurate.
International Security: Nonproliferation global power will exert a strong influence on what kind of global system the world will experience.
Their expectations have been strengthened by China’s rapid rise toward becoming the globe’s biggest economy and the growing fears that this coming financial primacy will translate into Chinese hard power and a military threat, possibly even a new Chinese unipolar period.
Likewise, realists think that great power competition will continue because the American military giant is unlikely to gracefully accept a reduction of its stature.
He visited an array of countries, including France, the Czech Republic, Great Britain, Germany, and Turkey, and also met with leaders of Saudi Arabia, Russia, and China.
A global shift is clearly in the making, although the trajectories in the rise and fall of the great powers’ relative position in the global hierarchy are much in doubt.
As realists warn, if the past history of power transitions in the global balance of power is prologue, the global future may be a very dangerous future.
When American primacy does wane, the American “hobbled hegemon” will no longer remain in position to play its self-described role of global peacekeeper.
In the next two chapters of World Politics, turn your attention away from the balance-of-power politics of realism to examine proposals by liberal theorists to engineer institutional reforms in order to create a more orderly world order.
New Rules for Military Intervention THE JUDICIAL ERAMEWORKOE INTERNATIONAL LAW Law's Contribution to Peace and Justice E ^ '-S e E — ""O o E y I Winston Churchill, Franklin D Roosevelt and Joseph Stalin, 1945 Richard Nixon and Leonid Brezhnev, 1972 Ronald Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev, 1988 DIPLOMACY DIALOGUES To liberal reformers, direct negotiations between adversaries are a crucial step on the path to make peace a possibility.
Talks allow both sides to put their interests on the bargaining table and discuss issues openly—far better than resolving them on the battiefield.
Remembering your pledge to try to make the world a better place before you die, you decide to put your ethical principles above power.
You are joining Andrew Carnegie, Bill Gates, Warren Buffet, and other exceptionally wealthy philanthropists who generously chose to give large portions of their fortunes to causes that try to change the world for the better.
You could seek, for example, to strengthen human rights law, provide humanitarian relief for refugees, fight worldwide poverty and disease, join others in seeking to stem the threat of global warming, or subsidize a global campaign to educate all youth throughout the world.
Sorting through your moral values, however, you conclude that the greatest threat to the world is the awesome danger of armed aggression.
Acting on this conviction, you see your mission to be helping others find better ways than military methods for preventing war.
Reliance on weapons of war and balances of power has been tried since the beginning of time, but never with lasting success.
So now you have found your cause—finding peaceful methods for controlling armed aggression.
Alas, you must now go another difficult step in your attempt to clarify your values.
It is time for you to do some homework and draw lessons from policy makers and philosophers who have spent their lifetimes probing the same question you are now asking yourself—how to do good in a wicked world.
Your Internet search directs you to thinkers who have values compatible with your own and who see ideas as powerful forces that shape our reality.
The search engine directs you for insight to the knowledge of theorists from both liberal and constructivist perspectives.
Changing attitudes toward sovereignty are evident in the emerging norms of “sovereignty as responsibility,” the “responsibility to protect,” and the “responsibility to prevent,” as well as in the work of international relations theorists in the liberal and constructivist schools.
The paths to peace that are depicted by various liberal thinkers differ greatly in their approach to world order, but they all share your great fear of states’ historic propensity to wage war.
You are drawn in particular to those sets of premises and perspectives that focus on diplomacy and international law as a means of resolving conflict.
Resting on the liberal premises that principled moral behavior ultimately reaps higher rewards for all because fair treatment toward others promotes their fair behavior, and interstate cooperation can be encouraged by creating rules for peaceful interaction, liberal theory leads us to place emphasis on the role of collaboration and rule-making in shaping behavior in world politics.
To understand how international rules are created, constructivism informs us that leading ideas have meaningful consequences, and that when a favorable climate of opinion crystallizes about the preferred conduct for relations between states, those constructed images influence perceptions about the rules by which the game of nations should be played.
Diplomatic negotiations and international law communicate the prevailing international consensus about the rules to govern international relations.
For this reason, consistent with constructivist theory, many experts see international law mirroring changes in the most popular constructions of images about the ways in which states are habitually acting or should act toward one another in any particular period of history.
Keep these perspectives in mind as you contemplate the benefits and liabilities of alternative roads to peace.
These include diplomatic negotiations, international courts, collective security, and other methods of conflict resolution that are advocated hy policy makers whose image of world politics is informed hy liberal and constructivist theories. diplomatic negotiations, international disputes before they escalate to warfare or bring the use of armed force under meaningful legal controls that restrict the purposes for which armed aggression can be legally conducted, so that the likelihood of taking up arms will decline.
The goal here is political —to exercise influence over an enemy in order to convince that enemy that acceding to an opposing state’s demands will be less costly than defying those demands.
This result, realists advise, can be accomplished by delivering an ultimatum that threatens the target with an immediate threat in order to increase pressure and make it comply with the coercive state’s request.
The major problem with coercive diplomacy’s reliance on the threat of armed force is that such acts usually create a crisis that escalates to war.
The problem that liberal reformers identify is that these crises and armed conflicts could potentially have been settled by diplomatic negotiations had that avenue for dispute settlement been attempted. crisis a situation in which the threat of escaiation to warfare is high and the time avaiiabie for making decisions and reaching compromised solutions in negotiations is compressed.
When a crisis erupts, the capacity for reaching coolheaded rational decisions is reduced.
The threat to use force causes stress and reduces the amount of time available to reach decisions that might successfully end the crisis peacefully.
The frequency has varied over time, but its recurrence attests to states’ compulsion to make threats to use military force to get their way and demonstrates that efforts to resolve disputes through negotiations have frequently either failed or were not pursued.
The Suez Crisis of 1956 is an often-cited example of the inherent dangers.
To liberals, it is always better to talk about percolating divisive issues at a negotiating table than to let anger and anxieties sizzle and tempt the disputants to take up arms.
Only through discussion and bargaining can positions be clarified and, possibly, concession and compromises be reached that terminate the threat of warfare.
Negotiation is a process of bargaining between two or more actors in an effort to deal with an issue or situation in order to reach an agreement that settles the dispute.
At a basic, elementary level, negotiation entails an exchange of communications, with discussion flowing back and forth between the bargaining parties.
As an approach to conflict management, the goal is to facilitate communication between the parties regarding their intentions and goals, and produce options that address the interests of those involved.
In the give-and-take required to negotiate a compromised solution, there is a strong propensity for some level of reciprocity to emerge from the action-and-reaction sequence of communications—to return in kind or degree the kind of friendly or hostile communication received from the other party.
Note that, for this reason, reciprocated communications can produce greater cooperation or greater conflict.
The Chinese translation of the word “crisis” means both “opportunity” and “danger,” and efforts to negotiate compromises provide an opportunity to produce a positive agreement or to produce a dangerous negative outcome that heightens threats and tensions.
That is why negotiation is not a sure cure-all for the resolution of interstate conflicts and crises.
Still, negotiations make possible the settlement of disputes, providing the offers of concessions freely given are reciprocated by the target with the same level of similar concessions.
Vladimir Putin, Russia’s Prime Minister, offered wise counsel saying that “Today to be successful, one must be able to reach agreements.
Reciprocated gestures of goodwill and empathy for the opponent’s situation pave the way for a compromised agreement.
Indeed, a common bargaining approach to induce the other party to reach agreements is through a tit-for-tat strategy that responds to any cooperative offer by immediately reciprocating it with an equal offer; the reward through repetitive concessions can facilitate a mutually satisfactory agreement.
Diplomacy is aimed at resolving international disputes peacefully, which is why diplomacy is favored by liberals.
Conversely, realists, for whom states’ primary interest is the pursuit of power, believe that threats of war preserve peace better than diplomatic efforts.
Even when pursued for the prevention of armed aggression and the peaceful settlement of conflicts, diplomacy requires great intelligence, information, imagination, flexibility, ingenuity, and honesty to successfully maintain peaceful negotiations.
To quell controversies, manage quarrels without resort to force, and lessen tensions and promote mutual understanding between rivals is a huge challenge in world politics.
Convincing adversaries that their interests are served by forging cordial and durable relations and engaging them in a web of mutual interests is fraught with difficulties and as a result, negotiations between disputants often fail.
Compounding the challenge is the common liability that while diplomats are sent to negotiate for his or her country, no matter what their skill or sincerity, they cannot succeed unless they have the full backing of their government’s authority.
Diplomats must possess the authority to compromise and their leadership must accept the potential for public criticism for partially backing down to an adversary.
These problems, potholes, and pitfalls notwithstanding, liberals regard negotiation as a preferred method for fostering international peace.
The alternative—the coercive use of military power—is ethically unacceptable to people seeking to avoid war.
Fortunately, those playing the game of international politics have been inventive in creating supplementary methods to enable negotiations to reduce the threat of war.
Several types of approaches are available for opponents facing dangerous relations and the threat of war.
All are now nested in the laws of nations accepted by the global community.
Mediation occurs when an outside actor, either another state or a group of states in an intergovernmental organization , participate directly in negotiations between the parties to a dispute to aid them in recognizing their shared interests and proposing solutions based on these common interests.
More pessimistically, the mediation of international crises has proven less successful when ethnic groups have been a player in the crisis that led to armed aggression . mediation a conflict-resolution procedure in which a third party proposes a nonbinding solution to the disputants.
Feminist theory stresses the importance of gender in studying world politics, and explores the extent to which a “masculine” conceptualization of key ideas—such as power, interest, and security—shapes the conduct of foreign affairs.
Others, however, claim that differences exist and are contextual, with each gender being more capable than the other in certain endeavors.
With its emphasis on the role of power in an amoral pursuit of narrow self-interest by rational actors, realism portrays a competitive world with a preference for an instrumental masculine orientation to decision making.
Thus men are often comfortable negotiating in situations in which controlled conflict is expected.
Some argue, however, that as a product of their traditional social roles, the tendency of women to have interdependent self-schemas and a nurturing orientation provides them with valuable perspectives that are an asset to conflict negotiation and mediation.
Moreover, women understand events in terms of a context that takes into account relationships as well as evolving situations.
Eschewing the realist perspective of power achieved through competition, women tend to be more inclined to a liberal view of mutual empowerment achieved through cooperative interactions that construct connections and understanding.
Rooted in the premise that women bring certain values to negotiation and mediation that are derived from their gendered socialization experiences, and that these insights and policy prescriptions have been absent due to the exclusionary nature of international negotiations , such is the intent of UN Resolution 1325, which seeks to “increase the participation of women at decision making levels in conflict resolution and peace processes"" in the interest of generating new perspectives and options for lasting conflict resolution.
Perhaps as greater numbers of women are included in international negotiations where men have traditionally dominated, both will benefit from the perspectives of the other and the role of diplomacy in preventing and resolving conflict will be enhanced.
Liberals have long advocated that international law be strengthened in order to police armed aggression between states and to more capably provide for world order.
LAW AT THE INTERNATIONAL LEVEL when you think about law, it is very likely that you construct an image of how law functions within the country in which you are residing.
In this constructed image, when a society perceives a particular type of behavior to be harmful, a law is predictably passed to prohibit it.
The emergent consensus in many countries that underage drinking and smoking in public places are harmful led, for example, to new laws to regulate and prohibit these practices.
Actually, no, or at least not until relatively recently in the modern saga of world history.
If murder and killing have been condemned in the precepts of your religion and prohibited by the laws of your country, you may be shocked to learn that the military drive for power has been legal in most historical phases of international law.
Next, the chapter will look at the evolution of international law and how that situation came to be.
THE CHARACTERISTICS OF INTERNATIONAL LAW In 1984, the United States announced that it would unilaterally withdraw from the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice, or the World Court.
This move followed Nicaragua’s accusation that the United States Central Intelligence Agency had illegally attempted to “overthrow and destabilize” the elected Sandinista government.
Nicaragua charged that the United States had illegally mined its ports and supplied money, military assistance, and training to the rebel contra forces.
In so doing, however, it was not acting without precedent; others had done so previously.
Yet this ruling had little effect, as neither the court nor Nicaragua had any means to enforce it.
Indeed, many experts—whether they are realists or liberals—skeptically ask whether international law is really law.
Most global activity falls within the realm oi private international law —the regulation of the kinds of transnational activities undertaken every day in such areas as commerce, communications, and travel.
Although largely invisible to the public, private international law is the location for almost all international legal activities.
It is where most transnational disputes are regularly settled and where the record of compliance compares favorably with that achieved in domestic legal systems.
In contrast, public international law covers issues of relations between governments and the interactions of governments with intergovernmental organizations and nongovernmental organizations such as multinational corporations.
Some believe that we should use the phrase world law to describe the mixture of public and private, domestic and international transactions that public international law seeks to regulate in an increasingly globalized world.
However, it is the regulation of governmentto-government relations that dominates the headlines in discussion of public international law.
This area of activity also receives most of the criticism, for here, failures—when they occur—are conspicuous.
This is especially true with respect to the breakdown of peace and security.
When states engage in armed conflict, criticism of public international law’s shortcomings escalates.
Without a doubt, the inability of public international law to control armed aggression is regarded as its greatest weakness.
To cut deeper into the characteristics of contemporary international law, the chapter will next look briefly at some of its other salient characteristics. private international law law pertaining to routine transnational intercourse between or among states as well as nonstate actors. public international law law pertaining to govern ment-togovernment relations as well as countries’ relations with other types of transnational actors.
Core Principles of International Law Today No principle of international law is more important than state sovereignty.
Ever since the 1648 Treaties of Westphalia, states have tried to reserve the right to perform within their territories in any way the government chooses.
Sovereignty means that no authority is legally above the state, except that which the state voluntarily confers on the international organizations it joins.
In fact, as conceived by theoreticians schooled in the realist tradition since the seventeenth century, all the rules of international law express codes of conduct that protect states’ freedom.
Each state is given “a complete freedom of action” to do whatever it takes to preserve its sovereign independence.
Nearly every legal doctrine supports and extends the cardinal principle that states are the primary subjects of international law.
Although the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 expanded concern about states’ treatment of individual people, states remain supreme.
Accordingly, the vast majority of rules address the rights and duties of states, not people.
For instance, the principle of sovereign equality entitles each state to full respect by other states as well as equal protection by the system’s legal rules.
The right of independence also guarantees states’ autonomy in their domestic affairs and external relations, under the logic that the independence of each presumes that of all.
Similarly, the doctrine of neutrality permits states to avoid involvement in others’ conflicts and coalitions.
Furthermore, the noninterference principle forms the basis for the nonintervention norm —requiring states to refrain from uninvited activities within in another country’s territory.
This sometimes-abused classic rule gives governments the right to exercise jurisdiction over practically all things on, under, or above their bounded territory.
In practice, domestic jurisdiction permits a state to enact and enforce whatever laws it wishes for its own citizens.
A citizen was not protected against the state’s abuse of human rights or crimes against humanity.
Limitations of the International Legal System Sovereignty and the legal principles derived from it shape and reinforce international anarchy.
Throughout most of modern history, international law as constructed by realists was designed by states to protect the state, and thereby made sovereignty the core principle to ensure states’ freedom to act in terms of their perceived national interests.
Moreover, the great powers alone have the capacity to promote wide acceptance and then enforce the transnational norms of statecraft they favor.
To liberal theoreticians, putting the state ahead of the global community was a serious flaw that undermined international law’s potential effectiveness.
Many theorists consider the international legal system institutionally defective due to its dependence on states’ willingness to participate.
Because formal legal institutions are weak at the global level, critics make the following points.
First, in world politics, no legislative body is capable of making binding laws.
Rules are made only when states willingly observe or embrace them in the treaties to which they voluntarily subscribe.
Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice affirms this.
Second, in world politics, no judicial body exists to authoritatively identify and record the rules accepted by states, interpret when and how the rules apply, and identify violations.
Finally, in world politics there is no executive body capable of enforcing the rules.
Rule enforcement usually occurs through the unilateral self-help actions of the victims of a transgression or with the assistance of their allies or other interested parties.
No centralized enforcement procedures exist, and compliance is voluntary.
The whole system rests, therefore, on states’ willingness to abide by the rules to which they consent and on the ability of each transnational norms the regular customs widely practiced by countries in their relations with other countries and the kinds of behavior that the international community accepts as what ought to be practiced.
Consequently, states themselves—not a higher authority—determine what the rules are, when they apply, and how they should be enforced.
It is precisely this problem that prompts reformers to restrict the sovereign freedom of states and expand their common pursuit of shared legal norms in order to advance collective global interests over the interests of individual states.
An effective legal system must represent the norms shared by those it governs.
According to the precept of Roman law, ubi societas, ibi jus (where there is society, there is law), shared community values are a minimal precondition for forming a legal system.
Yet the contemporary international order is culturally and ideologically pluralistic and lacks consensus on common values, as evidenced by the “clash of civilizations” (Berger and Huntington 2002) and the rejection by terrorists and others of the Western-based international legal order.
International law justifies the competitive pursuit of national advantage without regard to morality or justice.
As in any legal system, in world politics what is legal is not necessarily moral.
International law is an instrument of the powerful to oppress the weak.
In a voluntary consent system, the rules to which the powerful willingly agree are those that serve their interests.
Eminent legal scholar Hans Kelsen’s contention that “states ought to behave as they have customarily behaved” and E Adamson Hoebel’s dictum that “what the most do, others should do” reflect the positivist legal theory that when a type of behavior occurs frequently, it becomes legal.
In fact, highly regarded positivist legal theorists stress states’ customary practices as the most important source from which laws derive in the absence of formal machinery for creating international rules.
When the origins of international law are interpreted in this way, the actions of states shape law, not vice versa.
The vague, elastic wording of international law makes it easy for states to define and interpret almost any action as legitimate.
The Abiding Relevance of International Law Although international law has deficiencies, this should not lead to the conclusion that it is irrelevant or useless.
States themselves find international law useful and expend much effort to shape its evolution.
The major reason that even the most powerful states usually abide by international legal rules is that they recognize that adherence pays benefits that outweigh the costs of expedient rule violation.
Those that play the game of international politics by recognized rules receive rewards, whereas states that ignore international law or opportunistically break customary norms pay costs for doing as they please.
Violators also must fear retaliation by those victimized, as well as the loss of prestige.
Eor this reason, only the most ambitious or reckless state is apt to flagrantly disregard accepted standards of conduct. positivist legal theory a theory that stresses states' customs and habitual ways of behaving as the most important source of law.
Claiming that the United States “does not torture people,” then President Bush nonetheless defended his government’s interrogation of terrorist suspects at the Guantanamo detainee prison by using such methods as frigid temperatures and simulated drowning.
Law helps shape expectations, and rules reduce uncertainty and enhance predictability in international affairs.
As constructivist theory elucidates, transnational norms historically change in conjunction with each major transformation in world politics—^with fundamental changes in prevailing global conditions, such as shifts in the primary foreign policy goals that states are pursuing.
According to this constructivist interpretation, throughout history the rules of international statecraft have changed in the aftermath of changes in the customary practices of how states are mostly behaving.
Every breakdown of international law, of course, does not prove the existence of general lawlessness.
Today, with street crime in cities worldwide at epidemic proportions and ethnic and religious warfare within countries exacting a deadly toll against hundreds of minority groups, states’ domestic legal systems are clearly failing to prevent killing.
This suggests that even when strong formal institutions for rule enforcement are in place, they do not and cannot guarantee compliance.
No legal system can deter all of its members from breaking existing laws.
Consequently, it is a mistake to expect a legal system to prevent all criminal behavior or to assert that any violation of the law proves the inadequacy of the legal structure.
Law is designed to deter crime, but it is unreasonable to expect it to prevent it.
Thus, the allegedly “deficient” international legal system may perform its primary task—inhibiting interstate violence—even more effectively than supposedly more-sophisticated domestic systems.
Perhaps, then, the usual criteria by which critics assess legal systems are dubious.
International law is an institutional device for communicating to the policymakers of various states a consensus on the nature of the international system. —William D, Coplin, international legal theoretician THE LEGAL CONTROL OF ARMED AGGRESSION Liberal reformers often complain that international law is the weakest in controlling armed aggression—the realm of behavior most resistant to legal control.
If under international law, as fashioned by realist leaders, states are “legally bound to respect each other’s independence and other rights, and yet free to attack each other at will” , international law may actually encourage war.
As constructivists point out, throughout history, changes in international law have followed changes in the moral consensus about the ethics of using armed force in interstate relations.
Therefore, it is important to understand the origins of just war theory and the way it is evolving today, before reviewing contemporary changes in the legal rules of warfare that have led to the formation of security regimes —sets of rules to contain armed aggression. just war doctrine the moral criteria identifying when a just war may be undertaken and how it shouid be fought once it begins.
The Changing Ethics Regarding the Use of Armed Force Many people are confused by international law because it both prohibits and justifies the use of force.
The Christian was obligated, he felt, to fight against evil and wickedness.
Augustine, the City of Man was inherently sinful, in contrast to the City of God.
The modern just war doctrine evolved from this perspective, as developed by such humanist reformers as Hugo Grotius.
He challenged the warring Catholic and Protestant Christian powers in the Thirty Years’ War to abide by humane standards of conduct and sought to replace the two “cities,” or ethical realms of St.
For war to be moral it must also be fought by just means without harm to innocent noncombatants.
The latter specifies restraints on the range of permissible tactics to be used in fighting a just war.
Thomas More contended that the assassination of an evil leader responsible for starting a war was justified if it would prevent the taking of innocent lives.
His treatise called on the great powers to resolve their conflicts by judicial procedures rather than on the battlefield and specified the legal principles he felt could encourage cooperation, peace, and more humane treatment of people.
These ethical criteria continue to color thinking about the rules of warfare and the circumstances under which the use of armed force is legally permissible.
For example, insurgent terrorists and now the armies fighting them are increasingly relying on Improvised Explosive Devices planted on animal carcasses, mobile cell phones, or human cadavers in addition to lEDs left in the open in order to kill without risk of death to the killers.
Today’s lEDs, first invented by the United States and now on the global black market for purchase by any transnational extremist, are cheap and easy-to-make gadgets such as garage-door openers used to detonate bombs.
Because containment and prevention of violence have become the chief purposes of arms and Mlerevelt, Michiel van, Jansz {1567-1641) Hugo Grotius , father of international law, 1631.
Stedelijk Museum Het Prinsenhof, Delft, The Netherland/Erich Lessing/Art Resource, Inc.
Just war theory reflects the continuing quest to place legal constraints on the use of armed force in order to create a moral consensus about the conditions under which ends justify means, even though today disagreements continue about the criteria that should be accepted.
These differences became especially evident in the heated debate after the United States preemptive invasion of Iraq.
E TO ra ^ O ■a 9^ £ ■q. h o ro 00 ""o cn 4< T3 o Armed Conflict FIGURE 10.
THE LEGAL PROHIBITION AGAINST INITIATING WARS, 1815-2009 Legal restraints on the historic right of states to start a war have fluctuated over time, hut have increased steadily since World War I when that carnage prompted the global community to make wars of conquest illegal.
Since 9/11, these legal prohibitions have been questioned in the aftermath of the United States efforts to promote preemption as a legal right to repel the /rofenf/a/aggression of another state or nonstate terrorist network even before its threat of attack is imminent, which blurs the distinction between preemptive war and preventive war.
Others disagree, with some suggesting that United States intent in waging war was justifiable, as Saddam Hussein intentionally let the United States believe Iraq had weapons of mass destruction.
The 2003 United States invasion of Iraq has made the legality of the use of force a hot topic.
The Bush administration further claimed that Saddam Hussein had close ties with the Al Qaeda terrorist network that orchestrated the 9/11 attack on the United States.
Warning that Saddam Hussein would “stop at nothing until something stops him,"" the United States undertook a massive attack to overthrow the rogue dictatorship.
However, that was not to be the case; more than six years later, American troops remained locked in deadly fighting with Iraqi insurgents and suicide terrorist bombers seeking to drive the United States from occupied Iraq, Afghanistan, and Islamic holy lands.
Though many in the United States expected to be welcomed with rice and rose petals, instead 80 percent of the Iraqi population saw the American troops as an invading army rather than their liberators.
As the body toll of American troops climbed to the thousands, criticism of the war’s purposes, conduct, and strategy mounted in American public opinion.
Furthermore, after exhaustive searches, even United States intelligence agencies could uncover no evidence, as the United States had claimed, that Saddam Hussein had been either hiding weapons of mass destruction or had supported Al Quada’s 9/11 terrorist attack.
This “liberal-hawk” abrupt shift in the American rationale tor the Iraq war raises important questions about the conditions, if any, under which it is just for any country to wage war against an adversary.
These types of questions are central to the ethical evaluation of international behavior and lie at the intersection of the debate between realists and liberals.
Policy makers and analysts are divided about the purposes for which military force might be justifiably used.
For instance, former National Security Advisor General Brent Scowcroft, who served the senior Bush presidency and who calls himself an “enlightened realist” as well as a “cynical idealist,” criticized the United States intervention as a misguided example of putting liberal idealism over national self-interest because “a true realist does not employ the military for selfless humanitarian operations” and does not enter a war without an exit strategy.
New Rules for Military Intervention International law has recently begun to fundamentally revise its traditional prohibition against military intervention in the wake of the recent wave of terrorism by states against their own people.
For humanitarian purposes, the belief that governments have a right, even an obligation, to intervene in the affairs of other states under certain conditions has won advocates.
The result has been the collapse of the Westphalian principle that what a state does within its own borders is its own business.
This rule change permits states and international organizations to punish acts of genocide by re-interpreting the traditional rule against external interference in the internal affairs of another state and making outside intervention permissible.
This sea change suggests that international law develops and changes most rapidly when global problems arise that require collective solutions and legal military necessity the legal principle that violation of the rules of warfare may be excused for defensive purposes during periods of extreme emergency.
THE CHANGING STATUS OF THE NONINTERVENTION NORM IN INTERNATIONAL LAW SINCE 1820 Overtime, the illegality of intervening in sovereign states has changed, as measured by changes in international law about the prevailing consensus regarding rules for international conduct.
Since 1960, international law has adopted an increasingly permissive posture toward this form of coercive diplomacy for a variety of purposes, including humanitarian aid, preventing genocide, protecting civil liberties, promoting democracy through “reform interventions,” and combating global terrorism. remedies.
The spread of genocide and atrocities in failed states and countries ruled by tyrants has spawned new sets of legal rules to arrest these dangers.
Likewise, the rising frequency of global terrorism has pushed efforts to rewrite international law to permit interventions within countries that provide terrorists a secure base of operations, in order to contain terrorist acts of violence.
Attention to terrorism has led to increased cooperation and spawned new branches of international law.
Terrorism has prompted states to step up their mutual cooperation on criminal matters based on common interest, both to prevent terrorist groups from attacking innocent civilians or state officials, and, in case such attacks are carried out, to arrest the culprits and bring them to justice.
These restraints include the principles of discrimination and noncombatant immunity, which attempt to protect innocent civilians by restricting military targets to soldiers and supplies.
The laws of retaliation specify conditions under which certain practices are legitimate.
One category of coercive power, reprisals (hostile and illegal acts permitted only if made in proportionate response to a prior hostile and illegal act), stipulates procedures for military occupations, blockades, shows of force, and bombardments.
Another category, retorsion (hostile but legal retaliatory acts made in response to similar legal acts initiated by other states), provides rules for embargoes, boycotts, import quotas, tariffs, and travel restrictions to redress grievances.
The advent of a new set of legal justifications for military intervention to protect civilians is explained by the fact that noncombatants have become the primary victims in warfare.
The ratio of soldiers to civilians killed between 1914 and 1918 was about 90 to 10.
To be sure, liberal and constructivist reformers have a long way to travel to fulfill their wish to see international law strengthen so that it can more effectively police international armed aggression.
However, reformers take heart from the trends that have recently enabled international law to increase its capacity to manage the threat of war within states, between states, and through global terrorism.
And they question those cynics who still contend that international law is and should remain irrelevant to states’ use of armed force.
It is a mistake, therefore, to claim that international law has broken down whenever war breaks out.
Legal procedures exist to resolve conflicts before they erupt into open hostilities.
Although law cannot prevent war, legal procedures often make recourse to violence unnecessary by resolving disputes that might otherwise escalate to war.
International Court of Justice the primary court established by the United Nations for resolving legal disputes between states and providing advisory opinions to international agencies and the UN General Assembly.
The demonstrable capacity of legal methods to reduce the frequency of war does not mean that international adjudicative machinery is well developed or functionally effective.
Nowhere is this more evident than with the International Court of Justice , known as the World Court, which was created after World War II as the highest judicial body on Earth—the only international court with universal scope and general jurisdiction.
In addition, more than three hundred bilateral or multilateral treaties provide for the World Court to have jurisdiction in the resolution of disputes arising from their application for a legal interpretation.
A weakness in the World Court is that it can make rulings only on disputes freely submitted by states exercising their sovereign rights; the court cannot rule on cases that states do not bring to it.
State sovereignty is protected, and many states have traditionally been hesitant to use the court because ICJ decisions are final—there is no opportunity to appeal.
The trends in the World Court’s activity are not encouraging to advocates of world law.
Whereas the number of sovereign states since 1950 has tripled, the court’s caseload has not increased at the same rate.
Once the court has ruled on these cases, the disputants have complied with ICJ judgments only a little more than half of the time.
This record suggests that while approval for using the court of law to resolve international conflicts is increasingly voiced, most states remain reluctant to voluntarily use judicial procedures to settle their most important international disputes.
It is encouraging that the global community has radically revised international law to prevent the horror of civilian casualties and contain the mass slaughter that has increasingly taken place, and it now holds leaders of countries accountable for war crimes as war criminals.
International law prohibits leaders from allowing their militaries to undertake actions in violation of certain principles accepted by the international community, such as the protection of innocent noncombatants.
Formerly, when violations occurred, little could be done except to condemn those acts because international law then failed to hold government leaders to the same standards it held soldiers and military officers who committed atrocities against enemy civilians and captured soldiers.
Previously, international law exempted leaders from legal jurisdiction under the doctrine of “sovereign immunity,” even when their commands ignored the laws of war.
The formation of international criminal tribunals in 1993 signaled to would-be perpetrators the global community’s intolerance for these atrocities.
The International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia was established in 1993, followed by the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda in 1994.
One of the most famous tribunal detainees was Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president and architect of four wars in the 1990s that killed more than 250,000 and tore the Balkans apart, who died in March 2006 in his Hague prison cell while facing trial.
Both the ICTY and the ICTR were set up by the United Nations on an ad hoc basis for a limited time period and a specific jurisdiction, and underscored the need for a permanent global criminal court.
The ICC only pursues a case when a state’s courts are unwilling or unable to do so, and brings charges only against international criminal tribunals special tribunals established by the United Nations to prosecute those responsible for wartime atrocities and genocide, bring justice to victims, and deter such crimes in the future.
International Criminal Court a court established by international treaty for indicting and administering justice to people committing war crimes.
A Ticking Bomb state-sponsored terrorism formal assistance, training, and arming of foreign terrorists by a state in order to achieve foreign policy and/or domestic goais. war crimes acts performed during war that the international community defines as crimes against humanity, including atrocities committed against an enemy’s prisoners of war, civilians, or the state’s own minority population. individuals as opposed to states.
To date, the ICC has opened investigations into atrocities in Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo, the Central African Republic, and Darfur—and despite resistance from many members of the African Union, in March 2009 issued a warrant for the arrest of Sudanese President Omar al-Bashir for genocide.
The ICC could become a useful mechanism for dealing with mid-level thugs and warlords, or retired dicators, where in-country prosecutions are considered too contentious.
Among the most prominent legal issues facing the court is the need to refine the currently vague definition of “crimes of aggression,” and this could run contrary to the interests of many states, particularly those in the Global North.
Nonetheless, the criminalization of rulers’ state-sponsored terrorism raises the legal restraints on the initiation and conduct of war to an all-time high, widening the scope of acts now classified as war crimes.
Law’s Contribution to Peace and Justice World order will depend to a considerable extent on the future uses to which states put international law.
Alleged shortcomings of international law do not lie with the laws but with their creators—states and their continuing realpolitik dedication to preserving sovereignty as a legal right in order to protect states’ independence and autonomy.
The crucial factor in determining the future role of international law depends on which trend prevails.
One path is displayed by the United States, which in 2002 pledged that it would continue to act in accordance with its so-called Connally amendment that reserves the United States right to determine which cases it will permit the World Court to hear.
The United States preference is to try cases in United States courts and to let others use United States courts as global arbiters of global rights and wrongs.
It now enables victims of torture, genocide, slavery, and war crimes throughout the world to try to get justice in United States courts.
An example of this occurred in 2001 when five Chinese civilians sued Chinese Prime Minister Li Peng in an American court for his role in the 1989 crackdown in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square, which killed hundreds of civilians.
The United States Supreme Court in 2004 upheld this old law by allowing victims of the Abu Chraib prison abuses to sue United States contractors.
Now at the regional level the EU’s twenty-seven members give the European Court of Human Rights the power to exercise authoritative jurisdiction, and in Central and South America the Inter-American Court on Human Rights routinely makes binding decisions.
The global community could, in principle, follow Europe’s and South America’s lead and strengthen international law’s capacity.
In this chapter, you have inspected two of the major liberal paths to peace; procedures for the negotiated settlement of international disputes and the legal control of armed aggression.
Both routes have pitfalls but, as the construction of international norms and ideas in world politics evolves to place greater emphasis on global responsibility, humanitarianism, and the importance of justice for all, there are promising prospects for a more just and stable world order.
In the next chapter, you will consider other liberal and constructivist avenues to enhance collective security and international peace.
The 21st century must be, if we are to survive it, an age that all nations . . . understand as ill-suited to gladiators and leviathans — an age that will reward countries that share a commitment to transparency, cooperation, and mutual benefit. —Strobe Talbott, former United States Deputy Secretary of State INSTITUTIONS, NORMS, AND WORLD ORDER GLOBAL CHANGE THROUGH GLOBAL CONNECTIONS Liberals, and many constructivists, are dissatisfied with the world and would like to change it.
They have mobilized to exert pressure to contain arms races, global warming, warfare, and world poverty, among other causes.
A crowd in London presses for humanitarian aid to fight African poverty at one of ten demonstrations organized on the same day around the world.
But not all trends are converging, and some are pulling against others in opposite directions.
Whatever their collective synergistic impact on one another, it seems certain that your future world will be different from the one that now exists.
The things you desire cannot all be obtained, and so you will confront making trade-offs among incompatible choices about how to set priorities and best help forge a better world.
Many of your value preferences lie at the vortex of the contest between realist and liberal thought, and they defy easy reconciliation.
Sure, you want your country to be militarily powerful for defense, but you do not want other countries to build their military capabilities, and you must dread the prospect of a world darkened by the worldwide proliferation of weapons.
Many of the things you value can only be served by some sacrifice of other values.
In this chapter, focus your attention on some of the major ways in which liberal international thought directly challenges the assumptions underlying realist thinking about world politics.
Also consider, from constructivist and identity perspectives, the importance of progressive ideas and norms in shaping international behavior and collective conceptions of world politics.
This will require you to contemplate the consequences that are likely to result if three major roads to world order are pursued; disarmament, collective security through international organizations, and the building of a single world culture through the promotion of norms supporting free trade and free governments worldwide.
All three are questioned and are opposed by the dominant strains of thought in the realist theoretical tradition.
If your country is militarily stronger than its rivals, it is not very likely to be attacked.
Using counterfactual logic by asking yourself what would be the likely consequences if all countries adhered to this advice and what would happen if your country did not build bigger and better weapons capabilities, you might arrive at another conclusion.
Your country may become less secure, not more, as it builds its military might.
In this construction, the security dilemma figures prominently— when a country builds armaments, alarmed neighbors mistrust its claims that the weapons are for defensive purposes, and in fearful reaction begin to vigorously arm themselves also.
All the arming parties are now more vulnerable; wanting peace, war preparations increase the likelihood of war.
Sir John Frederick Maurice wrote in his memoirs, “I went into the British Army believing that if you want peace you must prepare for war.
The destructiveness of today’s weapons has inspired many people to embrace the conclusion that reducing the weapons of war can increase the prospects for global peace.
While there is no single constructivist position on armaments or armed aggression, there is a widespread interest in moving beyond a limited traditional conception of security to one that takes into account the consequence of progressive ideas and human creativity.
Thus, while realists, and even liberals, emphasize the material underpinnings of war and peace, constructivists take into account both the material and communicative sources.
As ideas “do not float freely are embedded in an elaborate set of rules, norms, regimes and institutions” , the constructivist perspective is often complimentary to the liberal emphasis on institutional and normative paths to peace, and the idea that constraints on the development and spread of weapons of war are critical to global security.
Many feminist scholars share a critical view of the role of weapons of mass destruction in ensuring global security.
There is hope that reduction in armaments will lead to less armed aggression and a safer and more secure world.
But in thinking about the the control of the spread of weapons around the world, keep in mind that it is not strictly a tenet of liberal theory alone.
While realists are reluctant to view arms control as a path to peace, most policy makers who have negotiated agreements to limit arms have been realists who perceived such treaties as prudent tools to promote security by balancing military power with power to maintain the threat of war.
Theories of International Relations: Realism versus Liberalism bilateral agreements exchanges between two states, such as arms control agreements negotiated cooperatively to set ceilings on military force levels. multilateral agreements cooperative compacts among three or more states to ensure that a concerted policy is implemented toward alleviating a common problem, such as levels of future weapons capabilities.
Disarmament versus Arms Control as Routes to Peace Several distinctions must be made in any consideration of this approach to international security.
It aims to reduce or eliminate armaments or classes of armaments completely, usually by a negotiated reciprocal agreement between two or more rivals, in efforts to prevent the use of those weapons in warfare.
Arms control is designed to regulate arms levels either by limiting their growth or by restricting how they might be used.
It results from agreements between potential enemies to cooperate in order to reduce the probability that conflicting interests will erupt in warfare, and to reduce the scope of violence in any armed conflict that may nonetheless occur.
Where they part ways is in their respective posture toward the advantages of disarmament versus arms control.
Liberals are more willing to take a heroic leap of faith and consider disarmament as a workable possibility for peace.
Because arms control is based on recognition that a true conflict of interest between rivals exists, it is favored by realists who see a positive contribution potentially made when enemies negotiate an agreement to balance their weapons and through that balancing build mutual confidence.
Controlling war by reducing weapons inventories is hardly a novel idea.
Yet, until recently, few states have negotiated disarmament agreements.
Canada and the United States disarmed the Great Lakes region through the 1817 Rush-Bagot Agreement.
Nonetheless, these kinds of achievements have been relatively rare in history.
Most disarmament has been involuntary, the product of reductions imposed by the victors in the immediate aftermath of a war, as when the Allied powers attempted to disarm a defeated Germany after World War 1.
In addition to differentiating between arms control and disarmament, you should also distinguish between bilateral agreements and multilateral agreements.
Because the former involves only two countries, such agreements are often easier to negotiate and to enforce than are the latter, which are agreements among three or more countries.
As a result, bilateral arms agreements tend to be more successful than multilateral agreements.
This chapter will look briefly at the record of SovietAmerican negotiations before examining the checkered history of multilateral arms control and disarmament.
Bilateral Arms Control and Disarmament The Cold War between the Soviet Union and the United States never degenerated into a trial of military strength.
Beginning with the 1963 Hot Line Agreement, which established a direct radio and telegraph communications system between the two governments, Soviet and American leaders reached a series of modest agreements aimed at stabilizing the military balance and reducing the risk of war.
Each of these bilateral treaties lowered tensions and helped build a climate of trust that encouraged efforts to negotiate further agreements.
The most important agreements between the superpowers were the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks of 1972 and 1979; the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty of 1987; the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty of 1991, 1993, and 1997; and the Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty of 2002.
The first two agreements stabilized the nuclear arms race, and the remaining agreements reduced the weapons in each side’s inventories.
When the Cold War ended in 1991, the United States still had more than ninety-five hundred nuclear warheads and Russia had about eight thousand.
After decades in which the two rivals engaged in a rapidly expanded arms race that increased the size of their nuclear arsenals, the United States and Russia reached a series of historic disarmament agreements that has cut the number of new nuclear warheads in their stockpiles dramatically.
Since their 1986 peak, the sizes of the two superpowers’ nuclear arsenals have declined by nearly 90 percent, and they will decline much further by 2012 as a result of the 2002 Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty.
This disarmament achievement has inspired other nuclear powers to discontinue building and expanding their nuclear arsenal.
As a result, most of the other nuclear powers have not increased their stockpile of nuclear weapons since the 2002 treaty.
That said, threatened states are always tempted to rearm, and therefore fears that disarmament will not continue are rising.
Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty the U.S.-Russian series of negotiations that began in 1993 and, with the 1997 START-Ill agreement ratified by Russia in 2000, pledged to cut the nuclear arsenals of both sides by 80 percent of the Cold War peaks, in order to lower the risk of nuclear war.
Strategic Offensive Reductions Treaty the U.S.-Russian agreement to reduce the number of strategic warheads to between 1,700 and 2,200 for each country by 2012.
Also dispelling disarmament hopes was Russia’s successful test in August 2008 of a new long-range nuclear missile.
Designed to dodge defense systems, the Topol intercontinental stealth rocket has a range of 6,125 miles, posing a threat to peace in Europe.
The record of successful bilateral arms control and even disarmament between the United States and Russia attests to the possibilities for rival military powers to contain by agreement a dangerous arms race.
Multilateral Arms Control and Disarmament History provides many examples of multilateral arms control and disarmament efforts.
As early as the eleventh century, the Second Lateran Council prohibited the use of crossbows in fighting.
In 1899 and 1907, International Peace Conferences at The Hague restricted the use of some weapons and prohibited others.
The leaders of the United States, Britain, Japan, France, and Italy signed treaties at the Washington Naval Conferences agreeing to adjust the relative tonnage of their fleets.
Of these, the 1968 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty , which prohibited the transfer of nuclear weapons and production technologies to nonnuclear weapons states, stands out.
In 2005, painstaking negotiations sought to renew and preserve the NPT, which promotes the nonproliferation that had stopped the spread of nuclear weapons of mass destruction —until 1998, when India and Pakistan, though themselves not signatories to the NPT, broke the NPT’s barriers to become nuclear-weapon states.
The final consensus documents to the 2005 NPT renewal conference are considered politically binding, giving a boost to nonproliferation.
North Korea later violated the NPT with its secret development of nuclear weapons.
Some states that signed the original agreement are wondering whether the deal they were handed by the “nuclear club” in 1968 was a raw one.
They observe the failure of the original nuclear powers to honor their pledge to disarm, the United States talk of building new nuclear weapons and using them against nonnuclear states, and the United States rejection of the nuclear test-ban treaty.
Nearly eighty-four hundred nuclear war heads remain (SIPRI2009, 345), and more and more countries are acquiring the means to produce them.
Eears of nuclear proliferation were inflamed by Iran’s test-firing in late September 2009 of missiles capable of striking Israel, parts of Europe, and American bases in the Persian Gulf, and the unveiling of a secret underground nuclear plant where nuclear fuel is manufactured.
Encouragingly, on September 24, 2009, the United Nations Security Council sought to strengthen rules to stop the spread of nuclear weapons.
It unanimously adopted a resolution that commits all member states to ratification of the test ban treaty, stronger national controls on exports so as to secure nuclear materials within four years, and to review and strengthen the NPT in 2010.
And, in the face of intense international criticism, on October 1, 2009, Iran agreed in talks with the United States and other major powers to open the facility to international inspection.
Yet some continue to be skeptical of the Security Council’s ability and willingness to monitor and punish nuclear development.
This concern was expressed by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu who said before the General Assembly that “the most urgent challenge facing this body is to prevent the tyrants of Tehran from acquiring nuclear weapons.
Eurther nuclear nonproliferation remains much in doubt, and in recognition of these serious trends.
President Obama challenged the world to renew its commitment to confronting the spread of nuclear weapons.
The Problematic Future of Arms Control and Disarmament The obstacles to arms control and disarmament are formidable.
Critics complain that these agreements frequently only regulate obsolete armaments or ones that the parties to the agreement have little incentive for developing in the first place.
Even when agreements are reached on modern, sophisticated weapons, the parties often set ceilings higher than the number of weapons currently deployed, so they do not have to slash their inventories.
A second pitfall is the propensity of limits on one type of weapon system to prompt developments in another system.
Like a balloon that is squeezed at one end but expands at the other, constraints on certain parts of a country’s arsenal can lead to enhancements elsewhere.
An example can be seen in the 1972 SALT I agreement, which limited the number of intercontinental ballistic missiles possessed by the United States and Soviet Union.
In short, the quantitative freeze on launchers led to qualitative improvements in their warhead delivery systems. antipersonnel landmines weapons buried below the surface of the soil that explode on contact when any person— soldier or citizen— steps on them.
Also reducing faith in future meaningful arms control is the slow, weak, and ineffective ability of the global community to ban some of the most dangerous and counterproductive weapons.
Consider the case of antipersonnel landmines , which cannot discriminate between soldiers and civilians.
It is estimated that about one mine exists for every fifty people in the world and that each year they kill or maim more than twenty-six thousand people—almost all of them civilians.
Antipersonnel mines are triggered by the contact or presence of a person.
Indiscriminate weapons of war that do not recognize a ceasefire or termination of hostilities, they kill or cause injuries such as destroyed limbs, burns and blindness.
Burin, in a hospital with his mother where he is being treated for the loss of his right leg and other serious wounds that he received while picking strawberries in a field in southern Kosovo.
In 1994, not a single state would endorse a prohibition on these deadly weapons.
It took peace activist Jody Williams to organize the International Campaign to Ban Landmines, which led to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Use, Stockpiling, Production and Transfer of Antipersonnel Mines that opened for signature in December 1997.
A final problem facing those advocating arms control and disarmament is continuous innovation.
By the time that limits are negotiated on one type of weapon, a new generation of weapons has emerged.
Modern technology is creating an ever-widening range of novel weapons— increasingly smaller, deadlier, and easier to conceal.
On the surface, the incentives for meaningful arms control seem numerous.
ARMS RACES AND THE PRISONER'S DILEMMA Realists and liberal theorists both agree that the world could be a better place if countries would see their selfinterests served by international cooperation.
But realists and liberals hold differing views about the prospects tor cooperation.
The two schools of thought have been engaged in a controversial debate about why competition often trumps cooperation.
One way to address this question is to examine the logic underlying the well-known “Prisoner’s Dilemma"" game.
It illuminates the circumstantial barriers to international cooperation among distrustful transnational actors across many arenas of international politics, and is especially relevant to arms control and arms races.
Imagine two suspects following an armed robbery are taken into police custody and placed in separate cells by the district attorney, who is certain that they are guilty but only has sufficient evidence to convict them on an illegal weapons charge.
If one prisoner confesses and the other doesn’t, he will be given immunity from prosecution for providing evidence whereas his accomplice will get a sentence often years in the state penitentiary.
If both confess, they will be given a reduced sentence of five years in the penitentiary.
If neither confesses, they will be convicted on the weapons charge and serve only six months in the county jail.
The accompanying matrix depicts the results that will occur depending on whether each prisoner chooses to cooperate with his accomplice by remaining silent or defect by confessing to the district attorney.
Rememberthat they both want as little time behind bars as possible, and they are being interrogated separately so they cannot communicate.
Although the optimal strategy for both prisoners would be to tacitly cooperate with each other and keep quiet so each receives only a six-month sentence , the structural properties of this situation are such that there are powerful incentives to defect from your partner and provide incriminating evidence to the district attorney.
First, there is an offensive incentive to defect based on the prospect of getting immunity by confessing.
Second, there is a defensive incentive to defect grounded in the fear of being double-crossed by an accomplice who squeals.
Not wanting be a “sucker” who spends a decade incarcerated while his partner in crime goes free, both prisoners conclude that it is in their self-interest to defect and testify against one another; consequently, they both receive a less than optimal result than if they had tacitly cooperated by remaining silent.
By cooperating to lower arms spending they could devote more resources to other national needs such as education and health care , but given offensive and defensive incentives that are similar to those tempting the two prisoners in our earlier example, they both conclude that it is in their individual self-interest to play it safe and arm.
As a result of their joint detection , they end up worse off by locking themselves into an expensive arms race that may destabilize the prevailing balance of power.
NOTE The first number in each celi of this matrix is A’s payoff; the second number is B’s payoff.
The number 1 represents tbe most preferred outcome, whereas 4 represents the least preferred outcome.
Although this version of the Prisoner’s Dilemma game is a simplification that does not take into account what might happen in repeated plays overtime , it highlights for you some of the difficulties in reaching mutually beneficial arms control agreements among self-interested actors who distrust their peers.
However, most countries are reluctant to limit their armaments because of the self-help system that requires each state to protect itself.
Here policy makers read from the realist script, which insists that national security is best protected by developing military capabilities and not by reducing armaments or military spending.
They counsel against putting faith in arms control treaties, because deception and broken promises are to be expected by ruthless leaders in the global jungle.
Thus, instead of holding commitments to arms control agreements that cannot be enforced, realists advise reliance on unilateral self-help through military preparedness.
The realist mind-set was very evident in United States decisions at the turn of the century to reject an array of international treaties designed to control the threat of nuclear weapons.
During 2001 alone, the United States decided to abrogate the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty, withdraw from a UN conference to impose limits on illegal trafficking of small arms, and reject proposed enforcement measures for the 1972 Biological Weapons Convention.
This disregard for arms control set a standard for other states to follow.
Prisoner's Dilemma Especially troubling was the United States repudiation of the 1972 ABM treaty, which was regarded by many as the cornerstone of nuclear arms control, as that announcement was the first time in modern history that the United States had renounced a major international accord.
It ignited fears that a global chain reaction of massive repudiations of arms control agreements by other states would follow.
For example, in 2007 Russia threatened to quit the INF missile treaty and to place a moratorium on the CFE treaty.
However, while acknowledging a continued commitment to defensive military preparation, United States President Barack Obama indicated a renewed interested in controlling the spread of deadly weapons, stating that “we are spending billions of dollars on missile defense.
Further signaling a change in policy, in September 2009 the United States announced plans to scrap its missile defense shield program in Poland and the Czech Republic.
The eight known nuclear states have conducted a total of 2,064 nuclear explosions in twenty-four different locations since 1945—an average of one test every eleven days.
Both China and the United States regularly conduct so-called zero-yield nuclear experiments and are suspected of conducting explosive tests so small that they cannot be detected.
Moreover, the partial test ban treaty of 1963, which prohibited atmospheric and underwater testing but not underground explosions, did not slow the pace of testing.
Threefourths of all nuclear tests took place after the ban went into effect.
Since the dawn of the nuclear age, the eight known nuclear powers have conducted 2,064 documented tests of their weapons.
As the timeline at the bottom of the map shows, testing declined since the 1960s, but following North Korea’s tests in October 2006 and May 2009, fear of a wave of new testing has accelerated.
It appears that realists, and their abiding emphasis on peace through military preparations, are trumping those liberals who counsel that weapons acquisitions are not a safe road toward world order.
Someday, Woodrow Wilson’s cause of world disarmament may yet triumph, as he hoped and prayed.
As long as the threat of armed aggression haunts the world, leaders are unlikely to think it prudent to disarm.
Many liberals and constructivists perceive other paths to peace as more promising.
The construction of international organizations for collective security benefits from a more encouraging history, in part because so many military crises require multilateral cooperation to be peacefully managed.
MAINTAINING COLLECTIVE SECURITY THROUGH INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS International organizations throughout history have all advanced the preservation of peace as one of the prime rationales for their formation.
An institutional pathway to international peace is sculpted in liberal and constructivist thinking, with liberals focusing on interdependence and the possibility of cooperation and constructivists emphasizing the centrality of ideas and norms.
Such an approach is voiced as an alternative to the balance of power advocated by realist thinkers to maintain peace by redistributing power through the free-floating mechanism of shifting alliances and alignments.
Note that reliance on international organization is opposed vigorously by classical realist thinking.
Realism, it should be recalled, prizes the sovereign independence of states as a core value, and berates international organization as a barrier to states’ foreign policy autonomy, freedom, and flexibility of unilateral action.
Indeed, prescriptions for the global community to “get organized” by creating institutions above states as a route to global stability are rejected by realist thought.
By definition, collective security requires collective decisions for collective purposes to contain international armed aggression, guided by the principle that an act of aggression by any state will be met with a unified response from the rest.
International organizations are seen as key to peaceful conflict management as “organizations with interventionist capabilities encourage disputing members to attempt peaceful conflict resolution” Collective security assumes that every nation perceives every challenge to the international order in the same way, and is prepared to run the same risk to preserve it. —Henry Kissinger, former United States Secretary of State The League of Nations and Collective Security Perhaps more than any other event.
World War I discredited the realist argument that peace was a by product of a stable balance of power.
Citing arms races, secret treaties, and competing alliances as sources of acute tension, many liberals viewed power balancing as a cause of war instead of as an instrument for its prevention.
This plea led to the formation of the League of Nations to replace the balance of power with a global governance system for world order in which aggression by any state would be met by a united response.
Yet long before Wilson and other reformers called for the establishment of a League of Nations, the idea of collective security had been expressed in various peace plans.
Between the eleventh and thirteenth centuries, for example, French ecclesiastic councils held in Poitiers , Limoges , and Toulouse discussed rudimentary versions of collective security.
Underlying these plans was the belief that an organized “community” of power would be more effective in preserving peace than shifting alliances aimed at balancing power.
If aggression anywhere is ignored, it eventually will spread to other countries and become more difficult to stop; hence, an attack on any one state must be regarded as an attack on all states.
Instead of maneuvering against one another in rival alliances, states should link up in a single “uniting” alliance.
Such a universal collectivity, it is assumed, would possess the international legitimacy and strength to keep the peace.
It assumes that peaceful change is possible when institutions are available to resolve conflicts of interest.
In addition to providing a mechanism for the mediation of disagreements, the collective security organization would also contain a judicial organ authorized to issue binding judgments on contentious disputes.
A final assumption underpinning the theory holds that members of the collective security organization would be willing and able to give mutual assistance to any state suffering an attack.
Sanctions could range from public condemnation to an economic boycott to military retaliation.
Putting the pieces of these premises together, this approach to international peace through collective security organizations aims to control national selfhelp warfare by guaranteeing states’ defense through collective regulation.
Ironically, therefore, liberal reformers accept the use of military might—not to expand state power, but rather to deter potential aggressors by confronting them with armed force organized by the united opposition of the entire global community.
To the disappointment of its advocates, the League of Nations never became an effective collective system.
It was not endorsed by the United States, the very power that had most championed it in the waning months of World War I Moreover, its members disagreed over how to define “aggression,” as well as how to share the costs and risks of mounting an organized response to aggressors.
The United Nations and Peacekeeping Like the League, the United Nations was established to promote international peace and security after a gruesome world war.
The architects of the United Nations were painfully aware of the League’s disappointing experience with collective security.
They hoped a new structure would make the United Nations more effective than the defunct League.
Recall from Chapter 5 that the UN Charter established a Security Council of fifteen members, a General Assembly composed of representatives from all member states, and an administrative apparatus under the leadership of a Secretary-General.
Although the UN’s founders voiced support for collective security, they were heavily influenced by the idea of a concert of great powers.
The UN Charter permitted any of the Security Council’s five permanent members (the United States, the Soviet Union, Great Britain, France, and China) to veto and thereby block proposed military actions.
Because the Security Council could approve military actions only when the permanent members fully agreed, the United Nations was hamstrung by great power rivalries, especially between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Because the UN’s structure limited its ability to function as a true collective security organization, the United Nations fell short during the Cold War of many of the ideals its more ambitious founders envisioned.
Nevertheless, like any adaptive institution, the UN found other ways to overcome the compromising legal restrictions and lack of great power cooperation that inhibited its capacity to preserve world order.
For example, in contrast to peace enforcement as in the Korean War, the UN undertook a new approach, termed peacekeeping, that aimed at separating enemies.
The UN Emergency Force , authorized in 1956 by the Uniting for Peace Resolution in the General Assembly in response to the Suez crisis, was the first of many other peacekeeping operations.
In addition, in 1960, Secretary-General Dag Hammarskjold sought to manage security through what he termed preventive diplomacy by attempting to resolve conflicts before they reached the crisis stage, in contrast to ending wars once they erupted.
UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan concentrated the UN’s efforts on peace building by creating the conditions that make renewed war unlikely, while at the same time working on peacemaking (ending fighting already under way) and managing the UN’s peace operations to police those conflicts in which the threat of renewed fighting between enemies is high.
These endeavors have emphasized peace enforcement operations, relying on UN forces that are trained and equipped to use military force if necessary without the prior consent of the disputants.
However, the end of the Cold War removed many of the impediments to the UN’s ability to lead in preserving peace.
For example, in 1999, the Security Council swung into action to authorize military coercion to force Iraq to withdraw from Kuwait, which it had invaded.
This successful collective security initiative jump started optimism for use of the UN for peacekeeping leadership.
After 1990, the UN launched five times as many peacekeeping missions as it had in its previous forty years of its existence.
The office of the Secretary-General is seeking to fulfill the UN’s humanitarian and security mandate, especially through intervention, to stop horrific atrocities wherever and whenever they occur.
However, critics voice concerns that the UN is inclined to practice selective engagement in sending peacekeeping forces primarily to those trouble spots where the Security Council’s great powers have economic interests in securing access to resources such as oil and other products.
While “one of the best predictors of UN interventions is the number of deaths in a conflict speaks well of the UN’s mission to address costly human suffering .. . the UN has not been evenhanded in how it responds to deaths.
Perhaps this selective peacekeeping focus is a product of limited financial restraints as much as it is the priorities of the Security Council’s great powers.
Based on data from the United Nations Department of Public Information.
UN PEACE MISSIONS SINCE 1948 In its first forty years, the United Nations undertook a mere thirteen peacekeeping operations.
But since 1986, the UN has been much more active, sending Blue Helmet peacekeepers to forty-eight flash points.
Since 1989, on average, the UN has had seventeen operations under way each year, and as the following figure shows, most of the sixty-three missions between 1948 and 2010 have been in operation for at least a decade. and June 2009, the budget support to 92,876 UN peacekeeping personnel was $7. billion, and outstanding contributions were running $1.58 billion.
UN peacekeeping operations remain understaffed, underfunded, and overwhelmed in responding where “Blue Helmet” participation is needed.
The UN is not empowered to achieve the high purposes for which it was created, and the aim of global collective security for all humanity cannot be met with inadequate capabilities.
THE INCREASING DEMAND FOR “PEACE” The above chart shows a clear trend in the demand for peacekeepers over time, as the total number of personnel involved in peacekeeping missions has increased fivefold since 1999.
Stephan Mergenthaler, and Philipp Rotmann , “UN peacekeeping is the victim of its own success,” as the increased demand for peacekeepers, as well as the increasingly diverse nature of their missions, has not been matched by increases in infrastructure and training.
For the UN to succeed, the world community must match the means given to it with the demands made on it.
Despite its imperfections, the United Nations remains the only global institution effective at organizing international collaboration to meet security crises in situations where states are unwilling or unprepared to act alone.
However, the use of regional security organizations is rising as regional IGOs are stepping into the breach in those situations where UN Blue Helmets have not been given the support necessary to do the job.
The kinds of wars raging today do not lend themselves to control by a worldwide body because these conflicts are now almost entirely civil wars.
The UN was designed to manage only international wars between states; it was not organized or legally authorized to intervene in internal battles within sovereign borders.
Hence, regional security organizations can be expected to play an increasingly larger role in the future security affairs of their regions.
The North Atlantic Treaty Organization is the best-known regional security organization.
Regional organizations with somewhat broader political mandates beyond defense include the Organization of American States , the Eeague of Arab States, the Organization of African Unity , the Nordic Council, the Association of Southeast Asian Nations , and the Gulf Cooperation Council.
Many of today’s regional security organizations face the challenge of preserving consensus and solidarity without a clearly identifiable external enemy or common threat.
Cohesion is hard to maintain in the absence of a clear sense of the alliance’s mission.
The ambiguous European security setting is now marked by numerous ethnic and religious conflicts that NATO was not originally designed to handle.
Its original charter envisioned only one purpose—mutual self-protection from external attack.
Consequently, until 1995, when NATO took charge of all military operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina from the UN, it was uncertain whether the alliance could adapt to a broadened purpose.
For the first time invoking its Article 5, which requires collective defense of a member under attack, NATO joined the war in Afghanistan in a strong show of support for the United States in the aftermath of 9/11.
Pictured here are NATO soldiers at the scene of a suicide attack in Kabul, Afghanistan, on September 17,2009. that intervention, NATO has redefined itself, and in March 1999 it undertook an interventionary peacemaking assignment to police the civil violence in Kosovo and, in the aftermath of the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States, it intervened in the war in Afghanistan.
It has transformed itself to become both a military alliance for security between states and within them and for containing the spread of global terrorism, as well as a political alliance for encouraging the spread of democracy.
That said, the primary purpose remains putting NATO’s twenty-eight members under a security umbrella, with the promise that an attack on one would be considered an attack on all.
THE ENLARGED NATO IN THE NEW GEOSTRATEGIC BALANCE OF POWER The twenty-first-century geostrategic iandscape has been transformed hy NATO’s expansion to twenty-eight fuii members, with Aibania and Croatia formally joining as the newest members on April 1,2009.
The barriers to collective security faced by regional organizations are similar to those faced by the United Nations.
The recent record indicates that there are several key preconditions that must be met for collective security organizations to work both globally and regionally.
First, these security organizations are most capable of creating successful peacekeeping operations only when their most powerful members reach agreement about the benefits of any proposed operation.
Second, such third-party peacekeeping operations have been most successful in those cases when the target is neither a great power nor has a military alliance with a major power.
Finally, past cases indicate that security organizations’ capacity to control controversial conflicts depends on pressure from world public opinion to mobilize international organizations to take action.
The absence of some of these preconditions accounts for the frequent failure of IGOs to engineer a timely response to tragic situations where slaughter and genocide occur; the slow and insufficient reaction to stop the bloodshed in the Darfur region of Sudan and Somalia in the Horn of Africa are the most recent examples of inadequate collective global action.
UNITING ONE WORLD IN A COMMON CULTURE OF SHARED MORAL VALUES Liberal and constructivist perspectives on war and peace, armed aggression, and international security are fundamentally shaped by the importance attached to shared ethics and morality in world politics.
Liberalism places the power of principle over the principle of power because it is based on the conviction that peace depends on acting by moral motives.
Ethics is about the criteria for evaluating right and wrong behavior and motives; morality is about the norms for behavior that should govern actors’ interactions.
Liberals, and many constructivists, understandably focus on humanitarian concerns and human rights when they emphasize the importance of normative values as factors shaping global conditions.
One of the greatest moral ethicists who grappled with war and peace in an immoral world was German philosopher Immanuel Kant.
A global civil society is one in which institutions are created to protect civil liberties and use peaceful methods for conflict resolution.
The world does not yet benefit from either these institutions or agreement about the mores or normative convictions that should guide international decision making.
However, liberals believe that these ethical standards can gain acceptance and create a civil society at the global level of analysis.
Picturing war as a consequence of illogical reasoning because its practice works against states’ long-term interests, Kant proposed using humans’ capacity to reason rationally to discover paths that would truly serve their real long-term interests in living in an orderly and just world.
Most powerful states in his era were then great powers practicing narrow mercantilism to expand their national economies at others’ expense through imperialism and colonialism and monarchies ruled by kings opposed to democratic liberties for the subjects under their absolute reign.
Needless to say, Kant was repelled by the acceptance and frequent use of warfare by these realist rulers to increase by military means the power of their states.
So Kant advocated a total transformation of the realist values on which world politics was then functioning.
These radical ideas resonated in the ears of other innovators in liberal thought, such as Adam Smith, Thomas Jefferson, and James Madison; and they later were made pillars of the peace program that Woodrow Wilson proposed in his Fourteen Points Address.
These twin highways to peace require the global acceptance of the norms for international conduct that together capture the third major liberal path to international security.
However, there exists another expanding side-payoff to free-trade; When it increases, it ties the trading partners together in an expanding web of interdependence from which all the trading parties to the free-trade agreement benefit.
It is therefore rational, according to liberal economic theory, to promote free trade.
Additionally, since parties to active free exchanges of goods across borders increasingly need each other for the growth of their wealth, they are therefore less tempted to go to war with one another.
Armed aggression would end the cooperation that makes their mutual prosperity grow.
In this regard, global economic trade interdependence among nations provides a strong underpinning for peace.
Interdependence (when the behavior of states greatly affects the others with whom they come into frequent contact, and the parties to such active exchanges become increasingly mutually vulnerable to each others’ actions) thus fosters the trade-interdependent countries’ mutual need for each other for their own welfare.
In this construction, therefore, trade interdependence is a financial path to peace. commercial liberalism an economic theory advocating free markets and the removai of barriers to the flow of trade and capitai as a iocomotive for prosperity. interdependence a situation in which the behavior of international actors greatly affects others with whom they have contact, making all parties mutually sensitive and vulnerable to the others’ actions.
For this nonmilitary path to global security to truly arrive at its preferred pacific destination, constructivists remind us that the global community must accept the norms of behavior on which this approach is predicated.
Realists warn that, if and when economic conditions deteriorate, countries are then likely to return to ruthless economic competition and trade protectionism to gain at others’ expense.
Fiberal reformers agree with realist pessimism; they also see a civil society with peace dependent on the preservation of normative values and mores that must retain global acceptance.
Should such a free-trade liberal climate of global world opinion decay, so will the prospects for world order.
It is with these concerns in mind that some have worried about the impact of the current global economic crisis on peace and stability throughout the world.
That said, the far distance the global community has journeyed down the free-trade avenue toward prosperity and peace has instilled growing faith that this progress will persist, so long as countries continue to recognize that their interests are advanced through peace and economic interdependence.
Fiberal and constructivist reformers are well aware of the potential fragility of trade interdependence as a condition for fostering international security.
However, there may be a better payoff to an alternative route to cement international peace; the construction and proliferation of liberal norms supporting democratic values.
A Democratic Peace Pact what is now widely known as the democratic peace is the theory that because democratic states almost never fight wars with one another, the spread of democratic governance throughout the world will reduce greatly the probability of war.
COUNTRIES DEPENDENT ON TRADE In the globalized marketplace, the level of states’ dependence on exports for economic prosperity is growing.
This map shows the great extent to which many countries are today dependent on trade.
Three short years later, Immanuel Kant advanced the same liberal speculation in his more famous Perpetual Peace, when he, too, hypothesized that giving peace-loving citizens the right to vote could stop violence—that allowing ballots for citizens could become a sturdy barrier against authoritarian rulers’ habitual use of bullets and bombs.
History demonstrates that there are sound reasons for accepting this liberal proposition.
Democracy and Peace This lesson was not lost on leaders of democratic states seeking to find a principle on which to ground their national security policies.
That doctrine was officially endorsed earlier by the other major EU and NATO liberal democracies whose members insisted on states being democratically ruled as a condition for membership.
Democratic reforms over the past four decades have produced impressive results worldwide.
Since the mid-1970s, freedom and civil liberties within countries have expanded through a series of liberalizing governmental reforms in many new countries.
This figure shows that as 2009 began, 78 percent of the countries in the world were either fuliy or partiaiiy democratic, according to Freedom House.
This inspires iiherals’ hopes that a glohai peace among democracies wili continue to spread and deepen, even despite difficuit times of terrorism and tension.
Some realist skeptics question whether democracies should really be counted upon to put their liberal ideals ahead of their narrow national interests by resisting the natural temptation to use armed force when serious disputes surface.
These doubts about a lasting “democratic peace pact” not withstanding, liberal reformers are heartened by past trends.
Therefore, providing that democratic states continue to abide by their past record of dealing with conflicts through negotiation, mediation, arbitration, and adjudication, the existing liberal democracies’ efforts to enlarge their community could usher in a major transformation of world politics.
In 1949 Chiang Kai-shek and his party the Kuomintang lost the Chinese Civil War and retreated trom the Mainland to Taiwan with one to two million tollowers and troops.
Taiwan began the 1950s poor and ruled by an immigrant, authoritarian regime.
Policy choices economically transformed Taiwan, including initiating land reform, extending free and universal education, moving trom import-substitution to trade-led export growth, and emphasizing heavy and then-hightech industrial policy.
By the 1990s Taiwan was one of the “East Asian Tigers"" with a trading economy based on small and medium sized businesses, leadership in many high-tech industries, and an extensive, educated middle class.
Population grew from 7. to 23 million, and GDP per capita grew from $900 in 1949, to $5,300 in 1987, to $19,000 in 2009.
Taiwan became the only example of a Chinese society with a multiparty democracy, and stood as a counter to the argument by Malaysia’s and Singapore’s leaders forthe cultural distinctiveness of Asian values and the limits of Asian democracy.
First, democracy advocates and a Taiwanese ethnic majority that was politically repressed by mainlanders were empowered by economic prosperity and pressured the regime to change.
Next, Chiang Ching-kuo and part of the KMT preferred compromise to confrontation.
Finally, international circumstances made democracy Taiwan’s best hope for support and survival in an ongoing competition with China.
Since 1949, Taiwan has exercised de facto, if not dejure, sovereignty in international affairs.
China, however, rejects this distinction and views Taiwan as a “breakaway province,"" taken by Japan as a colony in 1895, occupied by the KMT after World War II, and rightfully a part of China.
In 2005 China passed an Anti-Secession Law formalizing its long-standing commitment to use “non-peaceful means"" if Taiwan declares formal independence.
In Taiwan, the 2000-2008 DPP government envisioned de jure independence.
In 2008-2009 tensions relaxed with a commitment to a diplomatic truce by the new KMT President, Ma Ying-jeou.
Trade also increasingly links Taiwan to the mainland, with as much as $200 billion invested and as many as one million Taiwanese managers living there.
Linked closely by trade, a democratic China might either allow Taiwan to go its own way peacefully or make unification palatable to the Taiwanese.
The Taiwan Strait remains one of the world’s most dangerous places where two nuclear powers could come into conflict.
As a result of the Cold War, the United States limited diplomatic dealings with China until President Nixon’s 1972 visit.
In 1979 the United States diplomatically recognized China, and Taiwanese recognition was withdrawn.
The United States Congress then passed the Taiwan Relations Act stating that any threat to the peace and security of Taiwan is of grave concern to the United States and committed America to provide Taiwan with defensive weapons.
Yet America has a deep, multifaceted relationship with China, balanced against nervousness about China’s future role and commitments to Taiwan.
North Korea, nonproliferation, and global finance, intensify the linkage.
President Clinton deployed aircraft carrier battle groups toward the Taiwan Strait.
American-Chinese tensions similarly escalated in the 1999 NATO bombing of China’s Embassy in Belgrade, in the 2001 mid-air collision between a United States surveillance plane and a Chinese tighter, and in reactions to the 2008 unrest in Tibet.
Chinese nationalism was inflamed by these incidents, and the 2008 Olympics showcased Chinese pride and China’s aspirations as a major global power.
China’s path to democracy is uncertain, and even if China democratizes without major civil strife, there will be a transitional period.
Democracies don’t tight each other, but transitional regimes are often belligerent.
This is partly because domestic democratic institutions are young, and politicians may use nationalism or demonizing each other to secure their own power.
In the long term, a democratic China may offer solutions both to Taiwan’s future and to the structuring of peace in East Asia.
There is more and more of an overlap between national interests and global responsibilities.
The task of multilateral diplomacy is to cope with new issues, new demands and new situations “shared responsibilities” and “strengthenedpartnerships.
Thus, liberals advocate institutional methods to pool sovereignty in order to collectively manage global problems.
With the expansion of global norms that support collective solutions to conflicts in world politics, constructivists envision greater possibilities for the peaceful resolution of situations that might otherwise lead to armed aggression.
Yet we must remain cognizant of the various concerns about the capacity of independent and competing sovereign states to engineer a hopeful future for humanity.
On balance, sovereign states have not used their foreign policies to create a safe and secure global environment.
Moreover, it is a paradox that despite their continuing power, the governments of sovereign states’ governments have proven to be very weak at either preventing armed aggression within their borders or commanding widespread citizen loyalty and respect.
Borders and oceans cannot isolate or insulate states from threats to security; they can only be controlled in the global commons by a collective effort.
It is for this reason that many international organizations originally came into being, and it is the persistence of collective threats produced by an increasingly globalized world that makes these institutions durable.
What is clear is that countries are making bold efforts to unite in a common civic culture behind common values to construct global institutions to jointly protect themselves against the many problems they face in common.
They appear to increasingly accept the once radical liberal view that, as Kofi Annan argues, “a new, broader definition of national interest is needed” that would unify states to work on common goals that transcend national interests.
But what is clear at this time is that the global agenda facing the world is huge.
The biggest problems facing humanity are transnational, and none can be solved effectively with a unilateral national response.
A multilateral approach is required to address the staggering number of global problems that require peaceful management through collective solutions.
This survey can aid understanding of the world as it presently exists and allow you to contemplate, as caring and responsible global citizens, the prospects for transformations that could create a better world.
Take an Online Practice Quiz www.cengage.com/politicalscience/kegley/worlclpolitics13e I Suggested Readings | Cohn, Carol, and Sara Ruddick.
We know that elections are won and lost on local issues — that is true for every country But it is global issues . . . that will shape the world our children live in."" —James Wolfenshohn, former World Bank President CULTURE AND COMMERCE IN A GLOBALIZED WORLD The growing web of globalization is creating an interdependent world.
Shown here are the 2008 Beijing Olympics, which opened with a celebration of Chinese culture and international goodwill.
As evidence of this, they point to crass commercialism, the masking of human rights abuse, and the air of legitimacy granted to unsavory governments.
Each explores some facet of the challenges to prosperity and human security that we face in our globalized world and the extent to which we have the ability, and responsibility, to respond and seek solutions to them.
Chapter 12 inspects how the globalization of finance is altering the international economic landscape, and Chapter 13 considers how the globalization of international trade is transforming the world.
Chapter 14 then examines the demographic dimensions of globalization as well as how the rise of the global information age is shaping culture and perceptions of identity.
Chapter 15 looks at the human condition, and how global actors and their activities affect the welfare and basic rights of all humanity.
Finally, Chapter 16 considers threats to the global environment that many people now see as a serious danger to the well-being of the planet and humanity’s continued survival.
THE TRANSNATIONAL EXCHANGE OF MONEY The Globalization of Finance Globalization is no longer a buzzword: it has arrived.
There is substantial evidence for an increasingly globalized marketplace.
World trade is expanding much faster than world production and cross-border investments are growing at a more rapid rate than trade.
In response to the recent financial crisis, the leaders of the G-20— an informal group of the twenty largest economies that meets periodically to discuss the coordination of financial policy—met in London in April 2009 to discuss recovery strategies.
Of particular note is the position of Chinese President Hu Jintao in the center-front of the photo line-up, which the Chinese press interpreted as among the most honored of the group.
Such symbolism was matched by a new assertiveness that China, the country with the largest amount of currency reserves, demonstrated at the meeting.
They all contain elements of truth, even though such aphorisms and cliches are somewhat contradictory.
Your challenge is to separate fact from fantasy by sorting out the place of money in your life and in the world in which you live.
However, the wisdom or folly of your conclusions will depend on your analytic skills in evaluating how money is a factor affecting many dimensions of world politics—and your own personal future financial fate.
Increasingly, this age-old intellectual task is more difficult than in the past.
Today, more than ever, money truly is moving around the world, and at everquickening speed.
And the rapidity of the movement of finance capital across borders directly affects your quality of life every day.
When you make a purchase, the odds are now very high that the goods have been produced overseas.
What is more, when you buy a sandwich, a sweater, a car, or gasoline to make it run, the cost of your payment is very likely to be affected by the rate at which your own country’s currency is valued and exchanged for the currency of the producer abroad.
Should you have the opportunity to travel overseas for work or for tourism, you will instantly discover how powerfully the global exchange of national currencies will determine whether you can afford to attend a rock concert or buy an extra bottle of wine.
This chapter is about how money markets in the global financial system operate.
It looks at the processes governing currency exchanges, concentrating on how the transfer of money across borders affects levels of national prosperity and human security.
Note that this topic is part of the larger one of international economics in general, and serves as an introduction to the coverage in Chapter 13 on international trade in the global political economy.
Neither dimension of international economics—money and marketplaces for trade— can be considered without the other; the two are tied intimately, and only by looking at both together can you gain an understanding of how money and markets drive the rise and fall of wealth for individuals and for countries.
You therefore will be looking at a phenomenon as old as recorded history and inspecting how it is influencing life in the twenty-first century.
When changes occur in the world, they force people to think about and interpret world politics in fresh ways.
Of all the many recent changes, perhaps none has been more continually invasive and far-reaching than those occurring in the economic world.
This is one of the main fields on which the game of world politics is played.
International Political Economy Fortunately, a large body of theory has been constructed that speaks to questions about how changes in one country’s economics and politics influence trends in world politics and the global economy.
As an area of scholarly study, international political economy emerged in the early 1970s as economic events such as the fall of the Bretton Woods order and the Oil Crisis of 1973, which led to a fourfold increase in the price of oil as a result of an embargo by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries , sent shock waves throughout the world.
The political fallout of these economic events called into question the traditional partitions between the study of international economics and international politics, and IPE began to investigate many key issues that lay at the intersection of the two.
The growth of the interdependence of states’ economies can be viewed as the recent culmination of a trend that began more than a century ago, but its current level is without precedent.
As states’ economies have become more closely linked, traditional ideas about states, currency exchange mechanisms, trade, and markets have been reexamined in a new light.
The contest between the rich states in the Global North and the poor states in the Global South has risen to the top of the international agenda in policy and theoretical debates.
The economic game of world politics has assumed increasing importance because the undercurrents in economics are shaping the foundation of international politics.
Today, high interest rates in one country lead to high interest rates in others.
Inflation is shared everywhere, and it now seems beyond the control of any single actor.
The balance of fiscal power is now as important to a country’s national security as is the global balance of military power.
Globalization has become a very common term—“the most ubiquitous in the language of international relations” —and hundreds of attempts have been made to define it.
Globalization is thus a shorthand for a cluster of interconnected phenomena, and you will find the term used to describe a process, a policy, a predicament, or the product of vast invisible international forces producing massive changes worldwide.
Moreover, most analysts would probably agree that globalization is a permanent trend leading to the probable transformation of world politics—the end of one historic pattern and the beginning of a new one in history.
Given the broad and multifaceted scope of globalization, this chapter, as well as the remaining chapters in World Politics, will deal with different dimensions of globalization and their implications.
The short answer is that globalization is the integration of everything with everything else.
A more complete definition is that globalization is the integration of markets, finance, and technology in a way MAP 12.
The index is based on twenty-four different measures of economic, social, and political aspects of globalization, such as trade flows, personal contacts across borders, and participation in international organizations.
There are also some trends among the least globalized, as they tend to be underdeveloped and largely autocratic regimes such as Myanmar, Congo, and Bangladesh.
Nowhere is this integration more apparent than in the world of international finance and capital.
So we will next focus our attention on the dynamics of the international monetary system through which currencies and credits are calculated as capital freely moves across national boundaries through investments, trade, foreign aid, and loans.
State governments have taken some tentative steps to create rules for adjusting their currencies with one another and stabilizing wide fluctuations in their exchange rates.
However, the process through which money between and among countries is exchanged after financial transactions have been conducted does not have strong supranational regulatory institutions.
Moreover, states often have very limited ability in controlling either those transactions or the relative value of their currencies on the world market.
At the same time, these transactions, as noted, are escalating with feverish pitch.
The Globalization of Finance Global finance encompasses a broad variety of portfolio-type transactions, including international loans, foreign aid, and currency trading, as well as cross-border investments such as the purchases of stocks, bonds, or derivatives.
Along these lines, the globalization of finance refers to the increasing transnationalization or centralization of these markets through the worldwide integration of capital flows.
The central characteristic of the emerging globalization of finance the increasing transnationalization of national markets through the worldwide integration of capital flows.
Thus, globalization implies the growth of a single, unified global market.
Whereas telecommunications specialists talk about the “death of distance,” financial specialists talk about the “end of geography” because geographic location is no longer important to finance.
Although trade has grown dramatically, since World War II the volume of cross-border capital flows has increased even more.
Yet the growth in the arbitrage market—in which currencies are bought and sold for profit based off differences in their relative values—has been truly staggering.
Since 1973 this market has grown sixty times faster than the value of world trade , and routinely handles over $2 trillion worth of currency on a daily basis.
Another indicator of the expansion of the global capital market is captured by the fact that its rise has far exceeded the actual rise in global GDP, as newer, more speculative, financial instruments have exponentially increased the size and scope of these capital flows.
The total value of all bonds, domestic and international, was even higher at $68 trillion.
The value of the derivatives market—newer financial instruments that are essentially “side bets” placed on the prospective future value of assets such as stocks and bonds—are much greater.
During that same year, $473 trillion of derivatives were bought and sold.
In an early form of globalization, a network of financial centers flourished along the Baltic and North $eas, and city-states such as Fiibeck, Hamburg, and Bergen dominated finance and trading.
Moreover, international financial crises are certainly nothing new; economist Charles Kindlberger notes the “manics, panics, and crashes” of global finance began in the early seventeenth century, with twenty-seven major financial crises occurring before the beginning of the twentieth century.
Financial centers are proliferating, and big transactions are made by many participants “sitting in front of computer screens, moving zillions of dollars, pounds, euros and yen around the globe at the flick of a key.
Technology, the mobility of capital and the spread of deregulation around the globe have created a vibrant and growing network . . . between financial centers as investors have diversified across regions.
Today’s globalized finance creates linkages across the world at unprecedented levels, connecting capital, people, and exchanges as these trends expand cross-border consolidation.
These developments, combined with the trends toward market deregulation that began to take hold across much of the world during the 1980s and 1990s, represented a marked policy shift toward commercial liberalism.
Indeed, commercial liberals heralded this policy shift as a means to bring economic growth into the Global South and ensure continued success in the Global North.
However, the recent financial crisis has caused many to reexamine the merits of this approach.
The globalization of finance has had broader political and economic influences upon the international system.
As the global financial market has become increasingly interconnected, capital has become extremely mobile.
Such ties have made imperative the need for a reliable system of money exchange to cope with the broadening array of fluctuating national currencies.
Politically, the global capital market reveals limitations in the power of the state.
Specifically, as the volume of currencies traded far exceeds the actual amount of reserve currencies held by governments, the ability of governments to influence exchange rates is increasingly limited.
For example, the powerlessness of the United States government to raise the price of the Chinese yuan against the United States dollar between 2005 and 2008 (to reduce the huge United States balance-of-trade deficit) speaks volumes about the breakdown of governments’ ability to modify the rates at which their currencies are exchanged.
Though commercial liberals argue that such a system benefits all countries, the globalization of finance does not affect all countries equally.
A vast majority of global capital goes to the Global North and Global East, and all countries are mutually vulnerable to rapid transfers of capital in this globalized system.
However, the Global South is the most dependent and vulnerable, and has been very exposed to shifts in the financial marketplace.
This circumstance suggests why bankers and economists have called for the creation of more reliable multilateral mechanisms for policy coordination to better manage the massive movement of cross-border capital.
The globalization of finance also has implications for international trade (see Chapter 13), and concern and debate has understandably increased about the monetary factors underlying trade transactions.
Controversies have risen over whether the international monetary system in place is causing inequalities or, worse still, reducing growth in international commerce.
States’ exports and imports depend on many factors, such as changes in global demand for the goods and services countries produce, and the prices they charge in the global marketplace.
Among these, the mechanisms that set the currency exchange rate by which goods are priced heavily influence changes in the flow of international trade across borders.
Indeed, the monetary system is the most critical factor allowing for international trade.
Without a stable and predictable method for calculating the value of sales and foreign investments, those transactions would become too risky, and trade and investment activities would fall.
In assessing the implications of capital mobility for the global system, as well as the global economy as a whole, it is thus necessary to understand the international monetary system, the processes through which the relative value of each state’s currencies are set.
With that in mind, we will next examine the core concepts of the global monetary system, some of the key issues and dilemmas surrounding monetary policy, and the some of its historical context.
As you read through these explanations, keep in mind that these are not separate phenomena but a related set of factors through which the global financial system operates.
To begin to put together how these factors are related, and the importance of a state’s monetary policy as a determinant of its well-being, we will consider why a country’s exchange rate fluctuates daily and the challenges states face in dealing with these fluctuations.
As you will see, states face a variety of “trade-offs” in navigating monetary policies, and must seek a difficult balance between sometimes competing values, goals, and priorities.
Moreover, states are ultimately limited in their ability to control monetary outcomes.
First, money must be widely accepted, so that people earning it can use it to buy goods and services from others.
Second, money must serve to store value, so that people will be willing to keep some of their wealth in the form of money.
Third, money must act as a standard of deferred payment, so that people will be willing to lend money knowing that when the money is repaid in the future, it will still have purchasing power.
Movements in a state’s exchange rate occur in part when changes develop in peoples’ assessment of the national currency’s underlying economic strength or the ability of its government to maintain the value of its money.
A deficit in a country’s balance of payments, for example, would likely cause a decline in the value of its currency relative to that of other countries.
This happens when the supply of the currency is greater than the demand for it.
Similarly, when those engaged in international economic transactions change their expectations about a currency’s future value, they might reschedule their lending and borrowing.
Arbitrage speculators who buy and sell money also affect the international stability of a country’s currency.
If, for instance, they believe that the Japanese yen will be worth more in three months than it is now, they can buy yen today and sell them for a profit three months later.
Conversely, if they believe that the yen will be worth less in three months, they can sell yen today for a certain number of dollars and then buy back the same yen in three months for monetary policy The decisions made by states’ central banks to change the country’s money suppiy in an effort to manage the national economy and control inflation, using fiscal policies such as changing the money supply and interest rates. exchange rate the rate at which one state’s currency is exchanged for another state’s currency in the global marketplace.
If a country imports more than it exports, it is said to have a balance-of-trade deficit.
It is responsible for issuing currency, setting monetary policy, acting as a bank for the government, and helping to administer the state’s banking industry.
Monetary Policy Central bank policy tools for managing their economies.
An expansionary monetary policy would entail such things as selling additional bonds and lowering interest rates.
Such policies would make money relatively more plentiful and less expensive to borrow.
An expansionary fiscal policy would consist of lowering taxes and/or increasing spending, while a “tight” or contractionary policy would involve raising taxes and/or decreasing spending.
Devaluation The lowering of the official exchange rate of one country’s currency relative to other currencies.
This is generally done to increase exports, as devaluation lowers the relative prices of a country’s exports.
However, it can also reduce the spending power of citizens within that country.
Exchange Rate The rate at which one state’s currency is exchanged for another state’s currency in the global marketplace.
For example, on June 28, 2009, for one United States dollaryou would have received 0.71 euro or 13.16 Mexican pesos.
Daily changes are generally quite small, though they can vary greatly over the long run.
For example, on June 28,2001, the United States dollar was worth 1.17 euros and 9.08 Mexican pesos.
Fixed Exchange Rate A system in which a government sets the value of its currency at a fixed rate for exchange in relation to another country’s currency (usually the United States dollar) or another measure of value (such as a group of different currencies or a precious metal such as gold) so that the exchange value is not free to fluctuate in the global money market.
Floating Exchange Rate System in which the relative value of a country’s currency is set by market forces.
In principle, the value of a country’s currency is indicative of the underlying strengths and weaknesses of its economy.
Fixed-but-Adjustable Exchange Rate System A system in which a government fixes its currency in relation to that of another country’s currency, but may still change the fixed price to reflect changes in the underlying strengths and weaknesses of their economies.
The general expectation is that such changes are rare and only occur under specially defined circumstances.
It is generally expressed in percentages and calculated on a yearly basis.
Inflation reduces the buying power of citizens, as it decreases the value of their currency.
Very high levels of inflation can cause severe disruptions within a society, as the currency becomes largely worthless.
For example, the inflation rate of Zimbabwe reached well over 231,000,000% by the start of 2009.
Capital Controls Government attempts to limit or prevent global capital transactions.
Examples range from placing taxes on foreign exchanges to outright bans on the movement of capital out of a country.
These policies are generally intended as a means to “insulate” an economy from the global capital market. fewer dollars, making a profit.
The globalization of finance now also encourages managers of investment portfolios to rapidly move funds from one currency to another in order to realize gains from differences in states’ interest rates and the declining value of other currencies in the global network of exchange rates.
In the same way that governments try to protect the value of their currencies at home, they often try to protect them internationally by intervening in currency markets.
Their willingness to do so is important to importers and exporters, who depend on predictability in the value of the currencies in which they deal to carry out transnational exchanges.
Governments intervene when countries’ central banks buy or sell currencies to change the value of their own currencies in relation to those of others.
Unlike speculators, however, governments are pledged not to manipulate exchange rates so as to gain unfair advantages, for states’ reputations as custodians of monetary stability are valuable.
Within this system, governments are faced with the difficult task of balancing the demands of the global currency market with the need to manage their own economies.
CALCULATING THE CHANGING COSTS OF GOODS IN THE GLOBE’S CURRENCY EXCHANGE SYSTEM The figure pictured on the left shows changes over time of the weighted average of the foreign exchange values of the United States dollar against a subset of the currencies of a large group of major United States trading partners.
Economists usually calculate currency exchange rates in terms of purchasing power of parity because that index of the value of exchange rates measures the cost of identical goods or services in any two countries.
The least expensive burger could be purchased in Hong Kong for $1.72 (13.
Hong Kong dollars at the August 8,2009, exchange rate), versus an average price of $3.57 in the United States.
To make the two prices equal would require an exchange rate of 2.08 HKD to the dollar, rather than the market rate of 7.75, implying that the yuan was undervalued against the dollar at this point in time, whereas the euro was 29 percent overvalued and the Swiss franc was 88 percent overvalued.
Chicago, Atlanta, and San Francisco ^Weighted average of member countries Big Mac price* {$) money supply the total amount of currency in circulation in a state, calculated to include demand deposits, such as checking accounts in commercial banks, and time deposits, such as savings accounts and bonds, in savings banks. versus unemployment, strong versus weak currency valuation strategies, and the competing values of stability versus autonomy.
Inflation occurs when the government creates too much money in relation to the goods and services produced in the economy.
However, the creation of money—whether through increasing the money supply or lowering interest rates—does serve to stimulate the economy, at least in the short term.
Yet such actions slow an economy down, which is generally associated with increased unemployment and even recession.
This is one of the most commonly noted trade-offs associated with monetary policy—inflation versus unemployment.
A related dilemma regards currency values, specifically whether states should seek to maintain “strong” or relatively “weak” currencies.
As mentioned, states are generally encouraged to refrain from manipulating the value of their currencies, or the currencies of other countries, in order to maintain predictability and stability.
However, there are benefits to maintaining a weak currency, through such means as capital controls, fixing exchange rates, or even currency devaluations.
Though a weaker currency has a negative effect on the spending power of the domestic consumers, it makes exporting industries more competitive in that their goods are relatively less expensive in the global marketplace.
Indeed, this is one of the primary controversies surrounding the value of the Chinese Renminbi, as critics contend that the unduly low exchange rate represents unfair competition in the global trade arena.
Alternatively, currencies that are relatively strong face the opposite dilemma— though their consumers have relatively more spending power, both at home and abroad, their exporting industries suffer, and they are more likely to run a balance-of-trade deficit.
This taps into a trade-off that is at the core of global monetary policy, namely the choice between currency stability and policy autonomy.
The basic problem is that in a system where capital flows freely (that is, there are no substantial capital controls), it is impossible to have both stability and autonomy.
Autonomy gives states the flexibility to pursue monetary policies that best suit their particular economic situation, such as the use of expansionary policies to stimulate growth.
A flexible exchange rate regime gives states autonomy to conduct their own monetary policies.
In this case, autonomy is gained, though there is no guarantee of stability, as the currency is subject to the vicissitudes of the global currency markets.
For example, if a country with a fixed exchange rate was to lower interest rates, the exchange rate could not move to take the decreased demand for the currency into account.
To fill this deficit, the country would need to intervene into the foreign exchange market to reduce the over supply of currency—a “tight” monetary policy that would essentially undo the initial policy—or get rid of the fixed exchange rate altogether.
Such dilemmas were faced by the United States near the end of the Bretton Woods era, France in the early 1980s, and Argentina in the late 1990s.
In conducting monetary policy, states thus have to balance competing interests—the desire to help their economy grow with the necessity to maintain their currencies, the relative utility of strong versus weak currency valuation, and the incompatibility between the ideals of stability and policy autonomy.
Moreover, states face all of these dilemmas within the context of a global monetary system over which they have very little actual control.
It is important to keep these trade-offs and limitations on state power in mind as you consider the monetary policies of the Bretton Woods era, as well as some of the current issues in international finance.
As the world’s preeminent economic and military power, the United States played the leading role.
Its proposals were shaped by the perceived causes of the 1930s economic catastrophe and its beliefs about the need for active United States leadership.
The United States sought free trade, open markets, and monetary stability—all central tenets of what would become the “Bretton Woods system”—based on the theoretical premises of commercial liberalism, which advocates free markets with few barriers to trade and capital flows.
Led by John Maynard Keynes—whose theories about the state’s role in managing inflation, unemployment, and growth still influence economic thinking throughout the world—the British delegation won support for the principle of strong government action by states facing economic problems.
Despite these differences, the rules established at Bretton Woods reflected a remarkable level of agreement.
First, power was concentrated in the rich Western European and North American countries, which reduced the number of states whose agreement was necessary for effective management by restricting the potential challenges from Japan, the Global South, and the then-communist Soviet Union and its sphere of influence in Eastern Europe.
Indeed, the onset of the Cold War helped to cement Western unity along these lines.
Second, a compromise was reached between the contrasting ideologies of the United States and Britain.
In particular, the emergent order honored both commercial liberal preferences for an open international economy and the more mercantilist desires for active state involvement in their domestic economies.
Third, Bretton Woods worked because the United States assumed the burdens of hegemonic leadership, and others willingly accepted that leadership.
Commercial liberalism’s preference for open markets spread worldwide during this time and remains dominant today.
Thus, it is still useful to embedded liberalism dominant economic approach during the Bretton Woods system, which combined open international markets with domestic state intervention to attain such goais as full employment and social welfare.
The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade , which later became the World Trade Organization , was formed to encourage trade liberalization.
Financial and Monetary Aspects of the Bretton Woods System speculative attacks massive sales of a country’s currency, caused by the anticipation of a future decline In Its value.
The global economic collapse of the 1930s provided specific lessons for monetary relations.
In particular, as the major economies contracted in the late 1920s, they found themselves unable to maintain their fixed exchange rate regime.
The resultant flexible regime was highly unstable, replete with speculative attacks on currencies and currency devaluations.
MONEY MATTERS Currency now moves effortlessly across borders, and the globalization of international finance is wreaking bavoc on the efforts of state governments to control rapid fluctuations in tbe rates at which their national currencies are exchanged with those of other countries.
The negotiating parties agreed that the postwar monetary regime should be based on fixed exchange rates, and governments were assigned the primary responsibility for enforcing the rules of the new order.
The IMF was to function somewhat like a global “credit union”—countries contributed to the fund and were able to draw capital from it to help them maintain balance-of-payments equilibrium, and hence exchange rate stability.
Along somewhat similar lines, they established the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, later known as the World Bank, to provide capital for longer-term development and recovery projects.
Today the IMF and World Bank are important, if controversial, players in the global monetary and financial systems.
In the period immediately after World War II, these institutions commanded too little authority and too few resources to cope with the enormous devastation of the war.
The United States dollar became the key to the hegemonic role that the United States eagerly assumed as manager of the international monetary system.
It was accepted in exchange markets as the reserve used by monetary authorities in most countries and by private banks, corporations, and individuals for international trade and capital transactions.
To maintain the value of their currencies, central banks in other countries used the dollar to raise or depress their value.
Thus, the Bretton Woods monetary regime was based on fixed-but-adjustable exchange rates based on the dollar and gold, which ultimately required a measure of government intervention for its operation.
To get United States dollars into the hands of those who needed them most, the Marshall Plan provided Western European states billions of dollars in aid to buy fixed exchange rate a system in which a government sets the value of its currency at a fixed rate for exchange in relation to another country's currency so that the exchange vaiue is not free to fluctuate in the global money market.
The United States also encouraged deficits in its own balance of payments as a way of providing international liquidity.
Such liquidity was intended to enable these countries to pursue expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, as well as to facilitate their participation in the global economy.
In addition to providing liquidity, the United States assumed a disproportionate share of the burden of rejuvenating Western Europe and Japan.
The United States willingly agreed to pay these costs of leadership because subsidizing economic growth in Europe and Japan increased the United States export markets and strengthened the West against communism’s possible popular appeal.
The End of Bretton Woods dollar overhang condition that precipitated the end of the Bretton Woods era, In which total holdings of dollars outside of the United States central bank exceeded the amount of dollars actually backed by gold.
By the 1960s it became apparent that the system was ultimately unsustainable.
As use of the dollar—as well as the amount of dollars in circulation—continued to expand, the resultant United States balance-of-payments deficit became increasingly problematic.
Unlike other countries, the United States was not able to adjust the value of its currency, as it was pegged to gold.
Though strict adherence to a fixed exchange regime supposedly limits the policy autonomy of a state, the United States nonetheless began to pursue expansionary macroeconomic tactics during the 1960s to finance policies such as the Vietnam War and increased social spending.
This gap between the amount of dollars in circulation and the amount of dollars actually supported by gold holdings was known as dollar overhang.
Simply put, though the dollar was officially “as good as gold,” the monetary reality was far different.
This left the Bretton Woods system in a tenuous position, and the United States very constrained in its options.
Tight monetary policies on behalf of the United States would have reduced the balance-of-payments deficit.
However, given the scope of the deficit, such cuts would have dealt a major shock to the United States economy.
Another potential option, currency devaluation, could conceivably have reduced the balance-of-payments problem.
Though some of the other major economies were willing to intervene to support the dollar, there were limits to what these countries would do, and it was widely known that the status quo was not sustainable.
The architecture of the international finance system must be reformed to reduce the susceptibility to crises.
The ultimate key is not economics or finance, but politics—the art of developing support for strong policy. —Robert Rubin, former United States Secretary of the Treasury Floating Exchange Rates and Financial Crises In 1971, United States President Richard Nixon cut this “Gordian knot” by abruptly announcing—without consulting with allies—that the United States would no longer exchange dollars for gold.
With the price of gold no longer fixed and dollar convertibility no longer guaranteed, the Bretton Woods system gave way to a substitute system based on floating exchange rates.
Market forces, rather than government intervention, now determine currency values.
A country experiencing adverse economic conditions now sees the value of its currency fall in response to the choices of traders, bankers, and businesspeople.
This was expected to make exports cheaper and imports more expensive, which in turn would pull the currency’s value back toward equilibrium—all without the need for central bankers to support the value of its currency.
In this way, it was hoped that the politically humiliating devaluations of the past could be avoided.
Moreover, though flexible exchange rates give governments the autonomy to conduct their own fiscal and monetary policies, these same market forces hold governments accountable for their policies and actions.
As a result, states should be forced to closely monitor their fiscal and monetary policies to avoid balance-of-payments deficits and inflation. floating exchange rates an unmanaged process in which governments neither establish an official rate for their currencies nor intervene to affect the value of their currencies, and instead allow market forces and private investors to influence the relative rate of exchange for currencies between countries.
Beginning in the late 1970s, escalating in the 1980s, and persisting through the present, a rising wave of financial crises, both in currency and banking, occurred.
This chronic problem in the crushing sea of circulating capital flows throughout the globe has strained the international monetary process to the brink of collapse.
Needless to say, this staggering debt load greatly reduces these countries’ capability to chart their future by themselves—as sovereign states are supposed to do.
Rather than increasing stability through the free exchange of currencies, the post-Bretton Woods era has been plagued by financial crises. $uch crises have become increasingly frequent throughout the world as a result of the inability of states to manage their debt, inflation, and interest rates, and the global monetary system is experiencing wild currency-exchange-rate gyrations.
In the past forty-five years, more than one hundred major episodes of banking insolvency occurred in nine of ten rapidly growing Global East countries.
This financial disease is also spreading to the Global North countries and their banking institutions.
The financial cost of these currency crises, in terms of the percentage of GDP lost, has been huge and threatens to increase.
In reaction to growing awareness of the extent to which the global prosperity of each country depends on a stable international currency system, the call has risen with increasing voice about the need for the great powers and all others to collectively coordinate, through multilateral agreements, the stabilization of international exchange rates.
Protests and riots against the IMF and the World Bank have become relatively commonplace.
In some instances, such as the 2003 “Black Friday” protests in Bolivia in which thirty-three people were killed, the violence can turn deadly.
In the case ot Indonesia in 1998, such protests and riots can sometimes help to overturn a government.
Of great contention are Structural Adjustment Policies , the package of policy reforms that accompany IMF and World Bank financial assistance.
The basic goal of SAPs is to help countries repay their foreign debts through a combination of fiscal and monetary policy reforms, as well as increased participation in the global economy.
SAPs were first introduced in the early 1980s as a way of helping countries in Latin America recover from the debt crisis.
Though this “playbook"" is in line with basic macroeconomic principles for reducing deficits, the political and economic results of these measures have been subject to a great deal of criticism.
SAPs—which are often enacted very rapidly—are very recessionary, particularly in the short run.
Decreases in government spending often translate into decreases in government jobs , as well as decreased levels of support for education, healthcare, and economic welfare.
Interest rate increases make it more expensive for citizens to acquire loans, while currency devaluation lowers individual spending power.
In many instances, the reduction of state subsidies may result in drastic increases in the prices that citizens pay for basic services, such as electricity and water, or goods that were formerly subsidized, including fuel and food.
These difficulties can be further exacerbated by trade liberalization, as inefficient domestic industries may be incapable of competing with their foreign counterparts.
As a result, these industries may be forced to cut jobs or close down entirely.
Countries in the Global South may view these institutions as another manitestation of “neocolonialism,"" which serves more to meet the interests of global investors and corporations rather than citizens of the Global South.
Indeed, in many instances “privatization"" results in many large state-run industries being sold off to multinational corporations from the Global North.
Many of the criticisms against the IMF were primarily from more populist and Marxist sources and focused on individual cases.
Flowever, recent studies have begun to systematically examine the impact of SAPs upon their recipient states.
Though acknowledging an imperfect record, the World Bank and the IMF defend their role in the international financial system.
Pointing to successes such as Poland, officials note that the IMF has played a key role in helping countries recover.
Moreover, countries only apply for help when they are in financial trouble, and thus it is hard to blame these organizations for problems that the country was facing anyway.
Finally, political leaders may find it expedient to “scapegoat"" the IMF and the World Bank, which can provide them “cover"" for enacting necessary, though unpopular, economic policies.
Ultimately, as argued by IMF economist Kenneth Rogoff, countries would be much worse off if they isolated themselves from the global economy.
THE CRISIS OF 2008 TFie current global financial system is still recovering from the massive crisis that came to a head in 2008.
The first phase of a crisis cycle is “displacement,” which refers to a change in the system that alters profit opportunities and creates new opportunities for financial gain.
There were several developments that brought increased attention to the mortgage and securities markets during the beginning of the century, including massive cash holdings by states such as China and the OPEC members, the real estate boom in the United States, extremely low interest rates in the United States, and the new investment instruments that banks and investment firms created.
These factors were inextricably linked—the initial dilemma that led to this crisis was how to put the “giant pool of money” that these states were holding into use.
At the same time, the low interest rates in the United States meant that mortgages were less expensive for homeowners.
As housing prices were increasing, buying new or larger homes was a good “investment” for homeowners.
Sensing opportunity, banks created instruments to link the “pool” of money to the housing market, by selling securities based off of these mortgages to large investors.
As a result, the investors made a higher rate of return from the mortgages, homeowners reaped the benefits of lower interest rates, and banks made billions of dollars as intermediaries.
The second phase of the crisis—the so-called “boom” period in which money pours into these new opportunities—thus began.
As the investors and bankers continued to reap profits, the “pool of money” became ever larger, and trillions of dollars continued to flow into this market.
Banks began to invent more investment instruments based off of this market (essentially different ways to “bundle” these mortgages together), and huge speculative markets based off of the performance of these instruments began to emerge.
Yet the “pool” continued to grow, and demand for these securities continued.
To keep the market going, banks began to sell mortgages to “subprime” buyers who would have never qualified for mortgages under normal circumstances.
The rationalization for doing this was that even if some loans were not repaid, there would still be a sufficient flow of capital to keep the overall securities serviced.
Even if the loans defaulted, the banks would get the real estate, which was considered to be an appreciating asset.
As homeowners failed to repay the mortgages, banks quickly found themselves without a stream of income from mortgage holders, holding properties whose value was declining and that they were unable to sell, and facing debt loads that were sometimes over thirty times greater than their own net worth.
As the mortgage market began to fall, the speculative markets and instruments built around it—whose total cash value was many times more than the value of the mortgages themselves—also collapsed.
As a result, banks and investors literally ran out of money, and the credit market in the United States and much of the world collapsed.
Though financial crises are not new to the global financial system, the current crisis has had a particularly profound impact upon the global financial order, as well as the international system as a whole.
Given the leading role of the United States in maintaining the liberal financial order, as well as the prevalence of the dollar as the currency of choice in international finance, this crisis has thus brought into question the leadership of the United States, as well as some of the fundamental ideals of the global financial system.
According to the IMF, in 2008, 64 percent of all foreign exchange reserves were in dollars.
Though the value of the dollar on the world market has recovered somewhat since the onset of the crisis, some of the leading economies in the world—most notably China—have suggested that the dollar be replaced as the major currency of the global marketplace.
Though the general need for a dominant currency is broadly noted among economists, and there is “no obvious replacement” for the dollar as the dominant currency, such suggestions do indicate damage to the reputation of the dollar and the future possibility of a less dollar-centered global economy.
Though the free exchanges of currencies, and the free movement of capital, are viewed as foundational to liberal economics, the financial crisis has served to undercut basic contentions regarding the efficacy of the marketplace.
Among the larger economies of the world, the ones that fared the best in the crisis were India and China, arguably the two major countries most insulated from the global financial order.
Indeed, Moldova, a very small country with a “cash-only system” of finance—that is, a system in which banks and credit cards are largely nonexistent and savings are generally stored under mattresses or in drawers—was recently ranked by a leading financial journal as the fifth most stable economy in the world.
As concluded by Roger Altman, a former United States Treasury Department official and a leading adviser to President Clinton, “the long movement towards market liberalization has stopped,” and “globalization itself is reversing.
To critics of liberalism, the crisis has revealed strengths in alternative perspectives on the global economy.
Marxists have long noted the inherent instability of capitalism, its susceptibility to speculative panics, and the need for strong state intervention into the financial system.
Giro Domenico/Landov The Globalization of International Finance THE DOMINO EFFECT IN GLOBAL FINANCE Financial crises starkly reveal the drawbacks to the globalization of finance.
When a country’s banks go bankrupt and its economy collapses, foreign capital flees in panic, which can often exacerbate the crisis.
Moreover, as there is no worldwide central bank to cushion such crashes, money problems in one country can lead to money problems in others.
This can create currency depreciations and plunges in stock prices at home and abroad.
Just as the crisis was driven by male dominance, the current financial crisis will have a disproportionate impact upon males.
In the United States, for example, over 80 percent of the job losses since November 2008 fell upon men, as traditionally male sectors (e.g., construction and manufacturing) were hardest hit.
As one scholar concludes, the financial crisis “will be not only a blow to the macho men’s club called finance capitalism that got the world into the current economic For their part, feminist scholars note that males are both primarily responsible for the crisis and suffering the most from its effects.
To the extent that the crisis weakens the economic and ideological power of the United States and its Western allies, the United States is less able to assert itself in international negotiations.
To the extent that the negative impact of this crisis has spilled over into many developing countries, including fragile states such as Pakistan and the Democratic Republic of Congo as well as resource-driven states such as Iran, Venezuela, and Russia, the economic downturn has the potential to increase political instability in various regions of the world.
Financial crises have traditionally been followed by a multitude of suggestions for reform.
In dealing with the crisis of 2008, efforts were made improving the rather informal system of financial cooperation between states.
In particular, whereas such matters were traditionally discussed among the seven or eight largest economies , a much larger group consisting of the twenty largest economies met to discuss ways to deal with the financial crisis.
The rationale behind the larger group was that the larger economies of the developing world, such as Argentina, Brazil, and Indonesia, and Saudi Arabia, should have input into forging a common response to the crisis.
For the great difference between an ordinary casino where you can go into or stay away from, and the global casino of high finance, is that in the latter all of us are involuntarily engaged in the days’ play. —Susan Strange, economist and international relations scholar What these and other proposals seek is a mechanism for creating the currency stability and flexibility on which prosperity depends.
With the spread of democracy throughout the globe, most governments now face increasing domestic pressures to sacrifice such goals as exchange rate stability for unemployment reduction.
So it seems likely that the reality of a new financial system will remain elusive, and floating exchange rates, with all their costs and uncertainties, are here to stay.
For these actors, the IMF remains a preferred instrument for coping with financial crises.
Flence, while the schemes for alternatives proliferate, the prospects are for incremental tinkering rather than wholesale restructuring.
The mixed results of the G-20 summit illustrate the difficulty in bringing about any fundamental change.
Despite their common interest in recovering from the current crisis and averting future crises, the members could not agree on a common set of policies to help their own economies recover, and did not want to establish a supranational regulatory body to deal with global financial exchanges.
In each instance, countries valued their own domestic policy autonomy over their common interest in monetary stability.
Global investment flows continue to proliferate, and there is every reason to expect that the currency dilemmas facing the world will continue to intensify.
To this end, the EU created the euro in the hopes that a single currency would make the EU a single market for business, and that the euro would promote economic growth, cross-border investment, corporate innovation and efficiency, and political integration.
As innovative as the creation of the euro appears, it may not serve as a model for other countries and regions.
The EU’s common currency represents much more than an economic policy, but the end result of a decades-long process of economic integration.
A controversy surrounding multilateral institutions, such as the IMF, is that their policies are seen as another way in which powerful states of the Global North seek domination over those in the Global South.
In this picture, taken on January 15,1998, Indonesian President Suharto signs an agreement for a $43 billion assistance and reform package, while IMF Managing Director Michel Camdessus looks on.
Indonesians, who place a great value on symbolism and body language, viewed the picture as a humiliating loss of face for the president, who was forced out of office four months later.
In addition to helping to solidify negative opinions of the IMF within the developing world (Camdessus later apologized for his arm-crossing and his stance), Suharto subsequently reneged on many aspects of the deal, particularly those that called for the dismantling of business monopolies owned by his family members. change designed to create a European superstate and thereby erase the individuality and economic and political sovereignty of European states.
This solution through currency integration in Europe is best seen as a response to United States domination of the global economy.
However, the United States dollar remains the primary global currency for settling international accounts, and it is doubtful that countries with smaller economies could successfully create their own regional currency blocs.
Along those lines, economic globalization would largely mean the “dollarization” of the international political economy.
This means that the debate over currency and monetary policies will remain as intense as ever, particularly in the turbulent arena of international trade.
It is that twin dimension of economic globalization that we will next consider in Chapter 13.
World Trade and the Financial Crisis GLOBALIZATION AND CARBONATION; COCA-COLA The Coca-Cola logo is one of the most recognizable images in the world, and the global reach of this product is massive.
According to company reports, the average global per capita consumption of its products over tbe course of a year is eighty-five cans—in other words over 1. hillion servings of Coca-Cola are consumed daily.
Coca-Cola has been active there for over eighty years, and controls over half of China’s carbonated beverage market.
The bottle in the middle is from the Huiyuan Company, which Coca-Cola attempted to buy in 2009.
His employer has decided to move its production to India in order to save money by hiring lower-paid foreign workers without trade unions.
The downside of globalized international trade has come home to roost, and the quality of your life is declining.
Or so it would appear as you contemplate your future clad in Levi jeans no longer produced in the United States and Calvin Klein shirts made in China.
Trying to find meaning in the whirlwind of international trade going on around you, you race off to your international economics course, where you hope you can derive some insight.
She introduces her topic by telling you that trade across national borders is the biggest part of the globalization of world politics.
As you next learn, scholars also hold competing views about the consequences of the globalization of international trade.
To construct an objective evaluation of these rival interpretations, begin by stepping backward to understand leading ideas about states’ trade policies, which are rooted in past thinking.
In this chapter, you will focus on the contest between liberalism and mercantilism, two dominant sets of values that underlie the different trade strategies states pursue in their quest for power and wealth.
However, to provide a broader context, the place to start is with data that describes trends in the globalization of international trade.
We must ensure that the global market is embedded in broadly shared values and practices that reflect global social needs, and that all the world’s people share the benefits of globalization. —Kofi Annan, former Secretary-General of the United Nations GLOBALIZATION AND TRADE Evidence of global trade is as close to you as the clothes you wear and the coffee you drink in the morning.
As Michael Mazarr explains, “Measuring global trade as a percentage of GDP is perhaps the simplest and most straightforward measure of globalization.
The index of trade integration reveals that international trade has become increasingly global over the past decades.
THE GROWTH OF GLOBAL TRADE iNTEGRATiON 1998-2008 When the percentage change each year in the volume of world trade grows faster than the annual rate of growth of the combined world economy, “trade integration” increases.
Though the general trend is toward greater integration, countries differ in the degree to which their economies participate in global commerce.
Global trade integration has become most rapid as a result of the mounting contribution of the Global East and Global South to world trade, which is also important to continued economic growth in the Global North.
The Global South’s share of global exports in manufactured products has grown from 10 percent in 1980 to 30 percent in 2009 , fueled predominantly by the Global East’s growth in the share of new export products.
Trade in services (intangible products such as tourism and banking financial assistance) and telecommunications are increasing as well.
Such commercial ties have expanded more than threefold since 1980, with the Global North reaping most of the benefits.
However, the spread of information technology, the ease with which new business software can be used, and the comparatively lower wage costs in developing economies are among reasons why the World Bank predicts that developing countries will capture an increasing share of world trade in services.
Global East countries such as India, with significant numbers of educated, English-speaking citizens, are already operating call centers and consumer assistance hotlines for Global North companies.
Trade is one of the most prevalent and visible aspects of the globalized world economy.
However, globalization is a multifaceted phenomenon (see Chapter 9), encompassing a variety of often interrelated actions.
There is a close relationship between trade and the global financial markets, as exchange rates set the values for the goods traded, and capital flows are often necessary to finance these commercial activities.
Trade is also inextricably linked to two other aspects of globalization, the globalization of production and the globalization of labor.
Understanding these components of globalization, as well as their relationship with trade, is important to understanding the complexities of the world economy.
But economically, countries depend on each other. —Robert J Samuelson, political economist Trade, Multinational Corporations, and the Globalization of Production Selling products to consumers in another country often requires companies to establish a presence abroad, where they can produce goods and offer services.
The pattern today is to dismantle the hub by dispersing production facilities worldwide, which was made economically feasible by the revolutions in communication and transportation.
As a result, the production of goods is commonly dispersed as different components are made in different countries.
Every Dell computer that is sold is, in effect, generating trade between nine different countries. globalization of production transnationalization of the productive process, in which finished goods rely on inputs from multiple countries outside of their final market.
This globalization of production is transforming the international political economy.
It once made sense to count trade in terms of flows between countries, and that practice continues because national account statistics are still gathered with states as the unit of analysis.
Together MNCs are now responsible for about onefourth of the world’s production and two-thirds of global exports.
Supply chains such as this have a significant influence on the world economy, reflecting increasing levels of cross-border integration and the “networked” nature of interdependence.
Thomas Friedman even goes so far as to offer a “Dell Theory” of conflict prevention, which posits that states that are part of common major supply chains are less likely to go to war.
These global actors have grown in influence also because many MNC parent companies are now linked with one another in virtual corporations and alliances of co-ownership and coproduction.
These MNC networks pursue truly global strategies for financial gain, often through long-term supplier agreements and licensing and franchising contracts.
As they funnel large financial flows across national borders, these global corporate conglomerates are integrating national economies into a worldwide market.
It is important to know not only how much FDI a country receives but from where.
The effect of inward FDI needs to be appreciated beyond its usual role of alleviating resource scarcities and creating jobs in host countries.
In addition to changing the way that we view world trade, the globalization of production has implications for the economic norms and practices of societies throughout the world.
In short, it affects global identities as well as global trade. intra-firm trade cross-national trade of intermediate goods and services within the same firm. virtual corporations agreements between otherwise competitive MNCs, often temporary, to join forces and skilis to coproduce and export particuiar products in the borderless global marketplace.
Though the ultimate effects of FDI are controversial , there is agreement that the globalization of production will only increase.
The direction of FDI flows is constantly changing, but a trend is apparent in the rise of the Global East and the Global $outh as fully engaged participants in this enormous transnational investment activity.
The globalization of production is thus inextricably linked to the globalization of labor as well as trade.
The globalization of labor has emerged as a result of interrelated changes in the world economy and global demographics.
As evidenced by the large volume of global FDI, an increasing amount of productive capital is mobile, and can readily change locations according to the specific needs of the firm as well as perceived advantages of prospective host countries.
Businesses are FDI inflows, global and by groups of economies, 1990-2009 2,000 1,800 1,600 1,400 Oi— cMco^uncor^oocnoi— cMco'^runcor^coos CT)0>05030>0503CT>05<7)0000000000 05Q503CJ5Q503CJ)0}CJ50000000000 1— 1— 1— -I— 1— 1— -I— -1— 1— 1— CNICMCMCMCNCMCMCMCMCM FIGURE 13.
THE SHIFTING DISTRIBUTION OF FOREIGN DIRECT INVESTMENTS As the figure demonstrates, there has been dramatic growth in FDI since 1990.
Between 1990 and 2007, global foreign direct investment increased roughly ten-fold, from about $200 billion to a record $1.98 trillion.
This was followed by a sharp decline in global FDI in 2008, due to tbe worldwide financial crisis.
Tbe figure on the right shows the distribution of FDI between the Global North and the Global South.
Dverall, a majority of FDI still flows into the Global North, though developed countries experienced a dramatic drop in FDI during 2008, reflecting their susceptibility to the immediate effects of the financial crisis and the failures of their financial institutions.
At the same time, there is mobility in the workforce as individuals move from one country to another.
Moreover, the overall size of the global workforce has increased greatly over the past few decades.
The mobile nature of capital could further weaken labor’s position; Companies that once were anchored in their communities can easily pick up and relocate.
In fact, companies which do not go where they can manufacture and operate most efficiently will soon be overtaken by those which do.
So capital can move, but labor can’t; business executives are in a strong bargaining position, but workers aren’t; and the result is pretty much what you would expect . globalization of labor integration of labor markets, predicated by the giobai nature of production as weii as the increased size and mobility of the global labor force.
Though the logic of supply and demand does bode poorly for the wage levels of workers, it oversimplifies the situation by treating labor as a relatively homogeneous, and thus interchangeable, good.
Such a view ignores a key factor in business decisions—the productivity of labor.
For example, it would not make sense for a corporation to move to a place where labor is 50 percent less expensive if the productivity of that labor was 75 percent less than the current location, as such a move would result in a net increase in operating expenses.
Wages are thus not the only factor that determines where global capital will locate.
Moreover, even though some workers may face lower wages, globalization acts to increase the purchasing power of these workers.
Along the lines of liberal economic theory, global commerce enables consumers to purchase greater selections of goods at lower prices than would be the case without globalization.
A similar dynamic is apparent between the globalization of labor and labor rights.
In this case the concern is that competition for capital and the increased supply of labor could prove harmful to the protection of labor rights, including the right to form unions and to legal protections from morally questionable labor practices such as the use of child labor and slave labor.
Anecdotal evidence about “sweatshops” and the repression of union rights in the name of foreign investment abound; companies as varied as Unocal, Walt Disney, and Nike have suffered embarrassment and financial costs for their associations with poor labor practices.
CHILD LABOR IN A GLOBAL SYSTEM Globalization is sped not only by the rapid expansion of technology but by the availability of cheap labor in some countries that take advantage of their peoples’ low wages to make products highly competitive in the globalized marketplace.
Here, a child labors under hazardous conditions and at near slave wages in Bangladesh, producing goods that cost less than those made where labor unions protect workers.
Though most studies have found the globalization of production and the globalization of labor to be-on balance—positive developments for societies, the gains have not been spread equally across or within societies.
Moreover, whatever the overall relationship between globalization and societal well-being, fears about it persist.
Though globalization creates winners and losers, the negative consequences of globalization—companies “outsourcing” their work or using child labor—are quite visible and strike deeply into people’s lives.
Alternatively, the gains from globalization, such as less expensive products and the gradual diffusion of technologies, are often unnoticed.
Similar dynamics are apparent in many of the controversies surrounding trade policy.
CONTENDING TRADE STRATEGIES FOR AN INTERDEPENDENT WORLD As you have learned, international trade is a far-reaching dimension of globalization and is one of the most hotly debated.
Disputes have intensified because the major participants in international trade are taking opposed foreign economic policy approaches.
To understand the trade strategies different states are pursuing, it is important to understand the economic philosophies of liberalism and mercantilism that guide their international economic decisions.
Over the course of the next three years, the leaders founded the liberal economic order based around the convertible currencies and the free flows of goods and capital.
The basic mission of the GATT was to encourage free trade among countries by reducing barriers to trade and serving as a common forum for resolving trade disputes.
First, the basic reciprocity premise of the GATT was for the mutual lowering of trade barriers, thus countries that lowered their tariffs could expect their trading partners to do the same.
In particular, nondiscrimination was put into practice in two specific forms, most-favored nation principle and national treatment.
The MFN principle holds that the tariff preferences granted to one state must be granted to all others—in other words, there could be no “favored nation” among members.
National treatment means that foreign goods are treated equally with domestic goods, and that countries are not able to enact policies, such as taxes or capricious regulations, to give their domestic products any advantage over foreign products.
Third, the GATT called for transparency in trade policy, meaning that trade regulations and barriers need to be clearly known among all states.
In a series of successive meetings or “rounds” held from 1947 to 1994, average tariff levels were lowered from 40 percent to just under 5 percent.
When the Uruguay Round was concluded in 1994 the GATT became the World Trade Organization , which further strengthened the organization by giving it the power to settle disputes between members.
COMMUNIST CHINA CHOOSES TO CONVERT TO CAPITALISM AND CONSUMERISM Shown here is one example of China’s growing consumerism: a view of the huge South China Mall in Donggum, the world’s biggest shopping center.
Opened in 2005, the mall has 7. million feet of leasable shopping area, and includes windmills and theme parks.
China now has utterly embraced America’s “shop-’til-you-drop” ethos and is in the midst of a buyat-the-mall frenzy . dreds of disputes among its members since 1994.
In addition to gaining additional power as an institution, the organization has grown stronger in terms of members— since 1947 its membership has grown from 23 countries to 153.
Though liberalization has spread worldwide as a policy principle (Simmons and Elkins 2004), not all states consistently support the liberal tenet that governments should not interfere by managing trade flows.
We will next review the basic philosophical stances underlying trade policy and the role of trade within the global political system, and assess some of the specific policy tools that states use in international trade.
They force governments to attempt to reconcile the overriding need for states to cooperate in trade liberalization if they are to maximize their wealth with each state’s natural competitive desire to put its own welfare first.
Most controversies in international political economy are ultimately reducible to differences between liberalism and mercantilism.
Commercial Liberalism Commercial liberalism proceeds from the premise that humankind’s natural inclination is to cooperate.
Thus, progress through mutually beneficial exchanges is possible, both to increase prosperity and to enlarge individual liberty under law.
In commercial liberalism, economic activity can lead to global welfare, and the major problems of capitalism can be managed.
Key Differences Between Liberalism and Mercantilism Liberalism Mercantilism Economic Relations Harmonious Conflictual Major Actors Households, Firms States Goal of Economic Activity Maximize global welfare Serve tbe national interest ~| Priority of Economics vs.
In it, he argued how the “invisible hand” in an unregulated market fueled by humans’ natural tendency to “truck, barter, and exchange” in pursuit of private interest could serve the globe’s collective or public interest by permitting efficiency and gains.
According to Smith, if individuals rationally pursue their own self-interest, they will maximize societal interests as well.
Regarding trade between states, the key concept that Smith fostered was the idea of absolute advantage, the idea that countries should produce goods in which their costs of production are lowest in comparison with other countries.
This issue was addressed by another eighteenth-century political economist, David Ricardo, and his concept of comparative advantage.
Ricardo argued that all parties, even those with no absolute advantage in anything, can benefit from trade.
In other words, a country should focus on the production of goods that it produces comparatively cheaply, rather than other goods that it could conceivably produce but at a higher cost.
This was a very profound concept with important implications for liberal theory as well as the discipline of economics.
As it shows that trade benefits all parties that partake in it, this principle is the basis for commercial liberalism’s advocacy of free trade as a means for all countries to mutually achieve economic progress.
Consider a brief hypothetical situation to help clarify the logic behind comparative advantage.
Assume an “economy” of two people, golfing legend Tiger Woods and yourself, and two “goods,” golfing and grass-cutting.
However, given his athleticism, he is also good at cutting grass, and could earn $50 per hour in this line of work.
As such your golfing skills only command $10 per hour and your grass-cutting is only worth $20 per hour.
If he thus hires you, you will be able to specialize in what you do relatively best while allowing Tiger Woods more time to devote to golf.
The implicit assumption is that markets succeed according to their own logic.
For liberals, state regulation of the national economy should be minimal to maximize growth and prosperity.
The best government is one that stays out of business, and politics should be divorced from the economic market.
Although commercial liberal theory promises that the “invisible hand” will maximize efficiency so that everyone will gain, it does not promise that everyone will gain equally.
Instead, “everyone will gain in accordance with his or her contribution to the whole, but . . . not everyone will gain equally because individual productivities differ.
The gains from international trade are distributed quite unequally, even if the principle of comparative advantage governs.
Commercial liberal theory ignores these differences, as it is most concerned with absolute gains for all rather than relative gains.
Mercantilist theory, in contrast, is more concerned with the political competition among states that determines how economic rewards are distributed.
Mercantilism Mercantilism is largely an economic extension of realist thinking.
Unlike liberals, who focus on the rationality of the marketplace, mutual mercantilism political economic perspective that views international trade in zero-sum terms and calls for active state intervention into domestic economies.
Classic mercantilists viewed the acquisition of gold and silver as the route to state power and wealth, and imperialistically acquiring overseas colonies was seen as a means to that end.
In the early nineteenth century, what we now call mercantilism (also called economic nationalism) emerged largely as a response to the rise of liberalism—indeed, one of the leading mercantilist works, Friedrich List’s National System of Political Economy, is to a large extent a direct critique of The Wealth of Nations.
Though economic nationalists draw from some of the core ideas of liberalism, such as the importance of productivity, the benefits of specialization, and the efficiency of the marketplace, they draw a different set of political conclusions.
In particular, mercantilists diverge from liberal thought in three main ways.
First, whereas liberals view wealth and economic growth as ends in themselves, mercantilists view them as instruments toward increasing national power.
Second, while liberal thought expounds upon the gains of specialization, it implicitly treats all specializations as equal in value.
For example, during the early years of the United States, Treasury Secretary Alexander Hamilton recommended that the United States specialize in manufacturing instead of agriculture, as it would better serve United States national interests.
As opposed to agriculture, manufacturing required higher levels of technological advancement.
Such industrialization would thus increase the “diversity of talents” in the country, and industrial capabilities would be more readily convertible to military might.
Finally, mercantilists view the state has having an active and vital role in their economies.
Specifically, as some specializations are superior to others, states can encourage the development of certain industries by subsidizing them and “protecting” them from foreign competition.
Whereas commercial liberals emphasize the mutual benefits of cooperative economic agreements, mercantilists focus on the likelihood of zero-sum competition and are therefore more concerned that the gains realized by one party in a trade exchange will come at the expense of the other trade partner.
For mercantilists, relative gains are more important than both parties’ absolute gains.
Though mercantilists recognize the superior efficiency of free trade, they have a more guarded view of its political benefits.
They view free trade as an acceptable practice for a powerful country, in that it often serves to solidify power.
However, in many instances adherence to liberal trade can undermine the pursuit of national security and long-term economic development.
Indeed, as mercantilists point out, powerful countries who profess to liberal practices, most notably the United States and the U.K., were quite protectionist when their industries were developing; “While American industry was developing, the country had no time for laissez-faire.
TRADE AND GLDBAL PDLITICS Trade plays a central role in the global system.
In addition to being a key facet of economic globalization, it has many implications for the global political system.
At the systemic level, one of the most influential theories involving global trade is hegemonic stability theory.
Hegemonic stability theory is based on the proposition that free trade and international peace depend on a single predominant great power, or hegemon, that is willing and able to use its economic and military strength to protect rules for international interaction.
A hegemon is much more than a powerful state; rather it refers to an instance where a single state has a preponderance of economic and military power, a dominant ideology shared throughout the world, and the willingness to be the leading state in the international system and to establish a set of common rules.
The underlying assumption to hegemonic stability theory is that a stable and prosperous global economy approximates a public or collective good. collective good public good, such as drinking water, from which everyone benefits.
This is due to the problematic nature of providing public goods, the collective action dilemma.
In this dilemma, the provision of public goods is problematic due to two basic problems, accountability and rationality.
First, though a public good generates benefits, there are certain costs associated with providing or maintaining the good.
If the benefit has a large group of potential recipients, it is not possible to hold any single party accountable for paying the costs to provide this good.
However, if everyone is “rational,” then no one will pay to maintain the good and it will eventually disappear.
But some may try to come and enjoy the benefits of the park without pitching in.
If enough people realize that they can get away with this—that they can enjoy a beautiful park without helping with its upkeep—it will not be long before the once beautiful park looks shabby.
This is also the case with the collective good of a liberal international economy, because many states that enjoy the collective good of an orderly, open, freemarket economy pay little or nothing for it.
A hegemon typically tolerates free-riders, partly because the benefits that the hegemon provides, such as a stable global currency, encourage other states to accept the leader’s dictates.
Thus, both gain—much as liberalism sees the benefits of cooperation as an absolute gain outcome because all parties to a bargain stand to benefit from their exchanges.
If the costs of leadership begin to multiply, however, a hegemon will tend to become less tolerant of others’ free riding.
In such a situation, cooperation will increasingly be seen as onesided or zero-sum because most of the benefits come at the expense of the hegemon.
Then the open global economy will crumble amid a competitive race for individual gain at others’ expense.
The theory is thus quite parsimonious in that it explains very broad political and economic trends in terms of the presence of one condition—hegemonic leadership.
Though theorists may disagree about how many instances of hegemony have existed throughout history, there is widespread agreement about the most recent case, the United States during the post-World War II period.
On a broader scale, Russett and Oneal posit that trade, alongside democracy and international organizations, is a key part of the “Kantian triad” that encourages lasting peace between states.
That fact accounts for the continuing popularity of the liberal belief that the exponential growth of trade contributes enormously to economic prosperity, as the last sixty years suggest.
Trade is also used as both a “carrot” and a “stick” in interstate relations.
Trade ties, and the granting of preferential access to markets, are commonly established with developing countries as a way to help them compete in the global market and thus achieve economic growth.
Leading examples include the WTO’s Generalized System of Preferences, which exempts developing countries from some of the nondiscrimination and reciprocity roles of the organization, the Lome Convention, which gives seventy-one developing countries preferential access to the EU markets, and the African Growth and Opportunities Act, which gives sub-Saharan African countries duty-free access to the United States market.
Economic sanctions —deliberate actions against a target country to deprive it of the benefits of continuing economic relations—are common ways that trade ties are used as a tool for coercive diplomacy.
Indeed, sanctions have been used with increasing frequency since WWII, and particularly since the end of the Cold War.
A considerable body of work has examined the utility of sanctions, and most question their usefulness as a strategic tool.
Sanctions “are seldom effective in impairing the military potential” of their targets , and are rarely successful as a substitute to warfare.
Moreover, as revealed by such economic sanctions punitive economic actions, such as the cessation of trade or financial ties, by one global actor against another to retaliate for objectionable behavior.
STICKS AND STONES OF ECONOMIC STATECRAFT In 1962, the United States extended sanctions on Cuba to a near-total commercial, economic, and financial embargo.
Pictured here are protestors in front of the United Nations headquarters in Nicaragua on April 17,2009 demanding the end of the blockade of Cuba.
As concluded by journalist Fareed Zakaria, “Sanctions are like the Energizer Bunny of foreign policy.
Though sanctions do impose economic costs to the sender, as it forgoes a potential trading partner, they are still perceived as a “cheap” tool that allows governments to symbolically demonstrate to their citizens and other countries that they are punishing unacceptable behavior.
Moreover, as Baldwin argues, examining whether or not sanctions are “effective” in meeting a given end may not be the correct way to view the situation.
Policymakers have a variety of “tools” at their disposal, all of which have various costs and benefits.
Thus “it is not enough to show the disadvantages of sanctions, one must show that some other policy option is better” for a given situation.
ECONOMIC FREEDOM IN TFIE WORLD Economic liberals and mercantilists portray two different visions of international economics, one in which the market has virtually free reign and the other in which the state actively intervenes to regulate and manipulate market forces.
Yet the reality is more nuanced, as there are differences in the degree to which free markets operate within each state.
Though there are differences in the degree to which economic freedom is enjoyed across countries, there does appear to be a strong relationship between economic freedom and prosperity.
Given the benefits of trade, it is not surprising that many states today welcome an open trading system.
These payoffs notwithstanding, there persist many reasons why so many states still attempt to increase their own domestic standard of living through trade protectionism.
Some of these feel that free trade is neither free nor fair because it does not benefit everyone equally.
Moreover, even though the percentage of countries practicing “domestic economic liberty” has increased throughout the globe for twelve straight years, many states remain unwilling to open their domestic markets to foreign imports because they are also unwilling to undertake reforms at home to create a free domestic economy.
According to the Heritage Foundation’s Index of Economic Freedom, at the start of 2009 only seven countries.
Economic freedom at home may produce the highest economic growth rates, provide the safest environments with the least risk for investments, and lead to foreign trade, but many governments are unwilling to realize these benefits through the liberalization of their local economies.
This is largely to their detriment, as it is not an accident that economically closed governments rule countries that also tend to be the poorest and the most corrupt.
This evidence underscores the influence of internal conditions on states’ international economic practices.
It suggests that the future preservation of the free-trade regime is unlikely in the absence of increases in the globe’s percentage of free governments and free economies.
THE FATE OF FREE TRADE Although many countries have reduced tariff barriers restricting imports from the rest of the world, there is much room for additional reductions.
Unfortunately for the fate of the existing liberal rules supporting freer trade, the threats to global prosperity are multiplying at the same time that countries’ growing dependency on volatile export and import markets is creating a precariously unstable situation.
If the entire global economy begins to decline, scores of countries are likely to turn away from the free-trade regime that has engineered their previous period of unprecedented growth.
In hard times, people are tempted to build barriers against foreign competitors.
Even in many economically open countries, protectionist pressures inevitably increase when jobs are lost.
Such was reflected in United States Congresswoman Maxine Waters’ call in October 2009 to “bring jobs back home” as a way to reduce the unemployment rate in the United States.
Thus before assessing current issues facing the world trading order, it is helpful to develop an understanding of the “trade tricks” that countries can use.
Trade Tricks Trade liberalization has played a key role in the growth of the global economy since World War II, and there is virtual unanimity among economists regarding the potential benefits of free trade.
This is due to the nature of the costs and benefits that accompany free trade.
In the aggregate, the societal benefits of free trade greatly outweigh the costs.
Yet these benefits, particularly the consumer gains that result from imports, are spread throughout an entire society, and are often not noticed.
For example, though foreign trade may enable you to save ten dollars on a sweatshirt, you are probably unaware that imports are the reason behind your savings.
There is thus little incentive to politically organize in the interests of imports—if you discovered that the price of sweatshirts had risen by ten dollars, you would probably not take the time to organize “pro-import” protest marches.
It is quite common, for example, to hear of plants being closed and jobs being lost due to the presence of cheaper imports.
There are thus greater political incentives to organize against free trade and for these forces to influence the political process.
Given this dilemma, trade squabbles are likely to continue, as states have political incentives to enact mercantilist policies.
This section will explain some of these policy tools, all which fall under the broad rubric of protectionism —policies designed to “protect” domestic industries from foreign competition.
Though average tariff levels have greatly decreased due to the WTO, they are still occasionally employed.
For example, in 2002 President Bush imposed tariffs ranging from 8 percent to 30 percent on steel imports.
In the late 1950s, for example, the United States established import quotas on oil, arguing that they were necessary to protect United States national security.
Hence the government. protectionism barriers of foreign frade, such as tariffs and quotas, that protect local industries from competition for the purchase of products local manufacturers produce. tariffs tax assessed on goods as they are imported into a country. import quotas numerical limit on the quantity of particular products that can be imported.
Export quotas result from negotiated agreements between producers and consumers and restrict the flow of products from the former to the latter.
Orderly market arrangements are formal agreements through which a country accepts limiting the export of products that might impair workers in the importing country, often under specific rules designed to monitor and manage trade flows.
Exporting countries are willing to accept such restrictions in exchange for concessions from the importing countries.
The MultiFiber Arrangement was an example of an elaborate OMA that restricted exports of textiles and apparel.
It originated in the early 1960s, when the United States formalized earlier, informal voluntary export restrictions with Japan and Hong Kong to protect domestic producers from cheap cotton imports.
As quotas and tariffs have been reduced, a broader category of trade restrictions known as nontariff barriers has been created to impede imports without direct tax levies.
Unlike tariffs and quotas, NTBs are more difficult to detect and dismantle.
Among developing countries whose domestic industrialization goals may be hindered by the absence of protection from the Global North’s more efficient firms, the infant industry argument is often used to justify mercantilist trade policies.
According to this argument, tariffs or other forms of protection are necessary to nurture young industries until they eventually mature and lower production costs to successfully compete in the global marketplace.
Import-substitution industrialization policies, which were once popular in Fatin America and elsewhere, often depended on protection of infant industries . strategic trade policy government subsidies for particular domestic industries to help them gain competitive advantages over foreign producers.
In the Global North and Global East, creating comparative advantages now motivates the use of what is known as strategic trade policy as a mercantilist method to ensure that a country’s industries will remain competitive.
Strategic trade policies focus government subsidies toward particular industries so they gain comparative advantages over foreign producers.
Countervailing duties impose tariffs to offset alleged subsidies, and their use is fairly common to offset agricultural subsidies.
Antidumping duties counter competitors’ sale of products below the cost of production.
Though much of liberalism is founded upon the virtues of free trade, realist theory helps to account for states’ impulse to pursue mercantilist policies.
Recall that realism argues that states often compete rather than cooperate because international anarchy without global governance feeds states’ distrust of each other.
In this sense, mercantilist strategic trade is a prime example of this realist explanation of states’ concern for self-interest and relative gains.
It explicitly aims to achieve trade surpluses and large dollar reserves.
It’s aimed at fostering production and a high savings rate but suppressing consumption” . countervailing duties government tariffs to offset suspected subsidies provided by foreign governments to their producers. antidumping duties taxes placed on another exporting state’s alleged selling of a product at a price below the cost to produce it. rents higher-than-normal financial returns on investments that are realized from governmental restrictive interference or monopolistic markets.
The Uneasy Coexistence of Liberalism and Mercantilism Given the political advantages of mercantilism, states often have a hard time resisting the constant demands of domestic industries and interest groups for protection.
They do so even if, according to liberalism, their relations with their trade partners will deteriorate and all will suffer in the long run, as trade partners retaliate with clever and innovative new counter-protectionist actions, of which there are many.
The result is that states simultaneously pursue liberalism and mercantilism.
Such a paradoxical approach to trade policy shows states’ determination to reap the benefits of interdependence while minimizing its costs.
It also reveals the tension between states and markets, between the promise that everyone will benefit and the fear that the benefits will not be equally distributed.
The absence of world government encourages each state to be more concerned with how it fares competitively in relation to other states—its relative gains—than collectively with its absolute gains.
America’s trade competitors have long noted that the United States, the principal advocate of free trade in the post-World War II era, has often failed to live up to its own rhetoric and has increasingly engaged in protectionism.
Indeed, some of the ways in which the United States uses its foreign economic tools are illustrative in this regard.
First, a major portion of United States foreign aid is “tied” to the purchase of United States goods and services.
Certain types of aid—particularly food—are legally required to be used to purchase goods made in the United States.
This turns foreign aid into a de facto subsidy for domestic corporations.
Security aims can also figure into United States trade liberalization efforts.
The implementation of the African Growth and Opportunities Act has been particularly contentious in this regard.
The original mandate of the AGOA was to encourage democratic governance and respect for human rights , though this emphasis has reportedly been supplanted by strategic interests.
Additionally, though overall tariff levels in the United States are lower than those in the developing world, the United States, like the rest of the developed countries, still protects several key sectors, most notably agriculture.
Such mercantilist moves are particularly damaging to the liberal trade regime, given the United States stature as the globe’s leading economic superpower and its liberal rhetoric.
This is particularly troublesome for developing countries, as they often have very powerful agricultural sectors as well.
The gap between the ideals and the actions of the developed world also brings back vestiges of colonialism and past hypocrisy on the part of the rich countries.
The pressures on free trade notwithstanding, “rapid globalization has done nothing to undermine the confidence liberals have always placed in trade.
To better assess this key issue, let us next examine the progression of the liberal trade order, as well as the current issues it faces.
The Development of the WTO Though it is difficult to maintain a liberal trade regime, and there are problems with the global trading system, it has a better-developed “architecture” than the global financial system.
As discussed in Chapter 12, the financial arrangement established by the Bretton Woods order broke down in 1971, and the current system is prone to “manics, panics, and crashes” —currencies fluctuate according to the dictates of the markets, there are only discussion forums to address issues of financial and monetary cooperation, and the IMF merely provides for the monitoring of financial systems and “crisis management” for countries that are in dire financial straits.
By contrast, the WTO provides a well-developed institutional structure for the world trading system.
The GATTA)7TO has had a rather tumultuous and uneven history and has been criticized for its lack of progress throughout its existence.
Yet to paraphrase Mark Twain, rumors of the institution’s death have been “greatly exaggerated,” and the GATT and WTO made progress in liberalizing global trade.
During the Bretton Woods era, successive meetings or “rounds” of the GATT were very successful in cutting tariffs.
The initial Geneva Round of negotiations in 1947 reduced tariffs by 35 percent, while successive rounds of negotiations in the 1950s, 1960s , 1970s , and the 1980s and 1990s virtually eliminated tariffs on manufactured goods.
The Doha Round, which officially began in 2002, has a very ambitious agenda for trade liberalization that addresses many of the remaining nontariff barriers as well as other trade-related items that are high on the global agenda, including intellectual property rights, environmental issues, trade in services, and trade-related investment measures.
THE WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION GOES GLOBAL When the GATT began in 1949Jt had twenty-three members.
Thus whatever the controversies surrounding the WTO, its near universal membership attests to the appeal of the institution among political leaders.
The WTO has handled around three hundred disputes since 1995 and can hold even its most powerful members accountable for their trade practices.
Moreover, Aaronson and Zimmerman note that the WTO accession process, as well as the periodic trade policy reviews required of WTO members, may have positive effects for the overall quality of governance within states, including increases in state transparency and levels of political participation.
Yet ironically the WTO is, to a large extent, a “victim” of its successes.
When the GATT was formed it contained twenty-three members and was charged with one central goal—the reduction of tariffs.
As tariffs have declined as a policy tool, the WTO has begun to confront a broad variety of issues related to international trade, including agricultural policy, intellectual property rights, trade in services, environmental protection measures, labor standards, and government procurement policies.
As demonstrated by the wave of protests in South Korea regarding United States beef imports , these new issues are much more difficult to resolve than the reduction of tariff levels, in that they may contradict the laws of individual countries.
In late November 1999, the then-135 member countries of the World Trade Organization and thirty additional observer states made final preparations to stage in Seattle what was billed as the Millennium Roundm trade negotiations—the follow-up to the Uruguay Round of trade talks completed in 1993.
The meeting promised to celebrate the free-trade regime for the global marketplace and the contributions that lower trade barriers arguably had made to the growth of international exports and, for many members (particularly the United States), their longest and largest peacetime economic expansion in the twentieth century.
There appeared to be widespread recognition that a half-century of generally rising prosperity had generated a climate of enthusiasm for the power of free trade.
Fears of imports tend to recede in good economic times, and, with the best decade ever, most leaders in the twilight of the twentieth century emphasized the sunnier side of free trade.
The goal of this meeting was to attain some consensus on how to build upon the success of the Uruguay Round.
That mood and the seeming consensus on which it was based were shattered when the Seattle trade talks opened.
An estimated fifty to one hundred thousand protesters and grassroots anti-WTO activists, who differed widely in their special interests joined hands to shout their common opposition to the general idea of globalization and free trade.
The immediate target of the demonstrations was the WTO; however, the organization itself was simply a convenient symbol of a much larger sea of discontent.
The WTO protests (and the failure of the WTO conference attendees to compromise on tightly held positions and agree on even a minimal accord) exposed the deep divisions about the best ways to open global commerce and adopt new rules at a time of rapid change.
Controversies about globalization, free trade, and global governance are multiple.
At the core is the question of whether globalization is an antidote to suffering or an enemy of human welfare.
The debates are explosive, because everyone is affected, but in quite different ways.
Many enjoyed the 1990s boom years under liberalized trade engineered by the WTO’s trade agreements.
But the celebration is confined largely to the top—the privileged, powerful, and prosperous.
Many others see themselves as clear victims of an open global economy, as when a factory closes and workers lose their jobs.
Those discontented with globalized free trade include a diverse coalition of protestors, many of whom harbor specific concerns about wages, the environment, and human rights issues.
Labor leaders contend that the WTO is sacrificing worker rights; environmental groups complain that when green values collide with world commerce, environmental standards are left out of trade negotiations; and human rights activists accuse the WTO of undercutting human rights in the pursuit of free markets.
In addition, some Global South trade ministers view efforts by the Global North to address labor and environmental standards as thinly guised efforts at “murky protectionism,” arguing that the Global North’s high-sounding rules are an excuse to impose high tariffs on their products and take away the comparative advantages Global South nations enjoy with lower wage scales and weaker environmental regulations.
Though the G-20 nations recently pledged to have the Doha Round concluded by 2010, virtually no one viewed the pledge as sincere or workable.
These issues are particularly difficult in that they raise concerns beyond free trade and protectionism.
In particular, areas such as labor and environmental standards take the discussions into deeper controversies about core human rights and the policies a state should enact to protect its environment.
The increase in membership has also brought additional challenges to WTO negotiations.
Traditionally GATT/WTO negotiations followed a “club model” in which a small group of trade officials ironed out policy largely out of the public eye.
For example, the conclusion of the Tokyo Round, which was widely heralded by experts as a sweeping victory for trade liberalization, was reported on page 18 of the Business Section of the Washington Post —hardly prime placement for news items.
Also, rounds were largely led by a small group of states, namely the United States, EU, and Japan, with other countries basically falling in line behind them.
The liberalization of agriculture has long been one of the most intractable items on the WTO agenda.
Many countries view agriculture as a vital part of their culture and security, and thus often have visceral responses to any potential “threat” to the status quo.
South Korea is certainly no exception to this, particularly with regard to its rice market.
This picture, taken at the 2003 WTO Ministerial Conference in Cancun, Mexico, shows South Korean rice farmer Lee Kyung Hae protesting rice liberalization.
Shortly after this picture was taken, Lee, a longtime advocate for rice farmers, publicly stabbed himself in the heart as a dramatic display of his opposition to trade liberalization and died shortly thereafter.
As evidenced by the massive protests that have become ubiquitous at every meeting, WTO rounds now generate vigorous public attention.
The WTO thus faces an interesting dilemma—having largely succeeded in its goal of lowering tariffs, and having attracted almost every state into the organization, it is now tasked with getting an increasing number of states to agree on an increasing number of very difficult and contentious issues.
The current economic context has hardly served to make these matters easier. regional trade agreements treaties that integrate the economies of members through the reduction of trade barriers.
Another recent trade trend has been the proliferation of regional and bilateral trade agreements.
The EU was the earliest and most successful example of regional integration, and similar, albeit less successful, initiatives occurred elsewhere in the Global North during the 1960s and 1970s.
However, the rapid proliferation of regional trade agreements and bilateral trade agreements began in earnest in the early 1990s—according to the WTO the number of trade agreements in force increased over tenfold since 1990.
RTAs and bilateral agreements are thus everywhere; every state except Mongolia belongs to at least one such organization.
For example, trade among the full members of Mercosur— Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, Uruguay — increased to $63 billion in 2007 from only $8 billion in 1990.
Many feel that NAFTA and other regional free-trade zones are consistent with WTO principles.
They see regional trade agreements as catalysts to trade because they encourage trade liberalization, albeit among smaller groups of states.
Political leaders assume that there is no natural conflict between bilateralism, regionalism, and multilateralism.
THE VOLUME OF TRADE FLOWS WITHIN AND BETWEEN MAJOR REGIONS This map indicates the levels of trade volume both within and between major regions.
While trade flows within regions comprise the highest share of world trade, there are notable differences in the pattern across various regions of the world.
The European Union’s growth is more intra-regional due to its deepening economic integration while Latin America, Africa, the Middle East, and the former Soviet Republic states (Commonwealth of Independent States CIS) are experiencing growth in trade with partners outside of their region.
The Contagious Economy former United States trade representative and current president of the World Bank, argued that through a process of “competitive liberalization,” the formation of bilateral and regional trade deals could pressure countries into strengthening multilateral institutions.
Yet others who support a liberal trading order are less sanguine about these agreements.
Politically, they argue that such agreements represent a “chimera” in which “attention and lobbying has been diverted to inconsequential deals” at the cost of pushing for multilateralism.
Legally, the end result of these various deals is a confusing and sometimes contradictory “spaghetti bowl” of regulations, which creates a muddled legal foundation for trade.
Finally, though the WTO has specific legal provisions for RTAs, in principle they do violate the core principle of nondiscrimination and MFN, as they give some WTO members advantages over others.
I discovered that the European Union, which started the pandemic (of regionalism) . . . applied its MFN tariff to only six countries—Australia, New Zealand, Canada, Japan, Taiwan, and the United States—with all other nations enjoying more favorable tariffs.
World Trade and the Financial Crisis In assessing global trade, it is important to keep the global context in mind, as all of these issues and struggles are taking place in the midst of the largest financial crisis since the Great Depression.
As noted in Chapter 12, world trade fell 9 percent in 2008—the first time that annual world trade has decreased since 1982.
The crisis, and its relationship to world trade, provides insights into the interdependent nature of the global economy, as well as how economic downturns embolden mercantilist policies.
The linkages between the financial crisis and the collapse of world trade reveal much about how the facets of economic globalization impact each other.
There are three main ways that the financial crisis precipitated the drop in world trade.
First, the crisis led to a downturn in the overall world economy, which created a huge fall in consumer demand.
There was thus less of a market for foreign goods, as well as products in general.
The globalization of production, in particular the nature of supply chains, further magnified this effect.
Using a prior example, for each unit decrease in sales of Dell computers in the United States, trade between nine countries is reduced.
Global supply chains thus mean that trade reduction has a “multiplier effect,” and that the pain of trade contractions is shared among a larger group of companies.
Exporters, for example, may need short-term loans during the time period between when their goods are produced and when the revenue from their sales makes it back.
The end result was a contraction in trade that was “sudden, severe, and synchronized” (Baldwin and Evenett 2009) across the major trading states.
Economic downturns tend to encourage protectionism, and the recent financial crisis is no exception.
Yet it is unlikely that the world’s economies will repeat the mistakes of the Great Depression, during which protectionist measures of individual states (the most notable was the ill-fated Smoot Hawley Act of 1932, which increased all United States tariffs by 50 percent) triggered a series of retaliatory measures and eventually the collapse of world trade.
Nevertheless, though the G-20 countries pledged from the onset of the crisis not to revert to protectionism, seventeen of the G-20 countries put in place a total of forty-seven trade-restricting measures since the crisis (Gamberoni and Newfarmer 2009), including subsidies to automobile industries, European subsidies to various dairy products, and a variety of smaller measures such as India’s banning of Chinese toys.
Though none of these measures were particularly sweeping, they do not bode well for trade liberalization.
The automobile subsidies are particularly problematic, as they may be indicative of broader shifts toward what Baldwin and Evenett (2009; see also Drezner 2009) call murky protectionism.
This refers to more subtle NTBs that may murky protectionism nontariff barriers to trade that may be “hidden"" in government policies not directiy reiated to trade, such as environmental initiatives and government spending.
Examples of such protectionism include abuses of safety and environmental initiatives, as well as policies related to government spending and procurement.
The stimulus packages that countries are enacting, which call for increases in public works and other government spending, may also discriminate against foreign trade.
In the UK, banks receiving government assistance are encouraged to make loans exclusively to domestic borrowers.
There are also contentious “buy American” clauses in the United States stimulus package that give steel and manufactured goods preferential access to government contracts.
The most controversial example thus far is the United States “bailout” of its domestic automobile industries with $30 billion in subsidies.
This was quickly pounced upon by foreign governments as unfair to international trade, whose economies were also suffering and whose industries were also requesting assistance.
Most agree a return to the rampant protectionism of the 1930s is unlikely.
Not only is the level of market integration higher, but, unlike the 1930s, there is an institutional structure to safeguard free trade.
Yet the financial crisis, and the resultant contraction of international trade, has certainly not helped the WTO in its attempt to reach agreement on the Doha Round.
As countries scramble to pull their own economies out of recessions, it is hard to take on the nuanced and complex tasks necessary for completing the Doha Round.
As political scientist Daniel Drezner concludes, “Too many people benefit too much from cross-border trade for the world to revisit the nineteen thirties.
The world trading system is thus in a precarious position, as countries look at mercantilist measures to help their individual economies recover, while the WTO encounters continued difficulties in expanding its power and legitimacy in a more multipolar system.
Such problems in the trading system do provide some corroboration to the realist viewpoint that there are definite limits to the strength of international organizations, as countries will focus on their domestic interests when threats arise, be they economic or political.
Yet at the same time, a liberal case can be made—for the WTO to maintain legitimacy during such tumultuous times does attest to its underlying strength and utility within the global economy.
Whatever the current “balance” between the two, the perennial struggle between mercantilism and liberalism will continue into the future.
Trade is not the cause of the current economic crisis, but is likely to be one of its most important casualties. —Stephen Leo, CEO, Center for Economic Policy Research This chapter, as well as the previous one, has shown that globalization is a “double-edged sword”—the same processes and ties that help our economies grow also ensure that crises are shared by all.
Moreover, you have seen the interdependent nature of the various facets of economic globalization, such as the linkages between global finance, production, labor, and trade.
Yet globalization is more than just economics; it involves individuals and cultures.
To understand that part of the broader puzzle of globalization, the next chapter will take you beyond the economics of globalization, by addressing the cultural and demographic dimensions of our global society.
Some people regard globalization as little more than the spread of values and beliefs of the globe’s reigning hegemon, the United States.
Shown here is one image that fuels that point of view—an enormous inflated Santa Clause in front of a hotel in downtown Hanoi, Vietnam—a predominantly Buddhist city still subscribing to the communist principles emphasizing the greed of market capitalism and the class divisions it is believed to create.
As you probably already have at one time or another imagined, beneath the skin every human being is essentially similar.
And we all tend to respond to the same experiences that almost everyone everywhere feels at one time or another—love, fear, alienation, or a sense of a common community and destiny.
There is rising expectation that this universal hope will be fulfilled.
One explanation is that growing numbers of people throughout the world are pursuing these human goals, because globalization is bringing all of humanity together as never before in bonds of interdependence.
This chapter opens a door to evaluating the prospect for such a jaw-dropping development.
You will be asked to consider if global trends might transform the world, and the world politics that condition it.
In the minutes to come, there will be another, then another, then another.
By next year at this time, all those minutes will have produced millions of newcomers in the great human mosh pit.
As the population on this planet increases, globalization is bringing us closer together in a crowded global village where transnational challenges characterize our borderless world.
Others claim that controls on family size are necessary because unregulated population will “parent” a crowded and unlivable future world without the resources necessary to sustain life for all people.
For this reason, politics—the exercise of influence in an attempt to resolve controversial issues in one’s favor—surrounds debate about population policies.
To understand why the globalization of population has become such a controversial issue, it is helpful to trace the global trends in population growth that have made this topic so problematic. demography the study of population changes, their sources, and their impact. global village a popular cosmopolitan perspective describing the growth of awareness that all people share a common fate because the world is becoming an integrated and interdependent whole.
When population increases at such a geometric rate, the acceleration can be staggering.
The next most important piece was the Grand Vizier— just what we might expect of a game invented by a Grand Vizier.
The object of the game was to capture the enemy King, and so the game was called, in Persian, shahmat—shah for king, mat for dead.
In Russia it is still called shakhmaty, which perhaps conveys a lingering revolutionary ardor.
There is, for example, no longer a piece called the Grand Vizier—it has become transmogrified into a Queen, with much more formidable powers.
Why a king should delight in the creation of a game called “Death to the King” is a mystery.
But, the story goes, he was so pleased that he asked the Grand Vizier to name his own reward for such a splendid invention.
Gesturing to the eight columns and eight rows of squares on the board he devised, he asked that he be given a single grain of wheat on the first square, twice that on the second square, twice that on the third, and so on, until each square had its complement of wheat.
So, secretly marveling at the unselfishness of his counselor, the King graciously consented.
When the Master of the Royal Granary began to count out the grains, however, the King was in for a rude surprise.
But by the time the 64th square is approached, the number becomes colossal, staggering.
If each grain were 2 millimeters in size, then all the grains together would weigh around 75 billion metric tons, which far exceeds what could have been stored in the King’s granaries.
The annual rate of population growth in the twentieth century increased from less than 1 percent in 1900 to a peak of 2. percent in 1964.
In terms of absolute numbers, the world population has grown dramatically in the twentieth century.
The Demographic Divide between Global North and Global South Population is growing much more rapidly in the developing Global South countries (which are least able to support their existing populations) than in the wealthy Global FIGURE 14.
WORLD POPULATION GROWTH PROJECTIONS TO THE YEAR 2050 By 2050 an additional 2. billion people are forecast to be living on the Earth, the UN predicts, raising the total to over 9. billion.
Such predictions are uncertain because growth rates depend on a variety of factors, but increased longevity in the Global North and a burgeoning youth bulge in the Global South are contributing to this trend.
The UN figure on fhe left depicts the decreasing fertility rates in high, medium, and low income countries.
The figure on the right displays the range of world population forecasts by the year 2050.
North, where population is declining gradually despite increasingly longer life spans.
Of the population growth the world has experienced since 1900, most—80 percent since 1950—has been in the Global South.
That will not happen until the total fertility rate, the worldwide average number of children born to a woman, falls from the rate of 2. today to 2.1.
Even though birthrates are likely to decline throughout the twenty-first century, world population is projected to continue to surge for decades in the future because of “population momentum” resulting from the large number of women now entering their childbearing years.
Eike the inertia of a descending airliner when it first touches down on the runway, population growth simply cannot be halted even with an immediate, full application of the brakes.
Instead, many years of high fertility mean that more women will be entering their reproductive years than in the past.
Not until the size of the generation giving birth to children is no larger than the generation among which deaths are occurring will the population “airplane” come to a halt.
This is unlikely to happen because “Current forecasts are that the world’s population will grow by a third over the next four decades.
Western Europe and sub-Saharan Africa illustrate the force of two different pictures of population momentum.
Africa’s demographic profile is one of rapid population growth, as each new age group contains more people than the one before it.
Thus, even if individual African couples choose to have fewer children than their parents, Africa’s population will continue to grow because there are now more men and women of childbearing age than ever before.
THE GEOGRAPHIC POPULATION DIVIDE It took until the early 1800s for world population to reach 1 billion people, and today another billion people are added every twelve to fourteen years.
World population is expected to exceed 9. billion by 2050, with almost all of the population growth occurring in the Global South.
In fact, Europe has moved beyond replacement-level fertility to become a stagnant population with low birthrates and a growing number of people who survive middle age.
A product of an extended period of low birthrates, low death rates, and increased longevity, Europe is best described as an aging society, where the low birthrates and aging populations have caused alarm that the number of European newborns will not be sufficient to renew populations.
Consider the demographic divide between the Global South and Global North further.
Eertility rates in the Global South are roughly twice as high as the Global North.
Because each cohort is typically larger than the one before it, the number of young men and women entering their reproductive years continues to grow.
Though the pace of aging is actually faster in the Global South than in the Global North—in the less-developed countries the population of people over the age of sixty-five will rise to 35 percent by 2050—people between the ages of fifteen and twenty-nine comprise more than 25 percent of the population in much of North Africa and the Middle East , and children under the age of fifteen comprise about 30 percent of the population throughout the Global South.
High birthrates pose challenges for economic growth and political stability, and a low birthrate is seen by some as a prerequisite for successful development.
Eurthermore, as a youth bulge develops wherein a burgeoning youth population in the Global South faces poor economic conditions and a lack of resources to provide for a family, many are turning to religious fundamentalism to counter their frustration and despair and are propelling an Islamic revival.
At the same time, a revolution in longevity is unfolding, with life expectancy at birth worldwide at a record-high of sixty-nine years and rising.
Eife expectancy at birth is expected to rise by the year 2015 to seventy-five years.
Global aging is occurring at rates never seen before, in part because of improvements in medicine and healthcare.
While the “aging and greying” of the human population is a global population trend that poses its own set of public policy dilemmas, it is more pronounced in the Global North than the Global South.
There are concerns that due to rapidly aging populations, the Global North will be especially burdened by rising old-age dependency and face an array of economic, budgetary, and social challenges.
While the effects are expected to vary among developed countries, these could include a decreasing labor supply; a decline in economic growth and per capita income; increased demand for public expenditures on healthcare, long-term care, and pensions; and an increased need to invest in the human capital development of future generations in order to boost overall productivity.
Resolving this dilemma in the Global North will require, in part, the promotion of demographic renewal by creating better conditions for families.
As advocated by the European Commission’s 2009 Aging Report; Demographic renewal requires action to develop an overall societal climate receptive of the needs of families, a shift towards a children-friendly society and creating conditions allowing a better work-life balance.
In countries where it is difficult to reconcile work and private life, employment rates of women tend to be low, as mothers often drop out of the labour market, and birth rates are low because many people feel that they cannot afford to have children.
Additionally, over the past few years, there has been growing debate within the Global North, particularly Europe, as to whether policy makers should adopt “pro-natal” policies designed to stimulate a rise in birthrates and combat norms for small families.
Russia, for one, has begun a protracted effort to encourage marriage and child bearing, offering financial incentives to women who have multiple children.
The resulting differences in demographic momentums are producing quite different population profiles in the developed and the developing worlds.
The poor Global South is home to a surplus of youth, with rising birthrates and growing populations; the rich Global North is aging, with falling birthrates and declining populations.
In the Global South, the working-age population will shoulder the burden of dependent children for years to come, while in the Global North it is the growing proportion of elderly adults that will pose a dependency burden.
It is not difficult to see how this facet of globalization is not making people in the world more alike.
Differentials in the geographical distribution of population are increasing differences in the quality of life experienced on the planet.
Urbanization When interpreting projections in demographics, consider also the geographic concentration of people within each country.
Known as population density, this measures how close together people are living.
Some FROM RUSSIA WITH LOVE In response to Russia’s demographic crisis, poiicy makers are offering married coupies incentives to procreate.
With September 12th declared Family Contact Day throughout Russia in an effort to encourage marital intimacy, the governor of the Ulyanovsk region coined it the “Day of Conception” and offered prizes to couples that give birth nine months later on June 12, Russia’s Independence Day.
Shown here is a couple on the Bench of Reconciliation in a Moscow park, which is curved to promote physical contact and help coupies to work out their differences.
This trend is producing another form of cultural globalization, and the urbanization of the world is accelerating and spreading.
What is more, already three-fourths of the populations in the Global North live in these big cities that are getting bigger, but cities are growing fastest in the developing Global South countries.
The impact of global urbanization is likely to aggravate health and environmental problems, straining supplies of clean water, shelter, and sanitation.
If the urbanization throughout the global community continues at its current pace, which is almost certain, this trend will lead to still another kind of transformation in the world.
We will consider another example next—the movement of people across borders through migration.
A WORLD THAT IS “SPIKY,” NOT FLAT As this map shows, “more and more people are clustering in urban areas—the world’s demographic mountain ranges, so to speak.
While people may be attracted by the better opportunities available in cities, it is nonetheless true that local services and amenities may come under severe strain.
Global Migration Trends global migration crisis a severe problem stemming from the growing number of people moving from their home country to another country, straining the ability of the host countries to absorb the foreign emigrants.
The movement of populations across frontiers has reached unprecedented proportions, producing a global migration crisis.
As floods of people leave their homeland for another country each year, cross-national migration has become a norm—so common in some places that leaving one’s native country has almost become an expectation.
The governments of sovereign states are losing their grip on regulating the movement of foreigners inside their borders, and no multilateral IGOs for meaningful global governance exist to deal with the consequences of the escalating migration of people around the globe.
Porous borders create ambiguous ethics about mass migration movements (see Parker and Brassett 2005), but one consequence is clear; there are both winners and losers through the globalization of migration.
For the home countries, many of which are poor Global South countries, the growing flow of remittances or money that migrants earn while working abroad and then send to their families in their home countries provides one of the biggest sources of foreign currency.
Yet there are worries that migration may reduce the job opportunities for natives and place a strain on public services.
These fears are all the more exacerbated by the weak global economy, and many countries have adopted measures intended to stem the flow of peoples across borders.
In the United States, construction continues to extend the line of fences along the border with Mexico.
In 2009, the European Parliament implemented controversial immigration rules that provide for illegal immigrants to be detained up to eighteen months and then expelled.
The Global Refugee Crisis Another trend in our “age of migration” is the flight of people not in search of economic opportunity but out of fear of persecution.
Refugees are individuals whose race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinions make them targets of persecution in their homelands and who, therefore, migrate from their country of origin, unable to return.
According to the UN High Commissioner for Refugees , at the start of 2009, the world’s refugee population was a staggering refugees people who flee for safety to another country because of a well-founded fear of political persecution, environmental degradation, or famine.
Forty-four percent of refugees are children under eighteen years of age. genocide the attempt to eliminate, in whole or in part, an ethnic, racial, religious, or national minority group. ethnic cleansing the extermination of an ethnic minority group by a state.
These may be conservative estimates, however; they only account for individuals who fell under the UNHCR’s mandate.
Additionally, though not considered displaced per se, there are about 12 million stateless people worldwide , and 827,000 asylum seekers.
This does not include the additional millions of children and women kidnapped by crime rings in the huge sex-trafficking trade and smuggled across borders as captives for prostitution.
Refugees and displaced persons alike are often the victims of war and political violence.
Renewed fighting between government armed forces and militia groups, as well as widespread human rights violations, caused over a half million Congolese to flee their homes.
In Somalia, the renewal of armed conflict led to roughly 1. million IDPs by the start of 2009.
A large proportion of the world’s refugees and displaced people flee their own homelands when ethnic and religious conflicts erupt in failed states where governments fail to preserve domestic law and order.
In addition, millions of refugees flee their homelands because when disaster strikes they are denied basic human rights such as police protection, access to fair trials in courts, and public assistance.
Nationalism and Religion atrocities brutal and savage acts against targeted citizen groups or prisoners of war, defined as illegal under international law.
Oppressive and violent conditions cause many people to leave their homes in the interest of security and survival.
While it is commonly assumed that Western states admit the most refugees from conflict, evidence indicates instead that most refugees flee to neighhoring countries in the Global South.
Indeed, the UNHCR estimates that between 83 and 90 percent of refugees remain within their region of origin.
As the leading country of origin of the world’s refugees, at the start of 2009, there were roughly 2. million Afghan refugees, with 96 percent of them fleeing to Pakistan and Iran.
Iraq was the second largest country of origin, responsible for 1. million refugees.
Together, Afghanistan and Iraq accounted for 45 percent of the global refugee population.
Somali and Sudanese refugees followed as third and fourth, respectively, with over 560,000 and 419,000 refugees.
Migrants also are pulled abroad by the promise of political freedom elsewhere, particularly in the democratically ruled Global North countries.
Yet today’s refugees are not finding safe havens; shutting the door is increasingly viewed as a solution and xenophobia is on the rise.
Among both developed and developing countries, there is a growing unwillingness to provide refuge for those seeking a better life.
With a weakening global economy, people are ever more resistant to foreigners competing for domestic jobs or resources.
Moreover, as security concerns since 9/11 have escalated worldwide, the linkage drawn between refugees and the probability of terrorism has tightened immigration controls.
Not only have countries in the Global North restricted the flow of people across borders, but those in the Global South are increasingly unwilling to bear the burden of hosting refugees.
This places blame for insecurity on the victims—refugees seeking refuge—because “as a general rule, individuals and communities do not abandon their homes unless they are confronted with serious threats to their lives and liberty.
That said, efforts to stem the tide of migrants have not reversed the trend of people seeking sanctuary.
This represented the second consecutive annual increase and constituted a 28 percent increase over the prior year.
The ethical issue is whether in the future the wealthy countries will respond to the plight of the needy with indifference or with compassion.
Globalization portends many prospects on which people are basing their hopes.
But globalization is breeding many demographic countertrends spelling doom and gloom that are provoking peoples’ fears about their future.
Threats, such as the outbreak of a widespread and deadly disease, could produce a population implosion.
Next we will look at examples of life-threatening diseases that are sweeping a globe without borders. population implosion a rapid reduction of population that reverses a previous trend toward progressively larger populations; a severe reduction in the world’s population.
DESPERATE REFUGEES ON THE RUN On average, over the last decade about 15 million refugees eacA year have become homeless people in search of sanctuary.
Shown right is actress Angelina Jolie, pictured with refugee children in northeastern Congo.
THE GLOBAL IMPACT OF DISEASE Although infant and child mortality rates remain discouragingly high in much of the developing countries, at least they are decreasing.
However, this trend in rising longevity could reverse if globally transmittable diseases cut into the extension of life spans made possible by improvements in healthcare, nutrition, water quality, and public sanitation.
In our age of globalization, a disease such as drug-resistant strains of tuberculosis , which affects more than nine million people worldwide each year , knows no borders.
Because communicable diseases cause one-third of deaths worldwide , global health is a concern and a threat to human security . £ o ■D ""q.
THE BURDEN OF DISEASE Globally, one out of three people die from infectious disease.
Yet a death divide is apparent between the Giobai North and the Giobai South.
Shown on the ieft, over half of deaths in the Giobai South are caused by communicabie disease, with HIV/AIDS as the most common culprit.
In the Global North, people tend to live longer and die from noncommunicable conditions such as cardiovascular disease and cancer.
On the right, the radar graph shows regional differences in the cause of death.
The circumstances are tragic, and stopping the tragedy is “a moral duty” even though the UN estimates that the AIDS pandemic is beginning to lose momentum.
In 2008 about 33 million people worldwide were infected with HIV; the number of new infections peaked in 1998 at 3. million and the number of deaths peaked in 2005.
This does not mean that the epidemic is vanishing; in many of the most seriously AIDS-affected countries, deaths are projected to overtake births and cause population decreases in the next few years.
This is tragic because the disease, which is transmitted by mosquitoes to humans, is largely preventable and treatable.
Efforts to combat the spread of the disease include the distribution of millions of insecticide-treated bed nets.
What makes influenza different from other global diseases is the frightening ease with which it spreads.
Another deadly strain of influenza, one that crossed the species barrier between pigs and people and is known as HlNl or swine flu, has recently captured global attention as policy makers and healthcare officials have raced to combat the infectious disease through public health measures.
There is uncertainty as to whether this new strain of flu is more dangerous than normal seasonal flu.
A number of countries, particularly China and Russia, have taken vigorous quarantine measures against Mexicans, Americans, and people who have traveled to countries suffering from a high number of infected people.
The spread and control of infectious diseases such as AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, Lassa fever, Ebola, lymphatic filariasis.
THE MOST SERIOUSLY HlNl-AFFECTED COUNTRIES This map shows the severity of the swine fiu giobai heaith crisis.
First detected in Mexico eariier in the year, on June 11,2009, the outbreak of swine fin was deciared a giobai pandemic.
This was the first designation by the Worid Heaith Organization of a woridwide influenza pandemic in forty-one years, and though the severity of the pandemic was considered “moderate” at the time, there was the expectation that it wouid spread in the coming winter months. disease, and swine flu have established themselves on the radar screen of policy makers throughout the world.
They will not vanish from sight anytime soon, and are a stark reminder of the transnational threats that are present in our borderless world and necessitate global cooperation and coordination.
A relationship exists between the health of individuals within a state and that state’s national security.
In contrast, in a more optimistic scenario, liberal theory anticipates a globalization of cultures that transcends contemporary geopolitical boundaries and erodes the meaning of national identity and sovereignty by creating “global citizens” who assign loyalty to the common interests of all peoples.
Trends in this cultural dimension of globalization are generating changes in how people construct their identities and encourage a more cosmopolitan perspective.
The major source of this global transformation is the growing speed and flow of communications, which is a hallmark of the global village —a metaphor used by many to portray a future in which borders will vanish and the world will become a single community.
In the age of global communication, the meaning of “home” and “abroad” and of “near” and “far” vanishes, promoting changes in people’s images of community and their own identity.
Will cellular phones, the Internet, blogs, and other means of transnational communication portend consensus, and.
THE WORLD AT ONE’S FINGER TIPS The revolution in telecommunications has contributed to “the death of distance,” as virtually instantaneous communications are possible nearly everywhere.
No area of the world and no arena of politics, economics, society, or culture is immune from the pervasive influence of communications technology.
Communication between areas as diverse as rural communities in the Global South and “wired” Global North countries is facilitated by personal computers and the “wireless world” of mobile or cellular phones.
The result of the expanding worldwide use of the Internet is the creation of a cyberspace, a global information superhighway allowing people everywhere to communicate freely without constraints as they surf the Web, exchange e-mails, and join Internet chat rooms.
The increasing number of Internet users is promoting a cultural revolution by giving most of the world access to information for the first time.
Drawing on the content of the international media and the Internet, bloggers weave together an elaborate network with agenda-setting power on issues ranging from human rights in China to the United States occupation of Iraq to electoral fraud in Iran.
Added to this is the enormous popularity of podcasts, which allow people to create their own Web site channels and share audio and visual versions of new uploads with anyone throughout the world who signs on.
If one constant stands out, it is continuous change in technological innovation.
The rapid pace of information technology development drives globalization.
It can make today’s methods of communicating look ancient in a few years, and in the process is transforming how people communicate as well as which countries lead and which follow.
To enthusiasts, the advantages of the global communications revolution are a blessing for humanity.
When people are connected worldwide through the revolution in digital communications, the shared information propels human development and productivity.
For example, in 2009, through the use of information technology such as Twitter and the online video-sharing site YouTube, Iranians were able “to document and disseminate to the world images of and information on repression in the wake of the recent election.
They were seen around the world, and served to sustain Iranian dissatisfaction with the ruling regime, particularly among those two-thirds of Iranians that are thirty years of age and younger.
On the other hand, there is a “dark side” to the global communications revolution.
Critics complain that the growing electronic network has created a new global condition known as virtuality.
In the name of national security, governments are also developing extensive surveillance systems that discreetly monitor activities, many in public spaces.
One example is the high-tech surveillance program in China, known as “Golden Shield,” that will identify dissent and allow the government to address it before it turns into a mass movement.
Critics also warn that even as Internet use and commerce grow, the communications revolution is widening the gap between the rich and the poor, leading to the globalization of poverty and the destruction of local culture.
Noting that access to and use of the Internet is heavily concentrated in the Global North , the critics fear that the advantages of the digital communication for small entrepreneurs in the Global South will not be shared and that the digital divide in access to communications technology is not closing as rapidly as expected.
At present, the Global North (and particularly the United States, where the Internet was developed) remains predominant and the primary beneficiary of the IT revolution.
However, the growing capacity of many United States rivals to excel in IT innovation has rapidly closed the gap.
This trend suggests that America’s domination in technology and information may not endure for long without a revival of United States public support for education amd, in particular, greater emphasis on training in science and technology.
Presently, there are concerns that the United States decline in spending for education is already creating a United States “creativity crisis” . digital divide the division between the internet-technoiogyrich Globai North and the Giobal South in the proportion of internet users and hosts.
The Politics and Business of Global Communication The more than $1 trillion global telecommunications industry is without question the major vehicle for the rapid spread of ideas, information, and images worldwide.
That impact accelerated after the World Trade Organization created the World Telecom Pact in 1997.
This regime ended government and private telecommunications monopolies in many states and the resulting cuts in phone costs were widely seen as a catalyst to the world economy’s expansion.
This development has been augmented by advances in information technology, and the expansive scope of global media.
Yet, contrary to conventional wisdom that the media has the ability to drive a country’s foreign policy, the type of power the media wield over international affairs is arguably specific and limited.
Scholarship shows that the media influence what people think about more than what they think.
In this way, the media primarily function to set the agenda of public discussion about public affairs instead of determining public opinion.
For example, global broadcasts of the ruthless repression and illegitimate tactics associated with Mugabe’s bid for reelection in Zimbabwe in 2008 ignited a worldwide chain reaction to aid that country’s refugees and pressure the government to reform.
Similarly, reports by professional journalists and individual activists helped to fan Iranian resistance and protest over the declared electoral victory of incumbent president Mahmoud Ahmadinejad in 2009.
These examples of the power of information technology in international politics aside, some people caution that this kind of “virtual diplomacy” has real limitations.
Not only can it constrain the policy options available to global decision makers, but it can provide biased or incomplete information that may contribute to an inaccurate or limited understanding of global problems.
Headquartered mostly in the rich Global North, these industry leaders are merging to combine their resources and, in the process, expanding their global reach.
They keep “us fully entertained and perhaps half-informed, always growing here and shriveling there, with certain of its members bulking up, while others slowly fall apart or get digested whole.
The world’s population is a captive audience, and the information presented by these corporate giants shapes our values and our images of what the world is like.
Not surprisingly, the message of international events and ideas projected by the media is highly reflective of Western culture.
The handful of news and information agencies operate like a giant circulatory system, pumping ideas, information, and ideals from the wealthy center to the remote periphery in the Global South.
The Internet, CNN, and MTV are media channels with global reach centered in the Global North.
What Global South opponents of globalization complain about is not so much modernization and trade; rather, they oppose “corporate globalization” dictated by mass media multinational corporations that, they contend, ignore the values and needs of the vast majority in the developing world.
Nonetheless, most of the growth in the media industries is expected to occur in the Global South over the next five years.
Whatever its true character, advocates see global telecommunications as a vehicle for progress, liberating minds, expanding choices, penetrating societies closed to diplomatic communication, and creating a single, more united, homogenized global culture.
They note that the airwaves can broadcast divisive messages as well as unifying ones, and that what is said is more important than how much is said.
Because globalized communications and information may be used as tools for terrorism and revolution as well as for cartel a convergence of independent commercial enterprises or political groups that combine for collective action, such as limiting competition, setting prices tor their services, or forming a coalition to advance their group’s interests.
Over 65 percent of citizens in the Giobal North are Internet users, as are over 13 percent of people in the iess deveioped Giobal South , and Internet usage is growing rapidly.
People from all over the world will draw knowledge and inspiration from the same technology platform, but different cultures will flourish on it.
The next phase of globalization is going to be more glocalization—more and more local content made global. —Thomas L Friedman, international journalist GLOBALIZATION AND THE GLOBAL FUTURE Rapid globalization, propelled in large measure by revolutions in technology, is almost certain to continue.
Whereas globalization has narrowed the distance between the world’s people, some have gained and others have lost ground.
The global village is not proving to be an equally hospitable home for everyone.
Winners in the game downplay the cost of global integration, and critics deny globalization’s benefits.
And the debate about globalization’s problematic impact is intensifying, but without resolution, as the debaters are hardening their positions without listening to the counter arguments.
You have now taken into account a number of dimensions of the trend toward globalization—in international economics, demography, global communication, and the potential spread of universal values for the entire world.
If the trends you have surveyed actually do culminate for the first time in a global consensus uniting all of humanity, these values and understandings might unify all people on Earth into a common global culture.
This could conceivably prepare the way for the advent of a global civil society, even with the eventual emergence of supranational institutions to govern all of humanity.
Yet this worldview and set of predictions strikes fear into the hearts of many people who experience cognitive dissonance when they confront a frightening vision that challenges their customary way of thinking about world affairs.
These people strenuously reject the idea that the traditional system of independent sovereign states can or should be replaced by a global community with strong supranational regulatory institutions for global governance.
Many people recommend globalization for international public policy, because they believe that its consequences are basically good for humankind.
However, critics argue that globalization’s costs far outweigh its benefits.
As the pace of globalization has become a recognized force in world politics, it also has become a heated topic of debate.
Globalization has hit a political speed bump, provoking intense critical evaluation of globalization’s causes, characteristics, and consequences and inspiring fresh ethical examination of the elevated interdependence of countries and humans.
To many students of international relations, globalization displays two faces, one positive and the other negative.
To those whose perceptions focus on globalization’s benefits, globalization is a blessing that should be promoted to deepen and widen its helpful effects.
They believe that globalization helps to break down traditional divisions of humanity—between races, nations, and cultures—^that are barriers to peace, prosperity, and justice.
To others, globalization is a harmful phenomenon, breeding such things as global disease and threats to local job security, and therefore a force to be resisted.
Globalization can and must change. globalization’s potential for good—promoting open societies, open economies, and freer exchange of goods, knowledge, and ideas.
But the Commission also found deepseated and persistent imbalances in the current workings of the global economy that are ethically unacceptable and politically unsustainable.
More than one billion people are either unemployed, underemployed, or working poor.
Clearly, globalization’s benefits are out of reach for far too many people.
An alternative exercise would be to make an ethical assessment of the morality or immorality of globalization.
In it, he applies as a criterion the utilitarian principle that it is a moral duty to maximize the happiness and welfare of all human beings and even animal welfare.
Singer sees great benefits to the retreat of the doctrine of state sovereignty and to the advance of the view that the entire world should be the unit of ethical analysis.
This is beneficial, to Singer, because globalization gives all of us great incentives to perform our utilitarian duty toward others.
Under globalization, altruism and concern for others pay dividends, whereas narrow selfish behavior causes the selfish competitor counterproductive harm.
He concedes a few points to globalization's critics but, wielding logic and fact, demolishes most of the allegations made against it.
To the claim that globalization increases poverty, Bhagwati's response is, rubbish.
Interdependence and Future International Politics The age of globalization has far-reaching implications for humanity.
Refuguess, Asylum-Seekers, Returnees, Internally Displaced and Stateless Persons.
The only society that works today is also one founded on mutual respect, on a recognition that we have a responsibility collectively and individually, to help each other on the basis of each other’s equal worth.
Shown here are women protesting in Kabul, Afghanistan, in April 2009 to demand the repeal of a law that authorizes a range of extreme restrictions on human rights, including marital rape.
From living in conditions of squalor and poverty to being victimized by raping and pillaging by paramilitary forces, you are stunned and sickened at the trials and tribulations that many of those less fortunate than you must endure.
Like most people with a heart and interest in making the world a better place, you hope for a better future for all of humanity.
The opportunities and choices that are most basic to freedom from fear and poverty are unavailable for most people in the Global South’s poorest countries.
They experience much slower rates of development and less human security than in the Global North, and the prospects of the “have-nots” are not improving.
Given the serious deprivations facing so many people, there are many reasons for humanitarian concern.
The denial to most humans of the inalienable rights to which all humans are presumably entitled—the “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness ” of which the United States Declaration of Independence speaks — attests to the extent to which fundamental human security is not being met.
This problem prompted Mary Robinson, the former UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, to “call on global actors—corporations, governments and the international financial organizations—to join with globalized civil society and share responsibility for humanizing globalization.” human security a measure popular in liberal theory of the degree to which the welfare of individuals is protected and promoted, in contrast to realist theory's emphasis on putting the state’s interests in military and national security ahead of all other goals.
PUTTING PEOPLE INTO THE PICTURE Until relatively recently in the unfolding evolution of the theoretical study of world politics, the needs of the faceless billions of everyday people were neglected.
That past theoretical legacy, in this tradition, pictured the mass of humanity as marginalized victims or left them invisible by painting their fates as controlled by forces over which hapless people have little influence.
A consensus now supports the view that people are important, that they have worth, and, therefore, that ethics and morality belong in the study of international relations.
These principles apply to interstate relations, and they are at the heart of analyses of human security in world politics.
That consensus notwithstanding, many observers embrace the traditional assumption of realism that vast global forces make people powerless.
Realists recognize that people participate politically but claim they have no real power because an invisible set of powerful forces described as the “system” gives most human beings only superficial involvement without real influence. agency the capacity of actors to harness power to achieve objectives.
This denial of the importance and influence of individual human agency seems increasingly strange, because classic thinking about the world has long concentrated on people and on the essential character of human nature.
A humanistic interpretation is needed that gives people status and value.
A normative consensus has grown about the inherent moral worth and status of humans and the concomitant obligation of states to recognize and protect that status . human rights the political rights and civil liberties recognized by the international community as inalienable and valid for individuals in all countries by virtue of their humanity.
If you, as a student of international affairs, are to develop a more complete comprehension of the forces behind the prevailing trends in world politics, it is important to consider the conditions faced by humanity.
This chapter introduces information about the human condition to enable you to evaluate the unfolding debate about the role of humans as actors on the global stage, the prospect for human development, and the ethics of human rights.
Together, these five countries are responsible for 93 percent of all executions carried out in 2008.
These countries provide the greatest challenge towards global abolition of the death penalty” (Amnesty International 2009). conception of human nature, it ignores the role of leaders and the nongovernmental organizations that people form.
Liberals attach more importance to humans, following the ethical precept of German philosopher Immanuel Kant that people should be treated as ends and not means, and that therefore human rights and human dignity should be safeguarded.
THE HUMAN CONDITION TODAY “Man is born free, and everywhere he is in chains,” political philosopher Jean Jacques Rousseau bemoaned in his famous 1762 book.
But in many respects Rousseau’s characterization of the human condition remains accurate.
The inequalities and disparities evident in people’s standards of living cannot help but to evoke sympathy for the difficult conditions faced by many people, especially for those in the less developed Global South countries.
One American graduate student, when working on his Ph.D., painfully learned about the plight of people in the Global South during his field research in South America.
Brian Wallace found a reality far different from his own experience of growing up in the southern United States.
When I left . . . for Colombia , I fully expected Bogota to be like any large United States city, only with citizens who spoke Spanish.
As a personal experience this shock was occasionally funny and sometimes sad.
But after all the laughing and the crying were over, it forced me to reevaluate both my life and the society in which I live.
It has a per capita GNP of $550 and a very unequal distribution of income.
But to “know” these things intellectually is much different from experiencing firsthand how they affect people’s lives.
It is one thing to lecture in air conditioned classrooms about the problems of world poverty.
It is quite another to see four-year-old children begging or sleeping in the streets.
What this means in human terms is children with dirty faces who beg for bread money or turn into pickpockets because the principle of private property gets blurred by empty stomachs.
It means other children whose minds and bodies will never develop fully because they were malnourished as infants.
It means street vendors who sell candy and cigarettes 14 hours a day in order to feed their families.
It also means well-dressed businessmen and petty bureaucrats who indifferently pass this poverty every day as they seek asylum in their fortified houses to the north of the city.
It means rich people who prefer not to see the poor, except for maids and security guards.
It means foreigners like me who come to Colombia and spend more in one month than the average Colombian earns in a year.
Somewhere within the polemics of the politicians and the “objectivity” of the social scientists, the human being has been lost.
Income inequality is a serious global problem from which many other difficulties and disputes result.
And that problem is entrenched; Consumption patterns show that the division between the rich and the poor is growing.
Only about one-fifth of the globe’s wealthiest people consume anywhere from two-thirds to nine-tenths of its resources.
Another fifth of humanity survive on less than $1 a day and live in countries where children die for want of a simple anti-mosquito bed net,” according to the United Nations Development Programme.
WHERE POVERTY PREVAILS IN THE WORLD; THE SHARE OF PEOPLE LIVING ON LESS THAN $1.25 A DAY As this map shows, hillions of people in a wide range of countries are struggling to exist under conditions of extreme poverty.
The most people living in extreme poverty are in Asia, hut Africa has the iargest number of high-poverty countries.
For some segments of humanity things have improved; “On average, people in developing countries are healthier, better educated, and less impoverished—and they are more likely to live in a multiparty democracy.
Since 1990 life expectancy in developing countries has increased by 4 years.
Much evidence captures the extreme suffering of people in many parts of the world, but especially in the low-income countries of the Global South where life has changed little from that of their ancestors.
For example, life expectancy in the Global South averages sixty-three years, whereas in the Global North it is seventy-six years.
To make the promotion of human development a global priority, a precise measure of human welfare is needed.
This theory, advanced by Global South leaders, attributed persistent poverty to exploitation caused by dependent relationships of the less developed countries with the wealthy Global North.
Advocates of a basic human needs perspective sought new ways to measure development beyond those focusing exclusively on economic indicators such as the average income for each person in each country.
In 1990, Mahbud ul Haq, a famous social scientist, constructed for the United Nations Development Programme a Human Development Index to measure states’ comparative ability to provide for their citizens’ well-being.
Successive Human Development Reports have provoked fresh debate about the meaning of human development in international forums such as the World Summit for Social Development.
The HDI, as the UNDP most recently defines it, seeks to capture as many aspects of human development as possible in one simple, composite index and human needs those basic physical, social, and political needs, such as food and freedom, that are required for survival and security.
Human Development Index an index that uses life expectancy, literacy, average number of years of schooling, and income to assess a country's performance in providing for its people’s welfare and security.
Although no multiple-indicator index can perfectly monitor progress in human development, the HDI comes close as an estimating procedure.
It measures three dimensions of human welfare—living a long and healthy life, being educated, and having a decent standard of living.
The HDI is a more comprehensive measure than per capita income and has the advantage of directing attention from material possessions toward human needs.
Thus, by focusing on aspects of human welfare beyond average income for each person—by treating income as a proxy for a decent standard of living—the HDI provides a more complete picture of human life than income does.
By this measure, the evidence provides a basic profile of the extent to which humanitarian aspirations are succeeding and failing.
The HDI value for a country shows the distance that it has already traveled toward the maximum possible value of 1 and allows for comparison with other countries.
The difference between the value achieved by a country and the maximum possible value shows how far it has to go, and the challenge for every country is to find ways to reduce that discrepancy.
These indicators show that consumption is not the same as human welfare and that economic growth does not automatically produce human development.
The HDI can give a more complete picture of the state of a country’s development than can income alone highlight the importance of policies that translate wealth into human development.
However, a problem with the HDI is that “it does not include measures of the other aspects of human development such as leisure, security, justice, freedom, human rights, and self respect.
It would be possible to register a high HDI in a zoo or even in a well-run prison.
And, although at low incomes illness often leads to death, the HDI has no independent indicator of morbidity, the absence of which is surely one of the most basic needs.
When using the Human Development Index to measure the human welfare and development of people within various populations, notice how countries can rank somewhat differently than when using an aggregate measure such as the gross domestic product per capita.
At PPP exchange rates of human well-being across the globe, there are many important aspects of human security and human rights that it does not assess.
However, critics of globalization complain that it is the culprit—that relative deprivation is caused by globalization, not cured by it.
They see globalization as a part of the problem of human suffering, not the solution.
Capital may flow more freely around the world, but it flows most slowly to the places and people where it is most scarce.
To their constructed image of the consequences of cascading globalization, a more global economy increases inequality in some countries, particularly in the marginalized periphery of the Global South.
Critics decry the “human harms” wrought by globalization, arguing that “nothing is more certain than the inequality and exploitation generated by a totally free market.
Although progress in human development has occurred and will likely persist, so will trends toward declining human welfare, making the twenty-first century appear to be both the best of times and the worst of times.
Thus, the future of world politics will be not only a struggle between the Global North and the Global South but also a contest between those who hopelessly expect continuing human poverty and those who envision possible further progress in human development.
Yet, where human development has expanded, one factor stands out—the degree to which countries rule themselves democratically and protect citizens’ civil liberties.
Where democracy thrives, human development and human rights also tend to thrive.
THE MAP OF HUMAN DEVELOPMENT This map measures the level of human development in the countries of the world, using the HDI scale.
Although the Global East and some Global South countries have made big gains in the past quarter-century , a gap in people’s quality of life and in their levels of human development is apparent and parallels to some degree the gap between the Global North and the Global South. countries, or less than half of the countries in the world , were “free,” providing their citizens with a broad range of civil liberties in their political, civic, educational, cultural, ethnic, economic, and religious rights.
Now compare the location where people benefit from such freedom with Map 15.2, which shows the various levels of human development in countries across the globe.
But in autocratic governments not ruled by the will of the people, human development fails to occur and human rights are denied.
But the exceptions demonstrate the general rule that how countries organize themselves for governance, and their protection of the civil rights and political liberties of their populations, makes a crucial difference in achieving levels of human development.
Some question the “trickle-down” hypothesis (that if the rich first get richer eventually the benefits will trickle down to help the poor) while accepting the evidence that meeting basic human needs promotes long-term economic growth.
Others maintain that redistributive policies to enhance human welfare and growth-oriented policies focusing on “trickle-down” benefits function at crosspurposes because the latter can only be attained at the expense of the former.
Many now recommend fostering human development through a “Third Way” strategy that combines the efficiency of a free-enterprise capitalistic market with the compassion of governmental economic planning and regulation in an effort, through a fused administrative system, to cooperatively produce the greatest good for the greatest number.
Proponents agree that this mixed approach would enable a free market to generate rapid growth while providing a safety net for those most in need of assistance, and this formula is the best solution for engineering economic growth with a moral human purpose.
In the idea that those who suffer “no grievance or injury” have the obligation to speak up for those who have suffered them lies the birth of the vision that human rights are universal. —Adam Hoschschild, humanitarian historian internationally Recognized Human Rights The body of legal rules and norms designed to protect individual human beings is anchored in the ethical requirement that every person should be treated with equal concern and respect.
As the most authoritative statement of these norms, the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights “establishes a broad range of civil and political rights, including freedom of assembly, freedom of thought and expression, and the right to participate in government.
The declaration also proclaims that social and economic rights are indispensable, including the right to education, the right to work, and the right to participate in the cultural life of the community.
These rights have since been codified and extended in a series of treaties, most notably in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights.
Although the multilateral treaties enumerating these rights are legally binding on the states ratifying them, many have either not ratified them or done so with significant reservations.
When states specify reservations, they are expressing agreement with the broad declarations of principle contained in these treaties while indicating that they object to certain specific provisions and elect not to be bound by them.
The United States, for example, ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights with reservations in 1992, but it has not ratified the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights.
As this example illustrates, countries who agree with the general principle that all human beings possess certain rights that cannot be withheld may still disagree on the scope of these rights.
Thus, some emphasize rights associated with the rule of law and political rights, whereas others stress the importance of economic and social rights.
Unfortunately, not everyone enjoys the human rights recognized by international law.
Three groups for whom respect for human rights remains particularly problematic are indigenous peoples, women, and children.
The UN Human Rights Commission holds annual sessions that deal with accusations that some UN members are violating human rights treaties.
Stipulated in Islam’s holy book, the Quran, caning is practiced in some Islamic countries.
As you learned in the Chapter 5 introduction to nonstate actors, indigenous peoples are representative of one type of ethnic and cultural group that were once native to a geographic location.
In most cases indigenous peoples were at one time politically sovereign and economically self-sufficient.
This photo depicts the resuits of one such bloodbath, where as many as 800,000 Tutsis died.
Many indigenous peoples feel persecuted because their livelihoods, lands, and cultures are threatened.
The mass killing of Armenians by Turks, of Jews by Hitler, of Cambodians by the Khmer Rouge, and of the Tutsi of Rwanda by the Hutu exemplify the atrocities committed during the twentieth century.
International Law and Organization: Indigenous Peoples Responding to the tragedy of the Nazi holocaust, Polish jurist Raphael Lemkin coined the word genocide from the Greek word genos and the Latin caedere , and called for it to be singled out as the gravest violation of human rights, a heinous crime the international community would be morally responsible for punishing.
The members of many such nonstate nations are divided about objectives, and militants who are prepared to fight for independence are usually in a minority.
In fact, most indigenous movements only seek a greater voice in redirecting the policies and allocation of resources within existing states and are eliciting the support of NGOs and IGOs to pressure states to recognize their claims and protect their rights.
A substantial number of indigenous movements in the last decade have successfully negotiated settlements resulting in devolution —the granting of regional political power to increase local self-governance.
Examples include the Miskitos in Nicaragua, the Gagauz in Moldova, and most regional separatists in Ethiopia and in India’s Assam region.
Yet, as suggested by the continuing hostilities between the Chechens and the Russian Eederation, resolving clashes between aspiring peoples and established states can be extremely difficult.
The goal expressed in the UN Charter of promoting “universal respect for, and observance of, human rights and fundamental freedoms” for everyone is a challenge for many nationally diverse countries.
The division of these states along ethnic and cultural lines makes them inherently fragile.
Although interethnic competition is a phenomenon that dates back to biblical times, it remains a contemporary plague.
Some analysts predict that conflict within and between ethnically divided states will become a major axis on which twenty-firstcentury world politics revolves.
Efforts to toughen domestic refugee legislation and criteria for granting asylum raise important ethical issues.
The policy proposals crafted to address these questions may involve controversial trade-offs, and point to the difficulties in responding to the global refugee crisis in particular , and human rights abuse in general.
Some see it primarily in military terms, others in human welfare terms.
Underlying the disagreement is a different conception of what is most important on the global agenda.
One tradition gives states first priority and assumes that protecting their territorial integrity must be foremost in the minds of national leaders.
Others challenge this conception and give primacy to the security of individual people, arguing that social and environmental protection must therefore be seen as a global priority.
In considering this question, take into consideration the traditional realist view that national security is essentially the freedom from fear of attack by another country or nonstate terrorists.
Realists maintain that armed aggression is a paramount security priority and that preparing for war to prevent war is each state’s supreme imperative overriding any other security concerns.
Therefore “security” must be defined primarily in terms of each country’s capacity to resist armed threats to survival and national values by either foreign enemies or insurgents at home.
This definition puts the protection of entire states’ interests above those of individual people.
In contrast, “human security” has risen as a recent concept that focuses on protecting individuals from a/rythreat.
The Human Security Centre elaborates this new conception that derives from liberal thought, explaining that “secure states do not automatically mean secure peoples.
Protecting citizens from foreign attack may be a necessary condition for the security of individuals, but it is not a sufficient one.
Indeed, during the last one hundred years far more people have been killed by their own governments than by foreign armies.
All proponents of human security agree that its primary goal is a protection of individuals.
Gender Empowerment Measure the UN Development Programme’s attempt to measure the extent ot gender equality across the globe’s countries, based on estimates of women’s relative economic income, high-paying positions, and access to professional and parliamentary positions. gender inequalities differences between men and women in opportunity and reward that are determined by the values that guide states’ foreign and domestic policies.
A global consensus emerged about the need to improve the status of women if human rights and development were to progress.
These conferences are signposts that increasingly depict gender equality and empowerment across political, social, and economic arenas as a fundamental right.
Disparities between men and women persist, for example, in literacy rates, school and college enrollments, and targeted educational resources.
Moreover, women enjoy less access to advanced study and training in professional fields, such as science, engineering, law, and business.
In addition, within occupational groups, they are almost always in lessprestigious jobs, they face formidable barriers to political involvement, and they typically receive less pay than men.
Indeed, in most countries, gender inequalities —differences in living standards between men and women—remain widespread both within and across states, despite the measurable improvement in the daily lot and future prospects of millions of women during the past several decades.
In many developing countries women are a large part of agricultural employment, often as unpaid family workers.
Women are also greatly underrepresented in policy-making positions within government, even in democracies and developed countries.
As the first female Chancellor of Germany , Angela Merkel is one of the most powerful women in the world.
GENDER POLITICS Spain’s Cabinet has more women than men—including Defense Minister Carme Chacon.
Yet there are signs that a transformation is under way, and that an encouraging trend of greater female participation in politics is spreading across many countries.
Further gender differences continue at the most basic levels of human development, and it is easy to conclude that women remain victims of human rights abuse and discrimination nearly everywhere.
Gender myopia, denying the existence of the many barriers that prevent women equal freedoms and privileges enjoyed by men, is pervasive.
Indeed, it was not until 2001 that “sexual enslavement” was established at The Hague as a war crime, a fact that feminists point out as an example of the traditional disregard for women’s human rights.
And blatant disregard for the individual sexual and reproductive rights of women continues today, as reflected in current-day Afghanistan.
Though the language of the law supported by Afghan President Hamid Karzai in April 2009 was toned down in the face of international opposition, in August later that year a similar law was quietly passed that permitted men to deny their wives food and sustenance if they did not obey their husbands’ sexual demands, gave guardianship of children to the fathers and grandfathers, required permission from the husband for a woman to work, and allowed a rapist to avoid prosecution by paying “blood money” to the victim.
Protecting women’s rights is difficult because the issues touch deeply entrenched, as well as widely divergent, religious and cultural beliefs.
In many Islamic countries, for example, women must hide their faces with veils in public, and women and men are often completely separated in social and religious activities.
For many in liberal Western countries focused on social, political, and economic equality of the sexes, these traditions are difficult to understand.
Once this concept gained acceptance as a lens through which to construct a view of the core issues on the global agenda, gender issues became a central concern.
Slavery and Human Trafficking A human rights horror to which women, as well as children, are particularly vulnerable is human trafficking.
While many people assume that slavery is an obsolescent practice, the reality is that trade in humans bought, sold, or forced into a miserable life of subjugation and servitude is huge.
Slavery and the global slave trade continue to thrive to this day; in fact, it is likely that more people are being trafficked across borders against their will now than at any point in the past.
This human stain is not just a minor blot on the rich tapestry of international commerce.
It is a product of the same political, technological, and economic forces that have fueled globalization.
Just as the brutal facts of the Atlantic slave trade ultimately led to a reexamination of United States history—^ United States historiography until the 1960s had been largely celebratory—so must growing awareness of the modern slave trade spark a recognition of the flaws in our contemporary economic and governmental arrangements.
The current system offers too many incentives to criminals and outlaw states to market humans and promises too little in the way of sanctions.
The growing slave trade crisscrosses the entire globe; according to the United States Agency for International Development, 700,000 to 4 million people are bought and sold each year as sex slaves, prostitutes, domestic workers, child laborers, and child soldiers.
The UN has found that the leading form of human trafficking, at 79 percent, is sexual exploitation.
Most of the victims are women and girls—though somewhat surprisingly, in 30 percent of the countries that reported the gender of the perpetrators, the human traffickers were female.
The second leading form of human trafficking is forced labor , and about one in five victims are children.
While many victims of human trafficking are moved across continents, intraregional and domestic trafficking is far more common.
Human trafficking is a lucrative criminal activity that generates between $12 and $17 billion annually.
MODERN-DAY SLAVERY “More must be done to reduce the vulnerability of victims, increase the risks to traffickers, and lower demand for the goods and services of modern-day slaves” says Antonio Maria Costa, Executive Director of the UN Office on Drugs and Crime.
Shown on the left is a seventeen year old sex worker in Bangladesh after her service with a customer.
She ran away from home to escape marriage at the age of fifteen, and sought work at a factory where she was deceived and sold to a brothel.
Pictured on the right is actress Mira Sorvino who, in an effort to increase public awareness of human trafficking and generate greater commitment to combating the problem, was appointed by the United Nations as a Goodwill Ambassador to Combat Human Trafficking.
They face horrific neglect and abuse, as evident in their suffering from unmitigated hunger and illness, being forced into slavery for labor or sexual exploitation, and conscription as child soldiers.
Children are tortured and mistreated by state officials; they are arbitrarily or lawfully detained, often in appalling conditions; in some countries they are subjected to the death penalty.
Countless thousands are killed or maimed in armed conflicts, many more have fled their homes to become refugees.
Children forced by poverty or abuse to live on the streets are sometimes detained, attacked and even killed in the name of social cleansing.
Many millions of children work at exploitative or hazardous jobs, or are the victims of child trafficking and forced prostitution.
They are often plagued by corruption, ineffectively police their territory, and are unable to provide basic services.
To bring about a transformation in the human condition, UNICEF contends that “improvements in public health services are essential, including safe water and better sanitation.
Education, especially for girls and mothers, will also save children’s lives.
Though child mortality has declined in every region of the world since 1960, almost 10 million children every year still do not live to see their fifth birthday.
Poor human rights conditions are exacerbated in countries where there is armed conflict.
Not only are children often orphaned or separated from their family and left without food or care, but many are direct participants in war.
In 2009, the United Nations identified fifty-six governments and armed groups from fourteen countries where children are being recruited and used as child soldiers in violation of international law.
Because children are smaller than adults and more easily intimidated, they typically make obedient soldiers.
Some are abducted from their homes, others fight under threat of death, and others join out of desperation or a desire to avenge the death of family members.
In the past decade alone, an estimated 2 million children have been killed in armed conflict.
Three times as many have been seriously injured or permanently disabled.
Countless others have been forced to witness or even to take part in horrifying acts of violence.
HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS Pictured is a young girl whose impoverished family gave her away in marriage, a fate that befalls girls as young as eight in Yemen, where an average marriage age in rural areas is twelve to thirteen years old.
On the right, a starving farmer in Afghanistan, Akhtar Mohammed, watches his ten-year-old son, Sher, whom he traded to a wealthy farmer in exchange for a monthly supply of wheat.
Yet, today there are more slaves than at any time in human history” , and children are frequent victims.
In order to confront the problem of child soldiers, “their legal protection is essential.
On August 4,2009, the UN Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution that expands the Secretary-General’s annual report on grave violations of children by groups involved in armed conflict to include the names of groups that kill or maim children contrary to international law, or perpetrate grave sexual violence against children in wartime.
The treatment of children has traditionally been seen as a “private” issue of family life that is firmly rooted in cultural values and traditions.
Nonetheless, as innocents in our global society, many believe that security and sustenance are basic human rights to which children are entitled, and that the international community must assist in the protection of these human rights.
These sentiments were embraced by the Convention on the Rights of the Child , which the United Nations adopted on November 20,1989.
Emphasizing an entitlement to human dignity and harmonious development, and ratified by all of the UN member states except the United States and Somalia, this treaty is widely seen as a landmark victory for human rights.
As the human rights NGO Amnesty International enthusiastically proclaimed.
RESPONDING TO HUMAN RIGHTS ABUSES There are at least three arguments that oppose the promotion and enforcement of human rights by the global community.
Statists or legalists reject human rights promotion in target states because it represents an unwarranted intrusion into the domestic affairs of others and an infringement upon the principle of state sovereignty.
As constructivists tell us, the evolution of global values can have a powerful impact on international behavior.
The most common manifestation of this trend is the expansion in recent years of laws that regulate the practices that sovereign states may use.
Moreover, international law has fundamentally revised the traditional realist protection of the state by redefining the relationship of states to humans.
If you are neutral in a situation of injustice, you have chosen the side of the oppressor. —Archbishop Desmund Tutu, Nobel Prize winner The Human Rights Legal Framework The global community has expanded its legal protection of human rights significantly over the past sixty years.
Multilateral treaties have proliferated as part of a global effort to construct consensus on the rights of humanity and to put an end to human rights abuse.
A large number of conventions have been enacted that have steadily endowed individuals with rights—asserting that people must be treated as worthy of the freedom and dignity traditionally granted by international law to states and rulers.
Moreover, from the perspective of international law, a state is obligated to respect the human rights of its own citizens as well as those of another country, and the international community has the prerogative to challenge any state that does not do so.
Additionally, there are hundreds of legal instruments and political declarations across a wide array of human rights issues, many of which have been accepted by most states.
They provide specific standards for human rights protection for vulnerable groups such as women, children, migrant workers, and disabled persons and for collective rights for minorities and indigenous groups.
The United Nations and its members have been a driving force behind the development of a global human rights legal system.
The International Labor Organization and regional organizations such as the African Union, the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, and the European Court of Human Rights have established human rights protections as well.
The Challenge of Enforcement Once the content of human rights obligations was enumerated in multilateral treaties, international attention shifted to monitoring their implementation and addressing violations.
There are some countries that endorse human rights treaties as merely a superficial symbolic commitment and continue to repress human rights.
Moreover, full agreement has yet to be reached on the extent to which the international community has a responsibility to intervene in order to enforce human rights.
As the International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty noted in its report.
While expanding global norms that elevate human security do much to advance the cause of human rights, critical policy questions remain about what steps can and should be taken to safeguard these rights.
The issue is not whether there exists a compelling need and moral obligation to express concerns about populations at risk of slaughter, starvation, or persecution; the issue is about humanitarian intervention the use of peacekeeping troops by foreign states or international organizations to protect endangered people from gross violations of their human rights and from mass murder.
You find yourself unjustly imprisoned on accusations that you were transporting illegal drugs, spying for your government, trafficking in the practice and sale of children tor prostitution, you name it.
To make matters incredibly worse, you discover that the jail in which you are incarcerated is full of thousands of political prisoners held, and abused, by their guards, who are employed by a military dictatorship that claims the sovereign right to treat all accused lawbreakers any way they want.
Never in the authorities’ explanation is mention made of human rights, such as trial by a jury of peers and prohibition against the cruel punishment of prisoners.
Power was monopolized by state governments, which could do anything and everything to protect and promote their self-interests by preempting potential threats to their self-preservation.
That code of conduct, enshrined in the 1648 Westphalian treaties drafted by realists, proclaimed that state authority was sacrosanct and that people and their human rights were subservient.
For the state and its rulers, anything goes toward subjects within a sovereign country’s territory.
Now protecting human rights in foreign states has become legal for the first time under international law.
An ideology that helps to protect your human rights also undermines the national interests of sovereign states.
The United States initially claimed a right to indefinitely detain “enemy combatants"" on the grounds of “necessity"" in times of warfare—this time against faceless terrorists—^though the United States Supreme Court later ruled in 2008 that detainees had a constitutional right to challenge their detention in federal court.
As you contemplate this hypothetical controversy, keep in mind many countries’ entrenched defense of the traditional right of their state to be protected against foreign intervention—even for humanitarian purposes.
Many states, especially the weak and relatively defenseless governments in the Global South, vigorously resist humanitarian interference within their borders and maintain that their resistance to a norm of humanitarian intervention is legal.
Even China and the United States oppose the idea that other actors in the global community might claim the right to intervene to protect human rights within their sovereign territory.
Humanitarian intervention is controversial because it pits the legal principle of territorial sovereignty against what some see as a moral duty to protect vulnerable populations from egregious violations of human rights.
While the construction of global human rights norms has made great strides over the past sixty years, the enforcement of human rights laws has lagged.
The HRC is a relatively new intergovernmental organization, having been created by the UN General Assembly on March 15,2006, for the purpose of evaluating situations of human rights abuse and making recommendations about them.
At that time, the United States, the Marshall Islands, and Palau voted against the resolution; Iran, Venezuela, and Belarus did not vote.
There were concerns that the UNHCR did not have the ability to prevent states with poor human rights records from membership on the Council, and that the agency’s mission undermined the principle of nonintervention.
In June 2008, the United States relinquished its observer status and disengaged from the HRC, much to the disappointment and concern of human rights advocates who felt that this greatly diminished the role of the IGO and sent a negative message about the importance of human rights around the world.
Nonetheless, despite the significant efforts to monitor human rights and enforce norms and agreements, the effectiveness of the United Nations and other intergovernmental organizations is constrained, as they can exercise only the authority that member states delegate to them.
In response to these limitations, nongovernmental organizations have assumed an important role in promoting human rights.
These organizations investigate human rights abuses wherever they occur, including in places enduring armed conflict.
Because of their reputation for accuracy, their findings are relied on by the news media, many governments.
While these NGOs hope their reports will bring about a change in the behavior of the government or other entity whose abuses they spotlight, their main targets are the policymakers who are in a more powerful position to put pressure on human rights violators.
With greater openness to institutional activism in the post-Cold War era, human rights activists have pressed to strengthen enforcement mechanisms.
Their efforts account in part for the establishment of UN tribunals to review gross human rights abuse, as in the cases of the former Yugoslavia and Rwanda, and the creation of the International Criminal Court.
While some individuals remain skeptical of claims that we all have transcendent moral obligations to humanity as a whole, others believe that everyone, by virtue of being human, has certain inherent and inalienable rights that warrant international protection.
Human rights buttress political and economic freedom, “which in turn tends to bring international trade and prosperity.
Promoting the rights and dignity of ordinary people around the world is a formidable challenge.
Yet, as global PRINCIPLED SECURITY Shown here are inmates in Iraq's Abu Ghraib prison crying for freedom when dictator Saddam Hussein still ruled.
Because concerns for human rights have gained stature under international law and are being monitored more closely by IGOs and NGOs than ever before, we can expect human rights to receive continuing attention, as long as people are caught in emergency situations such as genocide or the threat of famine.
Eleanor Roosevelt championed the cosmopolitan ideal, and her energetic leadership was largely responsible for global acceptance in 1948 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights.
In the next chapter of World Politics, you will have an opportunity to look at another major issue that entails rights and responsibility to humanity.
As the cascading globalization of our world accelerates, the human choices about our natural environment have consequences for the entire planet and affect the Earth’s capability to sustain human life and security.
Framing the Ecological Debate The Ecopolitics otthe Atmosphere The Ecopolitics ot Biodiversity, Deforestation, and Water Shortages The Ecopolitics ot Energy Supply and Demand TOWARD SUSTAINABILITY AND HUMAN SECURITY The Tragedy ot the Commons Global Solutions National and Local Solutions FEELING THE HEAT The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , composed of six hundred scientists from forty countries, concluded that evidence of the Earth’s rising temperatures was “unequivocal” and that global warming was more than 90 percent likely to be the product of human activity.
As demographic environmentalist Bill McKibbin warns, “We are heating up the planet, substantially.
On whichever side of the environmental debate you fall, there is at least one scholar and several politicians who share your opinion.
These people claim that environmental deterioration and resource depletion have many people needlessly alarmed.
Other scientists are pessimistic and are now certain that the threats are real.
They are themselves alarmed by optimists who fail to face the “clear and present danger” of environmental threats and undertake reforms.
The ecological threats that rivet the worried scientific community were documented in A1 Gore’s famous movie and book on global warming, An Inconvenient Truth, for which he won a 2007 Nobel Peace Prize.
Those frightened climate experts are advocating big changes by governments, and now —before it becomes too late to save the human race from certain doom.
In this chapter, you have the opportunity to sharpen your own thinking by weighing the available evidence about prevailing global trends conditioning the environment shared by all on Earth.
So take a look at various dimensions of the planet’s ecology now in transformation.
Then base your stand on this global issue on information that can better ground your existing opinions, and consider what responsibility humanity has to preserve our global environment.
For them, prices are the key adjustment mechanism that in time produces the greatest good for the greatest number of people.
Neo-Malthusians, on the other hand, share more in common with economic mercantilism, which argues that free markets fail to prevent excessive exploitation of both renewable and nonrenewable resources and that, accordingly, intervention by governing institutions is necessary.
This latter perspective rejects the belief that the free market will always maximize social welfare. cornucopians optimists who question limits-to-growth perspectives and contend that markets effectively maintain a balance between population, resources, and the environment.
Cornucopians and neo-Malthusians paint very different pictures of our future, and how we frame our understanding of environmental challenges will affect our policy prescriptions.
Whether the world community has the political will and capacity to cope with ecological problems and expand the possibilities for humanity will be critical for human security.
A paradigm, or popular way of organizing thought, about international problems is rising among scholars and policy makers who are now convinced that threats to the preservation of the global commons likewise threaten our basic welfare and security. neo-Malthusians pessimists who warn of the global ecopolltical dangers of uncontrolled population growth.
Framing the Ecological Debate Environmental concerns are linked to other values that states prize, notably, security, economic prosperity, and social well-being.
Because fears of a nuclear holocaust and other forms of violence have long haunted the world, security has been conventionally equated with national security, the struggle for state power central to realist theory and its emphasis on armed aggression.
Environmental security broadens the definition of national security by pushing visions beyond borders and their protection.
It focuses on the transborder character of challenges to preserving the global environment by recognizing that threats such as global warming, ozone depletion, and the loss of tropical forests and marine habitats can threaten the future of humanity as much as the threat of warfare using weapons of mass destruction.
Because environmental degradation undercuts states’ economic well-being and the quality of life of their citizens, liberalism informs current thinking about how states can cooperate with international organizations and nongovernmental organizations to preserve the global environment.
The liberal epistemic community has redefined “security” in order to move beyond realism’s conventional state-centric and militaristic portrayal of international politics. environmental security a concept recognizing that environmental threats to global life systems are as dangerous as the threat of armed conflicts. epistemic community scientific experts on a subject of inquiry such as global warming that are organized internationally as NGOs to communicate with one another and use their constructed understanding of “knowledge” to lobby for global transformations.
This reconstruction is compatible with liberal theory, which emphasizes that security should be defined as the capacity to protect quality of life.
Out of conditions of global poverty and want emerge the so-called politics of scarcity, which anticipates that future international conflict will likely be caused by resource scarcities—restricted access to food, oil, and water, for example—rather than by overt military challenges.
Ecologists—those who study the interrelationships of living organisms and the Earth’s physical environment—use the term the global commons to highlight our growing interdependence, because they see the Earth as a common environment made up of the totality of organisms.
In a world where everything affects everything else, the fate of the global commons is the fate of humanity.
The planet’s carrying capacity —the Earth’s ability to support and sustain life—is at the center of discussion about the future of the global commons.
Throughout history, humans have lived on the Earth’s sustainable yield— the interest from its natural endowment.
In ecology, as in economics, we can consume principal along with interest in the short run, but, for the long term, that practice leads to bankruptcy.
The pessimists sounding the alarm about the signs of ecological deterioration, and the optimists confidently extolling the virtues of free markets and technological innovation in saving the planet, portray very different visions of the global future.
Sustainable development is now popularly perceived as an alternative to the quest for unrestrained growth.
The movement began in earnest in 1972, when the UN General Assembly convened the first UN Conference of the Human Environment in Stockholm.
Since then, conferences on a wide range of environmental topics have produced scores of treaties and new international agencies to promote cooperation and monitor environmental developments.
You do not have to go tar to learn about the impact of the global food crisis.
Globally, increased food prices have created a good deal of civil unrest as well as a wave of humanitarian crises in the developing world.
Between 2007 and 2009, at least thirty countries had food riots—such as the “tortilla riots” in Mexico and the “pasta riots” in Italy.
Examining some of the major factors that are pushing us into this “danger zone” provides insight into the interconnected nature of global threats, the trade-offs inherent in trying to provide for human needs, as well as the ways in which the policies of individual governments and international organizations can influence the international system as a whole.
One of the primary effects of climate change is an increase in “extreme weather” events, and such events have had a key role in damaging agricultural production.
For example, droughts in Australia cut its wheat production in half, while flooding in Ecuador played a key role in the recent rise of banana prices.
As noted in Chapter 13, governments have traditionally protected their agricultural markets through subsidies and tariffs, which have served to increase the price of many agricultural goods.
Moreover, recent food shortages have resulted in a proliferation of another form of government intervention— limits on the export of agricultural products such as wheat and rice.
These bans serve to decrease the world supply of these goods, which thus increases prices.
Along these lines, government encouragement of biofuel production has had an impact upon food prices.
In emerging markets, such as China, India, Russia, and Brazil, people have changed their eating habits as their countries have developed.
In particular, these countries have greatly increased their consumption ot meat and dairy products.
The food crisis is thus at the “crossroads"" of many international phenomena and raises many fundamental issues about the international system.
An immediate issue ot concern is whether the food crisis will continue into the future.
Unfortunately, many of the causes of the food crisis are the result of structural changes that are quite averse to change in the short term.
Most every international organization has begun to articulate some type of response, though maintaining the political will to enact fundamental changes is always difficult.
Developed countries, for example, are very resistant to reducing agricultural subsidies.
Moreover, some ot the suggested solutions, such as the increased use of genetic engineering and transgenetic crops and livestock, are quite controversial and not supported by a variety of countries and NGOs.
The dominant cornucopian social paradigm stressing the right to conspicuous consumption is under global attack, but many challenges remain to achieving sustainable development worldwide.
The commission concluded that the world cannot sustain the growth required to meet the needs and aspirations of the world’s growing population unless it adopts radically different approaches to basic issues of economic expansion, equity, resource management, energy efficiency, and the like.
Another milestone in the challenge to the then-dominant cornucopian social paradigm occurred at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on the twentieth anniversary of the Stockholm conference.
Before the Earth Summit, the environment and economic genetic engineering research geared to discover seeds for new types of plant and human life for sale and use as substitutes for those produced naturally. transgenetic crops new crops with improved characteristics created artificially through genetic engineering that combine genes from species that would not naturally interbreed.
ENVIRONMENTAL THREATS ON A PLANETARY SCALE When United States astronauts first viewed Earth from the Apollo spacecraft, they told millions of listeners about the “hig blue marble” planet they saw and how the clouds and continents flowed into one another without regard to the political boundaries humans had imposed on a pristine planet.
However, the improvement in space technology since the 1990s also allows the world to see uncomfortable images—of atmospheric poisons that encircle the globe, of violent winter and summer storms pounding islands and continents with relentless fury, of massive holes in the ozone shield that protects humans from dangerous ultraviolet rays, of vanishing forests and widening deserts.
Taken from a NASA global satellite surveillance system, this photo shows how the integrated and globalized borderless planet shares a single interconnected ecology.
In Rio, the concept of sustainability galvanized a simultaneous treatment of environmental and development issues.
Other international conferences have since punctuated the strong consensus behind the proposition that all politics—even global politics—are local, that what happens any place ultimately affects conditions every place, and accordingly that the protection of Earth’s environment is a primary international security issue.
To make a prediction, the next step is for you to characterize and estimate the nature and magnitude of environmental threats and challenges.
The clusters illustrate some of the obstacles to the sustainable development of common properties and renewable resources.
The Ecopolitics of the Atmosphere The scores of government negotiators and nongovernmental representatives who converged on Rio de Janeiro in 1992 came in the wake of the hottest decade on record.
For years, scientists had warned that global warming—the gradual rise in world temperature—would cause destructive changes in world climatological patterns and that rising sea levels, melting glaciers, and freak storms would provoke widespread changes in the globe’s political and economic systems and relationships.
Perhaps because they had been burned by the chronic heat wave throughout the 1980s, negotiators agreed at Rio to a Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Since then, fears have increased in conjunction with the continuing rise of planetary temperatures.
In response to the series of record-setting global temperatures in the twenty-first century, attention to the pollutants blamed for global warming has risen.
The gas molecules, primarily carbon dioxide and chlorofluorocarbons , form the equivalent of a greenhouse roof by trapping heat remitted from Earth that would otherwise escape into outer space.
Since 1950, the emissions of carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels have climbed steadily and risen fourfold.
As these gases are released into the atmosphere, they have created a greenhouse effect, which has caused global temperatures to rise.
That rate of increase would be much larger than most past rates of increase,” meaning that the warming trend is accelerating . greenhouse effect the phenomenon producing planetary warming when gases released by burning fossil fuels act as a blanket in the atmosphere, thereby increasing temperatures.
RISING AVERAGE GLOBAL TEMPERATURES AT THE EARTH’S SURFACE SINCE 1867 The World Meteorological Organization monitors average global surface temperatures at thousands of sites around the world.
However, since the mid-1970s the mercury has been rising, and the 1996-2009 period has been the warmest since reliable measurements began.
The UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts that, depending on greenhouse-gas emissions, global temperature will probably rise about 2 to 12 degrees Fahrenheit by 2100, with longer and more intense heat waves.
NASA makes a similar forecast, anticipating that temperature may increase by 2. to 10. degrees Fahrenheit within that time span.
Although CO^ is the principal greenhouse gas, concentrations of methane in the atmosphere are growing more rapidly.
Methane gas emissions arise from livestock populations, rice cultivation, and the production and transportation of natural gas.
To the alarm of many scientists, the largest concentrations of methane are not in the atmosphere but locked in ice, permafrost, and coastal marine sediments.
This raises the probability that warming will cause more methane to be released into the atmosphere, which would then increase global temperatures because of methane’s strong warming potential.
Some scientists insist that the rise in global temperature is only part of a cyclical change the world has experienced for thousands of years.
They are able to cite evidence of “sudden and dramatic temperature swings over the past 400,000 years, from warm climates to ice ages. global warming skeptics say the climate changes we’re seeing today reflect these natural variations” , and that cold water needs to be poured on all the “hot air” because global warming is a climate myth.
The UN team of hundreds of atmospheric scientists from around the world known as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change first conclusively stated in 1995 its belief that global climate trends are “unlikely to be entirely due to natural causes,” that humans are to blame for at least part of the problem, and that the consequences are likely to be very harmful and costly.
Even at the lower end of the panel’s estimates, the rise would be faster than any experienced in recorded human history.
According to the IPCC, global warming is not coming, it’s here, and it has led to a rising number of natural disasters.
The IPCC warns that the effects of continued rising temperatures will be both dramatic and devastating; ■ Sea levels will rise, mostly because of melting glaciers and the expansion of water as it warms up.
This will produce massive floods of vast areas of low-lying coastal lands, especially in Asia and the United States Atlantic coast.
Millions of people are likely to be displaced by major floods each year.
Indeed, the Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Disasters predicts that approximately 5,150 natural disasters will occur in the period between 2000 and 2010.
According to the insurance firm Swiss Re, in 2008 alone more than 240,000 people lost their lives due to natural and man-made catastrophes, with a total cost of damages at $269 billion.
Shown is the destruction caused in September 2009 by flooding in the Philippines that followed a deadly tropical storm.
Also shown is the damage caused in April 2009 by a massive earthquake in L’Aquila, Italy.
As ocean temperatures continue to rise, hurricanes, which draw their energy from warm oceans, will become increasingly stronger and more frequent.
A hotter Earth will drive some plant life to higher latitudes and altitudes, requiring farmers to change their crops and agricultural practices.
The high-income Global North states contribute more than half of global carbon emissions, in large measure because of their big buildings, millions of cars, and relatively inefficient industries.
However, the Global East dynamos China and India have rapidly increased their emissions as their economies have grown and generated increasing demands for fossil fuel energy.
Some scientists believe that China has already surpassed the United States as the world’s top emitter of greenhouse gases.
The International Energy Agency forecasts that the increase of greenhousegas emissions from 2000 to 2030 from China alone will nearly equal the increase from the entire industrialized world.
Compare the existing and new industrial giants’ consumption of energy and production of greenhouse gases with the low-income Global South countries.
They, too, are growing rapidly , and their appetite for fossil fuel energy sources is growing along with their economic development.
Thus, countries in all regions are contributing, at different rates, to the global trend in the growing level of carbon added to the atmosphere.
Yet, rather than comparing rich and poor countries, an article published in July 2009 in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences suggests that “it is rich people, rather than rich countries, who need to change the most.
While far too difficult to implement, the proposal highlights how the lower level of carbon emissions in the Global South masks the variation within states where the wealthy contribute at a far higher rate to environmental degradation than the poor.
The figure on the left charts the sources of greenhouse-gas emissions by each major sector.
The figure on the right identifies the distribution of carbon-equivalent greenhouse-gas emissions by region from 2001 and projected through the year 2025.
The politics of global warming is dramatically illustrated by the tensions between countries over carving up the Arctic in order to reap economic payoffs from exploitation of the resources that lie beneath the polar icecap.
The disappearing ice also offers the possibility of new sea routes, at least for part of the year, which would significantly reduce the time it takes for ships to travel from Europe to Asia.
As you can see, the Arctic icecap is melting fast and it is “only half the size that it was 50 years ago.
Due to the dramatic potential to transform energy markets and global shipping, and in an effort to prevent global conflict, in 2008 all five countries agreed to allow the United Nations to rule on competing claims for resources.
None of this international friction would have materialized had global warming not made competition for control of this geostrategic arena possible. ozone layer the protective layer of the upper atmosphere over the Earth’s surface that shields the planet from the sun’s harmful impact on living organisms.
Ozone Depletion and Protection The story of climate change is similar to states’ efforts to cope with the depletion of the atmosphere’s protective ozone layer In this case, however, an international regime has emerged, progressively strengthened by mounting scientific evidence that environmental damage is directly caused by human activity.
Ozone is a pollutant in the lower atmosphere, but in the upper atmosphere it provides the Earth with a critical layer of protection against the sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation.
Scientists have discovered a marked depletion of the ozone layer—most notably an “ozone hole” over Antarctica that has grown larger than the continental United States.
They have conclusively linked the thinning of the layer to CFCs—a related family of compounds known as halons, hydrochlorofluorocarbons , methyl bromide, and other chemicals.
Depletion of the ozone layer exposes humans to health hazards of various sorts, particularly skin cancer, and threatens other forms of marine and terrestrial life.
The expansion of the ozone regime was made possible by growing scientific evidence and by having an active NGO epistemic community to actively promote the treaty.
However, in spite of reductions in CFCs over the past twenty years, the ozone hole over Antarctica continues to expand, and depletion of the protective ozone shield is expected to continue before it begins to regenerate itself.
Production of CFCs in the Global North declined sharply in the 1990s as the largest producers of these ozone-damaging products prepared for their complete phase-out.
However, production in the Global South surged, and increased demand for refrigerators, air conditioners, and other products using CFCs offset the gains realized by stopping production in the Global North.
Developed countries agreed to provide aid to help the developing countries adopt CFC alternatives, but they have failed to provide all of the resources promised.
Without this support, many in the Global South may not be able to keep their end of the global bargain.
Meanwhile, a significant illegal trade in both virgin and recycled CFCs has emerged, threatening to further undermine the positive effects of the ozone regime.
The Ecopolitics of Biodiversity, Deforestation, and Water Shortages Success at containing ozone depletion has raised hopes that other environmental threats also can be given higher priority than vested financial interests.
Forests are critical in preserving the Earth’s biodiversity and protecting the atmosphere and land resources.
For these reasons, they have been a rising ecological issue on the global agenda.
Some rules have emerged to guide international behavior in the preservation of biodiversity, but issues concerning forests have proven much more difficult to address. biodiversity the variety of plant and animal species living in the Earth’s diverse ecosystems.
Threats to Global Biodiversity Biodiversity, or biological diversity, is an umbrella term that refers to the Earth’s variety of life.
Until recently, public attention has been focused almost exclusively on preserving species diversity, including old forests, tall grass prairies, wetlands, coastal habitats, and coral reefs.
Forests, especially tropical forests, are important to preserving biodiversity because they are home to countless species of animals and plants, many of them still unknown.
Scientists believe that the global habitat contains between eight and ten million species.
Of these, only about 1. million have been named, and most of them are in the temperate regions of North America, Europe, Russia, and Australia.
Destruction of tropical forests, where two-thirds to three-fourths of all species are believed to live, threatens the destruction of much of the world’s undiscovered biological diversity and genetic heritage.
Many experts worry that the globe is relentlessly heading toward major species extinction.
Of the 242,000 plant species surveyed by the World Conservation Union, some 33,000, or 14 percent, are threatened with extinction, mainly as a result of clearing land for housing, roads, and industries.
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts that global warming increases the risk of extinction for almost 70 percent of species, with Arctic animals such as the polar bear most likely to die out first.
Others doubt the imminence of a massive die-out, estimating that only a small fraction of the Earth’s species have actually disappeared over the past several centuries.
Because so much of the Earth’s biological heritage is concentrated in the tropics, the Global South also has a growing concern about protecting its interests in the face of MNCs’ efforts to reap profits from the sale of biologically based products.
MNCs in the Global North are major players in the socalled enclosure movement geared to privatize and merchandize the products derived from plant and animal genes that are the genetic bases for sustained life.
Pharmaceutical companies in particular have laid claim to Global South resources.
They actively explore plants, microbes, and other living organisms in tropical forests for possible use in prescription drugs.
Concern in the Global South is centered on the claim that the genetic character of the many species of plants and animals should be considered a part of the global commons and therefore available for commercial use by all, for their medical benefit.
Biogenetic engineering threatens to escalate the loss of global diversity.
Biological resources—animal and plant species—are distributed unevenly in the world.
Map 16. shows the major “biodiversity bastions” where more than half the Earth’s species are found in primarily tropical wilderness territories laden with plant and animal species yet covering only 2 percent of the land.
According to the UN, about fifty thousand plant and animal species become extinct each year as the global community wrestles with the ethics of biodiversity preservation and management policies.
Shrinking Forests, Dust Bowls, and Water Shortages Trends since the 1980s point toward considerable deforestation throughout much of the world.
Destruction of tropical rain forests in such places as Brazil, Indonesia, and Malaysia is a matter of special concern because much of the world’s genetic heritage is found there.
The developing countries feared that legally accepting this view would enable the Global North to interfere with the local management of their tropical forest resources.
As Ogar Assam Effa, a tree plantation director in Nigeria, observes, “The developed countries want us to keep the forests, since the air we breathe is for all of us, rich countries and poor countries.
It would be easy to convince people to stop clearing the forest if there was an alternative” . desertification the creation of deserts due to soil erosion, overfarming, and deforestation, which converts cropland to nonproductive, arid sand.
Meanwhile, high population growth rates, industrialization, and urbanization increase pressure to farm forests and marginal land poorly suited to cultivation.
This has led to deforestation and desertification, which turn an increasing portion of the Earth’s landmass into deserts useless for agricultural productivity or wildlife habitats.
There’s water everywhere, of course, but less than three percent of it is fresh, and most of that is locked up in polar ice caps and glaciers, unrecoverable for practical purposes.
Takes, rivers, marshes, aquifers, and atmospheric vapor make up less than one percent of the Earth’s total water, and people are already using more than half of the accessible runoff.
Eurthermore, as countries across the world become more prosperous, their populations tend to shift from vegetarian diets to meaty ones that require more water to produce.
With rising population and consumption, in the absence of serious water-conservation measures and cooperation among mutual water users for watershed preservation, water availability will become an ever-growing resource issue.
Soil erosion and pollution are problems both in densely populated developing countries and in the more highly developed regions of mechanized industrial agriculture.
Map 16. shows the trends across regions where desertification is occurring most rapidly.
This is not the case, however, in many cash-starved Global South countries where the reasons for rapid destruction vary.
South American forests, most notably the Amazon, are generally burned for industrial-scale soybean farming or cattle grazing.
In Southeast Asia, forests are burned or cut for large-scale planting of palm to obtain the oil that is used in a wide array of products, including cosmetics and food processing.
And most recently, deforestation is being spurred by the global demand for biofuels.
In Brazil, deforestation roughly doubled in 2008 alone due in part to the dramatic expansion in agriculture aimed at producing farm-grown fuels.
As John Carter, founder of a nonprofit that promotes sustainable ranching in the Amazonian region, lamented “You can’t protect it.
While biofuels such as ethanol are often touted as being eco-friendly, critics point out that ethanol destroys forests, contributes to global warming, and inflates food prices.
So the natural processes that remove greenhouse gases are destroyed when forests are cut down, and, as the forests decay or are burned, the amount of CO 2 released into the atmosphere increases.
The Amazon rain forest is “an incomparable storehouse of carbon, the very carbon that heats up the planet when it’s released into the atmosphere.
LOSS OF FOREST AND GROUND TO DESERTS This map displays the extent to which certain regions are experiencing desertification or lost, degraded, dry lands as the result of climate change, exploitative agricultural overgrazing, and the lack of conservation efforts.
An abundant supply of oil at low prices facilitated the recovery of Western Europe and Japan from World War II and encouraged consumers to use energy-intensive technologies, such as the private automobile.
An enormous growth in the worldwide demand for and consumption of energy followed.
The International Energy Agency predicts that, even taking into account gains in efficiency (the United States has doubled its energy efficiency since the 1970s), the world will be using 50 percent more oil by 2030.
Oil companies such as Chevron and ExxonMobil continue to be “supermajors” within the oil industry, though others such as Amoco have disappeared.
But traditional MNCs no longer maintain overriding control of the oil industry.
Rather, “much larger state-owned companies, which, along with governments, today control more than 80 percent of the world’s oil reserves.
Moreover, oil has moved from being just a physical commodity to now also being a financial asset, where there has been a massive growth in the number of oil investors and traders.
Old players such as the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries remain, of course.
To maximize profits, OPEC emerged as an important intergovernmental organization.
Because the resources OPEC controls cannot be easily replaced, it has monopoly power.
In March 1999, OPEC began to flex its economic muscles by cutting production to limit supplies.
Oil prices tripled within a year, showing that OPEC could still make oil a critical global political issue—as it has again since 2004 in an effort to use oil prices as an instrument of coercive diplomacy to influence, by the use of threats, the course of the unfolding war on terrorism.
Oil supplies assume great importance in world politics because oil is not being discovered at the same rate it is being used.
Eor every two barrels pumped out of the ground, the giant oil companies discover only one new barrel.
Production in the United States peaked thirty years ago, and that Russia peaked in 1987.
About 70 percent of the oil consumed today was found twenty-five years ago or longer.
This may still be the case, but what we have now witnessed is that the price of oil as a commodity is extremely volatile.
In December 2008, the price of oil had fallen to $32.40 per barrel; on July 11,2009, exactly a year after the peak oil price, the price of oil was as low as $59.87 per barrel.
In October 2009, OPEC announced projections that global demand for oil would increase by almost 1 percent in 2010 due to anticipated improvements in the global economy.
What strikes fear in the minds of those who study oil supplies against rising demand is the widespread “illusion” of petroleum plenty.
This alarming predicament suggests that a “new geopolitics of oil” has arisen over how the oil producers will use their supplies in international bargaining with those oil-importing countries that are dependent and vulnerable to supply disruptions.
The world today does not face the immediate threat of running out of oil; it faces instead the problem that over half of the proven oil reserves are now concentrated in a small number of OPEC countries that are drawing down their reserves at half the average global rate.
It seems almost inevitable that OPEC’s share of the world oil market will grow.
This means that OPEC is critical to global oil supply, the Middle East is critical to OPEC, and countries that depend on oil imports from this volatile, unstable source are highly vulnerable to disruptions.
THE UPS AND DOWNS OF THE PRICE FOR OIL As seen above, there are three very different projections regarding world oil prices between now and 2030.
Most analysts, however, expect that oil demand will grow quickly as the world economy recovers and that we will see another oil spike, perhaps as soon as 2012.
In response to the threat of future shortages, the Global North may be on the verge of a potentially historic juncture that would overturn the pivotal place of oil in the global political economy.
In 2008, China and Japan ended a long-time dispute by agreeing to jointly develop two natural gas fields in the East China Sea; in August 2009, Russia reached an agreement with Turkey to build a gas pipeline from the Black Sea to the Mediterranean via the Anatolian Peninsula.
There is also an array of efforts under way to develop alternative clean-energy fuel sources, such as wind and solar power, to break our dependence on fossil fuels.
TOWARD SUSTAINABILITY AND HUMAN SECURITY Across the globe, people desire to live in a clean and green environment and seek to avoid ones that are polluted, dangerous to health, and prone to floods, hurricanes, tornadoes, and typhoons.
Earth provides enough to satisfy every mans need, but not every mans greed. —Mohandas Gandhi, Indian peace activist The Tragedy of the Global Commons Humanity faces enormous challenges of unprecedented scope and danger; arresting global climate change, preserving biodiversity, providing clean water, and restoring forests, fisheries, and other overly exploited renewable resources.
No single cause is responsible for the trends in the global environment.
Rather, many causes interact with each other to produce the dreaded dangers undermining the preservation of the world’s life systems on which human existence depends.
But among the ecologists who scientifically study the origins of planetary predicaments and problems, one explanation has become very popular—environmental degradation is seen, in part, as a product of the individual pursuit of private gain.
The tragedy of the commons is a popular term constructed to capture the human roots of the growing threats to the planet’s resources and its delicately balanced ecological system.
Lloyd, and later Hardin, asked observers to consider what happened in medieval English villages, where the village green was typically common property on which all villagers could graze their cattle.
Sharing the common grazing area worked well as long as usage by individuals didn’t reduce the land’s usefulness to everyone else.
Assuming that the villagers were driven by the profit motive and that no laws existed to restrain their greed, herders had maximum incentive to increase their stock for gain as much as possible.
If pushed, individual herders might concede that the collective interest of all would be served if each contained the size of their herd rather than increasing it, so that the commons could be preserved.
But self-restraint—voluntary reduction of the number of one’s own cattle to relieve the pressure on the common village green—was not popular.
By contrast, the addition of one more animal to the village green would produce a personal gain whose costs would be borne by everyone.
Therefore, economic rational choice to pursue wealth encouraged all to increase indiscriminately the size of the herds, and it discouraged self-sacrifice for the common welfare.
Ultimately, the collective impact of each effort to maximize individual gain was to place more cattle on the village green than it could sustain.
The tragedy of the commons has become a standard concept in ecological analysis because it illuminates so well the sources of environmental degradation and many other global problems and predicaments.
It is particularly applicable to the debate today about pressures on the global environment because the English common green is comparable to planetary “common property,” such as the oceans and the atmosphere from which individual profit is maximized on the basis of a first-come, first-served principle.
Overuse of common property is also highlighted, as when the oceans and atmosphere are used by a few as sinks for environmental pollutants whose costs are borne by many.
However, you have probably already guessed that experts disagree about the moral and ethical implications of Hardin’s interpretation.
Note that the logical conclusion is that reforms are required to save planet Earth.
The needed changes will require both some self-restraint on people’s freedom of choice as well as a modicum of regulation in order to control the ruinous consequence of the tragedy of an unmanaged global commons.
Theorists adhering to realism and free-market mercantilism go very far in defending freedom of economic choice without regulation as the best and safest path to realizing the greatest good for the greatest number.
Theorists from these traditions believe that the pursuit of self-interest and personal profit will in the long run benefit all, producing more income and technological innovation than would occur by supervisory regulation of corporations, entrepreneurs, and investors given free reign to seek profits.
They also feel that minimal interference in the pursuit of personal gain is helpful to the preservation of the Earth’s ecological health.
To their way of reasoning, the pursuit of private gain with little restraint is a virtue, not a vice.
Almost all religious moral traditions highly question this realist and mercantilist conclusion.
Christianity, for example, follows ancient Hebrew ethics in defining greed as one of the seven deadly sins.
The predictable outcome of selfishness and blind dedication to personal financial gain over other values such as altruistic love and compassion for the community of humankind is a certain path to ruin and to sin.
These streams of thoughts argue that concern for the welfare of all provides happiness and benefits because only if community interests are protected can individuals realize their most precious personal interest in advancing such common values as the opportunity for maintaining a clean and sustainable environment.
Ecopolitics forces you to weigh rival perspectives and to evaluate competing values.
A 2008 report by the International Union for Conservation of Nature found that nearly one in four mammals are at risk for extinction, and that overfishing and acidification of the oceans are threatening marine life.
Shown here is a “dead forest” in Madagascar, which has lost over 80 percent of its forest due mostly to slash-and-burn rice farming that also exhausts the soil and destroys the habitats of countless species.
These and other ethical questions are directly in the crossfire of the debate about what is causing the threats to the planetary commons and what, if anything, should be undertaken to contain them, and at what costs.
Environmental decay seems to recognize few borders; it is a worldwide problem, for both poor and rich countries.
That transformation makes protection of the planetary environment a necessity, but the solutions are hard to find when many people put their personal advantage ahead of those of all humanity.
Recommended changes to protect and preserve the planet Earth’s ecology may be expensive.
While the goal of sustainable development remains distant and frustrations about lost opportunities high, government and nonstate actors’ acceptance of the concept continues to inspire creative, environmentally sensitive responses.
Taking their point of departure from the adage “think globally, act locally,” there are also under way movements to save planet Earth at the state level of analysis and individual level of analysis.
Global Solutions In a political world in which growing population means growing demand for energy, food, and other resources, the politics of scarcity becomes central.
Moreover, how countries meet their growing demand for energy directly influences the evolution and preservation of the global commons.
Left unchecked, threats to environmental security will compromise human security.
Some of the initiatives to counter environmental degradation are carried out at a global level.
Converting to Renewable Sources of Energy A new and less destructive source of energy could emerge because of the advent of revolutionary new technologies that derive energy from the sun, wind, and other abundant and renewable sources of energy such as hydrogen.
Together, widely fluctuating but rising oil prices and public alarm about global warming are pushing the world, however haltingly, toward cleaner and cheaper energy systems. acid rain precipitation that has been made acidic through contact with sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxides.
The supply of fossil fuels will not run out anytime soon, but the externalities or consequences of environmental and health threats make the burning of fossil fuels excessively dangerous.
The combustion of oil and coal are traced to lung cancer and many other health hazards.
And what is more, it leads to air pollution, urban smog, and acid rain that damage forests, water quality, and soil.
There are powerful incentives to harness technology to shift to renewable sources of energy.
Among known technologies, nuclear energy has often been championed as the leading alternative to fossil fuel dependence.
However, safety and financial costs may reduce this scheduled surge toward nuclear power; these problems have led some countries to reduce (or, like Germany, Sweden, and Spain, phase out) their nuclear programs.
Well-publicized nuclear accidents in the United States at the Three Mile Island nuclear power plant in Pennsylvania in 1979 and at Chernobyl in Ukraine in 1986 and no less FIGURE 16.
SUPPLYING THE WORLD’S ENERGY NEEDS BY THE YEAR 2100 The global economy’s need for energy continues to rise, requiring more energy than is ultimateiy avaiiabie from nonrenewabie resources.
Rising demand is likely to change the current distribution of resources on which the world relies to meet its energy needs , because 82 percent of the world’s energy supply presently comes from fossil fuels and that share cannot continue.
As a fossil-free energy supply becomes increasingly probable , it might become possible to tap renewable sources to meet the world’s entire energy needs by the end of the twenty-first century.
Since then, fears have decreased, and the demand for nuclear power has risen despite continuing safety fears.
There are no safe procedures for handling the fifty-two thousand tons of toxic radioactive nuclear waste, some of which will remain dangerous for hundreds of thousands of years.
A related fear is that countries that currently do not possess nuclear knowhow might develop nuclear weapons.
This dilemma was highlighted as a significant concern with regard to North Korea’s nuclear development program.
Other efforts to develop alternative potential fuel sources have also begun in hopes of breaking our dependence on fossil fuels.
Thomas L Friedman echoed this sentiment, arguing that countries that cling to fossil fuels will see their security and prosperity decline as compared to those that pioneer renewable-energy technologies.
This emphasis reflects a shift over the past decade or two from a focus on conventional pollution issues to one on clean-energy opportunities.
Seaweed fields of algae are touted as a potential wave of the future, as “algal oil can be processed into biodiesel or nonpetroleum gasoline, the carbohydrates into ethanol, and the protein into animal feed or human nutritional supplements.
Indonesia and the Philippines, located within the “Pacific Ring of Fire,” are looking to harness volcanic power in developing geothermal power.
And while presently too expensive for most people, Honda Motor has begun production of the world’s first hydrogen-powered fuel-cell car.
Technological, economic, cultural, and environmental changes suggest that the early stage of a major energy transformation is under way, forced by supply scarcities and demand increases.
Conversion to renewable sources of energy represents a possible avenue away from global environmental degradation.
International Treaties for Environmental Protection The 1992 Earth Summit in Stockholm was precedent-setting.
From it, a separate treaty set forth a comprehensive agreement for the preservation of biodiversity throughout the world.
It committed state governments to devise national strategies for conserving habitats, protecting endangered species, expanding protected areas, and repairing damaged ones.
Since then, the world has attempted to cooperate through increasingly concerted efforts to reach agreements and to back them with ratified treaties to protect the sustained global commons.
The Biodiversity Treaty was followed by other international efforts to deal with environmental problems by agreements globally.
In his 2009 inaugaral address, United States President Obama pledged to work with the international community to “roll back the spector of a warming planet,” and one of his first presidential policy pronouncements was to call for a federal “cap-and-trade” system to greatly reduce United States greenhouse emissions.
In anticipation of the impending 2012 deadline for negotiating a successor to the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, the UN climate-change summit convened in Copenhagen in December 2009.
With hopes that leadership from the United States president could propel greater concensus and commitment to international efforts to address environmental degradation and the threats that it poses to human security, governments from around the world met to discuss a new global climate agreement.
Given the growing threats to environmental protection that are now recognized, this collective response is encouraging.
The question facing the world is whether the response to date is adequate.
However, many skeptics fear that these efforts are too little, too late, and that not enough is being done to save the global commons for future generations.
Many question the ability of today’s existing treaties to manage the environmental dangers they are meant to address.
Some are weak and introduce expressions of concern without commanding necessary policy changes to remedy the various problems they identify.
Of particular concern is the reluctant backing of the globe’s superpower, the United States.
Of the UN’s thirty-one major global environmental agreements, the United States has only ratified ten.
Environmental protection activists worry that if the American hegemon refuses to lead, the prospects for strengthening the rules of the environmental preservation regime are dim.
Trade, the Environment, and Sustainable Development Multinational corporations are key players in the ecopolitics game that has the potential to determine the Earth’s fate.
Corporations rule globally, and they are strong advocates with powerful lobbyists of free trade.
The question is especially pertinent in a rapidly globalizing world in which trade increasingly links politics, economics, ecology, and societies and cultures in webs of ever-tightening interdependencies.
Rather than iearning from this iesson, and despite strong opposition from the pubiic, Russia opened its borders to become the largest international repository for radioactive nuclear wastes, in the hope of earning billions of dollars over the next two decades. trade to promote environmental standards.
Some countries, however, particularly in the Global South, view the use of trade mechanisms to protect the environment as yet another way the rich states block entry into lucrative Global North markets and keep the Global South permanently disadvantaged.
Trade-offs must sometimes be made between goals that, in principle, all seem designed to increase human well-being and security.
However, another interpretation maintains that trade encourages states to live beyond their means.
The “pond” in which they are playing was originally a sludge pit containing chemical by products from the former pesticide plant, and the actual color of the “water” was closer to black.
Though the chemical leakage at Bhopal, which resulted in over three thousand deaths, occurred in 1984, the area—which still contains over four hundred tons of toxic waste—has yet to be cleaned up.
The picture is a stark reminder of how environmental crises can long outlive the political will necessary to resolve them. beyond state borders.
Countries that have depleted their resource bases or passed strict laws to protect them can easily look overseas for desired products, in ways that shift the environmental stress of high consumption to other states’ backyards.
A trend is under way in the culture of corporate global finance that bodes well for the potential for global corporations to begin to recognize that their profits will improve if they invest in and develop products for which there is rising consumer demand worldwide because they are environmentally green and popular among consumers.
This mega-corporation recently shifted its marketing strategy by seeking to attract still new customers, promising to cut its energy consumption and to sell products that are environmentally friendly.
What these and other changes suggest is that newly “green” corporations are beginning to realize financial payoffs.
The possibility that the international political economy will provide economic incentives for producing products that can contribute to global environment sustainability has inspired hope that the dangers to environmental preservation may be contained.
That hope is rising because some governments and individuals are seeking local solutions to environmental sustainability.
National and Local Solutions A huge concern is that some very powerful states, advantageously positioned in the global hierarchy, are selfishly resisting making painful and costly adjustments now.
They are resisting reforms of their own existing environmental protection policies.
Yet there are exceptions to this response to environmental degradation.
MEASURING NATIONAL COMMITMENTS TO ENVIRONMENTAL SUSTAINABILITY Measures of environmental protection performance suggest that some countries are doing much more than many others to assure that their environments are protected.
The Environmental Performance Index gauges the relative performance of countries across the categories of environmental health, air pollution, water resources, hiodiversity and habitat, productive natural resources, and climate change.
It charts the rankings of countries according to the Environmental Performance Index.
The score measures their investments in efforts to protect their future environments.
Clearly, some countries see environmental sustainability as a priority that protects their interest more so than others, which fail to do so.
Many people worldwide are dissatisfied with the tardy reaction of national governments to the appalling dangers to the global ecology.
In the United States, many of the fifty states have joined the lead pushed by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger of California.
In September 2006, the respected “Governator” signed the Global Warming Solutions Act requiring California to reduce its greenhouse-gas emissions 25 percent by 2020, and in 2008 he stood firm in his support for the moratorium against new off-shore drilling.
I am here to make businesses boom, but let’s also protect our environment.
And let’s fight global warming because we know now that this is a major danger, that this is not a debate anymore,” Governor Schwarzenegger explained.
Since then, three-fifths of American states have taken initiatives to also make rules in their home states to protect their local environments.
It is hard to determine whether this reaction was a result of pressure from huge numbers of private citizens who believe that it is crucial to set limits on climate-changing greenhouse emissions because they feel that this is the right thing to do.
Whatever the incentives, the pressure from citizens and even corporations for better laws to protect the global environment is growing.
Within the United States, in March 2007, thirteen corporations joined with fifty-two institutional investors to lobby the United States government for limits on carbon emissions that come from burning fossil fuels.
If so, ecologists will tell you quickly that you can make a difference, all by yourself, or more powerfully, by joining an NGO that shares your concerns and is pressuring governments to take the perceived needed urgent steps for change.
Environmentalists recommend many alternative steps that you might take.
You can save 2,400 pounds of carbon dioxide per year by recycling just half of your household waste.
Use less hot water by installing a low-flow showerhead and washing your clothes in cold or warm water.
You’ll save one pound of carbon dioxide for every mile you don’t drive.
Simply turning off your TV, DVD player, stereo, and computer when you’re not using them will save you thousands of pounds of carbon dioxide a year.
There are, of course, many other actions that individuals can undertake that might affect the future of the planet.
There is such a long list of things that could be done and that should be done that the options are about as unlimited as are the multiple threats to the planetary ecological predicament.
Efforts to develop alternative fuels, reduce greenhouse gases, and resurrect the auto industry by producing environmentally friendly, energy-efficient vehicles are high on everybody’s list.
The path humanity takes will affect human security far into the future.
Evidence of serious ecological problems is getting harder and harder to ignore.
Because the stakes are so high, all the pieces in the puzzle—population growth, natural resources, technology, and changing preferences in lifestyles—must be addressed simultaneously.
The planet must be saved, or all other opportunities will be closed, the global environment will face certain doom, and human history will end.
Therefore, the stakes are so high that perhaps solutions will be found.
This photo captures the dramatic inequalities that exist in many, if not all, cities across the globe—some enjoying rising prosperity, some living in desperate squalor.
M ost conjectures about the global future are based on some extrapolation from earlier events and experiences.
People usually speculate about future prospects based on their understanding of prevailing trends.
What makes prediction so difficult is the sheer complexity of uncertainties surrounding world politics—some trends move forward seemingly in the same direction, while others change direction; some trends intersect, whereas others diverge over time; and some trends increase the speed of other trends, while still different global trends reduce the impact of the others.
When thinking about the issues raised by these questions, ask yourself how they might be addressed to create a more peaceful and just global future.
In front of a crowd of an estimated two hundred thousand Germans at the Victory Column at Tiergarten Park in Berlin, Barack Obama caiied for giobai cooperation and purpose.
Some point toward integration, and others to fragmentation; the world looks like it is coming together and at the same time it is coming apart.
A new global system is on the horizon, but it is one whose characteristics have yet to develop definition.
Understandably, uncertainty and unpredictability are today’s prevailing mood.
But one thing is certain; seismic shifts under way are challenging the wisdom of old beliefs and orthodox visions.
Because both turmoil and turbulence describe contemporary international affairs, they require asking unconventional questions about conventional ideas.
They push us to think flve-dimensionally in order to understand the political, military, market, demographic, and environmental pressures that are increasingly being brought to bear on the countries of the world, the people who reside in them, and their interactions.
Facing the future, you confront an awesome investigative challenge; anticipating and interpreting the probable future contours of world affairs and constructing compelling theoretical explanations of their causes.
To do so, you must consider a number of unusual and controversial questions that are rising to the top of the global agenda for public debate throughout the world.
Experts whose profession it is to help you may be somewhat informative.
However, the rival conclusions boldly advanced by would-be prophets are not likely to be very definitive, and they diverge wildly.
Those caught up in revolutionary change rarely understand its ultimate significance. —Boutros Boutros-Ghali, former UN Secretary-General GLOBAL TRENDS AND FORECASTS A bewildering array of problems and challenges are expected to confront humanity in the future.
As recognized by former UN Secretary-General Kofi Annan , “We face a world of extraordinary challenges—and of extraordinary interconnectedness.
To construct your own images of the future of world affairs, begin by thinking about what key questions are likely to dominate international relations in the coming decades.
The questions you identify will determine which scenarios and theories better inform your understanding of your global future.
World Politics concludes this chapter with some additional questions to consider, and those questions will require you to weigh plausible contending interpretations to further prepare you intellectually to interpret the problematic future of world politics.
So proceed cautiously and with an open mind to views that may be different from those you now hold.
Your entire grade, your instructor tells you, will be determined by an essay exam with only one question.
It has been used to sort out candidates on exams for entry into the foreign service of several countries.
There really are no right or wrong questions about international relations.
Indeed, there is little agreement about the trends and issues that are the most important in international affairs, and no scholarly consensus among experts and policy makers exists about the questions most deserving of attention today.
To stimulate your thinking, make a preliminary list, based on what you now know after reading World Politics, of what you believe will be the crucial questions to ask when you make predictions about the future of the world.
It concludes now by identifying a series of questions about the global future that are high on the agenda for debate.
As a further catalyst to framing your own thinking, look critically at them, for how they are answered is widely expected to give shape to world politics throughout the remainder of the twenty-first century.
KEY QUESTIONS ABOUT A TURBULENT WORLD World Politics has argued that international relations are subject to recurring patterns and regularities.
Despite changes and chaos, behavior by transnational actors is not random.
It is governed by patterned propensities, and this makes it possible to uncover “laws” or generalized action-and-reaction patterns.
As realist theoretician Hans J Morganthau argued in his classic text Politics Among Nations, the past historical record speaks with sufficient continuity to make the scientific study of international politics a meaningful intellectual endeavor.
There are some lessons about how countries interact that are constant across time and place.
Under certain conditions, it can be assumed that certain types of transnational actors respond the same way to the same kinds of stimuli.
Sometimes similar actors in similar situations make different decisions.
Thus despite the existence of regularities in world politics, social scientists cannot draw on a body of uniform, deterministic laws to predict the global future precisely.
Another factor that makes it difficult to predict what will come to pass is the role of happenstance in world politics.
History is replete with what Greek philosopher Aristotle called accidental conjunctions—situations in which things come together by chance.
Consider, for example, the outbreak of World War I Recall from Chapter 3 that one of the proximate causes of the war was Austrian Archduke Franz Ferdinand’s assassination in Sarajevo on June 28, 1914.
When Ferdinand’s motorcade made a wrong turn en route to visit patients in a city hospital, it stopped briefly in front of a cafe where Gavrilo Pincip, one of the frustrated assassins, coincidentally had gone to get something to eat.
Astonished to find the archduke’s open-air car just five feet away, Princip fired two shots, killing the archduke and his wife.
Given the political climate in Europe at the time, if Franz Ferdinand had not been assassinated, something else might have precipitated the war.
Although we cannot predict with certainty which one will materialize, we can narrow the range of possibilities by forecasting how current trends will probably develop and how steps might be taken to channel the course of events toward a global future we prefer.
What follows are six questions designed to help you think about the future of world politics.
When pondering the long-term implications of these questions, you are encouraged to imagine what conceivable global futures are possible, estimate which are the most probable, and consider what policies would be of the most help to bring about the global future you prefer.
The glorious thing about the human race is that it does change the world — constantly.
One answer is ascribed to “globalization,” a widely accepted socially constructed code word understood as a transforming force that is creating sweeping governance crises in a new age of increasing interdependent complexity.
Globalization captures the idea that everything on the planet is now more closely connected than ever before, but on an institutional foundation that is shaky and unprepared for managing the massive adjustments brought on by accelerating worldwide changes.
From an optimistic perspective, an awareness of the common destiny of all, alongside the declining ability of many sovereign states to cope with global problems through unilateral self-help approaches, will energize efforts to put aside interstate competition.
According to this reasoning, conflict will recede as humanity begins to better recognize that national borders and oceans provide little protection against the multiple challenges arising from the global revolution in travel, communications, and trade.
Globalization is creating a strong web of constraints on the foreign policy behavior of those who are plugged into the network of global transactions.
Consequently, because globalization makes it imperative that states cooperate, this continued tightening of interstate linkages should be welcomed.
What is especially favorable about globalization is that when everyone depends on everyone else, all must work together.
Global interdependence makes it imperative for states to renounce their competition because they increasingly have a shared interest in cooperation and fewer and fewer incentives to fight.
Globalization may not lead to greater transnational cooperation, but instead to cut-throat competition.
Regardless of how compelling the need or how rewarding the benefits, increased contact and the trend toward an integrated single society of states may breed enmity, not amity.
Because its benefits will not be distributed equally, globalization will likely generate conflict between winners and losers.
Under conditions of fierce competition, scarcity, and resurgent nationalism, the temptation to seek isolation from the assault of globalization on national autonomy by creating barriers to trade and other transactions may be irresistible.
The temptation to achieve political benefits by military force will also continue.
Thus, the tightening web of globalization could lead to either danger or to opportunity.
Adding to growing concerns about escalating levels of globalization is the recognition that it is reducing states’ control over their national futures and fates.
As states lose their grip on coping with pressures and problems originating outside their borders, they fret about the loss of influence and identity.
The question for the future is whether humanity can count on relatively powerless but growing nongovernmental organizations at the grassroots level seeking to assume responsibility for engineering human progress through global public policy networks.
This arguably is one of the most important issues facing twenty-first-century world politics.
The surge in globalization that followed on the heels of late-twentieth-century discoveries in microelectronics and information processing has unleashed revolutionary changes.
The consequences of the technological revolution, however, are not certain.
It can increase productivity and economic output, but it can also displace workers and trigger social unrest and environmental damage.
Indeed, the most optimistic members of this group believe that because of promising developments in such fields as biotechnology and digital software, humanity is entering the most innovative period in history.
From their perspective, sufficient resources exist to fuel continued progress.
With patience, technological solutions eventually will be found to ease the most serious problems facing the world today.
Malnutrition and disease, they note as an example, may still exist, but, as a result of technological advances in agriculture and medicine, many people are alive today who might have perished in previous centuries.
In contrast to those who envision technological innovation as a way to increase economic growth and alleviate social welfare problems, others remain concerned that some proposed technological solutions will compound current problems.
Whereas genetically modified crops are seen by members of the former group as a way to reduce famine, members of the latter group worry about the public health consequences.
Although fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides initially increased crop yields in various Global South countries, they eventually spawned new problems such as contaminated water supplies.
Without wise management, technological advances can have detrimental side effects.
At first, larger ships and improvements in maritime technology resulted in increases in the amount of fish harvested from the world’s oceans.
Applying more technology could not increase catches once the ecosystem had collapsed.
So, when you look at new technologies , think counterfactually and imagine how things might turn out if new technologies had not been previously invented or how new ones might influence life on planet Earth for better or for worse.
Prevalent practices tend to wither away when they cease to serve their intended purpose, as the examples of slavery, dueling, and colonialism illustrate.
Trends point toward the possibility that this may happen as well for wars between states, which have declined nearly to the vanishing point.
Even more impressively, the period since 1945 has been the longest span of great power peace since the sixteenth century.
This achievement is raising expectations that large-scale warfare between countries will disappear and armed aggression between countries will become obsolete.
That said, the use of traditional weapons of warfare against the emergent threats that now haunt the globe is of questionable usefulness.
The old forms of military power still used by states today may be becoming impotent, and no level of military might can guarantee a state’s invulnerability.
The conduct of war has undergone several “generational” changes since the Thirty Years’ War drew to a close and gave birth to the modern state system.
Whereas “third-generation” military thinking has influenced most countries since World War II, today the threat of being attacked by the military forces of another country has receded, particularly in the Global North.
Unable to defeat conventional armies on the field of battle, irregular forces using unconventional tactics focus on their adversary’s will, using patience, ingenuity, and gruesome acts of violence to compel their opponent to weigh the mounting costs of continuing a long, drawn-out struggle.
Many civilians are targets of overt oppression and violence by governments presumably created to preserve law and order in courts and through ballots.
Of great concern is whether the moral outrage of the globe’s major powers will be sufficient for them to make concerted peacekeeping and peacemaking interventions to end human rights abuses in those countries where standards of conduct accepted in international law have been blatantly disregarded.
Atrocities in many failed states each year force a mass exodus of tens of millions of refugees and displaced people from their homes to seek safety.
The global community is being put to a test of its true ideals and its capacity to defend them, at potentially high costs.
Human rights law in principle now provides unprecedented protection for people everywhere to live in freedom without fear.
The challenge is to transcend traditional notions of sovereignty and to construct a global consensus for intervention that, in the words of civil rights activist Dr.
Shown here is a Sudanese refugee after she and her family reached sanctuary on the Chad border after hiding for a year in a cave in Sudan’s Darfur region.
Called the worst genocide since the World War II Holocaust, this slaughter (like the simmering conflicts in Congo and Somalia that have killed millions) raises deep concerns that the world’s great powers will intervene only when vital security interests or needed resources such as oil are threatened.
Leaders have long been loath to fall prey to the single-mindedness of preparing to compete with other states.
As France’s former President Francois Mitterand once urged, “together we must urgently find the solutions to the real problems at hand—especially unemployment and underdevelopment.
India’s former Prime Minister Indira Gandhi warned that “either nuclear war will annihilate the human race and destroy the Earth, thus disposing of any future, or men and women all over must raise their voices for peace and for an urgent attempt to combine the insights of different civilizations with contemporary knowledge.
These rhetorical positions reflect the problems and self-interests these leaders faced at home and abroad.
A large percentage of humanity faces famine, poverty, and a denial of basic human rights.
Millions are threatened by genocide and terrorism sponsored by their own governments.
Humankind may consequently self-destruct, not because it lacks opportunities, but because of its collective inability to see and to seize them.
To many observers, the history of world affairs is the struggle between tyranny and liberty.
It is an ideological contest for the allegiance of humanity to a particular form of political, social, and economic organization.
The twentieth century saw the developed world descend into a paroxysm of ideological violence, as liberalism contended first with the remnants of absolutism, then bolshevism and fascism, and finally an updated Marxism that threatened to lead to the ultimate apocalypse of nuclear war.
The abrupt repudiation of communism raised expectations that history had indeed “ended,” in the sense that liberal democratic capitalism had triumphed throughout most of the world.
Liberals, inspired by the belief that “liberal democracy and a market-oriented economic order are the only viable options for modern societies” , are heartened by the doubling since the mid-1980s of the number of countries practicing multi-party elections and capitalism at home and in foreign trade.
World order, they believe, can best be created by free governments practicing free trade.
As Woodrow Wilson argued, making the world “safe for democracy” would make the world itself safe.
From this liberal perspective, the diffusion of democratic capitalism bodes well for the future of world politics.
There are signals that the march of democracy’s spread is stalling, and many democracies remain ruled by one-party despots who, although elected, disregard constitutional limits on their power and deny their citizens basic political freedoms and religious and economic human rights.
This persistence of leaders unaccountable to the electorate suggests that we may not be witnessing history’s end.
The global economic crisis has also led to renewed speculation about the merits and shortcomings of global capitalism.
Though many countries are starting to regain their financial footing, the consensus on the virtues of commercial liberalism has been shattered.
The free market economies most exposed to the global economy bore the brunt of the financial damage, while countries that were relatively less open—ranging from India and China to Moldova—were less affected by the downturn.
Global, overarching forces such as modernization and widespread interconnectivity are converging to reshape our lives.
The paradox of contemporary world politics is that a world no longer haunted by the paralyzing fear of a looming all-out war between great powers now faces a series of challenges every bit as threatening and as potentially unmanageable.
In a prosperous and stable period of history, when confidence in peace and economic growth was high, and his administration was still in office, former United States President Bill Clinton found it necessary to warn that “profound and powerful forces are shaking and remaking our world.
The changes in recent years have spawned transnational threats to world order, in addition to the resurgence of nationalism, ethnic conflict, failed states, and separatist revolts.
These include acid rain, AIDS, HlNl, other contagious diseases, drug trafficking, international organized crime, ozone depletion, climate change, obstacles to gender equality, energy and food scarcities, desertification and deforestation, financial crises and collapsing economies, and neomercantile trade protectionism.
The potential impact of these additional threats is formidable, as emerging trends suggest that nonmilitary dangers will multiply alongside the continuing threat of arms and armed aggression in civil wars, as well as interstate wars in particular regions and terrorism almost any place and at any time in the world.
The distinction between geostrategic issues of security that pertain to matters of war and peace and global issues related to economic, social, demographic, and environmental aspects of relations between governments and people may disappear.
Previously established patterns and relationships have been obliterated.
It has identified the most important changes underway that are potentially leading to transformations in world politics.
It moves constantly, but at its own pace; and history reminds us that the evolutionary direction of global change is uncertain.
Many trends are unfolding at the same time, and their impact in combination can move the world along an unexpected trajectory.
In addition, trends can reverse themselves, and each trend that moves forward advances at its own rate.
Some trends move incredibly slowly in an evolutionary process that can only result in dramatic transformations over many centuries, whereas others exhibit short bursts of rapid change, interrupted by long periods without much change.
Many examples of reversible, interrupted, and constant trends exist, as you have learned in this book.
NASA Looking ahead at Global Trends and Transformations PICTURING GLOBAL DESTINY This view of a globe without borders is captured by the photo taken of the eastern Mediterranean from the Earth-orbiting space shuttle Columbia.
It pictures an integrated world community, in which humanity shares a common destiny.
It also captures the kinds of environmental threats confronting humanity in a globalized world, where problems do not stop at borders.
Note the difference in visibility in this panorama, which scientists believe is the result of pollution contaminating the atmosphere over the Black Sea.
To appreciate the diverse ways trends may combine to affect each other, it is helpful for you to construct your images by both using memories of the past and by being inspired by visions of the future.
In 1775, American revolutionary Patrick Henry underscored the importance of history, observing that he had “but one lamp by which my feet are guided, and that is the lamp of experience.
All of us need both perspectives, constructed with keen awareness that our images of history and of the future must avoid the temptation to see ourselves and our own country as we wish to be seen without taking into account how differently others might view us and our state.
It now appears that the collective impact of the divergent trends underway is signaling a major transformation in world politics.
Persistence and change coexist uneasily, and it is this mixture that makes the future so uncertain.
The outcomes of two races will determine the difference between the world that is and the world that will be.
Advances in science and technology far outpace the resolution of the social and political problems they generate.
Building the knowledge to confront these problems may therefore present the ultimate challenge.
If the world is to forge a promising future, it must develop more sophisticated knowledge.
Sophistication demands that we see the world as a whole, as well as in terms of its individual parts; it does not permit picturing others according to our self-images or projecting onto others our own aims and values.
We must discard belief in a simple formula for a better tomorrow and resist singleissue approaches to reform.
The future of world politics also rests on the outcome of a race between states’ ability to cooperatively act together and their historic tendency to compete and fight.
Only concerted international cooperation stands in the way of slipping back into military conflicts and ruthless competition.
To meet the global challenges of the future, and to make wise decisions to implement needed changes for bringing about a world that is more secure and just, vision is required.
If our image of the future were different, the decisions of today would be different. will impel us to action.
But if there is no commonly held image of what is worth striving for, society will lack both motivation and direction. —Willis Harman, policy analyst The future is not fixed, and headlines are not trend lines.
So we can overcome threatening present dangers by making wise and ethical choices.
Therefore, rather than fear the global future, we should welcome its opportunities as we strive to build a more peaceful and just world.
The moving words of former United States President John F Kennedy thus describe a posture we might well assume; “However close we sometimes seem to that dark and final abyss, let no man of peace and freedom despair.
Together we shall save our planet or together we shall perish in its flames.
The Rise of the New Muslim Middle Class and What It Will Mean for Our World.
European Commission The executive organ administratively responsible for the European Union.
G game theory Mathematical model of strafegic interaction where outcomes are determined not only by a single actoris preferences, buf also by fhe choices of all actors involved.
Gender Empowerment Measure The UN Development Programme’s attempt to measure the extent of gender equality across the globe’s countries, based on estimates of women’s relative economic income, highpaying positions, and access to professional and parliamentary positions. gender inequalities Differences between men and women in opportunity and reward that are determined by the values that guide states’ foreign and domestic policies.
Global commons The physical and organic characteristics and resources of the entire planet—the air in the atmosphere and conditions on land and sea—on which human life depends and which is the common heritage of all humanity.
Global East The rapidly growing economies of East and South Asia that have made those countries competitors with the traditionally dominant countries of the Global North. global level of analysis Analyses that emphasize the impact of worldwide conditions on foreign policy behavior and human welfare. global migration crisis A severe problem stemming from the growing number of people moving from their home country to another country, straining the ability of the host countries to absorb the foreign emigrants.
Global North A term used to refer to the world’s wealthy, industrialized countries located primarily in the Northern Hemisphere.
GNI measures production by a state’s citizens or companies, regardless of where the production occurs.
Group of 77 The coalition of Third World countries that sponsored the 1963 Joint Declaration of Deveioping Countries calling for reform to allow greater equality in North-South trade. groupthink The propensity for members of a group to accept and agree with the group's prevailing attitudes, rather than speaking out for what they believe. gunboat diplomacy A show of milifary force, historically naval force, to intimidate an adversary.
J jus ad bellum A component of just war doctrine that establishes criteria under which a just war may be initiated. jus in bello A component of just war doctrine that sets limits on the acceptable use offeree. just war doctrine The moral criteria identifying when a just war may be undertaken and how it should be fought once it begins. just war theory The theoretical criteria under which it is morally permissible, or “just,"" for a state to go to war and the methods by which a just war might be fought.
K Kellogg-Briand Pact A multilateral treaty negotiated in 1928 that outlawed war as a method for settling interstate conflicts.
M macroeconomics The sfudy of aggregate economic indicators such as GDP, the money supply, and the balance of trade that governments monitor to measure changes in national and global economies such as the rates of economic growth and inflation or the level of unemployment.
New International Economic Order The 1974 policy resolution in the UN that called for a North-South dialogue to open the way for the less-developed countries of the Global South to participate more fully in the making of international economic policy. newly industrialized countries The most prosperous members of the Global South, which have become important exporters of manufactured goods as well as important markets for the major industrialized countries that export capital goods.
North American Free Trade Agreement An agreement that brings Mexico into the free-trade zone linking Canada and the United States.
Nth country problem The expansion of additional new nuclear weapon states. nuclear deterrence Dissuading an adversary from attacking by threatening retaliation with nuclear weapons.
Strategic Arms Limitation Talks Two sets of agreements reached during the 1970s between the United States and the Soviet Union that established limits on strategic nuclear delivery systems.
Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty The U.S.-Russian series of negotiations that began in 1993 and, with the 1997 START-Ill agreement ratified by Russia in 2000, pledged to cut the nuclear arsenals of bofh sides by 80 percent of the Cold War peaks, in order to lower the risk of nuclear war.
Strategic Defense Initiative The so-called Star Wars plan conceived by the Reagan administration to seek to deploy an antiballistic missile system using space-based lasers that would destroy enemy nuclear missiles before they could reenter the Earth’s atmosphere.
T tariffs Tax assessed on goods as they are imported into a country. terrorism Premeditated violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational or transnational groups or clandestine agents, usually intended to influence an audience. theocracy A country whose government is organized around a religious dogma. theory A set of hypofheses postulating the relationship between variables or conditions advanced to describe, explain, or predict phenomena and make prescriptions about how positive changes ought to be engineered to realize particular goals and ethical principles.
Third Way An approach to governance advocated primarily by many European leaders who, while recognizing few alternatives to liberal capitalism, seek to soften the cruel social impact of free-markef individualism by progressively allowing government intervention to preserve social justice and the rights of individuals fo freedom from fear of the deprivations caused by disruptions in the global economy.
Washington consensus The view that Global South countries can best achieve sustained economic growth through democratic governance, fiscal discipline, free markets, a reliance on private enterprise, and trade liberalization.
World Bank Also known as the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development , the World Bank is the globe’s major IGO for financing economic growth and reducing poverty through long-term loans. world politics The study of how global actors’ activities entail the exercise of influence to achieve and defend their goals and ideals, and how it affects the world at large.
World Trade Organization A multilateral agency that monitors the implementation of frade agreements and settles disputes among trade partners. world-system theory A body of fheory thaf treats the capitalistic world economy originating in the sixteenth century as an interconnected unit of analysis encompassing fhe entire globe, with an international division of labor and multiple political centers and cultures whose rules constrain and share the behavior of all transnational actors.
X xenophobia The suspicious dislike,disrespect, and disregard for members of a foreign nationalify, ethnic, orlinguistic group.
Y Yalta Conference The 1945 summit meeting of the Allied victors to resolve postwar territorial issues and to establish voting procedures in the United Nations to collectively manage world order.
Yoshida Doctrine Japan’s traditional security policy of avoiding disputes with rivals, preventing foreign wars by low milifary spending, and promofing economic growth through foreign frade. youth bulge A burgeoning youth population, thought to make countries more prone to civil conflicts. z Zeitgeist The “spirit of the times,"" or the dominant cultural norms assumed to influence the behavior of people living in particular periods. zero-sum An exchange in a purely conflictual relationship in which what is gained by one competitor is lost by the other.
McGraw-Hill/ Dushkin. “Time to Renew Faith in the Nonproliferation Treaty,” International Herald Tribune : 8.
A Study of the Relationship of Military Power in Nations to Their Economic and Social Advantage.
Petersen Institute for International Economics. The United States and the World Economy.
A8. “ United States to Revive Dormant Nuclear-Power Industry,” Columbia, S.C., The State : A5.
Boyer, Mark A., Brian Urlacher, Natalie Florea Hudson, Anat NivSolomon, Laura L Janik, Michael Butler, and Andri loannou.
A15. “Global Forces May Change Balance between States and Federal Government,” Columbia, S.C., The State : A9.
Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, James D Morrow, Randolph M Siverson, and Alastair Smith.
Canetti-Nisim, Daphna, Eran Halperin, Keren Sharvit, and Stevan E Hobfoll.
Central Intelligence Agency. Handbook of International Economic Statistics 2000.
McGraw-Hill/Dushkin. “An Alliance of Democracies,” Washington Post (May 24): B.07. America Unbound: The Bush Revolution in Foreign Policy.
Drezner, Daniel W “Backdoor Protectionism” The National Interest Online.
The World Does Seem to Have Changed,” International Herald Tribune : 6.
Kim, A de Sherbinin, T Srebotniak, and V Mara.08 Environmentla Performance Index.
Commission of the European Communities, Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, The European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions.
McGraw-Hill Contemporary Learning Series. The Flight of the Creative Class: The New Global Competition for Talent.
Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. “Looking Ahead from China,” Columbia, S.C, The State : A9. “Arms Sales Begin at Home,” Columbia, S.C, The State :A13. “Disarmed in the Science Race,” Columbia, S.C, The State : D3. “The Revolution Will Be Podcast,” Columbia, S.C, The State : All. The World Is Flat: A Brief History of the Twenty-First Century.
Farrar, Straus, and Giroux. “Dreadful Irresponsibility after 9/11,” Columbia, S.C, The State : D3. “The Third Great Era of Globalization,” International Herald Tribune : 9. “Love It or Hate It, But the World Needs America,” International Herald Tribune : 6. The Lexus and the Olive Tree: Understanding Globalization.
Norton. Global Political Economy: Understanding the International Economic Order.
Nova Science Publishers. Conventional Arms Transfers to Developing Nations, 1999-2006.
Congressional Research Service. Conventional Arms Transfers to Developing Nations, 1998-2005.
Held, David, and Anthony McGrew, with David Goldblatt, and Jonathan Perraton.
Prentice Hall. Comparative Foreign Policy Analysis: Theories and Methods.
Simon &c Schuster. The Third Wave: Democratization in the Late Twentieth Century.
The Democratic Peace and Territorial Conflict in the Twentieth Century.
Jackson, Derrick Z “Spreading Fear, Selling Weapons,” Columbia, S.C., The State ; A9.
John Wiley and Sons. Manics, Panics, and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises, 4th ed.
Henry Holt. -(2002} Resource Wars: The New Landscape of Global Conflict.
A19. “An Oil-Driven Recession Is Possible,” International Herald Tribune : 9. The Great Unraveling: Losing Our Way in the New Century.
United States Foreign Policy and the Geopolitics of the Twenty-First Century.
Public Affairs. The Ideas That Conquered the World: Peace, Democracy, and Free Markets in the Twenty-First Century.
MIT Press. “When Ballots Bring Bullets,” International Herald Tribune : 6.
Norton. “Back to the Future: Instability in Europe after the Cold War,” International Security 15 : 5-56.
Curbing United States dependence on foreign oil,” The Washington Times.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. World Investment Report.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Distribution of Aid by Development Assistance Committee Members.
Random House. “Soft Balancing Against the United States,” International Security 30 : 7—45.
Blackwell. “World Economic Growth, Systemic Leadership and Southern Debt Crises,” Journal of Peace Research 41 : 5-24.
How Europe’s Vision of the Future is Quietly Eclipsing the American Dream.
All of the World Is Entitled to Democracy,” International Herald Tribune : 8.
The Secret of the Persian Chessboard,” Parade : 14. “The Common Enemy,” Parade : 4-7.
Washington's Bid for World Supremacy and the Betrayal of the American Promise.
Explaining the ‘lost decade’ in multilateral trade talks, 1948-1958,” Review of International Political Economy 2 : 1-26.
Thompson, Kenneth W Political Realism and the Crisis of World Politics.
Refugees, Asylum-seekers, Returnees, Internally Displaced and Stateless Persons.
United Nations. World Investment Report 2008; Transnational Corporations and the Infrastructure Challenge.
United Nations. “Global FDl Decline Bottoms Out in 2003,” press release.
Rowman 8c Littlefield. The Power of Power Politics: From Classical Realism to Neotraditionalism.
See also Global North Great Depression , 77, 455^57 Great Patriotic War, 12.
