The CIA was tipped off by Soviet spy Colonel Oleg Penkovsky, who passed on war plans, secret documents, and other human intelligence.
For thirteen days, October 16 – 28, 1962, the United States and Soviet Union faced each other down in a confrontation that would be the closest the world came to nuclear annihilation during the Cold War.
President Kennedy is informed about the photographic evidence The President was notified of the presence and confirmation of Soviet missiles in Cuba and received a full intelligence briefing.
The President kept to his official schedule to raising concerns from the public.
United States troops begin buildup in the Southeast Military units flowed into bases in the Southeast United States as U-2 reconnaissance flights showed continued development of missile sites in Cuba, complete with medium and long range missiles, capable of hitting most of the continental United States The President met with the Libyan head of state and then went to Connecticut to support political candidates.
The Soviet Foreign Minister meets with Kennedy Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko met the President at the White House, assuring Kennedy the weapons were defensive.
Kennedy knew otherwise but didn’t press the issue, instead giving Gromyko a warning of “gravest consequences” if offensive nuclear weapons were on Cuba.
Business as usual The President stuck to his scheduled travel in the midwestern United States.
Kennedy orders a “quarantine” of Cuba The White House called the blockade a “quarantine” because a blockade is technically an act of war.
The President faked a cold as an excuse to end his trip early without alarming Americans and returned to Washington.
Tactical Air Command cannot guarantee destruction of the missiles The President attended Sunday Mass then met with General Walter Sweeney of the USAF’s Tactical Air Command.
Kennedy informs the public about the blockade and puts United States troops on alert President Kennedy informs former Presidents Hoover, Truman, and Eisenhower as well as the British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan on the Cuban Missile situation.
He then assembles and Executive Committee of the National Security Council to work out coordinating further action.
After a week of waiting, Kennedy addressed the nation to inform them about the presence of Soviet missiles on Cuba.
He also announced the quarantine of the island to prevent further “offensive military equipment” from arriving, stating the United States will not end the quarantine until the USSR removes the missiles.
The EXCOMM assembled by President Kennedy recommended a military invasion of Cuba to end the stalemate, which would have led to massive retaliation from the Soviet Union, and the destruction of all forces on the island.
Organization of American States Supports Quarantine The OAS support for the blockade gave the American move international legitimacy.
Soviet freighters bound for Cuba with military supplies stopped for the most part but the oil tanker Bucharest continued to Cuba.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy met with Ambassador Dobrynin at the Soviet Embassy.
Khrushchev denounces the quarantine The Soviet Premier denounced the United States quarantine of the island as an act of aggression.
Adlai Stevenson presents evidence of missiles in Cuba to UN The United States requested an emergency meeting of the UN Security council, where the Soviet ambassador denied the presence of missiles in Cuba.
UN Secretary General U Thant called for a “cooling off” period, rejected by President Kennedy because it left the missiles in Cuba.
The United States Armed Forces prepare for all out war The United States military moved to DEFCON 2.
Once the blockade was in place, all Soviet ships bound for Cuba either held their positions or reversed course.
Fearing an imminent attack from the United States, Cuban leader Fidel Castro suggested to Khrushchev the USSR should attack first.
The removal of the missiles in exchange for a promise not to invade Cuba.
The Soviet Premier sent a letter with a similar message to President Kennedy stating his willingness to remove the missiles from the island if the United States would pledge never to invade Cuba.
Jupiter missiles from Turkey, contradicting his personal letter to Kennedy.
A U-2 spy plane checking the progress of the missiles was shot down over Cuba, killing the pilot, Major Rudolph Anderson.
The United States ignored Khrushchev’s public offer and took him up on the first offer, adding they would voluntarily remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey a few months later, voluntarily.
A United States Navy ship dropped depth charges at a Soviet submarine under the blockade line.
The submarine was armed with nuclear torpedoes, but chose not to fire them in retaliation.
In the evening the USSR and USA, through Robert Kennedy and Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, reached an agreement to de-escalate the conflict.
The USSR announces it will remove missiles from Cuba The Soviets agreed publicly to remove the missiles in exchange for the promise not to invade Cuba.
They do not mention the agreement to remove United States missiles from Turkey.
Radio Moscow announced that the Soviet Union accepted the proposed solution and released the text of a Khrushchev letter affirming that the missiles would be removed.
The missiles were loaded and shipped back to the Soviet Union in early November 1962.
Soviet bombers left the country before the end of the year and the Jupiter missiles were removed form Turkey by the end of April, 1963.
A “hotline” was set up between the USSR and the United States to ensure direct communication between the two superpowers in the future.
