Gluchowski by Mark Kramer Eastern Europe was central to Soviet foreign and defence policy The prolonged crisis in Poland in 1980-81 was one of the most throughout the Cold War.
After World War II, and especially from intriguing episodes of the Cold War, but until very recently almost 1947 onward, the Soviet military and security forces, together with no primary sources relating to the crisis were available.
That local communist elites, constructed the most integrated alliance problem has greatly diminished over the past few years.
Their aim Khrushchev's CPSU CC Presidium Meeting Soviet Union's role in the Polish cri­ was to secure communist regimes in on East European Crises, 24 October 1956 sis.
The article will begin with a brief postwar Eastern Europe dedicated to review of some of the most important defend the Soviet Union's western Introduction, Translation, and Annotation new sources, and will then analyze the frontier.
To ensure loyalty, unifor­ by Mark Kramer decision-making calculus in Moscow mity, and quality, Soviet military in 1980-81.
Still, he quarreled with the a portion of the speech, and made it avail­ had absolutely no right to raise any Soviet leaders over the political aspects of able to us for publication.
The statement not public announcement ofthe decision prior to only constitutes President Castro's most Subsequently (and earlier, in his meetings the completed installation of missiles for extensive remarks about the 1962 confron­ with Mikoyan), the Cuban leader has said two reasons.
First, he judged that such a tation, but also provides his reflection on the that he understood the missiles also could be statement would itself have a deterrent ef­ episode only five years after it occurred. an immediate deterrent to a United States invasion. fect against a United States invasion, by effectively This document is usefully read in conjunc­ But here he presented the idea that Cuba committing the Soviet Union to Cuba's de­ tion with notes taken by the Soviet ambas­ would be on the front line of the struggle fense.
Second, publication of the Cuban­ sador to Cuba, Aleksandr Alekseev, during between East and West.
Soviet agreement would strengthen Cuba's meetings immediately after the crisis be­ Prior to 1962, Cuba had sought admis­ ""moral"" defense in the United Nations and in tween Soviet Deputy Premier Anastas sion to the Warsaw Pact, but had been re­ the forum of international public opinion.
Castro's rationale for accepting the Keeping the operation secret, he argued in Translated excerpts from both documents missiles provided a formulation that would 1968, required are printed below.
Taken together, the docu­ enable Cuba to claim de facto membership ments provide adeeper understanding of the in the Pact.
Cuban leaders rea­ the United States has felt that it has the relationship.
It is notable, then, that just soned first that the Kennedy Administration right to make agreements with dozens of eight months prior to the 1968 invasion, would not be content to accept blithely the countries and to send them weapons that Castro provided his party's leadership with outcome of the failed 1961 Bay of Pigs they see fit, without the Soviet Union such an extensive review of Cuban-Soviet invasion.
They viewed Cuba's January 1962 ever considering that it had a right to ties, starting with the Missile Crisis.
From the very outset it was a appreciate the significance ofthis speech, it can States as a justification for and prelude capitulation, an erosion of our sover­ is necessary first to review Cuba's perspec­ to an invasion. s Importantly, their fears . elgnty.... 9 tive on the Missile Crisis. were reinforced by the development of a major United States covert action, codenamed Op­ While the world breathed a sigh of relief Cuba's Perspective on the Crisis eration Mongoose, and other American mili­ when Premier Nikita Khrushchev announced tary preparations.
Cuban intelligence had infiltrated the at the same moment the United States did, by when a Soviet delegation (headed by the exile groups and had captured several ofthe hearing Khrushchev's announcement on Ra­ Uzbek party chief Sharif Rashidov) pro­ saboteurs.
In that letter, the Cuban leader and an even greater number in militias.
But predicted that United States military strikes, and con­ Cuban leaders did want to retain other weap­ Finally, Cuba perceived it was nothing ceivably an invasion, were likely to occur in the next 24 to 72 hours (that is, possibly 10­ onry that the United States was demanding the Soviet Union withdraw.
In order to protect Cuba, Mikoyan but capable of carrying a nuclear payload. of the anger and disillusionment is clear.
Our Cuba thus felt aggrieved at being ignored. not because we would have bombed the people could not believe that report.
It Second, Castro was angry over the bases, but because of their fear that we caused deep confusion.
On October 28, the Cuban leader had make broader the Iist of weapons for evacu­ In 1992, the Cuban leader intimated that this articulated five points that he stated should ation.
That would have at least recognized sad news that the IL-28 planes would also firm his suspicion that the protection of \ Cuban sovereignty.
Here i I agreeing to an internationally sponsored in­ sified Soviet records of the Mikoyan-Castro were the seeds of true discontent. •i spection of the dismantling of the missiles conversations, Mikoyan conveyed The lessons were clear to Castro, and ( on Cuban soil without first asking Cuba's Moscow's decision to withdraw the these were what he attempted to convey to permission. bomber's, to Castro's evident fury, in a the Central Committee in 1968.
The Soviet Third, there was the issue of Cuba's meeting on November 12.
Soviet accord would weaken Cuba inter­ Significance of the January 1968 Speech ""We realized,"" Castro said to the Central nally and encourage counter-revolution and Committee, ""how alone we would be in the perhaps challenges to his leadership.
The Cuba as ""a freely granted concession to top be a step backward, a retreat.
Cuba is a young the designation ""micro"" was intended to more as a deterrent to potential United States aggres­ developing country.
Our people are diminish their importance, there was little sion-a kind of tripwire that would involve very impulsive.
The moral factor has a doubt that the attack against them was filled the Soviet Union in a CubanUnited States conflict­ special significance in our country.
We with high drama and potentially high stakes than as a necessary military support.
The meeting began on January 23, and COLD WAR [NTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 83 was presided over by Raoul Castro, the on the history of Cuban-Soviet relations, the artistic community.
This was also a Minister ofthe Armed Forces and the party's which was quite critical of the Soviet Union, period when Havana was awash in graffiti second secretary.
The leader of the Popular Socialist interviews we conducted in Havana with that the purge was warranted.
What made the attack on Escalante sign of rupture between Cuba and its bene­ tionalism, which was the ultimate source of and his cohorts especially dramatic was that factor.
Moreover, cro-faction trial, after all, focused on alleg­ would have subverted Cuban national iden­ they were accused of meeting with officials edly errant individuals and avoided impli­ tity, but would have been a grave error, of the Soviet embassy in Havana, of provid­ cating the Soviet Union directly. because-as he argues in the section of the ing these officials (one of whom was alleg­ Cuban leaders were also worried about speech on the Missile Crisis-the Soviet edly the KGB station chief) with false infor­ internal disunity.
On the one hand, they did Union was untrustworthy. mation about Cuba, and of encouraging the not want to encourage the Cuban public to Third, by keeping the speech secret, Soviet Union to apply economic sanctions seize on the speech as a sign that Cuba Castro sent a message to the Soviet Union against Cuba.
In effect, their purge could be disavowed all aspects of Soviet socialism. that while Cuba profoundly disagreed with it interpreted as a direct rebuff to the Soviet There was considerable cultural ferment in over several issues, there was still the possi­ Union.
There are so many myths and was one of three Soviets who also partici­ tigation became possible, and Fidel Castro's puzzles about those events.
We would be pated, along with Fyodor Burlatsky and personal role in that decision.
At the conclusion of that ber 1987, only a few weeks after the Harvard events in which we were immediate partici­ interesting discussion it was agreed to ad­ discussions, the Soviet Union celebrated the pants.
But nobody has invited us."" vance a step further the historical study that 70th anniversary of the October Socialist Then I requested an invitation for the had been jointly launched. l Revolution.
Fidel The next ""round"" ofthis study was held the ""first persons,"" and Fidel Castro was promised to send a delegation and he deliv­ in Moscow in January 1989.
Dobrynin, A Alexeev, O Troyanovsky, dence, the mansion at the Leninskie Gory. continued on page 87 84 COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN would have been far more difficult to over­ challenge because it claimed to be the model quent months, in speeches critical of the come the tensions with the Soviet Union. for developing socialism in Latin America, Soviet model of socialism and world revolu­ These tensions were reaching their peak and the Cuban proletariat was less advanced tion, and supporting Che Guevara's Novem­ in January 1968.
To some extent the ideological prob­ message to the Tricontinental Conference in rationing of gasoline.
What the Soviets lem could be obscured by treating Cuba as which he declared that through ""liberation had done was to increase supplies only mod­ an exception, especially during the period struggles"" in Latin America, ""the Cuban estly from the previous year, and well below that it was not ruled by a communist party.
American Solidarity-which was created independence from the Soviet Union.
That came three months before a major by the Tricontinental Conference-Cuba ar­ The Soviet action came after Premier international meeting of revolutionaries in ranged for nearly all of the delegations to be Alexsei Kosygin visited Cuba in July 1967.
Later in the year, it point­ meeting in New Jersey with President its differences with Cuba on the matter of edly chose to absent itself from a Soviet­ 1 Lyndon Johnson.
The Castro-Kosygin meet­ armed struggle by resolving at a December organized preparatory meeting ofworld com­ ing reportedly was quite tense, in part be­ 1964 meeting of Latin American communist munist parties in Budapest. cause Cuba disagreed with Soviet aspira­ parties that while armed struggle was a valid The trial of the micro-faction thus came tions for a detente with the United States.
It means of achieving socialism. the appropri­ at what seemed to be a critical juncture for is likely, also, that Kosygin approvingly ate means were to be assessed by each com­ Cuba in its relationship with the Soviet Union. conveyed a United States message that Cuba should munist party.
But ""the had been a source of friction between the set the fragile peace.
It raised several problems for the conference would undermine China's He then announced that he was eliminating the Soviet Union.
In fact. by lieved that socialism could evolve peace­ organization, headquartered in Havana, to May 1968 Cuba had actually begun a rap­ fully in Latin America. and would come support armed revolutionary activity prochement with the Soviet Union, which about through united front alliances spear­ throughout the world, and the organization' s was evident in a softer tone in Castro's headed by the established communist par­ executive secretariat had only three repre­ speeches about international affairs.
It was critical in their view to appreciate sentatives from communist parties-CUba. in August, Cuba refused to condemn the that Latin America was not ripe for revolu­ North Vietnam and North Korea, all ofwhom Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia.
While tion. because it had an underdeveloped pro­ were critical of the Soviet Union.
By asserting Cuban Soviet Union and Cuba, and included President Castro, November 1962, Russian Foreign Ministry archives. as well as from documents declassified through the 14.
The correspondence between Kennedy and independence, Castro could accept the kind efforts of the National Security Archive.
See James G Khrushchev over the removal of the IL-28s is reprinted of ties that would have appeared to make Blight and David A Welch.
Cuba on the Brink.4­ the March closure of small businesses­ Crisis,"" in James A Nathan, ed., The Cuban Missile 225. proved to be critical for the future direction Crisis Revisited ; 17.
Granma.lnternational Edition , 4 and II Laurence Chang and Peter Kornbluh, eds., The Cuban February 1968. of the Cuban revolution.
Granma, International Edition , 7 January eral Cuban leaders that armed struggle was 5.
Indeed. the Soviets similarly assessed the suspen­ 1968.2-3. not going to be a viable means of building sion.
On pre-crisis United States military planning and covert , actions against Cuba, see James G Hershberg, ""Before 88.
Soviet 1deological and Strategi­ that were he a Cuban leader in 1962. he would likely cal Perspectives, 1959-77, trans.
Deanna Drendel Cuba any more rope with which to wander have assessed that United States actions portended an invasion.
United States Congress, Senate, Committee on the Judiciary, military invasion.
Operation Mongoose was devised as a total plan for Latin American Peoples,"" A Staff Study.th Cong., ward a rapprochement with the Soviet Union, low intensity conflict.
For exemplary speeches, see Martin Kenner and micro-faction trial and Castro's speech.
In nomic pressure that was implemented through the for­ James Petras, eds.
On Guevara's problems choosing to join the fold, Cuba would try to 1962.
That determina­ that would ultimately require a direct United States military 53,337. invasion.
Venceremos' The Speeches and tion clearly grew out of its experiences Missile Crisis, 1962.
Fidel Castro Speaks, 233, with which Cuba established its ties to the President Kennedy understood the matter of secrecy in 277.
Soviet Union that the January 1968 speech the same light, asserting that whoever revealed the 28.
Granma International Edition , 25 August makes an important contribution to the his­ missiles first would be able to set the terms of debate.68. tory of the Cold War.
The full text of the Missile Crisis portion of the see McGeorge Bundy and Theodore Sorensen's com­ speech will be published in James G Blight and Philip ments in Allyn.
Blight and Welch, Back to the Brink, James G Blight is Senior Research Fellow at the Brenner.
Centerfor Foreign Policy Development at Brown Uni­ Missiles. and Cuban-Soviet Relations (Lanham.
He went [Translated from Spanish by the Cuban the always unpleasant initiative of making a state­ to the extreme of proposing that the international Council of State] ment-at my suggestion-that would create the vessel be brought to MarieL saying that because right atmosphere, trying to justify the action by it was an international vessel it would no longer MEETING OF THE saying that the planes were obsolete, etc.
All of be Cuban territory, and the UN supervisors could CENTRAL COMMITTEE which was done in consideration for public opin­ be on board the vessel and could supervise the OF THE COMMUNIST PARTY OF CUBA ion, to protect the people from the trauma of operation.
PALACE OF THE REVOLUTION another blow of that nature, since we were seri­ ""Look, why don't you dress them up in sailor HAVANA ously concerned-and, in our view, rightly so suits?"" , referring to the interna­ JANUARY 26, 1968 given those circumstances-over the pernicious tional supervisors.
In the a mistake, in our opinion there had been a series their vessel, dressed up as Soviet sailors, but early hours of morning we stopped while on of mistakes, but the extent of our overall confi­ leaving us out of the whole mess.
It is true that I the topic of the reply sent to the Soviet Govern­ dence, and that deposited in the Soviet Union and was falling asleep, but I was not that far gone. ment in response to their letter attempting to find its policies, was still considerable.
That justifications in alleged alarms, and purporting So the planes went too.
I the withdrawal ofthe Soviet mechanized infantry problems with the translators and there were These issues were made perfectly clear in brigades stationed in Cuba.
Let me add here, in occasions when some of the things we said were that letter.
Later there was another long letter case anyone is unaware ofit, that at the time of the badly translated and there was even one point containing the same points of view, and though missile issue, there were over 40,000 Soviettroops when poor Mikoyan got furious.
It was over some couched in more diplomatic terms, so to speak, stationed in Cuba.
The imperialists must also phrase or other. f answering each of the items in Khrushchev's have known that, but they never declared the Anyway, those deliberations-as well as \ letter one by one. amount, they limited themselves to speculative some of the others-were characterized by total At that time, we also received Mikoyan's figures, which revealed their interest in reducing and complete disagreement.
No, the amount, perhaps due to possible effects on have the highest opinion of Mikoyan as an indi­ Mikoyan's visit was not taken down in short­ public opinion. vidual, as a person, and he was always favorably hand; there were notes on Mikoyan's visit.
U In fact, anyone who reads Kennedy's state­ inclined toward Cuba, he was Cuba's friend, and Thanf s visit was the one that was taken down in ments, his demands, will notice that he did not I think he still is a friend of Cuba; I mean, he did shorthand.
It is a real pity that the discussions include those divisions, which were not offensive quite a bit for us.
That is why he always received with Mikoyan were not taken down in shorthand, or strategic weapons, or anything of the sort.
And talks were under way; but made it clear that we were on the verge of another problem over the when it was remarked that the agreement would did not consider those talks conclusive at all.
I think that at this point The demoralizing effect began to manifest their fear that we might.
What we were most Raul made a joke that caused quite a commotion itself in the fact that the anti-aircraft gunners and concerned about then was avoiding a new impact in the atmosphere of that meeting.
I think it was the crews at the air bases had begun to draw on public opinion as regards a new blow, a new when we were discussing expedients.
Do you caricatures reflecting their mood and their situa­ i I COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 87 tion, in which they depicted the planes flying 6.
In 1968, Carlos Rafael Rodriguez had ministerial CASTRO AND GLASNOST above them, the Yanquis sticking their tongues rank and was involved in foreign commerce.
And we realized once again to revolution, and had served in the government of organizational problems related to the what extent the men who were supposed to be Fulgencio Batista in 1944, very experienced in struggling against the impe­ project, the Cuban leader began to recall and headed the Institute for Agrarian Reform from rialists were actually totally oblivious to imperi­ 1962-64.
And even though Castro repeat­ cowardly-attitude. edly spoke on this topic later, that conversa­ So we warned Mikoyan that we were going tion contained a series of statements and to open fire on the low-flying planes.
We even did him that favor, since they still had the ground­ judgments that shed some light on the devel­ to-air missiles and we were interested in preserv­ opment and outcome of the 1962 crisis, and CWIHP FELLOWSHIPS ing them.
Cuba On plicants should submit a CV, a state­ the anti-aircraft launchers.
It is not clear what lengthy letter Castro mendation; writing samples (particu­ for protection of those anti-aircraft launchers, but is referring to here, or whether it has been made they could not provide effective protection.
Applicants should have a gave an order to add hundreds of additional anti­ crisis and its impact on Soviet-Cuban relations, dated aircraft launchers to protect those launchers.
Ad­ 31 January 1963, from Khrushchev to Castro was working ability in English.
Preference released at the 1992 Havana conference.] ditionallaunchers were in the Cuban hands.
Soviet Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan arrived in way we wanted to protect the Soviet nuclear and Havana on 2 November 1962.
The first meeting with previously had an opportunity to do anti-aircraft missiles that were deployed in Cuba. the Cuban leader was on November 3.
Low overflights by the American planes repre­ here, Mikoyan notified the Cubans on about November sented a real threat of an unexpected attack on 5 or 6thatthe IL-28s would be removed.
At my meeting with the Com­ contemporary documents, however, including mander-in-chief of the Soviet forces in Cuba Kennedy-Khrushchev correspondence and Castro­ Mikoyan conversation minutes, suggest that Mikoyan Jim Hershberg I raised the question of the informed Castro about Moscow's acquiescence to Director serious danger that the American overflights rep­ Kennedy's demand to remove the IL-28s only on resented.
That meeting occurred on the 25th or Cold War International History November 12. the 26th.
Central Project allow the American planes to fly at such low American bases were used for training Cuban exiles in Woodrow Wilson International altitudes over the Cuban territory any more.
I 1960 and 1961, and for launching the Bay of Pigs Center for Scholars even sent a letter to Khrushchev invasion.
There is evidence that plans also were made 1000 Jefferson Drive, S,W. about that.
In that letter I told the Soviet leader for creating a Nicaraguan and Costa Rican base, but there is not clear evidence on whether they were used.
In fact, United States estimates were never more than half of already existed. that number.
Also see '''Soviet peared again, we gave orders to all Cuban anti­ Military Buildup in Cuba,' 21 October, 1962,"" in Mary aircraft batteries to fire.
We don't know any details, lar, reacted to the Soviet statements very nega­ of the planes and the Soviet troops.
He told me but it happened so that the plane was shot down by a Soviet anti-aircraft missile over the eastern tively.
However, in 24 hours the Soviet planes and ·•, i part of the country. the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
In all their public the majority of the troops were withdrawn from f I don't know in what manner they reported statements Cuban representatives stated that the Cuba.
If the Soviet i order to shoot down the plane was given by the had the right to use any kind of weapons for the Union was willing to give us assistance in our Commander-in-Chiefofthe Soviettroops in Cuba defense ofthe revolution.
We believed that those defense, why did they agree to withdraw the ; that decision was most probably made statements of the Soviet leaders did harm to the troops, we were asking.
At that time there were by the commanderofthe anti-aircraft missiles, or prestige of the Soviet Union in the eyes of the six regiments with 42,000 military personnel in even by a commander of one of the batteries. general public, since at the same time you al­ Cuba.
Khrushchev had withdrawn the troops Khrushchev, however, accused us of shooting lowed U-2 flights over the Cuban territory that from Cuba even though it was not required by the down that plane in his letter. took pictures of the missiles stationed there.
We disagreed with To be sincere, it was possible that we were At that time the question of the withdrawal such a decision.
In the end, as a concession to us to blame since we opened fire at the American of the Soviet missiles had not been raised yet. the decision was made to keep one brigade in planes first, because we were so decisively against However, the aggravation of the situation forced Cuba.
The Americans knew about that brigade the American overflights, But the biggest mis­ Khrushchev to make that decision.
We, on our from the very beginning, but they did not discuss take probably was that you, having installed part, thought that Khrushchev had rushed, having it. those missiles, still allowed the Americans to fly made that decision without any consultation with Many years later, in 1979, before the Non­ over the launching sites.
We believe that the inclusion of the Cuban aligned Conference [in Havana in September nothing else but preparation for a sudden Ameri­ side in the negotiations would have made it pos­ 1979] American Senator Church an­ can invasion of Cuba.
I cannot blame the Soviet sible to get bigger concessions from the Ameri­ nounced that a Soviet brigade was deployed in comrade who shot the U-2 for what he did be­ cans, possibly including the issue of the Ameri­ Cuba.
Then our Soviet comrades suggested that cause I understand his psychological condition can base in Guantanamo.
He saw that the Cubans opened fire at the fact that we found out about the Soviet­ against it.
However, before we had a chance to the American planes, and he decided to fire a American agreement from the radio.
Moreover, send our response, a statement had been \ missile at the U-2.
It is interesting that the former Soviet Am­ second the mentioning of Turkey was dropped. center in Cuba. bassador in Cuba, Alekseev, wrote When I visited the Soviet Union in 1963, At the time of the crisis President Kennedy in his memoirs that I was trying to avoid the Khrushchev read several letters to me.
For the sake of historical objectivity I American letters were signed by Thompson, but official Soviet position.
In shown the photos of the Soviet missiles in Cuba, Khrushchev after we had deployed the anti-air­ Khrushchev's response he spoke about the mis­ he had to agree that the Soviets lied to him. craft batteries and mobilized our people to repel siles in Turkey and Italy.
There were certain On the Question of nuclear warheads in the aggression I expressed my hope that we threats in Kennedy's letter.
In particular, he Cuba I can tell you that one day during the crisis would be able to preserve peace.
I wanted to wrote that if the Russians did not accept their I was invited to a meeting at the quarters of the show Khrushchev that I was not in an aggressive proposals, something would have happened.
At the same time I wanted to inform him response to that Khrushchev stated that some­ the commanders of different units reported on about my concern with the possibility ofan Ameri­ thing would have happened indeed if the Ameri­ their readiness.
Among them was the com­ can first strike, not even excluding a possibility of cans undertook any actions against Cuba in disre­ mander of the missile forces, who reported that a nuclear strike against Cuba. gard of the agreement, and that that something the missiles had been in full combat readiness.
At the same time I suggested to the Soviet would have been incredible in its scale.
That Soon after the Reagan administration came Commander-in-Chief in Cuba to dis­ meant that if the Americans had dared to violate to power an American emissary, Vernon Walters, perse the nuclear warheads, so that they would the agreement, a war would have begun. came to Cuba.
We talked extensively about all not have been completely destroyed in case of an Probably Khrushchev did not anticipate that aspects of our relations, and in particular, he American attack.
And he agreed with me. the interpreter who read the originals would have raised the question of the October crisis.
Trying One more question concerned the public mentioned Italy, but the original letter mentioned to show how informed he was, he said that, statements made by the Soviet leadership and the the withdrawal of missiles from Turkey and Italy. according to his sources, nuclear warheads had coverage of the events in the organs of mass Later I asked the Soviet side to give explanations not yet reached Cuba by the time of the crisis. r media.
I sent two emissaries to Moscow [on 27 of that issue, but they told me that the agreement don't know why he said that. but according to the August-2 September 1962--ed.]-I think they mentioned only Turkey.
I insisted larly IL-28 planes, subsequently they had been standing, Khrushchev was setting strategic goals that we should not allow the Americans to specu­ withdrawn on the American demand.
I asked Soviet comrades about that late with the public opinion, that we should make Mikoyan came to Cuba, he confirmed to us that many times, but nobody could give me an answer. the agreement public.
However, Khrushchev the agreement only provided for the withdrawal Personally, I believe that along with his love for declined. of the Soviet missiles.
I asked him what would Cuba Khrushchev wanted to fix the strategic COLD WAR INTERNATIONAL HISTORY PROJECT BULLETIN 89 parity in the cheapest way.
Hill and was in progress between Cuba and the comrades proposed to us to deploy the nuclear Wang, 1989; Noonday Press ofFarrar Straus and Giroux, People's Republic of China.
Soviet concessions indeed corroborated this political point of view we would have been seen 3.
On the 1992 Havana conference, see James G impression. as a Soviet military base in Latin America.
Castro. the Missile Crisis and the Soviet military invasion of Cuba in order to avoid the Collapse . friend and most loyal ally.
As had his political harm to the prestige of the Cuban revo­ predecessor-Stalin dispatched Mikoyan on lution.
Important from the Cuban viewpoint, belongs to Khrushchev who caused that crisis by Nikita Khrushchev, Fidel Castro, former Mikoyan had been the last in the Soviet his stubbornness, and then resolved it.did not know what was the real correlation of forces at Soviet Ambassador in Cuba Aleksandr leadership who belonged to the ""old guard"" that time, how many missiles did Khrushchev Alekseev.
Khrushchev told me that after the missiles between Cuba and the USSR was badly known all great revolutionaries of the cen­ would have been deployed in Cuba, Kennedy fractured.
Castro, for all his I believe that it was possible to achieve the same goals without deploying the missiles in Cuba.
To the Soviet perspective, that of a superpower, anger, let Mikoyan know on November 3 defend Cuba it would have been sufficient to the most important fact was that Castro had, that he remembered his role.
And that this open military acti vities against the Soviet troops. the United States if it invaded Cuba.
Now 1 understand that the actions under­ notion, considered dangerous and irrespon­ taken by Khrushchev were risky, if not to say What both sides felt and understood sible in Moscow, became an excuse com­ during the talks was no less important than irresponsible.
Khrushchev should have carried pletely to exclude Cuba from the U.S.-So­ their ""formal"" written content.
For the third out a policy like the one Gorbachev is carrying viet secret talks to resolve the crisis.
However, we understand that at that time the Soviet Union did not reach the parity of the Soviet leaders, gathered at the height the Sino-Soviet quarrel , which it has now.am not criticizing Khrushchev of the crisis on 27 October 1962 at Novo­ there was an open conflict of perspectives for pursuing strategic goals, but the choice of the Ogarevo governmental dacha near Moscow, and interests between the USSR and another timing and the means for achieving the goals was may even have feared that the Cubans, like communist regime.
The Cubans ridically, legally] with Khrushchev's let­ own considerations.
The Soviet withdraw the Soviet missiles from Cuba something about the Cuban crisis,"" he said with ambassador alerted the Soviet leadership under UN inspection.
But in any case, both a smile. that Moscow's actions had endangered So­ actions enraged and offended Castro, who I The organization and results ofthe 1987 Cambridge viet-Cuban friendship.
