In 1962, the Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev conceived a plan for a strategic base in Cuba that the U.S.S.R. could use to deter or threaten the United States and, at the same time, protect an ally from attack.
After an American spy plane discovered Soviet missiles capable of striking the United States in mid-October 1962, the world got as close as it ever did to a nuclear war.
The confrontation was eventually resolved peacefully, with the Soviet Union agreeing to remove the missiles.
Cold War Background The showdown grew out of several elements of the Cold War, including a very clear understanding on the part of the Soviet leadership of their nation's strategic weakness.
America's economic power, its technology, its initial leads in nuclear weapons and launchers, and its geographic advantages sat in the forefront of Soviet thinking throughout the 1950s.
American U-2 reconnaissance flights over Soviet territory flaunted this strength even as they uncovered Soviet weaknesses.
At the same time, Khrushchev believed that the Soviet Union could gain strength by currying allies in the developing world, where many nations were emerging from colonial rule.
For its part, the United States regarded Latin America as its sphere of influence.
The Soviets did not create Fidel Castro's revolution, but they were willing to embrace it.
The United States, however, refused to tolerate a Soviet client state in the Western Hemisphere.
Before 1962, two United States administrations had unleashed diplomats, economic sanctions, spies, propagandists, assassins, agents, and even a miniature army in order to destabilize or remove the Castro regime.
The spectacular failure of the American-sponsored invasion at the Bay of Pigs in 1961 actually encouraged the Kennedy administration to go after Castro again, by any means necessary, including the use of force.
Kennedy had, after all, attacked Eisenhower's dealings with Cuba during the 1960 campaign.
Now, he wanted to make sure that Khrushchev and the American electorate both understood that he was a tough and resolute leader.
Soviet leaders, for their part, had to confront their substantially weaker strategic position.
Their rockets could devastate Western Europe; but they had a strike force capable of hitting the United States only one-tenth the size of the force with which the United States could hit them.
Meanwhile, the Americans had, through NATO, placed Jupiter missiles in Turkey that could strike the Soviet Union in ten minutes.
As early as 1959, Eisenhower had compared such a NATO base with the possibility of Soviet missiles in Mexico or Cuba, which might warrant anything from serious concern to direct military action.
Now, the Soviets saw in Castro's revolution an opportunity to redress the strategic imbalance and to protect an ally faced with trouble.
Khrushchev's plan was a bold and imaginative stroke, but it was not a prudent one.
Properly respectful of the destructive power of thermonuclear explosions, and convinced that such weapons could never actually be used, Khrushchev moved, in the spring of 1962, to establish a Soviet base in Cuba.
The Americans would eventually discover about 40 mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles with one-megaton warheads, along with a squadron or so of obsolete, but nuclear-capable, bombers, surface-to-air missiles to protect them, and a contingent of Soviet technicians to operate the complex.
Most significantly, Soviet weapons included short-range cruise missiles tipped with tactical nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev also sent a powerful military force of 42,000 that could maintain and launch the missiles, support patrols in American waters by Soviet missile-launching submarines, and defend Cuba from an American invasion.
Kennedy Reacts Kremlin leaders had warned Khrushchev of the risks he was running, and military advisors had warned that American reconnaissance would most likely discover the installation before it was operational, as it did on October 15.
The failure of Khrushchev's gamble brought the two nations close to war.
Neither government wanted to back down; each realized that both of them had to back down; and both were painfully aware that one wrong move could begin a global thermonuclear war.
After gathering his senior advisors , Kennedy initially intended to bomb the missiles where they lay.
Gradually, the American leadership realized that bombing alone could not guarantee complete destruction, and ExComm began to talk about a full-scale invasion of Cuba, projected to result in more than 18,000 casualties.
The actual number would probably have been far higher than that, however, because the U-2s never discovered the tactical nuclear weapons, and intelligence had substantially underestimated the conventional ground forces that would have opposed a landing.
Diplomacy was never a first option, for Kennedy feared that opening with a diplomatic move would make him look weak.
However, ExComm discussed diplomatic solutions, including proposals to remove the American missiles in Turkey in exchange for removing the Soviet missiles in Cuba, throughout the first week of the crisis.
Only as Kennedy and his aides realized that a direct assault was unworkable did they allow themselves to accept the less immediately violent course of a naval blockade.
The “quarantine” provided a show of military force sufficient to impress both the Soviets and American politicians, while also providing some room to think.
Soviet Response The Soviets first realized on October 22 that the Americans had found them out.
It was the morning before Kennedy announced the discovery of the missiles and the blockade intended to force their removal.
Although some of their Cuban weapons were already operational, the Soviets had, surprisingly, made no plans for how to use them if the United States actually attacked.
Led by Khrushchev, the Soviet Presidium debated its course of action as heatedly as ExComm had for the previous week, and then backed down.
Defying Kennedy's blockade might start a war, but even if it did not, the Americans might well capture some of the U.S.S.R.'s most advanced military technology.
In public, they continued to deny that there were offensive missiles in Cuba, but the Americans had photographic proof that they presented to a live, televised session of the United Nations Security Council.
To defend Cuba against an American attack, the Soviets and the Cubans could have made do with what they had already had there, but they chose not to.
Kennedy's flat-out refusal to tolerate the missiles had exactly, and immediately, the impact he wanted—although he did not know it.
The idea of a Soviet strategic base was instantly dead, and Khrushchev was not willing to use nuclear missiles to defend Cuba.
On October 26, Khrushchev wrote to Kennedy offering to remove the missiles in return for a pledge that the United States would not invade Cuba.
Before Kennedy had a chance to respond, however, Khrushchev sent a second letter adding a demand that the American missiles in Turkey be removed.
While ExComm and the president wondered whether the Soviets were double-crossing them, or whether hard-liners had deposed Khrushchev, a Soviet antiaircraft commander, without authorization, shot down a U-2 spy plane with a surface-to-air missile.
With the possibility of a peaceful solution apparently receding, the American military began to implement more of its contingency plans for an invasion of Cuba.
Soviet forces prepared to repel them, although without authority to use their nuclear weapons.
After he had sent his first letter, Khrushchev interpreted an article by the American columnist Walter Lippmann proposing a Turkey-Cuba missile swap as Kennedy's signal that he was willing to make such a trade.
Shaken by the unauthorized missile firing, Khrushchev chose to accept Kennedy's deal before things got completely out of hand.
At the same time, however, Kennedy, equally disturbed, sent his brother, Attorney Gen.
Robert Kennedy, to the Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to accept the missile swap, provided that the swap agreement was kept secret.
The two countries had to clean up some details over the next month, but the crisis was over.
The global brush with death brought no respite to the Cold War , but a turning point in the conflict had passed.
Thereafter, the United States and the Soviet Union could sign some agreements never before in reach, and negotiations for nuclear arms control began and became institutionalized.
In the United States, President Kennedy's apparent victory, without war, earned him a reputation for Cold War management that eventually overshadowed the failures of his early months in power and the disaster of the Bay of Pigs.
The resolution to the confrontation contributed to the success of Kennedy's last year in office, and it remains a central element of his historical reputation.
In Moscow, Khrushchev's retreat from the confrontation was a principal reason the Presidium unseated him as its leader.
