War 1954-1""975 I 't < ' Chapter 20 A Time of Social Change 1963-1975· Government and Democracy Government enacted social and economic welfare programs, such as poverty relief, conservation, and urban renewal.
Rights and Responsibilities Citizens called for racial equality for African Americans and other minorities, equality for women, and social and political reforms.
Making Generalizations Find practice for Making Generalizations in the Skills Handbook, H13 A generalization is a broad statement that tells how different examples are similar in some way.
Experienced readers make generalizations that enable them to understand and remember what they are reading.
Before You Read Read the headings to determine what the passage Kennedy's Media Strategy The passage mentions more will be about.
Then make Presidents before and after Kennedy have been masthan one president. a mental list of what you ters of the media.
Ronald Reagan, an experienced radio, television, and film T While You Read actor, became known as the Great Communicator for his skill in conveying his messages directly to the voters.
But Kennedy was the first president to consciously use access to the media as part of his List facts from the passage. strategy for goveming the nation.
KenRoosevelt both tried to convey T nedy understood how such pictures would shape images of strength. his image and boost his appeal.
Like Roosevelt, he understood that images showing him in less-thanAfter You Read top physical shape might lessen the country's confiUse your prior knowledge dence in his abilities.
In reality, Kennedy struggled and facts from the reading with health problems most of his life.
He suffered to make a generalization from Addison's disease, a sometimes fatal condition. about what the passage A bad back kept him in nearly constant pain. means to you.
Test Prep Tip Some tests may ask you to make generalizations from a given reading passage.
Look for clue words such as all, everyone, many, most, few, generally, never, often, always, and usually that indicate generalizations.
Then make sure that the facts in the passage support the entire generalization.
Civil rights face-off Photojournalism often at Selma THE combines text and a pho4 tograph.
Civil rights activists used marches and other forms of nonviolent protest to spur change.
This photograph was taken and published at about the same time that the events were occurring.
As You Read Try to determine the author of the source, the intended audience, and the author's purpose.
As You Study Use the time-and-place rule to evaluate the reliability of each historical source.
Students analyze the economic boom and social transformation of post-Wortd War II America.
January 1961 Astronaut John Glenn shows President Kennedy the interior of space capsule Friendship 7, the vessel in which Glenn became the first American to orbit the Earth.
Winning August 1961 the race to conquer space was an important East Germany Cold War goal for President Kennedy.
July 1964 Congress funds ship Pueblo is Lyndon B Johnson Congress passes Civil Medicaid and captured by becomes president.
January 1966 Indira Gandhi becomes India's first woman August 1968 Soviet army crushes revolt in Czechoslovakia. prime minister.
Robert Kennedy consequences (foreign and War policy of resistFidel Castro domestic) of the Cold War 2.
Still tan from several days of campaigning in some 70 million Americans watched sunny California, he refused the traditional TV makeup.
Vice President Richard Nixon and Senator John Kennedy in Nixon refused makeup too.
In his gray suit, Nixon looked the first televised presidential debate.
During that time he had covered to his rested and fit appearance. 15,000 miles, campaigning in 25 states.
He had lost so The hour-long debate was broadcast on both radio and much weight that his shirt collar sagged around his neck. television.
Radio listeners thought Nixon narrowly won, On the day ofthe debate, he pored over his notes until just while those watching on television gave Kennedy before air time. the edge.
For days afterward, huge crowds turned out at campaign rallies to see the handsome candidate in the flesh.
Although some reporters at the time called them the Great Debates, the Kennedy-Nixon debates probably did not change the outcome of the 1960 election.
They did increase the average American's interest in politics, however.
One incident in October might have helped Kennedy Becomes President Kennedy's election campaign.
Kennedy telephoned political difference in the 1960 presidential King's wife, Caretta, to express his concern. campaign.
Kenned was born into a wealthy Robert Kennedy, the candidate's brother, perand politically powe1ful Massachusetts family, suaded the judge to release King on bail. while Nixon was afls elf-made ""common man"" King's father told the press he had planned from a small town i , southem California. to vote for Nixon but that Kennedy's call to his Although the tw men were about the same daughter-in-law had changed his mind.
The age, Kennedy's movie-star good looks made him Kennedy campaign printed 2 million leaflets appear much younger.
The leaflets ACADEMIC sion debates, he spoke with ease and authority. were passed out in African American churches VOCABULARY To many Americans, the 43-year-old senator the Sunday before election day. authority firm represented America's future.
Nixon's ties to self-assurance the 70-year-old Eisenhower made him seem a Kennedy takes office Kennedy's inaugupart of America's past. ral address focused on his theme of change.
Let every nation know, During the elec(ion campaign, Kennedy whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay played on the nation's Cold War fears by any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, supclaiming the United States had fallen behind port any friend, oppose any foe, in order to assure the Soviet Union in the development of nuclear the survival and the success of liberty.'' missiles.
He also claimed that the prosperity -John F Kennedy, Inaugural Address, January 20, 1961 of the 1950s was not reaching the poor.
Vice President Nixon defended President Eisenhower's record, which made him appear opposed to new ideas.
Despite Kennedy's personal appeal, some Protestant voters }vere concerned because he was a Roman C~tholic.
They feared that Kennedy might put the views of the Catholic Church over those of the American public.
Fewer than 120,000 votes separated the two candidates out of nearly 69 million ballots cast.
He became the youngest person and the first Catholic elected president.
Fifteen southern electors, however, cast their ballots for Virginia's Democratic senator Harry Byrd, who was not even a candidate.
This weakness in Kennedy's southem suppol)'t coupled with his narrow victory in the popular vote would later cause problems for his presidency.
At an average age of 4 7, Presispecify his policy goals at home because so much dent Kennedy's cabinet was relatively young. division existed over domestic issues.
However, Its members averaged 10 years younger than he made accomplishing domestic goals a top President Eisenhower's. priority.
Another the 1960 campaign, Kennedy learned that the adviser was a professor at Massachusetts Central Intelligence Agency was secretly Institute ofTechnology . training about 1,500 Cuban exiles in Central Most of Kennedy's advisers were young America in order to invade Cuba.
Ted trainees were Cuban Americans the CIA had Sorensen, who helped develop domestic policies recruited in south Florida.
Kennedy hower had authorized the project in the hope called Sorensen his ""intellectual blood bank."" of overthrowing Cuba's dictator Fidel Castro.
But no one was closer to the president than his own brother, Robert Kennedy.
He Background to the invasion Fidel Castro included his 36-year-old brother in his cabinet came to power in Cuba in 1959 after a twoby making him attorney general. year guerrilla war against Fulgencio Batista, Except for Bobby, cabinet members had less the U.S.-backed dictator of Cuba.
As Castro's influence on President Kennedy than did his followers increased in number, his tactics White House advisers.
When his rebel force marched on example, Kennedy relied more on National Havana, Cuba's capital city, Batista fled the Security Adviser Bundy than on Secretary of country.
On January 8, 1959, Castro entered State Dean Rusk or Secretary of Defense RobHavana and declared victory. ert MeN amara.
Kennedy also held cabinet During his revolt, Castro gained the support meetings less often than Eisenhower didofmany Cubans by promising to restore people's only once a month unless Kennedy cancelled rights and freedoms.
His government seized private busiJ esses, including American companies on the iFland.
U.S.1 Cuban relations wTre further strained when Castro signed a t~ade agreement with the Soviet Union in F bruary 1960.
Eisenhower responded by cutti g off American economic and diplomatic ties I ith Cuba.
The invasion of Cuba The CIA believed z --. 7~"""" 0 anjnvasion of Cuba would inspire its people ~ to rise up against Castro.
Eisenhower doubted 8z this prediction, but he let planning continue to 0 f2 keep all options open.
J z decision whether to approve an invasion. ~ lflKennedy asked his advisers about the ~ plan to invade Cuba.
Interpreting Visuals What comment is the carThe president was in a bind.
Castro's communism a threat to all of Latin What specific incident do you think the cartoon is America.
Eisenhower during the campaign for not taking stronger action against Castro.
Concerned about how such a response CIA assured Kennedy that the invasion would might affect U.S.-Soviet relations, the president succeed, he gave the go-ahead. rejected this advice.
Kennedy publicly Also, the CIA had greatly underestimated denied the story.
The expected anti-Castro air strike by old, unmarked United States bombers flown uprising in Cuba never took place.
The nearly from Nicaragua by Cuban exiles failed to 1,200 surviving invaders were captured and destroy Cuba's air force.
In December 1962 Kennedy damaged in the atl ack landed at Key West, obtained their release in return for $52 million I Florida, instead o~ returning to Nicaragua. in food and medical aid to Cuba.
With the United States connection now exposed, KenInstead of eliminating the threat of comnedy cancelled add~tional air strikes on Cuba munism so close to the United States, the Bay that had been plan~ed for April 16 and 17. of Pigs incident actually strengthened Castro's The land invas~on on April 17 had little ties to the Soviet Union.
Warned by the air attack, to the Soviets for protection from the United Castro was prepared.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev welexiles came ashore ~t the Bay of Pigs, Castro's comed the closer relations.
Within hours, some 25,000 The Berlin Crisis East German soldiers were in place to guard One reason Kennedy rejected sending United States forces a hastily erected barbed wire barrier around into Cuba was that he feared it would cause West Berlin.
The temporary fencing was soon ACADEMIC Khrushchev to retaliate in Europe.
Khrushchev, replaced with a high concrete wall, to block furVOCABULARY however, interpreted Kennedy's failure to ther escapes to freedom. interpreted intervene in Cuba as a sign of weakness.
It Kennedy responded to the construction of understood within encouraged Khrushchev to press the United the Berlin Wall by sending 1,500 troops from the context of the States in Berlin.
Vice President circumstances Lyndon B Johnson visited West Berlin to The Vienna conference Kennedy invited reassure its people that America would not Khrushchev to meet with him in Vienna, abandon them.
The president hoped to He believed that Khrushchev would now not ease tensions with the Soviet Union.
As time demanded that the United States withdraw passed it was extended and fortified.
Trenches East Germany in December if these demands were dug to keep vehicles from crashing though were not met.
The East Germans later built a seccould then decide for itself what to do about ond wall parallel to the first one.
Kennedy would not be bullied. between the two walls was patrolled by soldiers Berlin's significance Berlin had long been and attack dogs. a problem for the Soviet Union.
The western Nearly two years after the crisis was past, half of the city was an island of freedom surKennedy went to West Berlin to renew his rounded by East Germany.
At an outdoor rally of 1961 alone, about 200,000 East Germans near the Berlin Wall, he gave one of the greatest escaped communism by slipping past guards speeches of his presidency-his ""Ich bin ein Berliner"" speech.
Some of Kennedy's advisers were in English, he noted the wall's importance as a concerned that East Germany might use force symbol of the failures of communism. to gain control of West Berlin.
All agreed that HISTORY'S VOICES Khrushchev was using Berlin to test America's ''There are many people in the world who really will in Europe and that any action East don't understand ... the great issue between the Germany took would have the approval and free world and the communist world.
There are some who say that comDetermined to meet the Soviet test, munism is the wave of the future.
He called reserve troops to active and elsewhere we can work with the communists. duty, launched a program to build shelters Let them come to Berlin.'' in the United States against nuclear attack, -John F Kennedy, June 26, 1963 and began a troop buildup in West Germany.
Khrushchev responded by threatening to As the huge crowd cheered wildly, Kennedy mobilize troops.
WEST BERLIN The Berlin Wall divided families as well as the land itself.
Relatives had to settle for distant looks and shouted conversations over the wall.
Watchtowers equipped with searchlights, machine guns, and East German sharpshooters surveyed the death strip.
Later, unmanned automatic firing systems were installed that shot any moving thing detected in the death strip. -~ Tank traps and barbed wire prevented vehicles from crashing through the fence that marked the death strip.
They The Berlin Wall was m ~ ch more than mortar and bricks, but a system also made escape more difficult of barriers, guards, and deterrents. for those trying to flee on foot.
See Skills Handbook, H20 The Cuban Missile Crisi Kennedy faced similar pressures.
For several days in October 1962, the Cuba would be their main issue in the 1962 United States and the Soviet Union teetered congressional election campaign.
He also convinced Castro Buildup to the crisis The origins of the to allow the secret installation of offensive Cuban missile crisis can be found in the policies nuclear missiles that would be controlled by and politics of both the United States and the the Soviet Union.
United States actions in the Bay of Pigs and Berlin crises encouraged hard-line leaders The crisis begins Republicans' pressure on in the Soviet Union.
They pushed Khrushchev Kennedy increased as Khrushchev pumped aid to be more aggressive. into Cuba.
Kennedy responded by ordering U-2 Some Americans continued to call for an spy-plane flights over the island.
This 1962, one of these flights detected the SAMs. concerned Khrushchev because he had pledged The Soviets pointed out that the SAMs to defend Cuba.
They denied charges about nuclear missiles the United States had they were placing offensive missiles in Cuba. placed in Turkey.
Moscow replied the southern border of the United States. that a United States attack on Cuba would mean war.
Khrushchev warned that from a U-2 plane provided the first solid evitrying to stop them would mean war.
October 24, as they neared the United States blockade, they turned back.
Managing the crisis Kennedy assembled Two days later, Kennedy received a letter a group of advisers, known as the Ex Comm, from Khrushchev offering to remove the to help him decide on a response.
He usually missiles if the United States pledged to never Government did not attend the Ex Comm's daily meetings. invade Cuba.
The next day he received a tougher Kennedy's pledge He wanted to follow his normal schedule until letter from Khrushchev demanding that the that the United he was ready to reJ eal what he knew to the United States remove its missiles from Turkey.
States would Soviets and to the American people. never invade Cuba The Ex Comm advised Kennedy to ignore the caused many Ex Comm's military members favored an second letter and accept the offer in the first Cuban Americans air strike against the missile sites, perhaps letter.
The president did so, and Khrushchev to switch their followed by an invasion of Cuba.
Like an air Effects of the crisis This incident is the can community strike, the blockade -yvould be an act of war, but closest the world has ever come to nuclear war. remains strongly it seemed less likely to provoke a missile launch Kennedy and Khrushchev both took steps to Republican today.
In 1963 would also give the Soviets the chance to avoid they set up a hotli~er to allow United States presidents war by removing the missiles themselves.
The and Soviet leaders to communicate directly in president agreed witJh this reasoning. times of crisis.
The United States, the Soviet On October 22, ~nnedy went on television Union, and Great Britain also signed the to tell Americans a out the Soviet threat.
He Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty to end the put United States forces on fu . alert.
He sumincreased goodwill toward the United States marized the values he thought should guide throughout the world.
Another of Kennedy's foreign-policy proHISTORY'S VOICES grams was the Alliance for Progress.
Not a tals, roads, low-cost housing, and power plants enforced on the world by American weapons of war ... not merely peace for Americans but peace in Latin America.
For, in the final analysis, counter communism's influence in the region. our most basic common link is that we all inhabit It never lived up to its hopes, partly because this small planet.
We aid often went to anti-Communist dictators all cherish our children's future.
And we are all who had little support among their people. mortai.JJ In other areas Kennedy followed the Cold -John F Kennedy, June 10, 1963 War policies of his predecessors.
He continued the nuclear arms buildup begun by EisenKennedy also tried to express these prinhower as well as Truman's practice of containciples in his foreign policy through programs ment.
He also developed the strategy of flexible ACADEMIC to help poorer nations.
This entity trained and sent tional American forces so the nation would entity something volunteers to Africa, Asia, and Latin America have other options than nuclear weapons in that has a separate to serve for two years as educators, health care and distinct times of crisis. workers, and agricultural advisers, or in other existence jobs that aided the host country's development.
Describe Why were U.S.-Cuban relations strained when causes and effects of those crises.
Jacqueline Kennedy of foreign policy on domesbrought energy, New Frontier tic policies and vice versa 2.
What impact did Kennedy's assassifreeze"" movement). ideas to the Warren Court nation have on the nation and the [;Li3 11.11.
The press carried pictures ofthe president's toddlers playing in the Oval Office and stories of thei r pony strolling through the White House gardens.
The young family was shown sailing on the blue wat ers off Cape Cod, in Massachusetts.
The handsome young president was complemented by his glamorous first lady, Jacqueline.
Jacqueline Kennedy made the White House a showplace for art, music, and theater.
Many Americans responded with enthusiasm to her grace, charm, and sense of style.
As you will read, the outward image of youth and vigor helped set • John and Jacqueline a tone for politics and change that pushed the Kennedy brought youthful nation in new directions. elegance to the White House.
Few ""Jackie"" was the more refined of the two and presidents have been more available to the had a great interest in the arts.
Even fewer have used it as successfully White House the nation's unofficial cultural to obtain the ·public image they desired. center by hosting elaborate events featuring world-famous artists and musicians.
Image and reality Photographs of the president often showed him engaged in physical Kennedy and Congress Americans activities like sailing and swimming.
Kennedy seemed to like the Kennedys more than they understood how such pictures would shape liked his New Frontier.
In reality, he had spoken so often of a new frontier during struggled with health problems most of his life. the election campaign, this was the name given He suffered from Addison's disease, a fatiguing to his plans for changing the nation.
A bad back Americans in the early 1960s were not reform kept him in nearly constant pain. minded, however.
First lady Jacqueline Kennedy and the The makeup of Congress reflected the couple's two young children contributed to the American public's mood.
Conservative southern sense of glamour and energy that surrounded Democrats often joined with Republicans to Kennedy's presidency.
In addition, were the first young children to live in the Kennedy's narrow victory in the 1960 election White House since 1908.
Although Jacqueline denied him the clear mandate, or authorization Kennedy tried to protect the children's to act, he needed to convince Congress that the privacy, the president encouraged the press to people agreed with his plans. photograph and write about them.
He knew For example, Kennedy asked Congress to that this information also would help to create reduce taxes to fight rising unemployment.
Today such curiosity takes people into space and to robotic exploration of the oceans.
Study the time line to learn about how key events in American his1932 Amelia Earhart tory have transformed the nature becomes the first woman of exploration over time. to make a solo flight across the Atlantic Ocean.
Despite his policy crises helped to create the program urgings, Congress failed to act.
Congressional that came to symbolize the New Frontier-the leaders also ignored Kennedy's proposals to exploration of space.
In April1961 the Soviet provide federal aid to education and to create a Union launched the first human into space in health care plan for older Americans. a one-orbit flight.
It was nearly a year before In some cases Kennedy's popularity and U.S astronaut John Glenn matched the Soviet presidential powers allowed him to solve accomplishment. problems without depending on Congress.
For Khrushchev claimed the Soviet lead in example, the nation's major steel producers space showed the superiority of communism. announced big price increases in 1962.
Kennedy Coupled with the Cold War embarrassment was concerned this would lead to inflation. of the Bay of Pigs, Americans were dismayed.
President Kennedy asked his government contracts to buy steel from those advisers.
He also began a vigorous campaign proposal to Congress to restore America's against them in the media.
The steel companies world prestige. soon gave in to the president's pressure and cancelled their price increases.
HISTORY'S VOICES Although Kennedy was among the nation's Science and ''This nation should commit itself to achieving the Technology wealthiest presidents, he sought ways_to help goal, before this decade is out, of landing a man In 2004, President poor Americans.
He convinced Congress to on the moon and returning him safely to the earth.
George W Bush pass the Area Redevelopment Act in 1961, No single space project ... will be more impressive announced that which gave financial assistance to economito mankind, or more important for the long-range Americans would cally distressed regions.
But in a very real sense, it return to the will not be one man going to the moon ... it will moon by 2015 and a program to retrain workers in areas with establish a perhigh unemployment and raised the minimum be an entire nation.'' manent United States base wage from $1.00 to $1.25 per hour. -John F Kennedy, May 25, 1961 there by 2020.
Later, as governor of California, he fought against an effort to make the state's Assembly more representative of In November 1960 John F Kennedy became the youngest elected the people.
John and his 31-year-old wife, Jacqueline, Yet as chief justice, Warren led the Court in brought youth, energy, and style to the White House.
Known for her 1954 to one of the most significant civil rights sense of fashion, grace, and glamour as the first lady, Jacqueline proadvances in United States history.
He persuaded the moted the arts and culture. other justices in Brown Board of Education The first lady quickly rose to the top of the list of America's most to ban racial segregation in the nation's schools. admired women.
Her popularity spread beyond United States borders and often You will read more about this landmark case in exceeded that of the president.
When the Kennedys met Nikita Khrushchev, issued a series of decisions concerning other the Soviet leader said, ""I'd like to shake her hand first."" reforms.
These decisions required some of the The young couple also experienced tragedy during their years in legislative reforms Warren had opposed when the White House.
In August 1963 the Kennedys' third child, Patrick, he had been governor of California. died just two days after his birth.
In the mid-1900s it was standard practice for states not to redraw the boundaries of their legislative districts to reflect changes in the population.
As cities grew, however, their representaThe president also asked Congress to fund tion in state legislatures did not.
These see, for example, the boundaries of legislative proposals made the space race as much a part districts had not changed since 1901.
This race, however, was one the United number of state legislators as sparsely popuStates would win. lated rural regions.
The Court went further in Westberry Sanders and Reynolds Sims when it ruled that legislative The Warren Court districts must have equal populations.
This During Kennedy's presidency, Supreme Court reform guaranteed that each citizen's vote has decisions were responsible for major changes equal weight, a principle known as ""one perin American society.
Chief Justice Earl Warren, controversial Court rulings greatly extended individual rights and The rights of the accused The Warren freedoms.
Many historians regard Warren Court also extended the Bill of Rights to the as second only to John Marshall as the most actions of state governments.
Wainwright , the Supreme Court ruled The Kennedy Assassination that states must provide free lawyers to poor As 1964 approached, President Kennedy persons being tried for crimes.
To help win the backing of southern person has a right to a lawyer during police Democrats, Kennedy flew to Texas in late 1963. questioning.
In 1966 the Court extended On November 22, President Kennedy rode in these rights again in the case of Miranda an open car of a motorcade through the city Arizona.
You will read more about this case in of Dallas to the site where he was to deliver Landmark Supreme Court Cases at the end of a speech.
With the first lady by his side, the this chapter. president waved to the cheering crowds that lined his route.
Religious freedom In other important Then shots rang out from the sixth floor cases, the Warren Court defined the religion of a schoolbook depository building as the guarantees of the First Amendment.
Kennedy slumped over, Vitale , for example, the justices banned fatally wounded.
A year later Johnson, who was with the Kennedys on the the Court prohibited daily Bible readings in trip, was sworn in as president aboard Air school.
The Supreme Court ruled that both Force One. activities violated the First Amendment's Kennedy's tragic death shocked the nation guarantee that government would not make and the world.
People today still remember any religion the nation's ""official"" religion. what they were doing when they heard the terrible news.
I just want to tell a great effort to shape the nation's memory you how sorry I am that your young president of the fallen president.
II arranged a funeral to rival that of President -Donna Shalala, quoted in Ordinary Americans Lincoln's nearly a century before.
Broadcast live on national television, it concluded with White House correspondent Helen Thomas the president's burial at Arlington National later remarked, ""The legacy of hope died with Cemetery, on a hillside overlooking the capital, him.
Yet Clifford acknowledged that Oswald, a troubled loner with connections to "" offered a vast promise to a whole the Soviet Union and Cuba.
In world as police were transferring Oswald from the affairs, that promise was realized by improved Dallas Police Department to the county jail, relations with the Soviet Union following the Oswald was shot to death by Jack Ruby, a Cuban missile crisis and the goodwill toward Dallas nightclub owner with ties to organized America that the Peace Corps produced. crime.
These strange circumstances caused At home, Kennedy's accomplishments were some people to question whether Oswald had less impressive.
Kennedy had acknowledged that the nation's President Johnson named a commission social, economic, and environmental problems headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren to would take many years to solve.
The Warren to his successor, Lyndon B Johnson, to carry on Commission, after a 10-month investigation, his work.
As president, Johnson would achieve reported that there was no conspiracy and that greater legislative success than Kennedy.
Analyze Information Review your notes on President KenAnalyze How did Kennedy deal with the threat of nedy's proposed programs.
Expository Explain to a classmate what you see as President Evaluate Do you agree that ""the drama of Kennedy's legacy to the American people.
VISTA Johnson (e.g., with regard Kennedy's proposals Great Society to education, civil rights, 2.
In what ways did Johnson's Great persistence of poverty and of the Great Society.
Lyndon Johnson had an ability to get what he wanted that few others could match-or were able to resist.
The skills that made Johnson a highly effective majority leader in the Senate helped him to qu ickly become a strong president following President Kennedy's death.
He made it a point to learn everything he could about his subject and about the people with whom he was dealing.
He claimed to know the strengths and weaknesses of each senator-how far each could be pushed, in what direction, and by what means.
First, Johnson closed in on his target, until his face was just a couple of inches away.
Then words poured out of him in a torrent as his eyes widened and narrowed.
If the target tried to say something, Johnson never allowed the chance.
Observers of The Treatment called it an almost hypnotic experience that rendered its targets stunned and helpless.
At age 26 he was the Johnson Becomes President youngest NYA director in the nation.
Two years As vice president, · Lyndon B Johnson had later he ran for Congress, where he served his little opportunity to showcase his political talHill Country district until 1948.
Those talents, however, were one reason statewide elected him to the United States Senate.
John F Kennedy wanted Johnson as his vice After just one term as a senator, Johnson's president.
Another reason was that Kennedy Democratic colleagues made him majority needed a running mate in 1960 who would help leader in the Senate.
Kennedy might close relationship with the Republican presihave been better served, however, had Johndent Dwight D Eisenhower.
Johnson used his son remained in the Senate, where his politipowerful Senate position and Eisenhower's cal skills might have helped to get Kennedy's popularity to force compromises in Congress programs enacted. and pass the first civil rights laws since ReconKennedy and Johnson made an unlikely struction.
A large and intense man, Johnson shared Washington, D.C., than any other Democrat. none of Kennedy's good looks, polish, or charm.
Although Johnson campaigned hard for While Kennedy showed off his beautiful young Kennedy's election in 1960, he was unhappy children to reporters, Johnson was known to as vice president.
He missed the power he had display the surgery scars on his abdomen. exercised as Senate majority l~ader.
Even more His often crude language reflected the macho than Kennedy, Johnson promoted an expanded ranching culture from which he came.
Born role for government in making Americans' lives and raised in the rural Hill Country of central better.
He also had a greater concern for the Texas, he was hardworking and ambitious.
These differences spite of his sometimes overbearing manner, he were probably due to the two men's differing had a genuine desire to help others. backgrounds, including Johnson's experience Johnson gave up school teaching for as part of the New Deal. government work during the Great DepresDespite his sometimes crude behavior, sion.
He was created the National Youth Administration saddened by his inability to comfort Jacqueline in 1935, a New Deal agency that found Kennedy on the plane ride back fr,o m Dallas work for young people, Johnson sought the job following her husband's death.
When he told the nation in his first speech as president, ''All I have I would have given gladly not to be stand.
Unable to defeat Senator John F Kennedy of with his years of experience in Washington, Massachusetts for the nomination, Johnson accepted Kennedy's offer allowed him to manage the transition of of the vice presidency in order to unite the party. the presidency with great skill and tact.
He As president, Johnson carried out an ambitious set of social reassured the nation by promising no great reforms.
After winning the presidential election in 1964, he soon changes from the previous administration. escalated United States involvement in Vietnam.
Unwilling to let commuJohnson demonstrated that intent by asking nism advance, he sent American troops into battle.
As the Vietnam Kennedy's cabinet and advisers to continue War dragged on without success, Johnson's popularity with voters serving in the new administration.
In March 1968 he decided not to run for re-election. had before me the picture that Kennedy had Make Inferences How would Johnson's acceptance of the vice selected me,"" he later recalled.
After leaving high school, he joined do not become part of the the Job Corps and learned construction Job Corps program. and forestry.
The new president also pledged to carry Harrington's The Other America was a study on the New Frontier.
Speaking to a joint sesof poverty in the United States that shattered sion of Congress, he called on its members . the popular belief that all Americans had bento pass Kennedy's programs, which they had efited from the postwar prosperity. blocked for so long.
This is our challenge-not to hesitate, not to pause, not to Kennedy's staff had begun work on a series turn about and linger over this evil moment, but to of antipoverty programs he wanted to present continue on our course so that we may fulfill the as part of his 1964 re-election campaign.
John• destiny that history has set for us.' ' son was told of Kennedy's planned antipoverty -Lyndon B Johnson, speech to Congress, proposals on November 23, 1963, his first full November 27, 1963 day in office.
Push The War on Pove'rty After Congress passed ahead full tilt."" the Area Redevelopment Act in 1961, Kennedy In his first State of the Union Address in had told an adviser, ""I want to go beyond the January 1964, Johnson declared ""unconditional things that have already been accomplished."" war on poverty"" in America.
To launch the His interest in antipoverty programs was War on Poverty he asked Congress to pass the fueled in part by social activist Michael HarEconomic Opportunity Act.
Congress granted rington's influential book published in 1962. his request in August 1964.
J' The Economic Opportunity Act funded sev""Kennedy felt that the way to get the tax cut eral new antipoverty programs.
The Job Corps was to educate the Congress and ... persuade offered work-training programs for unemthem to go for it,"" an aide to both presidents ployed youth.
Corps that provided help to poor communities ""No memorial ... could more eloquently in the United States.
Other programs provided honor President Kennedy's memory than the basic education for adults, work opportuniearliest possible passage of the civil rights ties for unemployed fathers and mothers, and bill for which he fought so long,"" Johnson told help to fight rural poverty and assist migrants.
Congress gave more than a year of division and debate, Conthe OEO $1 billion to operate them. gress passed the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964.
He cleverly told the press, however, how difficult it was The Great Society to write a budget that met this requirement.
President Johnson wanted to do more than just Believing it had won a victory, Congress passed follow in Kennedy's footsteps, however.
He had the Tax Reduction Act in February 1964. ambitious plans of his own.
John F Kennedy was a little too conserVOCABULARY As a result, tax revenue actually increased. vative to suit my taste."" revenue income The Tax Reduction Act illustrated the Johnson described his own plans for the from a specific difference in the way Kennedy and Johnson nation in a commencement address at the Unisource approached getting legislation passed. versity of Michigan in May 1964.
A mushroom cloud replaces The final image asked the image ofthe girl as viewers to vote for Johnson's voice proclaims, President Johnson.
The ad begins with a little girl counting daisy Above are images from a Lyndon Johnson 1964 television campaign ad.
Her count is mimicked by a countdown to highly charged emotional content created a national outcry from both Demoa nuclear explosion. crats and Republicans alike.
Y COUNTERPOINTS Gove~nment's Role in Senator Barry Goldwater opposed President Johnson's Great Societywhich Hubert Humphrey had played a large part in creating.
H28-H29 HISTORY'S VOICES Goldwater set the tone of the campaign ''We have the opportunity to move not only in his acceptance speech at the Republitoward the rich society and the powerful society, can National Convention by declaring that but upward to the Great Society.
The Great Society ""extremism in the d~fense of liberty is no vice."" rests on abundance and liberty for all.
I want would lead the country into a nuclear war and to talk to you today about three places where we turn back the clock on the nation's social progbegin to build the Great Society-in our cities, in ress.
When Goldwater suggested using nuclear our countryside, and in our classrooms.JJ weapons to end the growing war in Vietnam, -Lyndon Johnson, May 22, 1964 he convinced many voters that he indeed was a dangerous extremist.
To also seemed to prove the Democrats' claims achieve his goals for the Great Society, Johnabout him.
Republicans selected Senator Barry Goldwater, In November, the voters provided Johnson a conservative from Arizona, as their nominee. with the mandate he sought.
The president The vast differences in the two candidates' received 61 percent of the popular vote in the views gave voters a clear choice. biggest election landslide of the century.
To their majorities in both houses of Congress. oversee this and other federal housing programs, Congress created the Department of Creating the Great Society Now that he Housing and Urban Development . had been elected president in his own right, Johnson appointed Robert Weaver to head this Johnson pushed even harder for his plans.
He new department, making him the first African told aides at an inaugural ball, ""Don't stay up American to be part of a president's cabinet. late.
We're on our way In July 1965 Congress authorized funds for to the Great Society."" states to set up Medicaid-a program that proEconomics Johnson had a personal interest in provid[ vides free health care for poor people.
In same time it created Medicare, a health care 12 percent of the 1965 Congress passed the Elementary and program for people over age 65.
Johnson travUnited States population Secondary Education Act, the first large-scale eled to Independence, Missouri, to sign the bill receives health program of government aid to public schools. into law in front ofHarryTruman, the 81-yearcare through Medicaid.
This cartoon, became president. called ""Maestro of the 88,"" reflects on Johnson's relationship with Congress.
Johnson's influence as a senator was so great that he has been called a Master of the Senate.
See Skills Handbook, H31 Many programs of the Great Society these concerns.
The Democrats retained their were intended to promote a better life for majorities in both houses of Congress, but the Americans regardless of their economic status.
Republicans gained 4 7 seats in the House of For example, improving the environment was Representatives and 3 in the Senate.
This shift a major emphasis of Johnson's presidency. enabled conservatives to slow down Johnson's He signed laws to improve the quality of the legislative program. air and water as well as ot her important The new Congress, however, did enact some environmental measures.
One was the Preserving the outdoors and the nation's Public Broadcasting Act.
This law, enacted natural beauty was especially important to in 1967, created the Corporation for Public Lady Bird Johnson, the first lady.
She asked Broadcasting to provide public affairs, her husband to push the Highway Beautificacultural, and educational programs.
It came to be called NPR provide alternatives to the offerings of Lady Bird's bill. commercial television and radio.
The Truth-in-Lending Act, also passed in The decline of the Great Society The 1967, required lenders to inform consumers of peak years for the Great Society were 1965 and actual costs of credit transactions.
However, some members of Congress Society reforms continue to provide benefits to expressed substantial concern over the rapid Americans today. pace of reform called for by Johnson.
In March 1967 the first direct treaty between the two nations since 1917 took effect.
Another factor in the decline of the Great The treaty protected each country's diplomats Society was the increasing involvement of the from harassment by authorities in the other United States in the Vietnam War.
You will country. read more details about the Vietnam War in A month later, the United States and the an upcoming chapter.
Soviet Union joined 58 other nations to ban At the end of1966 some 385,000 United States combat weapons in outer space.
The United States government between Israel and its Arab neighbors in June, was spending about $2. billion each month Johnson met Soviet leader Aleksey Kosygin in on the war.
Budgetary pressures mounted as New Jersey to discuss the situation. the nation tried to afford both a major war and A crisis developed in January 1968 when expensive social programs at home.
As one North Korean forces captured the Pueblo , a member of Congress put it, ""We cannot have United States Navy spy ship, off the coast of Commuguns and butter."" nist North Korea.
United States officials claimed the Johnson chose guns over butter because, Pueblo had been in international waters and like Kennedy, he was fully committed to stopdemanded its return. ping the spread of communism.
Johnson sent When the North Koreans refused, Johnson 22,000 United States troops in 1965 to end a revolt in the ordered the call-up of some 14,000 national Dominican Republic.
At the by declaring that revolutions in Latin America same time he sought a negotiated settlement were not just local concerns when ""the object to the Pueblo incident.
This guideline for intervention became the crew but kept the ship. known as the Johnson Doctrine.
Evaluate How would you rate Johnson's domestic achieve--~~~--------~~ 6.
Explain your answer. to your senator expressing support for the Great Society.
If a suspect is unaware of these rights, the police cannot interrogate him or her without informing the suspect about his or her rights.
Background of the Case In 1963 Mexican immigrant Ernesto Miranda was arrested in Arizona.
He confessed to a serious crime, was tried and convicted, and sentenced to jail.
The United States Supreme Court had ruled in Brown Miranda was one of the Warren Court's Mississippi that confessions coerced, or forced, most controversial decisions.
Those who by state or local officials violated the due process disagreed with the ruling warned it could allow guilty clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Wainwright , the Court held that a criminal Today police in the United States carry cards with defendant who cannot afford an attorney can have one the Miranda warnings printed on them and routinely appointed without charge.
Miranda's lawyer argued ""Mirandize"" suspects by ""reading them their rights"" that police must inform a suspect of these rights prior to questioning. before questioning.
The Decision The Supreme Court ruled that police must protect a suspect's right against self-incrimination before questioning him or her.
Analyze the Impact The year after Miranda was decided, the Court was faced with the question ' ' he person must be warned that he has a right to remain of whether an accused person is entitled to have silent, that any statement he does make may be used as evicounsel present when being shown to prosecution dence against him, and that he has a right to the presence of witnesses for identification at a line-up.
But they must stop if the suspect says ing a person suspected of committing a crime to he or she wants a lawyer or no longer wants to talk identify himself to police.
Kennedy's New Frontier and President Lyndon Johnson's Great Society programs.
Then you will be asked to write an essay about Kennedy's New Frontier and Johnson's Great Society, using facts from the documents and from the chapter to support the position you take in your thesis statement.
President John F Kennedy came into office with bold One component of the New Frontier was the creideas and an agenda that came to be known as the ation of the Peace Corps to help developing countries New Frontier.
He explained some of the goals of this improve their economies, education, and infrastrucprogram in his inaugural address. ture.
Thousands of young volunteers heeded Kennedy's call and went to help the poor in foreign countries. ""an holds in his mortal hands the power to abolish Here a Peace Corps volunteer is helping to inoculate all forms of human poverty and all forms of human life. children in Bolivia.
His costly programs would increase in which problems such as poverty and racism would be the size of government, they argued.
In the following speech, he explains his War larger central government would rob people of their on Poverty, a key element of creating the Great Society. democratic freedoms.
Actor Ronald Reagan was new to politics when he delivered the following speech in Octo""We are citizens of the richest and most fortunate ber 1964.
But we have ter lost the election to Johnson, but the speech made never lost sight of our goal-an America in which every Reagan a rising star in politics.
Reagan would one day citizen shares all the opportunities of his society, in become the 40th president of the United States. which every man has a chance to advance his welfare to the limit of his capacities.
In this vote-harvesting time, they use terms like the ""We have come a long way toward this goal.
We still ""Great Society,"" or as we were told a few days ago by have a long way to go.
It is an can plan them ourselves ... effort to allow them to develop and use their capacities, We have so many people who can't see a fat man as we have been allowed to develop and use ours, so standing beside a thin one without coming to the that they can share, as others share, in the promise of conclusion the fat man got that way by taking advanthis nation. tage of the thin one.
Johnson sends Kennedy announces marines to DominAlliance for August1963 August1964 ican Republic.
Congress passes Bay of Pigs invasion Kennedy is assasVoting Rights Act. fails in Cuba.
November 1964 sinated; Johnson Johnson defeats July 1965 January 1968 August1961 becomes president.
Medicare and captures Pueblo Communists build Medicaid programs. and its crew.
Berlin Wall. ilffii ll:TW~ ~J.~ ll:T~,~I~~ .-I:li1• i""I:"" ~ •~tma YEARS Reviewing Key Terms and People Complete each sentence by filling in the blank with the 8.
Dallas police arrested for the assassicorrect term or person. nation of President Kennedy.
The reported that there was no con1959. spiracy in the assassination of President Kennedy.
A domestic version of the Peace Corps called became known as the _ __ _ _ _ _ helped poor communities in the 3.
Kennedy's strategy of involved strengthelection was _ _ __ ening conventional United States forces to avoid using 12.
Under the Great Society, a government health care nuclear weapons in times of crisis. program for people over 65 called was 5.
The chief justice of the Supreme Court during for United States intervention in Latin America when there Kennedy's presidency was _ __ was the threat of a Communist dictatorship.
Comprehension and Critical Thinking SECTION 1 ~ 11.9.3, 11.11.2 Critical Reading 1m R2.4 15.
Then answer the Draw Conclusions In what ways did the Peace questions that follow.
Analyze Why did Johnson decide to carry out C Congress had originally rejected his nomination.
The Berlin Wall remained in To practice expository writing, complete the assignment place from 1961 to 1989, when it was finally torn below. down.
Using the keyword above, do research on the significance of the Berlin Wall.
Then write Writing Topic The New Frontier of John F. a report about the ways the construction and Kennedy destruction of this barrier changed the world.
Assignment Based on what you have read in this chapter, write a paragraph that explains what the Analyzing Primary Sources ~ cs1, HR4 New Frontier was and how it was presented to the Reading Like a Historian In response to criticism American people. of how he handled the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy made a speech.
