THE STORY OF MAJOR RUDY ANDERSON BY MAJOR C GEOFFREY CAMERON A THESIS PRESENTED TO THE FACULTY OF THE SCHOOL OF ADVANCED AIR AND SPACE STUDIES FOR COMPLETION OF GRADUATION REQUIREMENTS SCHOOL OF ADVANCED AIR AND SPACE STUDIES AIR UNIVERSITY MAXWELL AIR FORCE BASE, ALABAMA JUNE 2017 DISTRIBUTION A: Approved for public release: distribution unlimited.
APPROVAL The undersigned certify that this thesis meets master’s-level standards of research, argumentation, and expression.
RICHARD MULLER JAMES TUCCI DISCLAIMER The conclusions and opinions expressed in this document are those of the author.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR Major Cameron entered Air Foree serviee as a graduate of the United States Air Force Academy in 2003 where he majored in civil engineering.
Upon completing Undergraduate Pilot Training he served a tour as a T-38 First Assignment Instructor Pilot at Laughlin AFB, TX before entering the U-2 program in 2008.
He flew the U-2 operationally for five years including tours supporting five Combatant Commands.
Major Cameron then served on staff at United States Central Command as the Executive Officer to the Chief of Staff.
IV ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Writing this thesis has been one of the most ehallenging and rewarding experienees of my eareer.
First of all, 1 would like to thank the members of Class XXVI for their support and friendship through the year.
The shared diseussions in and out of the elassroom have made me a better offieer and 1 am honored to have had the opportunity to serve with them. 1 would like to aeknowledge several people without whose support and help 1 would never have gotten off the ground with this study. want to thank Brigadier General Gerald Mcllmoyle for his patienee and time.
His first-hand aeeount of the events that transpired almost 55 years ago were invaluable.
He provided insight into areas that were heretofore unexplored and clarified many issues that various experts disagreed upon. also want to thank Mr James Long, Chairman of the Laughlin Heritage Foundation.
He provided valuable information about the U-2 and facilitated important connections.
Both of their patience and understanding were unmatched in this effort.
Additionally, Mr Michael Dobbs provided a wealth of knowledge in his book One Minute to Midnight and the troves of primary source material that he shared online. 1 especially want to thank Dr Rich Muller for sparking my interest in this topic.
Without his thought provoking questions, clear guidance, and outstanding feedback this project would not be what it is today.
His experience and vision helped me shape the study and have been invaluable in helping to improve the quality of my work. would also like to thank Dr.
Jim Tucci for his support as my writing advisor and for reviewing the draft of this paper.
His comments and suggestions helped me improve my writing through the academic year.
Most importantly, 1 want to express my sincere appreciation to my family for their love, patience, and understanding during those times when 1 was absent in spirit, off struggling with this paper.
Their presence was very important to me and made all the difference in ensuring my success in completing this work.
V ABSTRACT This thesis provides a biographical sketch of the life of Major Rudolf A Anderson, Junior.
In the process of reviewing these two questions the thesis explores Rudolf Anderson’s childhood and early life.
The thesis also examines the development of strategic reconnaissance in the Cold War, focusing on the first dedicated reconnaissance aircraft, the Lockheed U-2 Dragon Lady.
Tensions were extremely high and it appeared that even the slightest provoeation would foree the erisis down a path of esealation leading to thermonuelear world war.
The day prior was full of politieal highs and lows, with an end to tensions seemingly imminent as Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushehev proposed a eourse of aetion intended to deesealate hostilities.
However, 26 Oetober did not end with resolution but rather with United States President John F Kennedy ordering an inerease in flights over Cuba and aeeelerated planning for an invasion of the island.
Any hope for a peaeeful solution ended with Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro ordering his military forees to fire on any United States aircraft or vessel approaching Cuba.
For reasons that will be explained later, three other missions were cancelled but Major Anderson’s flight remained on the schedule.
Major Anderson completed his briefing, was integrated into his partial pressure suit, and began the long process of pre-breathing one-hundred percent oxygen for two hours before take-off.
Captain Roger Herman, Anderson’s mobile pilot, escorted him to the U-2, followed him up the steps to the plane, and ran through a series of checklists with Anderson prior to take-off.
At 9:09 AM Anderson rolled down the runway of McCoy Air Force Base, Florida in his U-2.
The aircraft leapt into the sky and climbed like a rocket as he headed toward Cuba.
He was flying at over 72,000 feet, 14 miles above the state of Florida.
On this particular Saturday, the families below were not making a trip to the beach but rather were stockpiling groceries and watching the seemingly endless influx of military personnel that had descended upon the state in preparation for an invasion of Cuba.
Unbeknownst to Anderson, and the rest of the 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing , it would be the most dangerous mission of the Crisis.
Until that day, Soviet surface-to-air missiles were not fully operational and the men running the sites had not been given permission to use them.
This had all changed late on the evening of the 26* of October when Castro issued an order for the Cuban soldiers to fight and the air defense system was finally complete and integrated.
Because of the lack of information regarding the status of the SAM sites and the order by the president to prepare for an invasion which would include the use of United States 2 Ted Shelton, “The Major Flew Into the Page of History,” Greenville News, 17 October 1963, 5.
SAMs posed the only threat to the high-flying U-2, but two weeks into the crisis there had been no reported attempts to engage any aircraft.
Despite significant signals intelligence activity on the morning of 27 October, Anderson’s pre-flight intelligence brief indicated no change in the Cuban air defense posture.
Tragically, his intelligence briefing was wrong and the Soviet forces were waiting for the first of what they expected to be multiple U-2 flights that day.
He immediately appeared on the radar scopes of the Soviet forces operating throughout the island.
Two and a half years earlier one of his friends, Francis Gary Powers, flying a similarly configured U-2, was shot down over Soviet territory by the same type of missile.
Additionally, just a month earlier, in September 1962, Taiwanese pilot Huai Chen, who had trained with Anderson at Laughlin Air Force Base , was shot down by a People’s Republic of China SA-2 over Nanchang.
The Soviet officers tracking Anderson’s U-2 that day grew more and more concerned as they watched his track and anticipated the 3 Brig Gen Gerald Mcllmoyle claims to have been fired upon by an SA-2 the day prior.
However, the Department of Defense and Central Intelligence Agency reports state that this never occurred and that the missiles were not operational until the evening of 26 October.
Their concern peaked when they realized that Anderson’s flight had taken him directly over the locations of short-range nuclear cruise missiles that had just been positioned for an attack on the United States Navy base at Guantanamo Bay, as well as any forces attempting to conduct an amphibious assault on the island.
Grechko was in the command post monitoring Major Anderson’s U-2 as it flew over the island.
Shortly after his attempts to call, Anderson overflew Guantanamo Bay and began a turn toward the North.
While he still had a large portion of his route to fly, the Soviets feared he had completed his mission and was returning to Florida.
Grechko felt strongly that the aircraft had collected vital information and that the Americans could not be allowed to learn about the tactical nuclear missiles.
The men of the 1st Battalion of the 507th Anti-aircraft Rocket Regiment at the Banes SA-2 site immediately complied with the general’s order and fired two missiles.
Although the exaet details of the next few minutes will probably never be known, what is eertain is that at least one SA-2 exploded near Anderson’s U-2.
Shrapnel from the exploding warhead piereed the eoekpit, tore a hole in Major Anderson’s partial pressure suit, and shattered the faee-plate on his helmet.
His aircraft, with Anderson still in the cockpit, spiraled over 72,000 feet to the island below, landing close to the missile site that brought it down.
Meanwhile, at McCoy AFB, Anderson’s fellow U-2 pilots awaited his return.
When he did not return as scheduled, the men of the 4080th SRW notified Strategic Air Command and within a few hours of Anderson’s death, word of the loss of a U-2 over Cuba reached the White House Cabinet Room.
He recalled the tension as Assistant Secretary of Defense Paul Nitze declared, “they’ve fired the first shot,” and urged the necessity of a strong response.
Kennedy felt a responsibility to respond and avenge the death of an American pilot but also questioned whether Khrushchev 8 Robert F Kennedy, Thirteen Days, , various locations 5 and the Kremlin had aetually ordered the destruetion of an Ameriean reeonnaissanee aireraft.
Kennedy was angry and saw the shoot down as an esealation in the eonfliet.
However, he was eonflieted about ordering retaliation when less than 24 hours prior all indieations from the Soviet Premier indieated that Khrushehev was seeking a diplomatie solution.
While the ExCom’s debate over a military response to the SA-2 attack reached a crescendo, the President sent his brother Robert to meet with the Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin at the Justice Department in order to deliver an ultimatum to Khrushchev, President Kennedy was not alone in his fear that the next step might lead to the destruction of the world’s two great super powers.
Major Anderson’s death shook Premier Khrushchev and caused him to fear that if a resolution were not achieved immediately, total war would be inevitable.
The Soviets agreed to remove their offensive weapons from Cuba, and Kennedy publiely promised not to invade Cuba while privately agreeing to remove Ameriean Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
A erisis that eould have brought about the death of millions throughout the world ended with a lone easualty.
In the days that followed, all operations over Cuba ceased until assurances were made that no further hostile acts would occur.
Major Anderson’s body was recovered by the Cuban forces and later returned to the United States for burial in his home town of Greenville South Carolina.
Shortly after his funeral, under direction from President Kennedy and Air Force Chief of Staff Curtis LeMay, Anderson was posthumously awarded the Air Force Cross.
This was the first time the newly created medal was bestowed upon anyone.
Major Richard Heyser was invited to the White House to meet with President Kennedy and receive personal thanks for his piloting of the first mission that discovered missiles on the island of Cuba.
Major Heyser described his meeting with the President and more often his meeting with General LeMay on the way to the White House.
Heyser simply responded with a “yes sir” 12 and official SAC history and USAF accounts of the crisis gave Heyser and Anderson equal credit for taking the first photos.
Additionally, Major Heyser and the nine other USAF U-2 pilots who flew missions over Cuba have received even less recognition for their work in discovering missiles on Cuba and helping to resolve the crisis peacefully.
What follows is the story of Major Rudy Anderson, a man whose “death escalated the Crisis significantly...and was a jolt to Kennedy and Khrushchev that pushed the crisis to a point where they had to take one of two paths, both of which had clear consequences.
This is the story of a young boy who grew up in a small town in South Carolina building model airplanes and dreaming of one day being able to fly the real thing.
It tells of the events that forged Rudolf Anderson into a man who would fly missions alone, unarmed, and unafraid over Cuba at the height of the Cold War.
In a period of great international stress, he performed his duty of great responsibility with honor.
He was awarded the distinguished service medal, and gave his life that America could proceed on a course toward peace without the threat of tyrants.
During his brief thirtyfive years, he touched the lives of those around him everywhere he went.
In death, he touched millions, giving his life in service to the United States while highlighting the true cost of conflict to Washington, DC and Moscow.
He built model airplanes as a child, participated in Boy Scouts, softball, and football throughout primary and high school and excelled at both sports and academics.
He entered the aviation cadet program in 1950 and piloted RF-86A and RF-86F Sabres in and around Korea in the years following the Korean War.
Some of these sorties included RF-86F missions over Chinese and Soviet territory.
For his work in Korea, he was twice awarded the Distinguished Fl 5 dng Cross.
Throughout his brief, but influential life, he was described as quiet, dedicated, and serious.
He was known for his compassion, love of the military, love of his parents, and love of his family.
From childhood, he wanted nothing more than to fly airplanes and ultimately lost his life doing just that.
The stories that follow are not eomplete; Anderson’s life was full, and many stories will go untold here.
Rather, this chapter focuses on the key events that forged Rudy into a man that would lay down his life for his friends and country.
Early Childhood Rudolf Anderson Junior was born on Thursday, 15 September 1927 in the town of Spartanburg, South Carolina.
His parents, Rudolf Anderson Jr. and Mary Barksdale Anderson were proud of their baby boy, their second child.
Young Rudy had an older sister, Mary Elizabeth, who was two when Rudy was born.
He served in England and France as an artilleryman in the 75th Coastal Artillery Regiment^ Rudolf, an accomplished businessman before his service, returned from war with a drive to do more.
He drove the eitizens of Greenville to expand outside of the textile industry and grow the Chamber of Commeree.
She grew up in a family of four, as the sole daughter and oldest ehild.
As the oldest ehild in a well-to-do family, Mary worked hard both at sehool and in the rearing of her three younger brothers.
The Greenville Daily News contains numerous reports on her attendance at weddings, banquets, and galas where Mary was described as being both beautiful and elegant.
She was a dedicated mother and always put the needs of her family before herself.
Rudolf Anderson, Jr. was raised in a prominent home, guided by two hardworking, influential and loving parents.
The boy flourished, and certain traits became immediately apparent, foremost was his fascination with flight.
The three-month-old Rudolf lifted his head and followed the passing aircraft with his eyes as it soared by.
That night his mother recorded the incident in his baby book and noted that his love of airplanes was evident from that point on.
Wait for Word in the Serenity of the Mountains,” Greenville News, 31 October 1962, 11. 11 severe weather foreed a passing aireraft to make an emergeney landing near the Andersens’ home.
The next morning, the pilot, took Rudy, then a toddler, to see the aireraft.
Further demonstrations of his love of flight are evident throughout his early ehildhood.
On 27 February 1931, a few years after his first encounter with an airplane, Rudy decided to imitate an airplane and achieve flight on his own by jumping out of a window.
However, the three-and-a-half-year-old lacked the ability to do so and fell hard.
Throughout his early childhood, he built model planes and flew them around his yard, imagining a day when he could take to the skies himself.
Rudy Anderson Holds a Model Plane Source: Scott Mandeem, “Remembering a Hero, Major Rudolf Anderson,” Academy of Model Aeronautics, 31 October 2012 ® Society Club News: Has Broken Arm, Greenville News, 27 February 1931.
When he was just four years old, he wandered away from home and walked to his sister’s elementary sehool.
Sara Earle remembered that the young toddler walked right into the elassroom and told her that he was there just to “see how my sister’s getting along.
He was not worried at all about being away from home but was eoneerned for his sister and deeided to take it upon himself to eheek up on her.
While in his first year at school Rudy found a stray cat on the way to school.
Worried for the cat’s health he snuck it into school and kept it inside of his desk.
He would stop by Campbell’s Pharmacy in Greenville and ask for milk to feed the cat on his way home from school.
The compassion he showed for this stray animal was indicative of the way the people of Greenville remember him throughout his childhood, concerned for others well-being.
Rudy was a good student throughout his time at Augusta Circle Elementary.
Gault remembered that Rudy “was an outstanding boy...a very likable person and a good student.
It was during elementary school that Rudy developed an interest in two other events that would shape his life.
Wait for Word in the Serenity of the Mountains,” Greenville News, 31 October 1962, 11.
He was a member of Troop 19 in Greenville, having joined at the age of sevenT^ Roy Guliek, Anderson’s Seout Master, remembered how mueh Rudy loved Seouting.
Being a Boy Seout, Anderson learned about teamwork, loyalty, and bravery.
Anderson also learned about the reality of war through his participation in the Boy Scouts.
The Troop conducted food drives, sold war bonds, and served food at several shelters.
Additionally, as part of a broader national efforts, Greenville scouts were recruited to serve as laborers on local farms.
These “soldiers of the soil” diligently worked while their fathers, uncles, and older brothers were away on foreign lands.
Such projects instilled a sense of belonging and an understanding of service to Rudy and his fellow Scouts.
In February 1943, on the occasion of the thirty-third anniversary of Scouting in America, President Franklin D Roosevelt addressed the over 1. million scouts across the Country through a radio address and printed message in national and local papers.
The President said, “The leaders of our armed forces in training camps and on the battle fronts have emphasized the value of scout training in developing knowledge and skill, as well as courage, self-reliance, resourcefulness and initiative which are proving to be so essential in our determination to win the Shelton, “Major Anderson Was One ‘Man of Honor and Courage and Truth’,” 2.
He addressed the faet that a signifieant number of individuals that were deeorated for heroism or bravery were Seouts, and that their experienee in seout training developed the eourage and initiative needed for sueh trying times as battle.
These statements would ring true for Rudolf Anderson almost twenty years later.
This first area of interest, scouting, tied directly into Rudy’s second, church attendance.
He participated in church activities and played on church sports teams.
He regularly attended services and was active as a volunteer to help those in need.
The compassion that Rudy showed as a child to a stray cat named Frisky extended to those around him.
The young Anderson would discuss the Scriptures with his pastor leader Dr.
Between sehool, Seouting, ehureh, and sports his elementary years kept him busy.
In 1939, at the age of 12, he finished up his time at Augusta Cirele Elementary and returned from summer vaeation as a freshman student at Greenville High Sehool.
High School and College In elementary sehool Anderson exeelled at sports and studies.
When he arrived at Greenville High School in the summer of 1939, he planned to do the same.
However, when he tried out for the Greenville High football team, Rudy did not make the cut.
Rudy still practiced with the team but focused his efforts on ensuring that they had everything they needed.
Although he did not play on the field, Anderson was part of the Greenville High football team that won the 1943 South Carolina State Championship.
In addition to being part of the football team, Anderson was involved in multiple other sports and activities while in high school.
He also played on the Buncombe Street Methodist Church’s softball team.
His good friend Dan Foster remembered that Rudy was excellent, especially when pla 5 dng outfield.
Foster recalled, “he was so fast that we sometimes asked the middle outfielder just to stay out of his way.”2o In addition to sports, Anderson eontinued his love of flying.
In high sehool, he found time to learn to fly while eontinuing to build model aireraft.
He joined the Model Aireraft Club and rented aireraft to praetiee fl 5 dng on his own when money allowed.
He participated in intermural football, basketball, swimming, and softball.
He also was involved in several ROTC organizations and leadership roles.
One of the more remarkable stories regarding Rudolf Anderson’s time at Clemson occurred during his senior year.
Just three months before graduation the Clemson senior narrowly escaped serious injury when he fell out of a third-story window of his barracks.
On the night of 3 March 1948, Rudy was trying to catch a pigeon that had flown into the barracks and chased the bird right out the window.
It is understood that the student was chasing a pigeon down the hall of the third floor of the second barracks, and was unable to stop at the bird flew out the window.
Several witnesses said that he hit the eaves that protrude over the door of second barracks, breaking his fall, and saving him from more serious injuries.
He was conscious when arriving at the college hospital, and was able to identify himself.
Lee Milford said that it was a miracle that Anderson escaped with the injuries he obtained.
The gangplank that he finally came to rest on is constructed of iron and concrete.
The college physician further stated that Anderson had a good chance to recover provided nothing unforeseen turned up.
Milford reported that he was very pleased with Anderson’s condition, given the fall that he survived.
It was initially feared that Rudy would not be able to graduate on time, but he pulled through and recovered much more quickly than doctors expected.
One week later, on 11 March, the Clemson Tiger reported on Anderson’s condition.
Gentlemen: 1 read in the paper that one of your distinguished senior students fell out of a third-story window while chasing a pigeon down the hall.
This has me worried because 1 have often wondered whether a Clemson man is capable of catching a pigeon or not.
Yours truly, A Cute Pigeon26 Rudy fully recovered from the incident and graduated in 1948 with a degree in Textile Engineering.
Despite finishing his ROTC training at Clemson, the military was drawing down in size, and not all cadets were able to become commissioned officers.
On 7 June 1948, Anderson received a commission as an aircraft maintenance officer.
At the time, Greenville was eonsidered the textile eapitol of the world.
Anderson’s degree and family eonneetions made it easy for him to find a job in the busy textile industry.
Upon graduation, he was immediately hired by the Hudson Mill and worked there for two years in a high paying job.
While at Hudson Mill, he was fast moving up the eorporate ladder in the textile world as one of the preeminent textile engineers in the town.
He became an important part of the textile industry in Greenville and was becoming an influential member of the city council.
However, his comfortable life in Greenville changed in November of 1951.
The Greenville News later reported that “He could have in good conscience remained in civilian life where a comfortable and rewarding career was his for the taking.
Rudolf Anderson, Jr.” in “Town Talk Column” Greenville News, 22 November 1951, 2.
In August of 1952 Rudy was transferred from Florida to San Marcos, TX for pilot training.
Before departing for Texas, Rudy stopped by Greenville for a brief visit with his parents.
He told them he was excited and not to worry about him, then departed to fulfill his dream.
Rudy made the trip to San Marcos for brief introductory training and then traveled ninety miles south to the small town of Hondo, Texas.
Flying the Piper Cub was similar to the flying he had done as a boy, and he picked it up quickly.
Anderson was seleeted for the single-engine jet traek and stayed Texas to eomplete basie training at Webb AFB in Big Spring, Texas.
The T-33, or “T-Bird” as its pilots knew it, was a variant of the F-80, the USAF’s first operational jet fighter.
Upon completion of basic training Rudolf Anderson was selected to fly tactical reconnaissance in the North American RF-86 Sabre.
After only six months of training, in four different aircraft, Rudy Anderson received his pilot wings in February of 1953.
He finally achieved his childhood dream, Rudolf Anderson Jr. was a pilot.
Anderson arrived at Nellis AFB in March of 1953 for F-86 training followed by introductory fighter training.
On 15 September 1953, Anderson’s twenty-sixth birthday, he completed the last course at Nellis, aerial gunnery.
The course was the only time he fired weapons from an aircraft, for the remainder of his life his weapon was a camera.
Upon graduation from Nellis, Anderson immediately departed to Park Air Force Base in San Francisco to undergo a familiarization check-out in the RF-86 before departing for his first duty assignment as a pilot, the Republic of Korea.
A great need existed for shortrange overflights of the USSR, China, and North Korea.
These missions were very sensitive in nature, and eaeh one went through an arduous approval proeess.
Eaeh request was submitted through the Commander of the Far East Air Forees , then forwarded to the Joint Chiefs of Staff for review.
If the military ehannels reeommended an overflight mission, it was referred to President Eisenhower for approval.
The process kept the number of flights low to prevent a reaction from one of the communist nations.
While assigned to the 15* Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron at Kunsan AB, South Korea, Anderson was deployed as part of a special unit.
The unit was tasked to conduct the missions above and deployed to Komaki AB in Japan.
To make the aircraft lighter (a concept Anderson would become very familiar later with the U2) the guns were removed from the RF-86.
The nose of the aircraft was painted where the guns were normally housed to make it look like a normal F-86.
These cameras gave the aircraft panoramic vision and allowed it to cover a broad swath of territory.
Anderson quickly upgraded to flight lead and was chosen to lead one of the first missions of the special unit.
On 1 May 1954 1st Lt Rudy Anderson led a two-ship alongside his wingman 2nd Lt Robert Depew.
Because of the difficulty in gaining clearance for such missions, the 1 May sortie was tasked to overfly both Chinese and Soviet territory.
Even with full drop tanks, such a sortie was too far for the little RF-86 to make round trip so it was decided the men would take-off from Japan and fly directly to the unit’s home base at Kunsan, South Korea and launch the overflight mission to return at Komaki.
This plan was challenging for some reasons, the most pressing of which was the fact that the RF-86F 22 was not allowed to operate out of Kunsan.
The 1953 armistiee eontained a elause stating that only the military equipment that was present in either North or South Korea at the time of signing eould operate out of those two eountries.
The RF-86F did not meet this requirement, and the erew risked severe repereussions for the United States if they were diseovered.
They landed and stayed in the aircraft while the maintenance crews refueled the drop tanks and checked the camera equipment.
Less than an hour later, Anderson and Depew were airborne en route to the ports at Dairen, China.
The men fueled the aircraft from the drop tanks first and, when they were emptied, jettisoned them to maximize their altitude.
As they approached the coast of China, the formation was fl 5 dng at nearly 54,000 feet, over 12,000 feet above the operational ceiling of the aircraft.
Anderson led his wingman through this difficult process, and they overflew Dairen uneventfully.
Upon collecting their imagery of the Chinese port, Anderson directed the flight west over Port Arthur in the Soviet Union.
Once again, they met no resistance nor any sign that they were detected and turned for home.
It was rare for pilots to see the fruits of their labor, however, on this occasion Anderson was able to see the imagery he captured.
The intelligence branch of FEAF headquarters wanted to debrief the pilots on the Chinese and Soviet reactions and asked them to report to the headquarters.
Anderson and Depew flew to Tokyo on the morning of 2 May and saw the processed film.
Depew recalls being amazed by the number of submarines docked at Port Arthur.
As usual, Anderson was all business and just wanted to get back to Komaki to do their job.
He was twice awarded the Distinguished Fl 5 dng Cross for missions like the one described above.
In April of 1955, Rudy packed up his gear and returned to the United States.
He was given leave before reporting to his new squadron at Larson AFB, Washington and used that time to go back to the East Coast.
This time was used to visit his family in South Carolina and start the beginning of a new family.
While on leave before reporting to Larson AFB, Rudy proposed to Miss Frances “Jane” Corbett.
The two had met when Rudy was on duty in Georgia before departing for Texas in 1952.
They kept in touch over 36 Peebles, Shadow Flights, 57. 24 the course of the next three years, and when Rudy returned from Korea, he traveled to Georgia to ask for her hand in marriage.
Jane accepted, and they married on 20 November 1955 at the First Methodist Church in Parson, OR, near where Rudy was stationed.
Rudy excelled in the RF-84 and was even recognized as Strategic Air Command’s Pilot of the Month for April 1956.38 Such recognition was no easy feat for a tactical reconnaissance pilot in a Command dominated by bombers focused on nuclear war.
The fact that Rudy was chosen for such recognition is a testament to his abilities as a pilot and an officer.
McKenn, Commander of the 71®^ Strategic Reconnaissance Wing, held a ceremony to present Rudy the medal for performance during a classified mission in March 1955.39 In May 1956, Rudy’s childhood friend and Air Force Reserve pilot, Dan Foster, flew into Larson on his way to Alaska.
The two decided that they should take advantage of the opportunity and go on a fishing trip.
Rudy told Dan and another friend from the squadron to take his car and go fishing without him.
After a weekend enjo 5 dng fishing while Rudy sat alert, Dan asked him if he was tired of it and when he was going to get out.
I’d 37 Lutie McGee, “Interesting Betrothals are Revealed this Morning,” Greenville News, 6 November 1955, 2B 38 “City Air Officer Awarded DFC,” Greenville News, 15 June 1956, 14.
In the Spring of 1957 Rudy Anderson, along with some of his fellow pilots at Larson, were reeruited to a speeial program.
There is no indieation whether or not Rudy was party to one of these early recruitment trips.
However, given his previously mentioned statement to longtime friend Dan Foster, it is doubtful he would have resigned his commission if they had tried to recruit him.
Towards the end of 1956, the USAF picked up a significant portion of the U-2 mission and recruiting changed.
With the shift came a change for many of SAC’s Tac-Recce pilots, a move to a new command dominated by the fighter aces of the Korean War.
The USAF used this opportunity to recruit RF-86 and RF-84 pilots from SAC bases.
Anderson’s performance in SAC and experience involving overflight missions while assigned to the 15* Tactical Reconnaissance Squadron made Rudy a prime candidate.
He accepted the offer and prepared to make a series of major transitions.
In the Spring of 1957, the Andersons time at Larson came to an end, and they departed for an unknown adventure.
Rudy was given vague orders to Laughlin AFB, TX but with intermediary temporary duty assignments in between.
As would be the case at many points throughout his career, the Air Force had other plans for Rudy, and he was not able to stay with his new family.
He departed for Squadron Officer School a day after the birth of his boy, where he would remain for the next month and a half.
His orders called for him to attend training at March AFB, CA but he knew this was not the full story.
Rudy arrived at March AFB in May and found an empty squadron with no aircraft.
He quickly learned that his training would take place elsewhere and that he would have to board a C-123 to get there.
For the first class of USAF U-2 pilot trainees there were no instructor pilots, no trainer aircraft, and no base to speak of from which to conduct their training.
When Rudy arrived in the summer of 1957, he found a desolate, dry lakebed in the Nevada desert.
The site was officially called Groom Lake, but those who operated out of the remote facility called it ""The Ranch.
The USAF pilots operated without the assistance of their Agency brethren.
They taught themselves 42 Lutie McGee, “The Breakfast Hour” “Parents of a Son,” Greenville News, 28 March 1957, 22.
McDowell Publications, 2008), 31. 27 to fly the new aireraft, learning eapabilities and handling eharaeteristies while at the same time developing eheeklists and proeedures.
Another ehallenging aspeet of learning to fly the U-2 was the partial-pressure suit.
The U2 program was very seeretive in nature, but getting one’s pressure suit took seereey to the extreme.
After arriving in Worcester, Anderson and his fellow pilots were met by another individual who would pick them up in a car and drive them to the David Clark Company, maker of women’s brassieres.
Once inside the factory, the men had to navigate through the factory floor to a special room at the back where they were fitted for their suits.
They returned the following morning to try on their suits that had been put together overnight and then took it with them back to March.
The process seemed completely normal for the agency pilots who were accustomed to such clandestine lifestyles, but for the USAF pilots, it was uncomfortable and unfamiliar.
The USAF aircraft were flown from the Lockheed plant in California in the back of a mobility aircraft, assembled, and then flown once by a Lockheed test pilot to ensure it was put together correctly.
From that point on the pilots were on their own to figure out how to fly this strange powered glider that could outclimb an 5 rthing in the sky.
Remembering the Dragon Lady, Retired Colonel Tony Bevacqua recalled the challenges at Groom Lake and how he and the 44 Interview with Brig Gen Gerald Mcllmoyle, 1 February 2017 28 other men of the first elass were foeused eompletely on training.
Beeause of their baekgrounds and airmanship, they were thrust right into training.
The training began with a series of low-altitude flights and focused on the strange landing characteristics of the U-2.
After about a week of lowaltitude flights the men donned their partial pressure suits and took the Dragon Lady to altitude.
For the next two weeks, the pilots learned how to operate the jet at altitude and manage its various sensors.
The first class of USAF pilots arrived at Groom Lake and completed their entire training in less than three weeks.
On 3 September 1957, just twelve days before his thirtieth birthday, Rudy became the 83rd pilot to solo the Dragon Lady.
He completed training by the end of the month and departed for Laughlin AFB, TX where he would join his family and begin the life of a Dragon Lady pilot.
Between September 1957 and October 1962 Rudy Anderson amassed over one-thousand flight hours in the U-2.
He flew operational missions around the world and was always one of the first pilots to test a new upgrade to the aircraft or receive an additional qualification.
When work permitted, he would 45 Mcllmoyle, Remembering the Dragon Lady, 23.
At the squadron, his fellow pilots reeognized his talent and dedieation.
Anderson used his attention to detail to organize checklist and write procedures manuals for his fellow pilots.
Although no records show that President Kennedy remembered meeting Rudy Anderson when the Crisis occurred in October of 1962, it was Anderson who first introduced the President to the U-2.
In May of 1962, Major Rudolf Anderson was the special briefing officer for the President when he received his first read-in on the capabilities of the Dragon Lady.
Anderson presented the President with a briefing of the status and capabilities of the USAF version of the U-2 program.
Following the brief, Anderson provided Kennedy an aerial demonstration of the high-performance climb of the aircraft.
We own him and them a debt no less that that we owe to those who died or were permanently injured in other wars.
All who knew him were impressed by his singular character, his absolute manliness, his outgoing personality and spirit and his devotion to the right.
To avoid political involvements, such as flying in friendly airspace, or a decision on this permitting from vehicles whose performance is such that they can operate in Soviet airspace with greatly reduced chances of detection or interception.
The political obstacles to performing reconnaissance of the latter type are often mentioned as justifying a lack of effort on equipment and systems for pre-D-Day reconnaissance involving penetration of Soviet airspace.
Recommendation in the Beacon Hill Report Beacon Hill Study Group, 1952 The use of lighter-than-air vessels beeame a part of warfare in the 19* eentury; however this form of reeonnaissanee was limited in range due to the statie nature of the eraft used.
With the advent of the airplane in the early 20* eentury, visionaries reeognized the military value of sueh eraft.
The earliest uses of military aireraft were for reeonnaissanee and artillery spotting.
However, as airplane teehnology advaneed, so did its military applieation.
By the end of the Seeond World War, military aviation had progressed tremendously to inelude a myriad of missions, and in the United States was poised to beeome its own separate braneh of the military.
Through the erueible of two world wars, reeonnaissanee developed from a man with binoeulars peering over the side of the aireraft into something mueh more preeise and technical.
From these developments came strategic reconnaissance, the idea that the airplane could provide intelligence on an adversary or potential adversary in order to facilitate strategic decisions, even outside of wartime operations.
This became very important as World War 11 ended and a Cold War between the United States and USSR began.
These photographs were eaptured by the Allies after the German surrender in May 1945.
As victory in WWll appeared imminent, the USAAF under General Hap Arnold commissioned studies to assess the impact of strategic bombing in the war.
In addition to an evaluation of the contribution of strategic bombing, the United States Strategic Bombing Survey concluded that “the United States should have an intelligence organization capable of knowing the strategic vulnerabilities, capabilities and intentions of any potential enemy.
Additionally, the strategic bomber forces needed a list of verified targets in case conflict with the USSR broke out.
The United States ereated its initial aerial reeonnaissanee foree from a few eonverted bombers and fighters with the goal of developing a robust and eapable foree.
Within 5 years of the end of WWll, USAF RF-80As were flying along the borders of Soviet airspaee.
Throughout the Cold War, the USAF and Central Intelligence Agency conducted highly classified reconnaissance operations against the Soviet Union and its proxy states.
They did so while operating within very tight constraints imposed by national leadership, due to a fear of a Soviet response.
This chapter addresses the development of strategic reconnaissance in the Cold War.
It begins with the use of retrofitted fighters and bombers conducting reconnaissance operations and follows the evolution that led to the development of dedicated reconnaissance assets to include the U-2 that the men of the 4028* Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron flew over Cuba during the Missile Crisis.
Throughout this development, men like Major Rudolf Anderson flew highly dangerous and covert missions into unfriendly skies.
They were often alone, unarmed, and unafraid; relying on their aircraft and skill to take them deep into the heart of enemy territory and 4 Peebles, Shadow Flights, 9.
Post WWII Development Despite their allianee during World War 11, in the waning moments of the war tensions grew between the two emerging superpowers.
The United States saw the Soviet Union’s ability to mobilize massive amounts of men and maehines, and the manner in whieh it erushed the seemingly invincible Wehrmacht, as a direct threat to a stabilized world order.
On the other side, the USSR was threatened by the United States due to numerous factors, the strongest of which was its own insecurity and concern over another great war on the continent.
They felt that the Germans should be made to pay for the atrocities of both World Wars and wanted to exact revenge in the form of both monetary and physical reparations.
The USSR also saw its annexation of eastern Germany as part of the necessary creation of a buffer zone between itself and potential adversaries.
The USSR saw the growing alliance between the United States and United Kingdom as a threat.
Stalin also felt these allies were rebuilding and strengthening Germany and Japan too quiekly.
The USSR had fought both of these nations multiple times in the reeent past and wanted to see them erushed rather than restored.
In addition to diplomatie aetions, the Soviet Union warily watehed as the United States eontinued to develop and test new and more powerful atomie weapons, while ealling for international eontrols over other nations’ development of similar deviees.
The Soviets feared the United States’ growing monopoly on nuelear weapons and viewed the development of longer-range strategie bombers from whieh atomie weapons eould be delivered as a major threat to the Soviet Union.
The growing tensions in the seeond half of the 1940s also led to an end of United States baeked loans and aid to the USSR, 35 while the United States greatly inereased aid to other world nations under the Marshall Plan.
In the early years of the Cold War, the Soviet Union did not have nearly enough resourees or the teehnology required to monitor the vast borders of its 8. million square mile territory.
These radar sets were focused to the west and were very limited in range and capability.
They also relied on parts provided by the United States and UK, and as relationships deteriorated the flow of supplies needed to maintain the sites was cut off.
Additionally, even if the Soviets could detect an incoming aircraft, their Air Force was designed to combat German fighters on the Eastern Front at medium-to-low altitudes.
While their pilots were proficient, they did not have an interceptor aircraft that was capable of intercepting a World War Il-style bomber, like the B-29, until 1948.
This was the environment in which United States Cold War reconnaissance operations began.
The United States had a perceived need to fill a vast void of information, and the USSR had little means of stopping them.
Immediately after the end of World War II, the United States began flying intelligence and reconnaissance missions along the Soviet borders.
This was primarily conducted along the coastal region in the east and along Soviet occupied Germany in the west.
When they detected these flights, the Soviets tried to intercept any intruding aircraft that they could.
For the most part these intercept attempts were unsuccessful due to the higher altitudes and faster speeds of United States and UK aircraft.
As time went by, intereepts beeame more aggressive, and eventually, the intereeptors tried to ehase flights away rather than simply following them.
After nearly five years of this game of eat and mouse, the Soviets had had enough and their air defense fighters shot down the first United States reeonnaissanee flight on 8 April 1950.
The Soviet Ambassador to the United States delivered a formal demarche to United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson on 11 April 1950, three days after the aircraft had been shot down.
In the accusatory note, the USSR described the manner in which their defense force shot down a United States reconnaissance aircraft that had flown over 21 kilometers into Soviet territory.
The Soviets claimed that their interceptor aircraft discovered the violating aircraft and signaled for it to depart Soviet airspace or land.
Rather than comply, the Soviets stated that the aircraft fired on the Soviet interceptors, which of course required them to fire back in selfdefense.
The letter went on to describe how the Soviets shot at the United States aircraft and how it flew out over the water trailing smoke and eventually crashed into the sea.
Shortly after the formal demarche, the United States released a statement that refuted Soviet claims and portrayed them as the aggressor.
The report detailed the United States account of the incident and stated that the United States aircraft was unarmed, flying over international waters, and not spying but rather on a routine training mission.
In 1975 the United States Navy admitted that this flight was indeed a reconnaissance mission.
The aircraft was a Consolidated PB4Y-2 37 The April 1950 incident marked a major shift in Soviet policy regarding United States and UK reconnaissance flights.
Rather than simply intercepting aircraft and escorting them out of Soviet territory, the USSR took a more aggressive stance.
A new intercept policy was released in which the Soviet Union asserted the right and necessity to intercept any aircraft flying near or over their airspace.
Included in this new doctrine was the right to force violators to land and subject them to search and seizure.
If the reconnaissance aircraft attempted to flee rather than land, they claimed the right to shoot them down before they returned to international airspace.
This new Soviet policy meant that the United States and UK had to rethink their own policies towards gathering intelligence on the Soviet Union.
In 1946, British Prime Minister Winston Churchill gave a speech entitled “Sinews of Peace” at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri.
In the speech, he described the Soviets as hiding behind an Iron Curtain, a curtain which prevented other nations of the world from peering in and knowing what was happening inside their vast empire.
By the middle of 1950, the Iron Curtain that Churchill had so eloquently described in 1946 had extended higher into the heavens and was threatening the ability of the United States and UK to gather information and understand what the Soviets were doing.
Both nations knew that reconnaissance operations would demand a higher price as Soviet air defenses increased and Soviet pilots became better equipped and trained.
On the contrary, after the August 1949 test of the first Soviet atomic bomb.
Privateer, a modified version of the B-24 bomber that was outfitted with special electronic equipment designed to collect signals intelligence.
Additionally, the PB4Y-2 was heavily armed including twelve .50 caliber machine guns, so the story that it fired first is highly likely.
This need for intelligenee foreed the United States to aeeept an even greater priee in lost airerews and aireraft.
Meanwhile United States poliey makers feared that eontinuing esealation eould led to an inerease in tensions preeipitating another World War.
If the United States was to regain the reeonnaissanee advantage it enjoyed from 1946 to 1950 it had to find a new solution to eireumvent the inereasingly impenetrable Iron Curtain.
However, as reconnaissance flights continued into the early 1950s, a new solution was not adopted.
Rather, the United States and UK continued fl 5 dng modified fighters and bombers over and around the periphery of the USSR in increasing numbers.
Through late 1953 the significant increase in military, especially atomic, development in the USSR led the United States to dramatically increase reconnaissance operations.
This surge coupled with improvements in Soviet air defenses resulted in increased losses in reconnaissance aircraft and aircrew.
After over three years of discussing the need for a new aircraft or new techniques, the United States finally received the catalyst it needed to bring about change.
President Dwight D Eisenhower and the Technology Capabilities Panel The 1952 presidential election occurred during a time of political upheaval and rapid technological change.
The United States was mired in a stalemate in Korea that showed no promise of ending soon and polarized the nation.
Additionally, McCarthyism was rampant, driving a strong fear of communist conspiracy and aggression.
In the background, the United States military was expanding its nuclear arsenal in preparation for an allout war with the USSR and newly-Red China.
The first United States hydrogen bomb was tested just 3 days before the 1952 election, on 1 November.
This lack of quality intelligence led to the creation of the President’s Technology Capabilities Panel in 1954.15 The panel, led by James R Killian, president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, outlined the various programs that were currently under development and proposed new ideas that would enable the United States to collect vital intelligence on the Soviet Union.
National Archives, Winter 2009), 12. 40 missiles, and finally the seareh for a new high-altitude reeonnaissanee aireraft that eould operate above threats.
Many of the ideas proposed by the TCP were simultaneously explored or developed under the direetion of President Eisenhower.
Because they were not manned and not carrying weapons, the TCP believed that Project GENETRIX would not escalate the Cold War.
Unfortunately, the balloons proved very unreliable in both quality of collection and more so in the unpredictable nature of their flight path, and the project was abandoned.
While the TCP, Department of Defense, and industry explored other technological solutions; President Eisenhower proposed another, more diplomatic idea.
The President suggested that the RB-36, which the United States was then fl 5 dng on the periphery of the Soviet Union in a reconnaissance role, could be used in a new way.
Eisenhower envisioned an idea that would allow both the United States and USSR to use the aircraft as a tool to verify arms levels and push for a reduction with open, predictable, reconnaissance flights over each other’s territory.
CIA Archives, 15 Feb 1956) 17 David Haight, Ike and His Spies in the Sky, 18. 41 the United States to verify the status of weapons, This proposal was predieated on the idea that the Soviets would provide reeiproeal support to the United States, ensuring both sides knew what the other was doing in order to reduee the ehanee of misealeulation.
While the idea eould have redueed tensions, it rested on the United States pereeption of parity between the two nations.
In reality, the USSR knew that its forees were signifieantfy weaker than they elaimed, and therefore such a program would reveal this weakness to the world.
Secretary Khrushchev believed that the US, with its new war hero president, was attempting to identify targets for strategic attack on a Soviet Union weakened by the recent death of Joseph Stalin.
While Eisenhower hoped for a diplomatic solution, by the time he proposed OPEN SKIES in 1955 Eisenhower had already approved and developed a fallback plan, the Lockheed U-2.
Prior to the Geneva Summit the President stated, “111 give it [the Open Skies initiative] one shot.
Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency), 96.
This intensifleation in Soviet response to overflight operations eame at the same time as growing Soviet rhetorie about the strength of its bomber foree and the development of more powerful atomie weapons.
The ehanging geopolitieal landseape plaeed the United States in a position requiring the USAF to innovate or aeeept a major gap in intelligenee.
Aeeepting a gap in intelligence was something President Eisenhower was unwilling to do and, as mentioned above, he pushed for a better answer.
While the TCP pursued many options, the one that seemed the most capable also appeared to be the most technologically difficult—high-altitude reconnaissance.
Although several factors led the Eisenhower administration to pursue high-altitude reconnaissance aircraft, the major driving factor was an early-1954 RAND study regarding Soviet capabilities.
One of the TCP chairmen, Trevor Gardener, Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development, was briefed on the study which indicated that the Soviets were now capable of conducting a surprise attack on the United States which could destroy as much as 85 percent of SAC’s bomber fleet in a single day.
At the same time that this RAND study was being conducted, the United Kingdom made its first attempt at developing a high-altitude reconnaissance capability in the form of the English Electric Canberra.
In early 1953 a Canberra attempted a dangerous overflight of the Soviet missile test range at Kapustin Yar.
American Strategy in the Air-Atomic Age and the Rise of Mutually Assured Destruction.
RAF intelligenee offieials estimated the failure was due to the USSR’s ability to traek the aireraft and the inability of the Canberra to outelimb or outrun Soviet intereeptors.
James Baker, the same month that Gardener was told about the RAND study.
These two events were briefed to President Eisenhower in early 1954 and solidified his determination to pursue a true high-altitude option.
The memories of the surprise attack at Pearl Harbor heavily influenced the members of the TCP, the National Security Council, and the President.
The idea that the Soviets could launch a surprise attack that could destroy a majority of the United States strategic forces, and that United States and UK were not capable of continuing to monitor their strategic forces, was not acceptable.
President Eisenhower knew that manned-aerial reconnaissance was rapidly becoming the only means available to get answers to these vital national security concerns.
The United States Air Force began seriously pursuing the idea of highaltitude reconnaissance a year earlier, in January 1952.
Under the newly established Wright Air Development Center at Wright Patterson Air Force Base, two men recognized the need to address high altitude flight, specifically for reconnaissance uses.
The two men were an Air Force civilian engineer, Mr Bill Lamar, and an active duty engine specialist, Maj.
Their team submitted a request to industry for design proposals for a low-production run of aircraft that could perform high-altitude reconnaissance missions.
They believed that these smaller eompanies would eare more about the projeet and that the major eompanies like Loekheed and Boeing would not be interested in designing an aireraft that would be produeed in small numbers.
The three aforementioned eompanies were asked to submit design proposals by January 1954 for eonsideration.
The proposal, whieh would become known as Project BALD EAGLE, had very clear requirements but called for capabilities that had not yet been achieved in aviation.
Additionally, the aircraft was to be developed using available production engines in order to reduce cost and have as low a gross weight as possible, enabling it to be transported via existing cargo air craft.
As requested, the three eompanies submitted their respeetive studies by January 1954.
The front runner, Martin’s modified B-57, featured a longer wingspan, a modifieation of the bomb bay to aeeommodate a eamera or other sensors, and modified engines eapable of operating at higher altitudes.
Their proposal, the M195 was a long-winged, single engine aireraft featuring a unique engine intake on top of the fuselage, over the wings.
Finally, the Bell Corporation submitted a twin-engine aireraft with very long thin wings that they ealled Model 67.2.
All three proposals used the existing Pratt St Whitney J57-P19 engines, modified for high-altitude flight.
Models of Proposed Aircraft Source: Peter W Merlin, Unlimited Horizons, (Washington DC: NASA Publications, 2015) Meanwhile, Loekheed engineer Clarenee “Kelly” Johnson heard of the Air Foree request for designs and began work on his own unsolieited 26 Paul F Crickmore, Lockheed Blackbird: Beyond the Secret Missions, , 19. 46 proposal.
His work on the design and development of the USAF’s first jet fighter, the P-80, made his Lockheed “Skunk Works” team a name known for designing seemingly impossible technological developments quickly and affordably.
Johnson began work in early 1954 and, by March of that year, had completed a design proposal which Lockheed called the CL-282.
Johnson sent the proposal for the design to Air Force Colonel Bernard “Bennie” Schriever, who was also working on secret Air Force projects in Southern California at the time.
In early April, just three months after starting design for the project, Johnson briefed a CL282 proposal to the Commander of Strategic Air Command , General Curtis LeMay and a small group of other Air Force general officers at the Pentagon.
Both LeMay and Lieutenant General Donald Putt, Commander of Air Force Research and Development Command , cut the briefing short, and categorically rejected the fragile looking glider-type design and the idea of a single-engine aircraft.
LeMay stated that the thought of fl 5 dng an aircraft with only one engine over the Soviet Union was ridiculous and had been a primary reason for rejecting Fairchild’s M-195.28 Shortly after Johnson’s briefing, Martin was given further funding and approval to proeeed with produetion of the RB-57D.29 Under LeMay’s direetion the USAF deeided that a twin-engine design was best and, due to its existing infrastrueture, the RB-57 eould be fielded quiekly.
To the USAF it seemed that the problems were solved and that 27 Criekmore, Lockheed Blackbird, 20.
As the “Top Secret” Air Force study of high altitude reconnaissance aircraft progressed, CIA officials learned of the work being done by the USAF and were furious.
The CIA argued that clandestine reconnaissance was its jurisdiction and that flight over denied territory should be a function of a civilian intelligence agency rather than a military service.
Their argument gained little traction with the Air Force, which argued that reconnaissance was a military function and therefore under their purview.
The CIA decided to begin a parallel effort in hopes of gaining further support once they had a completed aircraft.
Although Johnson’s design was rejected by LeMay and AFRDC, he was not deterred.
Much like Martin’s redesign of the existing B-57, the Lockheed design for the CL-282 was based on an existing aircraft, the XF-104 fighter interceptor.
The XF-104 was designed to be a highaltitude, high-speed interceptor and Johnson believed that by shedding weight and increasing the wings’ surface area he could create an even higher fl 3 dng aircraft while being able to utilize existing equipment from the F-104 production line.
Johnson foresaw the CL-282 as being a short-lived, almost disposable, aircraft and decided to eliminate most of the structural supports that allowed the F-104 to maneuver under heavy gravity loads.
Johnson’s tenacity paid off and by November of 1954 his “Skunk Works” team was making their second presentation on the East Coast, this time at CIA headquarters in Langley, Virginia.
The First Fifty Years (Arlington, TX: Aerofax, 1993), 213. 48 secretary of the Air Force for Research and Development.
While the Air Force generals were not impressed with the presentation, Gardner believed it showed the most potential for success.
Gardener knew the CIA was looking for an aircraft of their own so he briefed the CIA’s lead intelligence analyst, Philip Strong, on the CL-282.
Strong recommended that the CIA listen to Johnson’s proposal and invited him to Langley to brief the CL-282.
The CIA liked the Lockheed design, but being impressed with a design did not generate funds for further development.
Gardner requested a meeting with CIA Director Allen Dulles to discuss the future of CIA aircraft operations.
Dulles accepted the meeting, but was skeptical that the CIA should involve itself with the design and production of aircraft, something that he believed fell into the purview of the military services.
However, Gardner, while serving as the Assistant Secretary of the United States Air Force for Research and Development, insisted that the CIA had not only the right but the obligation to pursue aircraft for intelligence collection.
Further, he briefed Dulles that he believed that as a civilian agency, the CIA was better suited to conduct covert operations.
The briefing concluded with a caution that time was of the essence and that rapid developments in Soviet technology might soon make any overflight impossible.
Gardner told Dulles that it was imperative to get the CL-282 funded and flying over the USSR as soon as possible.Dulles was convinced; now the USAF and CIA were each pursuing their own highaltitude reconnaissance projects.
In November 1954, President Eisenhower’s advisors briefed him on the CIA and USAF projects.
Eisenhower listened to the briefing and asked both sides many hard questions.
Additionally, after 38 years of military service, Eisenhower knew that military procurement was often plagued with delays and inter-service rivalries.
Although the CIA had the lead on the project, they could not handle the influx of $35 million required for Project AQUATONE without drawing attention.
Therefore, in an ironic twist, the funding for procurement came through the Air Force 34 The U-2’s development, which now involved Lockheed, the CIA, and the USAF, was conducted in the tightest seereey with funds being sent personally to Kelly Johnson to avoid someone at Loekheed or in the Government diseovering the projeet.
The projeet progressed quiekly; just one month after the eontraet was signed the Skunk Works team began produetion.
While the U-2 was under development and produetion in the first half of 1955, worldwide aerial reeonnaissanee missions eontinued using the existing fighter and bomber aireraft upgraded with reeonnaissanee equipment.
During the summer of 1955 two events further shaped the United States perception of a bomber gap and reinforced the urgent need to field the U-2.
In May, 1955 the USSR showcased its newest long-range bomber, the Tu-95 BEAR, at the Moscow May Day parade.
The aircraft was seen by Western reporters, and intelligence officials believed that the USSR had surpassed United States and UK bomber capabilities.
Additionally, in July 1955, the USSR conducted multiple fly-bys of Mya-4 bombers at a demonstration.
This convinced Western observers that they had numerous aircraft when in reality it was a much smaller formation of aircraft fl 5 dng a circuit pattern.
This overestimate, in turn, led to increased concern over Soviet capabilities and the 1954 RAND study’s implications.
If the Soviets were capable of destro 5 dng 85 percent of the United States bomber force before the recent surge in bomber production, analysts were even more concerned with what they could do after they increased production.
The combination of the 1954 RAND study and the summer 1955 bomber demonstrations dramatically highlighted the threat to national security and the importance of overflight reconnaissance of Soviet bomber bases.
After the May and July bomber demonstrations the estimates were doubled, projecting over 1200 long-range bombers in the near future.
After lagging in atomic weapons development, the Soviets finally closed the gap.
In November 1955 the USSR air-dropped its first megaton thermonuclear device at the Semipalatinsk test site.
This Soviet weapon, dropped from a Tu-16 bomber, reinforced concerns over a bomber gap and further fueled fear of a Soviet first strike.
While the U-2 was completing flight tests and sensor development, the USAF continued collecting intelligence on Soviet bomber forces and nuclear weapons testing.
Aircraft including USAF RB-47s and RAF Canberras conducted flights along the borders of the Soviet Union, but were continually harassed and unable to complete their missions.
Concerns grew over a lack of ability to collect intelligence coupled with strong Soviet rhetoric backed up by rapid advancements in capabilities.
The missile was a weapon that the United States could not defend against and one that gave the 36 Paul Lashmar, Spy Flights of the Cold War.
In early April 1956, the first round of U-2 aircraft was delivered to the CIA and the first crews completed their training.
Between May and mid-June of 1956 training flights were conducted from RAF Lakenheath.
On 15 June, the unit moved to Wiesbaden, West Germany and began fl 3 dng operational missions over East Germany and Poland.
These June flights were but a prequel to the real purpose of the U-2’s deployment to Wiesbaden.
Eisenhower was anxious about ordering OVERFLIGHT and was afraid of provoking a Soviet response.
However, given the events of the previous months, the need to gather intelligence outweighed his anxiety.
One of the President’s biggest concerns was the likely Soviet response if a U-2 was detected over their territory.
Eisenhower was bothered by the myriad possible responses that could occur, both tactically and strategically.
He was required to undergo surgery and while reeovering at the hospital took his final briefs and made the deeision regarding OVERFLlGHT.^o He asked his team about the eapabilities of Soviet radar, aireraft, and expeeted responses.
Hervey Stockman piloted the first mission which flew over Poland, Belorussia, and the primary target area of Leningrad’s shipyards (the home of development for Soviet naval submarines) as well as Bison bomber airfields.
The next day Carmine Vito flew over Moscow and numerous bomber bases and the missile plants at Kaliningrad and Khimki.
Over the next seven days, three other missions were flown against numerous airfields and production facilities within the Soviet Union.
The CIA’s belief that the U-2 would be invisible proved false, and the USSR was able to track the flights sporadically throughout their time in Soviet airspace.
Due to their ability to track the U-2 flights, the Soviets began to make official protests a week after Stockman’s first flight over their territory.
On 10 July, the Soviets delivered their first demarche, in the form of a note to the United States Embassy in Moscow.
The CIA saw this as an indieator that Soviet radar eould traek the U-2’s eourse but not provide any other information regarding its altitude.
Additionally, while reviewing the film, photo analysts in Langley diseovered images of Soviet MiGs attempting to attaek the U-2, however, in various stages of climbing, the interceptors stalled and fell well below the U-2.
These photos demonstrated that while the Soviets were able to track the U-2, they could not bring it down at operational altitudes.
They believed that they could resume missions immediately without fear of Soviet reactions.
However, they did not further respond, relieving Eisenhower of the concern over further escalation.
Although the President was discouraged by the evident Soviet abilities to track the U2, he was encouraged by their inability to do an 5 hhing about the intrusions and their apparent unwillingness to escalate beyond a demarche.
Additionally, the value of information gathered from these first eight flights was immense.
After overfl 5 dng most of the potential BISON bomber bases in the USSR and Eastern Europe, no BISON were photographed.
This did not mean that the Soviets had no bombers, but did assure Eisenhower and the National Security Council that the bomber gap was a fabrication.
This information allowed the President to 43 Pedlow and Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2 Program, 108.
Although the potential was low, the possibility of an aireraft being shot down or erashing over Soviet territory was too dangerous to be worth the potential information gained.
The CIA and military leaders continually asked for more overflight operations.
During almost four years of Soviet U-2 overflights, President Eisenhower only approved 24 total missions.
The driving factor for those missions was concern over the rapidly developing Soviet missile program; the same program that would produce the missiles that Khrushchev would deploy to Cuba in 1962.
From 9 July 1959 through 9 April 1960 missions were flown under Operation TOUCHDOWN with very limited political response from the Soviets.
Their air defense systems traeked the aireraft and fighter intereepts were attempted, but none eame elose to the U-2.
For almost a year, the limited flights of Operation TOUCHDOWN had produeed exeellent results.
The pilot chosen for this mission was Francis Gary Powers, the most experienced pilot in the U-2 program.
After a series of cancelled flights due to aircraft malfunctions and weather.
Powers’ mission was planned to take him over the T 5 airatam Missile Test Range, the missile fields at Chelyabinsk, northwest to more missile facilities at Kirov, and continue north to a landing at Bodo, Norway.
Unfortunately for Powers, the U-2 program, and the Eisenhower administration, a little over four hours into his flight he was shot down by a barrage of missiles from an undetected SA-2 site at Sverdlovsk.
Powers was unable to eject but was able to successfully get out of the aircraft, although in official debriefs he stated that he did not remember how.
Despite not knowing how he successfully bailed out, and a strong CIA belief that no one could survive a high altitude shoot down.
Because the CIA did not think it was possible for man or aircraft to survive such an event, on 3 May they released a cover story that a NASA aircraft was missing over Turkey and that the pilot had reported oxygen problems.
The Agency felt that this story would allow them to justify how an American aircraft ended up so far inside Soviet territory.
They did not announce the fact that they were successful in shooting down the U-2, nor the fact that they captured the pilot.
After the NASA eover story was released and made worldwide news, Khrushehev took the opportunity to announee the truth and showed pietures of both the aireraft and Powers as evidenee that the United States was eondueting illegal spy operations.The Soviets made a very publie display of the ineident and attempted to humiliate the United States and President Eisenhower.
Eisenhower took full responsibility for the ineident and the loss of the U-2.
In an 11 May press conference he stated that a United States reconnaissance aircraft had been shot down and that reconnaissance flights over the USSR were critical to United States national defense and had occurred many times over the past four years.
This, the first U-2 shoot down, had important consequences that shaped U-2 operations, Soviet defense systems, and most importantly US-Soviet relations.
A scheduled peace summit in Paris was cancelled, as was Presidents Eisenhower’s June visit to the USSR to discuss future peace talks.
The USAF began standing up a robust U-2 unit at Laughlin AFB that would include Major Rudolf Anderson, while CIA units were moved to Edwards AFB, California.
Although the strategic impact of Gary Powers’ shoot down spelled the end of U-2 operations over the USSR and the beginning of the end of CIA U-2 operations, it did not herald the end of the U-2.
Nor did the events of May 1960 eliminate the need for the United States to eonduet aerial reeonnaissanee.
Conversely, just two years later, aerial reeonnaissanee would warn a new President of a great Soviet threat in Cuba and provide him with the tools to reaeh a sueeessful and peaeeful eonelusion.
Their story has received brief mention in chronicles of the Crisis, but for the most part exists only in forgotten unit histories and in the minds of the ever-shrinking group of individuals who flew and supported the missions.
However, for Major Rudy Anderson and the members of the 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing , operations over Cuba began much earlier.
This chapter will tell their story chronologically, starting with the missions flown over Cuba following the “Bay of Pigs” disaster through the decision to concentrate U-2 operations in search of Soviet missiles.
It will then examine the deplo 5 mient of Majors Anderson and Heyser to learn to fly the CIA version of the U-2.
Next, the chapter will detail the flight flown by Major Heyser on 14 October, the first flight that discovered Soviet ballistic missiles on Cuba.
Ensuing sections will focus on the remainder of the Crisis through the perspective of the U-2 missions over Cuba culminating with Rudy Anderson’s final flight on 27 October.
This chapter will present the unique challenges faced by the men who gathered the 59 critical intelligence that informed President Kennedy and the ExCom.
It will also eonvey the internal struggles between the CIA and the USAF, as both entities battled for primaey in the realm of airborne intelligenee eolleetion.
Finally, the ehapter will explore the importanee of the information gathered in resolving the Crisis.
In reality, U-2s flew numerous missions over Cuba before the ill-fated “Bay of Pigs” invasion in April of 1961.
Even after the failed attempt to overthrow Castro’s regime, Cuba remained a high-priority reconnaissance requirement.
Shortly after Cuban forces defeated the invasion, the 4080 SRW stood up Detachment G to address the growing concern over Cuba.
This program, known as Project NIMBUS, focused on acquiring photographic intelligence on airfields and military installations throughout the island.
Missions progressed routinely throughout 1961 but begin to collect images of massive build-ups of military equipment on the island in the spring of 1962.
This upsurge in aetivity led the USAF and CIA to request missions inerease from one per month to two, so that photo interpreters eould better monitor ehanges taking plaee.
The seeond monthly mission was approved, and aireraft began flying over the island twiee a month in May 1962 with planned missions seheduled every two weeks.
However, the extra week between missions led to an intelligenee windfall.
However, the seeond August mission diseovered eight surfaee-to-air missile sites that were not present just twenty-four days prior.
As soon as the photos were interpreted, they appeared in the President’s daily brief on 31 August 1962.
August 1962 U-2 Missions Over Cuba Source: Gregory Pedlow and Donald Welzenbach, The CIA and the U-2 Program: 1954-1974, (Langley, VA: Center for the Study of Intelligence, 1992) President Kennedy’s 31 August brief contained two other disturbing reports.
On 30 August a SAC U-2 fl 5 dng a routine reconnaissance mission inadvertently penetrated Soviet airspace when the pilot missed a heading and overflew Sakhalin Island, a part of the USSR just north of Japan.
This incursion received significant Soviet 61 attention on the day of the overflight, and SAC offleials assumed it would result in diplomatie aetion.
Days later the Soviets protested at the United Nations and delivered a formal demarehe to the United States.
Even more eoneerning was another report from 30 August that detailed the events surrounding a United States Navy S2F anti-submarine aireraft on a training flight.
The S2F was operating fifteen miles off the coast of Cuba when it was fired upon by Cuban patrol boats.
Alarm over the safety of further NIMBUS missions escalated on 8 September.
Huai-Sheng Chen, a Taiwanese U-2 pilot, was shot down by an SA-2 over the People's Republic of China.
On 10 September 1962, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy called an informal meeting with Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Deputy Director of Central Intelligence Marshall Carter.
Bundy, Rusk, and Carter decided that, in the interest of safety, overflights would no longer traverse the whole island as depicted in figure 4. but would use standoff cameras and only perform quick overflights of the main target areas.
They also directed planners to avoid the weapons engagement zone of the newly discovered SAM sites.
While these changes were effective in reducing the danger to the U-2, they also signiflcantly reduced the aircraft’s ability to collect intelligence in the major areas.
Given the likelihood that SA-2 sites were placed to defend critical areas, by avoiding these sites the U-2 was not fully effective in its mission to monitor Soviet activity on the island.
These September missions revealed more SAM sites and a buildup of Soviet aircraft but not the reason that they were there.
The Director of Central Intelligence , John McCone, suspected that the Soviets installed these weapons to defend ballistic missiles on the island, but thus far had no proof.
The mounting evidence that something was happening in western Cuba drove McCone to call for a meeting of the National Security Council on 4 October 1962.
McCone outlined the problem with the Council’s current policy regarding U-2 flights and informed them that he believed the Soviets were installing medium-range ballistic missiles in western Cuba.
McCone stated, “The absence of coverage of the western end since August 29, coupled with the rate of construction we have observed, means that there may well be many more sites now being built of which we are unaware.
Ground observers have in several recent instances reported a sighting of what they believe to be the SS-4 MRBM in Cuba.
Two additional missions were flown between the 4 Oetober and 9 Oetober meetings.
They collected relatively little information and provided further ammunition for DCl McCone to press the need to fly over western Cuba as soon as weather allowed.
He also recommended that the first mission should overfly the SA-2 sites thought to be closest to operational status.
He told the Special Group that if there was no reaction from those sites, there should be immediate saturation of U-2 flights over the area.
Bundy was still concerned about the loss of a U-2, so McCone brought in an intelligence expert to address the possibility of losing an aircraft.
United States Air Force Colonel Jack Ledford, head of the CIA Office of Special Activities, briefed that the odds of losing a U-2 were l-in-6, a fact that the pilots who would fly the missions were never briefed, but these odds were acceptable to the Special Group.
Previous Project NIMBUS flights were a joint effort between CIA and USAF U-2s.
Given the heightened risks of the flights over known SA-2 sites some of the Special Group questioned the CIA’s role in the new missions.
Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric believed that the use of CIA pilots created a greater risk of escalation should they be shot down or crash over Cuba.
The Group decided that USAF should fly the missions, but that, on Colonel Ledford’s advice, they should fly Agency U-2s.
After two days of constant struggle, McGeorge Bundy sent Carter an official memorandum.
This memo ordered the CIA to train pilots on the Agency aircraft and transfer control of U-2 operations to SAC immediately.
The date was 12 October 1962 and SAC needed to get pilots trained up in the CIA aircraft to meet a planned 14 October mission.
Learning to Employ the Agency Aircraft Majors Rudy Anderson and Steve Heyser received a knock on their door on the afternoon of 10 October.
They were told that they needed to be ready to depart immediately for Edwards AFB and to be in place no later than that night.
The two pilots were also informed that they would be gone for an indeterminate amount of time.
This type of short notice deployment was nothing new for the members of the 4080 SRW, and all members kept a “go bag” by the front door for such short notice trips.
Both Heyser and Anderson had spent a considerable amount of time at Edwards and were familiar with some of the CIA’s aircraft and procedures.
Rudy Anderson was SACs lead inflight refueling pilot and had just spent 12 days at Edwards working with his Agency counterparts on procedures.
His trip was focused on preparing the Interview with Brig Gen Gerald Mcllmoyle, 1 Feb 2017.
The “E” model U-2 was modified for IFR and Anderson was the lead on establishing “taeties, proeedures, and handbook ehanges” for the aireraft.
Heyser and Anderson were both quiekly eheeked out in the Ageney aircraft.
Heyser flew a flight on both 12 and 13 October, which emphasized landings in the slightly different CIA aircraft.
Anderson completed one checkout flight on 13 October but did so while in extreme pain.
According to his medical records, Anderson reported to the squadron flight surgeon and was diagnosed with bursitis.
He had slipped and fallen on the ice while on assignment in Alaska just a few days earlier, and severely bruised his shoulder.
Despite his desire to fly again as soon as possible, the flight surgeon placed him on duty not involving fl 5 dng status and ordered him not to fly for at least three days.
Initially, there was a discussion of two flights departing on 14 October, but McCone thought it best to send one aircraft over the SAM sites first to ensure that they did not react.
McCone’s suggestion, coupled with Anderson being grounded until 15 October, meant that Steve Heyser was the only one able to fly the scheduled 14 October mission over Cuba.
The Mission That Discovers Missiles Steve Heyser began preparing for the Special Group’s planned mission over Western Cuba on the afternoon of 13 October, only hours after he landed from his second training flight in the Agency U-2A^ 14 History of the 4080* * Strategic Wing 1-30 September 1962, 40.
The plan was timed so that he would arrive at his target direetly over the SA-2 batteries hidden along the eoast of Cuba, west of Havana, at just the right sun angle to provide the best image for the photo interpreters.
Timing was eritieal; if he arrived too early, it would be too dark; too late, and the sun would not cast shadows needed by the analysts to detect the missiles.
In addition to his navigation planning, Heyser received a brief from CIA and USAF intelligence officers.
These men briefed him on the threat from the SA-2s and suspicions that they were intended to protect Soviet nuclear missile sites.
After completing his pre-flight requirements, Heyser took a sleeping pill and tried to get some sleep before fl 5 dng a mission across the country that night.
Maintenance crews immediately got to work appl 5 dng USAF insignia onto the fuselage of the Agency U-2.
Life Support personnel from the Physiological Support Division prepared Heyser’s partial-pressure suit and ensured that there was adequate oxygen in the aircraft and ground equipment that would support him.
SAC planners reviewed the mission and prepared Heyser’s inflight charts and navigational information.
While all of this was happening, the newly arrived members of the 4080 SRW at both Edwards and McCoy prepared to launch and recover Heyser’s aircraft.
Following slightly less than eight hours of sleep, Heyser awoke around 8 PM Pacific Time.
The exam eonsisted of an overall eheek of health, examination of ears, nose, and throat, and a test of temperature and blood pressure.
He was served the traditional “high-flight breakfast,” a high-protein, low-residue meal, ineluding steak, eggs, toast and eoffee.
The meal was designed to earry him through the next eight to ten hours of flight, while not generating excess waste in the body that would require him to relieve himself, something that he could not do in the partial-pressure suit.
Following his meal, Heyser donned his partial pressure suit with the help of the PSD technicians.
They then connected his suit to an oxygen tank, and Heyser began the U-2 preflight ritual of “pre-breathing” one-hundred percent oxygen.
This pre-breathing period was designed to facilitate the removal of as much nitrogen as possible from the pilot’s body.
The presence of nitrogen in the blood of pilots at the U-2’s operational altitudes was dangerous.
By breathing one-hundred percent oxygen, the pilot removed most of the nitrogen, thus alleviating some of the potential dangers.
While Heyser was pre-breathing, others were hard at work preparing his aircraft for takeoff.
A mix of CIA, Lockheed, and USAF maintenance crews ensured that the U-2 had the correct fuel loading, contained enough oxygen for the pilot, and that there were no structural problems with the aircraft.
Meanwhile, Heyser’s mobile offieer, Rudy Anderson, prepared the U-2 for Heyser to arrive.
Approximately thirty minutes before his seheduled takeoff, Heyser was transported to his plane in an air-eonditioned van.
Even at nighttime in Oetober, it eould be stifling inside of his pressure suit.
To keep the pilots eool, they remained indoors as long as possible and were brought to the aireraft in an air-eonditioned vehiele.
The PSD technicians helped him into the cockpit and ensured that he was fully connected to the ejection seat.
Then Rudy Anderson climbed up to the cockpit and conducted a final check to make sure that both Heyser and the aircraft were ready for this all-important mission.
Once he was ready to take-off, Heyser gave Anderson a thumbs up, and they closed and locked the cockpit, securing Heyser in the small enclosed space that would be his home for the next seven to eight hours.
For this mission, Heyser elected not to carry all of the normal CIA issued equipment.
For operational missions, the Agency provided its pilots with suicide devices.
The mobile officer is another U-2 pilot who is responsible for ensuring the safety of the mission.
They are typically the back-up pilot for that day and fill the role of a wingman and co-pilot wrapped up in one.
While the pilot is pre-breathing, the mobile officer conducts the pre-flight duties that most pilots would take care of for themselves in another aircraft.
These duties include a review of the aircraft’s paperwork, a preflight inspection of the aircraft, and setting up the cockpit for the mission.
These duties are very cumbersome in the pressure suit, so to ensure they are safely and adequately completed, the mobile officer performs them for the pilot.
The name “mobile” comes from the primary action performed by the officer.
They drive a chase-car, typically a high-performance sedan, and follow the aircraft out to the runway through take-off and upon landing.
In the landing phase of flight, it is very difficult for a U-2 pilot to see the runway.
The mobile officer acts as an extra pair of eyes, calling out the aircraft’s altitude above the runway over a radio.
This action aids the pilot flying the aircraft and talks them down to the runway.
Additionally, the mobile officer monitors and aids the pilot throughout the flight.
This can include coordination with outside agencies or simply helping the pilot flying with checklists, which can be difficult to review in the pressure suit. 70 and the pilots were highly eneouraged to use them if they were shot down or foreed to depart the aireraft over enemy territory.
In an interview later in life, Heyser said he had no use for the pills.
He told everyone ""there was no bullet out there with my name on it"" and “1 will eome home safely.
Once lined up on the runway he looked over at Anderson and received the thumbs-up sign meaning he was ready to take-off.
Heyser pushed the throttle forward, and the U-2 roared down the runway, seemingly leaping into the air after rolling just a few hundred feet.
The aircraft soared into the pitch-black night sky over southern California and turned to the east, setting a course that would bring the U-2 over the Western end of Cuba and, in doing so, would change the lives of millions.
After all of the excitement of a full day of work, mission planning, and preparing for this flight, it was now midnight over the deserts of the southwest of the United States and Heyser was alone with his thoughts and the hum of the aircraft engine.
Heyser would later recall that piloting the U-2 was a little like returning to the early days of aviation.
It was nothing like the fighters he had learned to fly before transitioning to the U-2.
He remembered that when you were fl 5 dng the U-2, you were physically doing ever 3 rthing.
It was all pulleys and cables, pure flying, in a fragile aircraft designed to minimalist safety standards to reduce weight, and therefore gain altitude.
Now that he was at operational altitude flying east along the USMexico border, Heyser was required to exercise one of the most challenging aspects of flying the U-2.
According to Heyser’s friend and 20 Richard S Heyser, Audio Interview, 1975. 71 fellow U-2 pilot, General Jerry Mellmoyle, a U-2 pilot was faeed with a strange diehotomy.
The pilot was required to sit still in a small and eramped spaee, inside of a pressure suit that separated their body from ever 3 rthing.
While flying long missions, the pilots had to reduee their food, water, and oxygen intake by totally relaxing their bodies and minimizing movement.
At the same time, their brains had to be very aetive, ealeulating fuel burns, plotting their position on the land and through celestial navigation, and operating sophisticated intelligence equipment.
As he entered international airspace over the Gulf of Mexico, Heyser turned south.
His planned route of flight took him south of Cuba and turned north to minimize time over the island, and more importantly over the SA-2 sites clustered in that area.
Approximately 70 miles south of the isle he turned to a northwesterly heading and prepared to overfly the island.
His mission planning contained specific points to look for as indicators for when to activate his B camera; for this mission it was the small Isle of Pines on the southern coast of Cuba.
He noted the time; it was just before 0731 Eastern Standard Time, less than one minute off on his planned arrival of 0730.22 He turned on the camera and felt the mechanical rh 5 hhm as the fourhundred and twenty-pound camera began clicking away on one of two six-thousand foot rolls of film.
His first target route took him over the swampy coastline of the Pinar del Rio province.
From there he turned to fly over the hills of the Sierra de los Organos and exited over the rocky coasts west of Havana.
His time over Cuba was brief, less than thirty minutes of a seven-hour flight, but would prove to be of great strategic importance in the days to come.
Rather than returning to California, SAC deeided to operate future missions from MeCoy Air Foree Base near Orlando, Florida.
Shortly before Heyser took-off from Edwards, most of the members of the 4080 who had deployed there for his mission departed en route to McCoy.
They were led by the 4080 SRW Commander, Colonel John DesPortes and accompanied by Generals Don Wilson, Deputy Director of the Defense Intelligence Agency and Keith Compton, SAC Director of Operations.
A total of 30 USAF personnel were on the flight bound for McCoy, along with CIA and Lockheed maintenance representatives.
This team arrived just before Heyser entered Cuban airspace and began the process of preparing the airfield for his arrival and the BRASS KNOB missions that would follow in the coming days.
After landing, Heyser and his aircraft were met by Brigadier General Robert W Smith, SAC Director of Intelligence.
He asked about his brief time over the island and enquired about any resistance from the defense forces located on the island.
General Smith personally eseorted the film direetly to the NPIC faeilities where it was proeessed, and analysts got to work reviewing it immediately.
Meanwhile, baek at Edwards, Major Anderson and the remaining maintenanee erew members were preparing for a seeond mission seheduled out of Edwards that night.
Anderson was expeeted to fly a route similar to Heyser’s, departing from Edwards on the evening of 14 October, overfl 5 dng Cuba the following morning, and landing at McCoy.
However, as maintenance prepared the aircraft, they discovered that the tailwheel strut was defective.
The part was not on hand at Edwards, and the CIA and SAC had to coordinate with Lockheed for a replacement.
By the time that the part was flown up from the Skunk Works factory in Burbank and installed, it was too late for Anderson to make the mission with the requisite crew rest needed to fly through the night.
In a Herculean logistics effort and a true example of interagency cooperation, the CIA ferried Anderson’s aircraft to McCoy while he departed on a KC135.
This plan gave Rudy an extra five hours of rest while he slept on the flight from Edwards to McCoy.
SAC planners worked to design a new route out of McCoy and, after working through the night, everything came together for a pre-dawn departure on the morning of 15 October.
It would take over a day to review the film that Heyser gathered on 14 October.
While it would not be discovered for another twenty-four hours, in an interesting twist of fate, Heyser’s aircraft had collected images of Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba on President Dwight Eisenhower’s seventy-second birthday.
Eisenhower sponsored the U-2 program and used the intelligence it produced to disprove the missile gap.
Now, on his birthday, the U-2 would discover that fears of Soviet missiles were now valid.
While analysts were busy reviewing thousands of feet of imagery, two more missions were flown out of McCoy.
After a whirlwind three days, Anderson and Heyser were rewarded for their hard work with more 74 work.
They would each fly a mission on 15 October, initially scheduled to cover the remaining areas of interest over the western tip of Cuba.
Anderson’s First Flight Over Cuba In the pre-dawn hours of 15 October Majors Heyser and Anderson awoke to fly two more missions over the areas of interest in the San Cristobal region.
Anderson had just landed in the back of a KC-135 and was awakened to begin mission planning and to go through the arduous process of preparing for his flight.
Heyser was on the ground at McCoy for less than twenty-four hours and spent much of the time debriefing his 14 October mission and working with planners to determine the routing that he and Anderson would fly on 15 October.
Based on Heyser’s report of no response from the Cuban defenses, SAC decided to spend more time over the island on the 15 October missions.
His “milk run” comment encouraged Major General Compton, and he decided to push for greater collection.
Aiding in this decision was the fact that the weather was forecast to be cloud free, a rare occurrence during Cuba’s rainy season.
The Special Projects Group agreed, and it was decided that the 15 October missions would photograph nearly the entire length of the island.
In the predawn hours, the roar of the two J-75 engines pierced the Monday morning silence and signified the start of a week that would bring the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Their time of flight was short, and soon they were over the island with cameras on and film clicking away.
The two spent almost four hours over the island collecting imagery on areas of interest related to the buildup of Soviet weapons on Cuba.
The relatively short time of flight over the island produeed a limited amount of film, and the NPIC team only devoted half of a normal erew to examine it.
The team was oriented to the route of flight, given a list of known terrain and manmade features, and told to look for a build up of military equipment.
Just before noon, members of the analysis team discovered six large canvas-covered objects.
The members of this team were unsure exactly what they were looking at but believed it to be missile-related equipment.
A special, “back-up” team was called in to review the unusual equipment.
DiRenzo was an expert on Soviet air defense systems and recognized that these six objects were not an 5 hhing he had ever seen before.
He had the team measure the objects multiple times, all resulting in a size in the sixty-five to seventy-foot by nine-foot range.
This was far too large for any known Soviet air defense system, and DiRenzo called senior analyst Dino Brugioni for support.
Brugioni’s team consisted of experts on both Soviet surface-to-air and surface-tosurface missiles.
When the team saw the images, Heyser collected the day prior they recognized the size of the canvas-covered objects.
The group collectively agreed that it was either the SS-3 or SS-4 nuclear missiles.
Around this time, Anderson and Heyser were landing from their 15 October missions.
Like the day prior, the missions proved to be uneventful from the standpoint of Cuban or Soviet reactions.
The skies were over ninety percent cloud free, and the equipment had worked as advertised.
Random House, 1990), 199. 76 place to debrief the two pilots and eolleet their film upon landing.
When Brugioni and DiRenzo determined that what they were viewing were probably Soviet surfaee-to-surfaee nuelear weapons on Cuba, they immediately elevated the finding.
The men reported the discovery to their team leads who reviewed the photos and informed their leadership.
Lundahl proceeded to the analysts’ workstation and reviewed the images.
Through a series of cryptic, unsecure phone calls and in-person messages word of the missiles reached National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy.
Bundy elected to stop the news at his level and direeted the teams to prepare briefs for the Seeretary of Defense and the President to take plaee the following morning.
While parts of NPIC were busy preparing briefing boards from Heyser’s 14 Oetober flight, others began reviewing Anderson and Heyser’s flight from that morning.
Random House, 1990), 209. 77 flights provided the President with eonelusive evidenee of the existenee of strategie missiles in Cuba.
Aeeording to offieial SAC history, these diseoveries direetly preeipitated the Presidential aetion that led to a quarantine of Cuba on 22 Oetober.
The men worked through the night examining the film from the three missions.
Lundahl deeided that the briefs for 16 Oetober would only inelude material from Heyser’s 14 Oetober mission sinee the other two missions were still being analyzed.
Lundahl also asked Brugioni to develop a map that showed the ranges of the missiles indicating their ability to hit key points in the United States, to include Washington DC.^o These boards were finished around 0430, almost twenty hours after the team began work on analyzing the film from Heyser’s mission.
President Kennedy is Briefed No U-2 missions were scheduled for 16 October.
After five days of day and night operations, sleeping in the back of transport aircraft and fl 5 dng missions, the men were exhausted.
The two pilots used the morning of 16 October to rest before mission planning for the next day.
The rest of the 4080 SRW used the break in flying to stand up an operations headquarters and to build the secure communication lines needed to talk to SAC Headquarters.
However, tensions between the erews began to simmer on this, the seeond day of operations at MeCoy.
The Ageney personnel were not happy that their aireraft were being flown and worked on by USAF men.
Brigadier General Mellmoyle reealled that when the mission depended on it, everyone worked together as a team, but when there was down time between flights tensions were very high between USAF and Agency members.
While tensions may have seemed high to the men arguing over who was in charge at McCoy, tensions were about to be much higher in Washington DC as NPIC and the CIA prepared to brief the American leadership on their findings.
Director Lundahl arrived at NPIC early on the morning of 16 October to prepare for what he knew would be a long day of briefings.
He reviewed the products that his team had put together the night before, asked many questions, and jotted down notes on multiple 3-by-5-inch cards.
At the CIA Lundahl met with Ray Cline, head of the Agency’s Intelligence Directorate.
Lundahl briefed Cline on the details, and then the two men departed for the White House where they would spend most of the rest of the day.
Upon arrival at the White House, the men went directly to McGeorge Bundy’s office for what would be the first of many briefs.
Random House, 1990), 219. 79 this point, Bundy was still the only one at the White House that knew about the news of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
After seeing the presentation, and the three briefing boards Bundy went to the President’s bedroom and told Kennedy the news.
The President’s morning sehedule was full, so he direeted Bundy to eall a prineipals meeting at 1145, the first time he had a break.
Although the President’s sehedule was full, his brother Bobby had free time.
Over the course of the next two hours, Lundahl and Cline would brief many of the principals who would attend the 1145 meeting.
Brugioni provided Hughes with the same material that Lundahl was given to brief the Administration, and Hughes was responsible for sharing the news with the Department of Defense.
Lieutenant General Joseph Carroll and then the two proceeded to Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara’s office.
McNamara directed the NPIC team to send their officers and brief their respective Service Chiefs so that everyone was prepared for the President’s 1145 briefing.
Lundahl’s briefing boards seemed rather small in sueh a large setting, but he had eome prepared.
Upon eompletion of his formal brief, he presented President Kennedy with eopies of the photos and a magnifying glass to walk him through the key features.
Lundahl stated that he was unsure but believed it would be a matter of days given the eurrent eonditions in the photos and the faet that the missiles were shipped aeross the sea.
Those at the brief recall that the President was very calm and asked thoughtful questions.
Rather than displa 5 dng the anger of betrayal that Bobby demonstrated, JFK was “crisp and businesslike.
Kennedy then expressed his gratitude and that of the nation for the men who had collected the photographs and those who had interpreted the film.^o Following the briefing, the Department of Defense immediately began investigating what it could do to maximize U-2 coverage over the island.
There were only two aircraft at McCoy, and only two USAF pilots checked out in the Agency’s aircraft.
McNamara decided to waive the restriction that only CIA U-2Fs could fly over Cuba and directed 4 U-2As from Laughlin to join the detachment at McCoy.
Things proeeeded as they had two days prior and weather over the target areas remained elear.
This time, however, they would be joined by four additional U-2s arriving from the west.
Three hours prior Majors James Qualls and Buddy Brown, along with Captains Roger Herman and George Bull departed Laughlin AFB, TX in four A-model U-2s.
After a brief deseription of what they would be doing; they were to go home, get some rest, and report back at 0100 on the morning of 17 October.
Buddy Brown recalled that he believed that their missions would be canceled because as he tried to get to sleep that afternoon, a massive thunderstorm was delivering devastating weather to the airfield.
As the four men arrived in the pouring rain, they were surprised to see what “seemed to be everyone from the Wing in the briefing room.”4i The men went through the normal pre-flight routine, as described above, but believed the whole time that the missions would be scrubbed on account of the horrendous weather.
All four were shocked when they were told that SAC approved the missions, despite the weather being well outside of the operational limits of the aircraft.
Brown described his disbelief when he got to his aircraft, and the cockpit was full of water from the torrential rains and his apprehension when he could not even see the taxiway to get to the runway.
He said the last words of wisdom imparted by his mobile offieer were, “say your prayers.
Eventually, all four aireraft made it out of the West Texas thunderstorm and were on their way to Cuba.
These missions revealed that the situation was even more serious than previously known; two additional MRBM sites were found along with MiG-21 and MiG-15 aireraft and lL-28 nuelear bombers.
An inereased operational tempo would be the norm in the days to eome, but 17 Oetober was the only day on whieh SAC flew six U2 aireraft in the same airspaee throughout the eourse of the Cold War.
Heyser and Anderson flew the U-2F every other day and were augmented by the other nine pilots fl 5 dng the A-model Laughlin aircraft as required.
SAC requested to use other pilots and fly the A-model aircraft more often, but McNamara refused.
He wanted the Agency aircraft to fly missions to the maximum extent possible, which meant that Heyser and Anderson would see the lion’s share of the sorties.
The pilots’ day would begin shortly after 0100, and they would take off around 0700.
By 18 October, Hurrieane Ella was approaehing Florida, and with it eame inereasing eloud eover. in addition to the U-2 operations, low-level reeonnaissanee missions flown by United States Navy and USAF pilots began.
Providing another souree of intelligenee were eleetronie intelligenee operations eondueted by USAF aireraft and USN ELINT vessels.
On 23 October Anderson flew a mission that started fairly clear but by the time he finished his collection run, he estimated that the coverage had dropped to 10 percent cloud free.
While Captain Gerald Mcllmoyle prepared for his 25 October mission, members of the world community readied themselves for a showdown at the United Nations.
Throughout the morning of 25 October, both pro-Soviet and pro-American nations sought a peaceful resolution to the crisis.
They proposed a missile exchange, the removal of United States missiles in Turkey for a removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
However, throughout the debate, Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorin denied the existence of offensive missiles on Cuba.
Mario Garcia-lnchaustegui adamantly denied the presence of any offensive weapons.
Garcia stated, “The representative of the United States presented no valid proof of the affirmations made by his President that Cuba constitutes a nuclear threat to the countries of the Western Hemisphere.
The President instructed his brother to relay a message to Stevenson giving him the go-ahead to display the photos of Soviet missiles on the floor of the Security Council.
Emboldened by the President’s encouragement, Stevenson went on the attack.
Random House, 1990), 425. 86 remarks by Zorin, Stevenson replied, “all right, sir, let me ask you one simple question: Do you.
He called on his aides to bring in the briefing boards to demonstrate that proof to the members of the Security Council.
Stevenson showed the development of the MRBM and IRBM sites erected at San Cristobal and Guanajay respectively.
The audience was silent; for the first time in history aerial photography was used in a public forum as a mean of resolving an international dispute.
In the words of Cold War author and former USAF pilot DeWitt Copp, “No other proof could have been more irrefutable, and no other proof would have been acceptable to many among ourselves, our allies, and, of course, those unsympathetic to us.
The UN could not debate away the iron reality of the aerial photographs, nor could the world.”5o As Stevenson and Zorin were engaged in a war of words and a battle of wills, Gerald Mcllmoyle was involved in a fight for survival.
Nearing the end of his mission Mcllmoyle was tasked to collect images of the SA-2 site near Banes.
The majority of the mission was flown over a cloud-covered island, but the area around Banes looked clear.
Doubleday, 1969), xi. 87 approached the site, he notieed the yellow radar warning reeeiver light illuminate.The light was known to malfunetion, and Mellmoyle thought nothing of it as he went into his planned turn over Banes.
However, as the aireraft rolled into the turn, he saw the unmistakable eontrails of two missiles streaking towards his aireraft.
Mellmoyle applied the proper avoidanee maneuver and watehed as the missiles passed his aireraft and exploded in the sky about a mile away from him.
Mellmoyle was already on the outbound leg of his mission and returned to McCoy with news of the SAM launch.
Mellmoyle recalled that he was met at the aircraft upon landing by a three-star Air Force General.
The General told Mellmoyle that he was not fired upon and not to talk to anyone else about it.
Mellmoyle promptly disregarded the General’s instructions and shared the story with his comrades.
Due to cloud cover on the processed images, the wing was tasked to refly Mcllmoyle’s 25 October mission, a mission that would be Rudy Anderson’s sixth and final flight over Cuba.
Before going to sleep on the afternoon of 26 October, Rudy Anderson mission planned for the following day and then called his mother, Mary Anderson.
He told her that things were going well and that he was enjoying his job.
He also urged her not to worry about him beeause he was in a safe plaee.
If the aireraft deteeted the traeking radar of an SA-2 a yellow light would illuminate.
If the aircraft detected a guidance signal, meaning that a missile was fired, the light would illuminate red.
The system was very unreliable and known by the pilots to malfunetion; Mellmoyle reealls that most pilots simply ignored the lights.
He awoke early on the morning of 27 Oetober, expeeting to be one of four missions flown that day.
The other three missions were eaneeled but Anderson’s remained on the sehedule.
Beeause Mellmoyle’s 25 Oetober mission was ineffeetive over mueh of the proposed area, it was deeided to launeh Anderson.
The need to revisit the key sites near San Cristobal outweighed the weather forecast, and Anderson proceeded as scheduled.
The story of Anderson’s fateful “Black Saturday” mission was detailed in the introduction and will not be repeated here.
However, parts of the story have not been written about and may help shed light on the reasons that Anderson was shot down and why he was unaware the missiles were fired at his aircraft.
These stories reside in recently declassified unit histories and the mind of the last remaining U2 pilot from the crisis.
When they approved BRASS KNOB missions at the beginning of October, President Kennedy and Secretary of Defense McNamara did so with the understanding that ELINT would cover U-2 throughout their flights.
This was promised by SAC, but in reality, it was a promise that was rarely, if ever, delivered upon.
SAC coordinated with Navy ELINT teams at Naval Air Station Key West and Guantanamo Naval Base.
These teams confirmed that they were willing and able to support U-2 missions over Cuba.
However, their equipment was neither capable of tracking the U-2 at operational altitude, nor detecting adversary radar emissions.
However, on the day of Anderson’s fateful flight, the asset had been ordered to operate further off the coast due to security concerns.
Additionally, the USN and USAF did not coordinate a common frequency for the two reconnaissance platforms to communicate.
Therefore, even if the Navy had detected the site at Banes, it is questionable if they would have been able to contact him quickly enough to facilitate the reaction.
Following Anderson’s death, SAC addressed these failures to use all available resources to protect the U-2.
They developed a plan to employ an R-4 ELINT aircraft off the coast of Cuba to support U-2 missions.
These aircraft cooperated with the aforementioned naval assets and operated on a common frequency, ensuring that the U-2 had adequate warning of a threat.
General Mcllmoyle recalls the importance of this change and the fact that it became a requisite for further missions over Cuba after they resumed in November.
In addition to the technical details of Anderson’s last flight, the opinions of his fellow pilots regarding the events of that day have received scant discussion, although they warrant telling, and will be discussed here.
He was a veteran reconnaissance pilot, accustomed to long, silent flights in the U-2.
The men all remembered the deep, gut-wrenehing feeling when the time for Anderson’s arrival to MeCoy eame and went without his return.
Mcllmoyle said that he and eight of the other pilots were out on the golf course that morning, enjo 5 dng a break from their otherwise hectic schedule.
When the time for Andy’s arrival approached, he remembers looking up and checking his watch more often than he looked at the course.
They sat quietly in the Officer’s Club, thinking about the friend they had lost and how it could have been them.
The reaction of Anderson’s fellow pilots was echoed as a collective gulp in Washington, Moscow, and Havana.
The ereseendo of “Blaek Saturday” oeeurred when the Banes SAM site launehed its missiles at Target 33 and destroyed an Ameriean U-2, killing its pilot Major Rudolf Anderson.
By all accounts, this event should have escalated the crisis and nudged the belligerents over the brink—but instead it did the opposite.
Each nation saw the shooting down of an unarmed reconnaissance aircraft differently, but all saw it as a slippery slope leading to all-out war.
For the Americans and Soviets, this was a wakeup call that invigorated negotiations and resulted in an end to the Crisis.
For the Cubans, it was a call to arms and preparation for what they believed would be an invasion of their homeland.
This chapter will explore the three contending nations’ military and political responses to the loss of Major Anderson and his aircraft.
It will begin with an exploration of Cuba’s response and then examine the sense of betrayal felt by Fidel Castro when the Soviets sought a peaceful end to the crisis.
It will then review the Soviet response, analyzing both the opinions of the military officers deployed to Cuba and the political response from Premier Khrushchev and the Kremlin.
Finally, the chapter will survey the American actions and the gulf between the planned response and the course that President Kennedy decided to take, despite the guidance of his military advisors.
The American officer, Rudolf Anderson, the pilot of the U-2, was killed.
At any time, another incident could have occurred and could have led to all-out war.
Fidel Castro In Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro's autobiography, he recalls the impact of “Black Saturday” and the results of the attack on Major Anderson’s aircraft.
This quotation, along with the exchange of letters between Castro and Khrushchev in the days that followed, demonstrates Cuba’s response to the downing of an American U-2.
Castro felt that war was inevitable and was prepared to sacrifice himself, his people, and ultimately the world to defeat America.
He later said, “it never occurred to us to give into the adversary’s threats.
He viewed the fight as between the Cubans and their aggressive neighbors to the north.
Because of this, he was angered and disillusioned by the Soviet response to Major Anderson’s death.
Less than a year after the Bay of Pigs incident, Castro was approached by the Soviets with a proposal to defend Cuba from further attack.
Senior Soviet officials, including Marshal Sergei Biryuzov, commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces, visited Cuba in February 1962 to inform them of an American plan to invade the island.
Castro initially rejeeted the proposal, one that he saw as a Soviet attempt to balanee power against United States weapons in Turkey and Italy.
However, Castro feared that if he did not accept the Soviet offer, he would be unable to defend against United States aggression.
The USSR and Cuba signed numerous agreements, and within three months, ships departed the Soviet Union bound for ports in Cuba.
For his part, Khrushchev promised that he would defend Cuba to the end, remarking that if it looked like the United States was becoming aggressive, he would send the entire Baltic Fleet to defend Cuba.
It was agreed that the Cubans would employ the less sophisticated and easier to use anti-aircraft artillery and that the Soviets would maintain control of the SAM systems.
These air defense systems were installed rapidly, and most were operational by the time Majors Heyser and Anderson began fl 5 dng over the island in October.
From the outset of the Crisis, Castro ordered his forces to fire upon United States aircraft fl 5 dng over Cuba.
Although Castro’s forces were ordered to shoot on sight, the Soviet forces were not given the same directive.
This disparity in operational guidance frustrated Castro and the Cuban military leadership.
They had invited the Soviet forces to their country to prevent American aggression, and now United States aircraft were fl 5 dng freely over Cuban airspace with no repercussions.
Castro, Mikoyan, Kennedy, Khrushchev, and the Missiles of November, (Washington, DC: Woodrow Wilson Center Press, 2012), 112. 95 to believe about Khmshehev’s attitude is that while surfaee-to-air missile batteries were loeated all over the island, there’d been no attempt to prevent the adversary from spotting the Soviet-Cuban defense positions with spy planes overfl 5 dng the island.
While there was a sentiment that the Kremlin lacked the willingness to engage the United States aircraft, the same was not true of the Soviet military men on the island of Cuba.
They shared the same frustrations as their Cuban comrades and did not understand why Moscow would not let them fire upon the United States intruders.
At the 1992 Havana Conference on the Crisis, Soviet General Anatoly Gribkov, army chief of operations in Cuba, shared feelings similar to those expressed by Castro.
Gribkov recalled, “1 was not able to understand the purpose of the S-75 installation.
Castro continually asked the officers in charge of the SAM sites why they were not firing upon the invading aircraft.
On the evening of 26 October, the Cuban intelligence service obtained information that the Americans were preparing for an invasion.
Following the news of an impending invasion, Castro reiterated his order to fire, without warning, on any American aircraft entering Cuban airspace.
This order was passed to the Soviet air defense officers who queried Moscow about their response.
The question went unanswered and, in light of the aforementioned intelligence information and a growing frustration with United States reconnaissance flights, the Soviet officers ordered their SAMs to fire upon Major Anderson’s U-2.
The Cubans were elated that the Soviets had finally defended them as promised.
At the same time, they saw the aet of destroying a United States aireraft and killing its pilot as a prelude to war and expeeted immediate esealation.
Castro even went as far as to send a eable to Khrushehev asking him to carry out a nuclear first strike on the US.^o However, rather than escalation, the Soviets sent a proposal to withdraw the missiles.
Confusion and frustration are apparent in a series of letters exehanged in the days following the death of Major Anderson.
At multiple times Khrushehev aeeused Castro and Cuban forees of shooting down the U-2, and therefore esealating the Crisis.
He did, however suggest “the Soviet Forees Command will be able to provide you with further information as to what happened with the downed plane.
In his final cable to Khrushchev, Castro succinctly summed up Cuba’s reaction to the downing of Anderson’s aircraft and the response that played out in the days that followed.
Castro wrote, “the eyes of many men, Soviet and Cuban, who were willing to die with supreme dignity, wept when they learned of the surprising, unexpected and practically unconditional decision to withdraw the weapons...you may not know to what degree the Cuban people were prepared to fulfil their duty to the patria and humanity.
Despite Castro’s initial misgivings about Soviet intentions, he allowed Khrushchev to deploy weapons to the island of Cuba.
Over the course of the five months during which the missiles were deployed to Cuba, Castro began to believe that the plight of his people was the raison d'etre for Soviet forces in Cuba.
However, he grew frustrated when Soviet SAMs were not permitted to fire upon American aircraft overfl 5 dng his airspace.
When Rudolf Anderson was shot down on 27 October, Castro was euphoric, but the euphoria was short-lived.
The Soviets quickly abandoned Castro and the people of Cuba, leaving them to live under increased sanctions and monitoring.
In the words of Soviet statesman Anastas Mikoyan, “as a participant in the conflict, the Cuban side was all but forgotten.”i4 Khrushchev Turns Away From Military Escalation At one point, Castro ordered our antiaircraft officers to shoot down a U-2 reconnaissance plane.
This time we feared that America's patience would be exhausted and war would break out.
However, in the case of an invasion, our troops should coordinate with the Cuban forces and be subordinate to Castro.
Our only goal was for the Cuban people to become the masters of their own natural resources and to help Cuba embark on the path of building scientific socialism.
Grechko, Khrushchev felt that his officers would not have disobeyed a direct order not to fire without the prompting of the Cuban Prime Minister.
This belief that his soldiers were falling under the influenee of Castro, and had destroyed an Ameriean aireraft at Castro’s behest, frightened Khrushehev and drove him to seek an immediate resolution to the Crisis.
This seetion outlines the Soviet response to the downing of Major Anderson’s U-2.
It reviews the response of the military forees on Cuba and Premier Khrushehev’s response to the loss of the U-2 flown by Anderson.
Rather than esealation that would lead to assured destruetion, the attaek that killed Rudolf Anderson eaused the Soviets to abandon haggling over speeifie details and seek an immediate end to tensions.
As mentioned above, the Soviet military forees in Cuba were disheartened by what they felt was a laek of reaetion from their government.
The men operating the SA-2 sites did not understand why they were deployed to Cuba to proteet nuelear weapons from being observed or attacked, only to be prevented from fulfilling their role.
The SA-2 sites were the first set up on the island, under the assumption that they were there to stop any further aerial reconnaissance from occurring.
The officers and men manning the sites felt that the Kremlin was prohibiting them from preventing the U-2 from collecting intelligence on 99 the nuclear weapons.
They also believed that their positions were compromised and that they would likely be targeted if hostilities commenced.
Therefore, the men of the Air Defense Forces were anxious to do their job and prevent the U-2 from gaining any further valuable reconnaissance information.
According to Colonel Grigory Romanovich Danilevich, head of the political section of the Air Defense Forces, he was ready to stop merely observing the Americans and fight.
Gerchenov and others should not have shuddered at the thought that they shot down U-2.
Premier Khrushchev was shocked and frightened by the news that an American U-2 was shot down over Cuba.
His son, Sergei Khrushchev recalls, “it was at that very moment...not before or after...that father felt the situation slipping out of control...as Father said later, that was the moment when he felt instinctively that the missiles had to be removed.
Up until that point, no lives were really at risk and the crisis was a series of moves and countermoves, posturing for a position of strength.
After Anderson’s death, the reality of the situation hit Khrushchev, and he realized that it was important to get the Americans to promise not to invade Cuba, but “beyond that, it was not worth forcing the situation to the boiling point.
The orders from the Kremlin were very clear; SAMs were not to be fired unless in selfdefense when under attack from United States aircraft.
The men in the Air Defense Forces had asked for permission but been denied multiple times.
The fact that they acted autonomously in firing upon and destroying an unarmed aircraft worried the Politburo.
The thought sent shockwaves through the military and political establishment and drove Khrushchev to conclude that continuing down the path of escalation would lead to assured destruction .20 The third response from the Kremlin was one of fear of Cuban actions.
On the same day that Anderson was shot down, Castro sent a cable to Khrushchev proposing that the Soviets carry out a nuclear first strike against American forces .21 Khrushchev began to see Castro as too IS Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers, 180.
Khrushchev appreciated Cuba’s plight and believed in its people, but began to feel that Castro was irrational in his approach to war.
Additionally, Khrushchev feared that Castro’s revolutionary zeal had permeated the ranks of the Soviet soldiers on Cuba.
However, Khrushchev worried that this attitude was adversely affecting the judgment of his men stationed in Cuba.
This feeling grew when his Minister of Defense, Rodion Malinovsky, explained the reason that Soviet forces fired on Anderson’s aircraft.
Malinovsky told Khrushchev that due to time constraints and an inability to receive guidance from Moscow, the soldiers elected to follow the guidance Castro had given his men.
These three factors shaped the Soviet response to the downing of an American U-2.
When Major Anderson was shot down, Khrushchev was confronted with the likelihood of escalation in a conflict that he did not deem important enough to commit full Soviet resources.
Additionally, he questioned the possibility that his forces might drive escalation.
Finally, the rhetoric coming out of Cuba led Khrushchev to believe that Castro was acting irrationally and that his charismatic and persuasive nature might influence other Soviets to follow suit.
Fortunately, their Cold War adversaries also peered into the abyss and elected to take a step back rather than forward.
Kennedy Revises the Planned United States Response We had to send a U-2 over to gain reconnaissance information on whether the Soviet missiles were becoming operational.
Robert S McNamara This brief statement, made by former Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara in the 2004 documentary film “The Fog of War,” outlines the chasm that existed between a preplanned response and the actual course of action taken by the United States as a result of Major Anderson’s death.
Before committing to increased reconnaissance flights over Cuba, the ExCom collectively agreed that any offensive action taken by the Soviets or Cubans would result in a retaliatory response from the United States.
Nevertheless, President Kennedy chose to revise the plan and did not order the reactive strikes.
This section will explore how Major Anderson’s death drove the President to reject the desires of his military advisors and alter the course of a nation.
Thirteen Days, Robert Kennedy describes the deliberations made in ExCom meetings before the commencement of military operations over Cuba.
In particular, the manner by which the United States would respond to a Soviet SA-2 launch against a U-2 reconnaissance mission become a topic of discussion.
The military leadership felt that this was an unnecessary step and believed that they should be able to react to aggression.
However, President Kennedy expressed a keen interest in verifying the attack and was adamant about his role as the final approval authority for such retaliatory strikes.
When the news of the loss of a U-2 over Cuba reached the ExCom at 4:00 pm on “Black Saturday,” the group reacted strongly.
General Maxwell Taylor immediately requested permission to strike back.
He wanted to scramble the alert aircraft and destroy the SAM site that had killed Anderson, along with the Cuban AAA sites that had fired on Navy RF-8As fl 5 dng low-level reconnaissance that morning.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara went even farther; he stated, “the military plan is very clear, a limited strike is out.
All signs pointed to a United States response against, at a minimum, the SAM site that shot down Major Anderson.
Kennedy saw the act of shooting down Anderson’s U-2 as deliberate escalation, but also challenged the idea of an immediate response.
While most of the ExCom was clamoring for airstrikes, Kennedy reminded them of the slippery slope down which such a response could lead them.
In response to the retaliatory strikes Kennedy said, “It isn’t the first step that concerns me, but both sides escalating to the fourth and fifth step— and we don’t go to the sixth because there is no one around to do so.
President Kennedy focused the ExCom on its responsibility to consider the implications of every step.
Rather than mechanically implementing the planned response, Kennedy asked his team to verify that the U-2 was intentionally shot down by Soviet forces.
He also asked them to consider what a surgical airstrike in Cuba would mean for United States forces in Berlin and Turkey.
By opening up the scope of the repercussions of action, the team looked at the conflict in terms of a global war instead of a localized airstrike.
The President quickly decided that he would not authorize immediate retaliatory strikes against the SAM site at Banes but allowed 26 Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 98.
Following the President’s deeision to delay attaeks on the offending SAM site, the foeus turned from military aetion to diplomaey.
Ultimately, this move enabled the President to foeus on a response to Khrushehev’s letters, while preserving options for military engagement and buying time for a diplomatie solution to take effeet.
Kennedy worked with the ExCom to devise a response to Khrushchev while simultaneously sending his brother Bobby to meet with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
This two-pronged approach ensured that the Soviets received a clear and concise message from the United States in an attempt to de-escalate the crisis before an American response became necessary.
Until the downing of the U-2, both the Soviets and Americans relied on vague statements and diplomatic “hints and feints.” 28 in the aftermath of Anderson’s death.
President Kennedy, like Premier Khrushchev, decided a direct approach was in order.
Kennedy’s written response, and that provided verbally through Bobby to Dobrynin, communicated clear incentives to reach an agreement and even more obvious threats if the conflict was not rapidly resolved.
Bobby Kennedy leveraged the loss of the U-2 in his communications with Dobrynin.
He later recalled, “1 explained to him that in the last two hours we had found that our planes flying over Cuba had been fired upon and that one of our U-2s had been shot down and the pilot killed. said these men were flying unarmed planes. told him that this was an extremely serious turn in events.
We would have to make certain decision within the next 12 or possible 24 hours.
The loss of Major Rudolf Anderson and the U-2 that he was flying caused the United States and USSR to realize the gravity of the situation, reassess their objectives, and step back from the brink of nuclear war.
From the diseovery of nuelear eapable ballistie missiles, to Major Rudolf Anderson’s death, and finally the missions that verified the removal of missiles from the island, U-2 reeonnaissanee played a vital role in providing aetionable intelligenee that enabled President Kennedy to apply diplomatie pressure on Premier Khrushehev and the Kremlin.
This ehapter begins with an exploration of Major Rudolf Anderson’s legaey—in the U-2 eommunity, in his hometown, and throughout the Air Foree.
It then examines the impaet of the Cold War on strategie thinking and eivil-military relations.
The Legacy of Major Rudolf Anderson The loss of Rudy Anderson on 27 October 1962 had an effect on many people.
As outlined in the previous chapter, the US, USSR, and Cuba each reacted differently to his death, but all were impacted by the gravity of the situation.
Furthermore, Rudy’s death had much longer lasting effects on his family, the U-2 community, his hometown of Greenville, South Carolina, and the United States Air Force.
When Rudy Anderson was shot down in October of 1962 his wife, Frances Jane Corbett, was at their home on Laughlin Air Force Base in Texas.
Aeeording to Brigadier General Gerald Mellmoyle, it was eommon for the U-2 pilots stationed at Laughlin to get only a few hours’ notiee before being asked to depart for another mission somewhere around the world.
While General Mellmoyle believes that many of the wives knew where their husbands were on this particular occasion, (primarily because most had asked their wives to send their golf clubs to Orlando), Jane had no way of being certain where her husband was or what missions he was fl 5 dng.
For the two weeks Andy had been gone this time, Jane was busy at home taking care of their two boys, Rudolf 111, who was five when his father was killed, and James, who was three.
Jane was also pregnant with a daughter, Robyn, who was born seven months later.
When the car carrying the Chaplain and Wing Commander Colonel John DesPortes arrived at her home on the evening of 27 October 1962, Jane was devastated.
Seven months earlier, Jane Anderson had been traumatized by a false report of Rudy's death in an air crash.
On that occasion, Rudy called just moments before the casualty team arrived and told her he was ok.
That experience dramatically shook Jane, but Rudy was still alive and they moved on.
However, this time when the casualty notification team arrived at her door, there would be no call.
As Colonel DesPortes approached the front door of the Anderson home, Jane ran into the bathroom and locked the door.
It took the prodding of her best friend, Marlene Powell, to coax her out of the bathroom.
According to Marlene Powell, “She felt that if he hadn’t been in the military, it wouldn’t have happened.
He recalls that she told him she wished it had been him flying that day and not Rudy.
At the funeral Mcllmoyle recalls that Jane was despondent; ""Rudy’s death blew her mind and she never recovered.
She gave birth to the daughter that Rudy had always wanted seven and a half months later.
Later in life Jane told Robyn that she had a very hard time believing that her husband was dead.
Although Jane Anderson eventually remarried and had another child, she was never the same.
Rudy Anderson’s family was significantly impacted by the events of 27 October 1962.
He was concerned over America and willing to give his life to 3 Michael Dobbs, “Into Thin Air,” Washington Post, 26 October 2003 4 Interview with Brig Gen Gerald Mcllmoyle, 2 Feb 2017.
If our ehildren ean be an 5 Avhere near the sort of person their father was, they 11 be my wealth.
In addition to a family legaey, Rudolf Anderson impaeted the lives of his fellow pilots, and in the proeess shaped the future of the U-2 and strategie reeonnaissanee.
Anderson’s aircraft had been equipped with a very primitive version of RWR but subsequent models would receive upgrades, stressing the importance of being able to detect, evade and/or jam enemy air defense systems.
While no study has been conducted to examine the impact these systems have had since they were implemented, no United States U-2 has been lost to a surface-to-air missile since 1962.
The importance of the upgraded defense system was especially evident during the Vietnam conflict, in which no U-2s were lost to SAMs despite nearly 10,000 SA-2s fired by the North Vietnamese.
Not only did Rudy Anderson affect the future of the U-2, he had an impact on the future of the Air Force.
President Kennedy posthumously awarded Anderson the first-ever Air Force Cross in 1964.
Until that 6 Lutie McGee, “Late Major Anderson’s Family Bravely Facing Life, With Pride,” Greenville News, 5 April 1964, 7.
Ill point, the highest award allowed for non-eombat aetion in the Cold War was the Bronze Star.
President Kennedy believed Anderson’s aetions warranted mueh more and eleeted to bestow upon him the Air Foree Cross, Purple Heart, and Cheney Award.
Anderson Hall is the location where over 25% of all United States Air Force pilots are now trained.
Each day, walking into the building, the students pass a plaque describing Anderson’s action and a display of his partial pressure suit along with his Air Force Cross and the accompan 5 dng citation.
Anderson’s example is a constant reminder to the students that he and many pilots in the past gave their lives under enemy fire.
It is also a reminder of the importance of the service to which they are committing, the potential dangers that lie ahead, and the reason that they must vigorously train and prepare every day.
The award was established in 1927 and is awarded annually to an airman for an act of valor, extreme fortitude or selfsacrifice in a humanitarian interest, performed in connection with aircraft.
This act does not have to be military in nature and many recipients, like “candy bomber” Colonel Gail Halvorsen received the award for acts of service rather than combat.
While the memories have faded as time has passed, for some members of the Greenville community interest in Major Anderson has grown.
In 1998, Greenville resident and former Air Force officer Jack Parillo began a campaign seeking Congressional approval to award Anderson the Medal of Honor.
This was not the first time that the idea of awarding the Medal of Honor had been considered.
Some had called for it in 1962 and 1963 but the Commander of Strategic Air Command, General Power, rejected the idea.
Parillo wrote a letter to the surviving pilots who flew with Anderson, asking for their support.
Fellow pilot Steve Heyser thought that Mr Parillo’s proposal was ridiculous and wrote back telling him so.
Heyser said that he believed that Andy would be turning over in his grave with embarrassment if he knew about the proposal.
Additionally, he is confident that the fear of further escalation after an American pilot was killed by a Soviet SAM made the dangers of the situation apparent and saved both nations from a nuclear exchange.
According to Parillo, Anderson’s death brought 13 History, 4080 SRW History, 1963.
In an interview, Brigadier General Mcllmoyle said that no one in the U-2 community cared about the medals.
Mcllmoyle stated that it was an honor to meet the President but that the medals themselves meant little.
What the 11 men that flew the missions over Cuba in October of 1962 cared about was getting the job done and ensuring that they presented their leaders with the best intelligence possible.
The loss of Anderson's U-2 was portrayed in the climax of New Line Cinema’s 2000 film Thirteen Days.
In the film, American actor Charles “Chip” Esten plays the role of Anderson.
The scenes leading up to Anderson’s flight are fictionalized with a personal call from Kennedy’s assistant, Kenny O’Donnell, telling Anderson that his mission was important and to be safe.
Robert McNamara disputed O’Donnell’s role in the ExCom and stated that Ted Sorenson was the key confidant of the President.
There were also no calls from the White House to McCoy AFB throughout the Crisis.
Similar to his appearance in The Missiles of October, the events surrounding Rudy’s death were discussed in the 1985 TV show “Call to Glory” hosted on the ABC network.
Anderson’s appearance in these shows has highlighted the role he played in the crisis, but they are a snapshot in time that look at the death of the man rather than his life of service.
Although there may be some debate about what award Rudolf Anderson should have received, there is no debate that he gave his life serving his country at a time of extreme peril.
Additionally, there should be no debate that his death was the catalyst that drove the United States and USSR to seek a peaceful resolution to the Crisis.
Strategic Thinking in the Cold War As outlined in Chapter 3, President Eisenhower grappled with the tension between the need for gathering intelligence on the Soviet Union and the danger of provoking a Soviet reaction.
Throughout his Presidency, Eisenhower weighed all decisions through the strategic lens of assured destruction.
Once the USSR gained the ability to strike the United States with atomic, and later thermonuclear weapons, Eisenhower’s primary goal was the prevention of nuclear war.
Therefore, while reconnaissance operations were necessary, they were always weighed against the risk of pushing the Soviets to respond.
While this level of control was something Eisenhower resented when he was in the military, as President he understood that the value of information gained did not always outweigh the possible consequences.
This poliey frustrated the CIA and military leadership who felt they were being handeuffed by the former General.
When President Kennedy took offiee in January of 1961, he inherited one sueh plan, the infamous Bay of Pigs Invasion.
Relations between Cuba and the United States deteriorated dramatieally towards the end of Eisenhower’s presidency.
A short time later, Castro led a brutal purge of dissenters and those who did not support his insurgency against President Batista.
In reaction to the gross human rights violations and increasing ties between Cuba and the USSR, Eisenhower broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba.
Additionally, Eisenhower approved, but did not launch, a covert plan devised to overthrow Castro.
When Kennedy assumed the presidency in 1961, he retained Eisenhower’s advisors who had helped plan the operation.
These advisors saw an opportunity to act and persuaded the young President to implement the plan sending approximately 1,200 CIAtrained Cuban exiles to land at Bahia de Cochinos on Cuba’s southern coast.
The coup attempt failed miserably, with most of the exiles killed or captured and the Cuban people united ever more firmly behind Castro, rather than rising up to overthrow him.
Kennedy was embarrassed by the incident and the disaster weighed heavily on his decisions for the remainder of his life.
JFK was concerned about how such a failure, mere months into his Presidency, would reflect upon his leadership and the nation’s credibility.
He knew that in the future he had to eontemplate the strategie impaet of his deeisions and eonsider both the effeets of sueeess and the eonsequenees of failure.
Following the Bay of Pigs, Kennedy kept his military advisors on a shorter leash and took a more measured view towards strategie deeisions.
However, Premier Khrushehev saw the ineident as a sign of weakness which he felt he could exploit.
This led to the deployment of Soviet short-range ballistic missiles and medium-range ballistic missiles to the island of Cuba in an attempt to gain a foothold in the Western Hemisphere.
The result of the deployment of those missiles became Kennedy’s ultimate test during his presidency and the closest that the Cold War ever came to escalating out of control.
Based on the experience of the Bay of Pigs and the Vienna Summit, Khrushchev felt he could bully President Kennedy into submission.
As outlined in Chapter 4, Kennedy applied the lessons of the Bay of Pigs and deliberately considered the consequences of all actions before making a decision.
His prudent use of reconnaissance and diplomacy resulted in a de-escalation of the Crisis.
Instead of acting rashly or responding to the adversary kinetically, Kennedy used strategic reconnaissance to make strategic decisions.
Kennedy studied what the enemy was doing and, rather than keeping that information stove-piped, he revealed it to the world to shape a strategic narrative, much like Khrushchev’s unveiling of Gary Powers and the U-2 photos in 1960.
President Nixon ensured he had the support—or at least the acquiescence—of the Soviet Union and China through detente before escalating attacks against North Vietnam in the 1972 LINEBACKER 1 8611 operations.
Before commencing both of these operations, Nixon ordered significant reconnaissance of the target areas to ensure maximum destruction and force the enemy to the bargaining table.
How those decisions impacted relations between the United States and USSR/PRC varied, but the importance of considering strategic impacts of tactical actions remained at the forefront of United States decision making.
The thought will not go away that a time may come when it will be a tradition for Americans and foreigners as well to place wreaths at the grave of the U-2 pilot shot down over Cuba, our one casualty in the showdown our “known soldier” representing hosts of others who did not die in one of history’s most decisive victories.
This thirteen-day period in 1962 began with the discovery by U-2 aircraft of Soviet missile installations on the island of Cuba.
These offensive, medium, and intermediate-range ballistic missiles were less than one hundred miles away from Florida and capable of reaching nearly any point on the continental United States, with Washington, DC less than twenty minutes time of flight away.
Almost fifty-five years ago, the United States and USSR were poised on the brink of destruction.
To many, it appeared that both nations were engaged in an escalatory spiral that could only end in a nuclear exchange.
Throughout the US, families tuned in to their radios and were glued to their television sets, anxiously awaiting news about the Crisis while anticipating an announcement of war with the Soviet Union.
Civil defense programs sprung up ever 3 Avhere in preparation for a Soviet attack.
Students participated in daily “duck and cover” drills at school, citizens stocked up on non-perishable supplies, and churches ever 3 Avhere called on their faithful to pray for peace.
Let them do all that is in their power to save peaee; in this way, they will avoid the horrors of war, the appalling eonsequenees of whieh no one eould prediet.
That esealation eame on the morning of 27 October 1962 and shocked the leaders of both nations.
A Soviet-manned SA-2 site fired upon Major Rudolf Anderson’s U-2, instantly killing him and destro 5 dng the aircraft.
The established standard operating procedures dictated a swift response, a strike against the offending missile site and possibly the entire air defense network.
Such a strike would inevitably kill Soviets and force the USSR to retaliate.
Many members of the ExCom and Politburo believed that war was the only possible outcome and began preparation for hostilities.
Years after the Crisis, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara remembered “leaving the White House at the end of that Saturday and thinking that might well be the last sunset 1 ever saw.
Major Anderson’s death had a profound, although unexpected, effect on the Crisis.
Rather than a rally to arms and a declaration of war, his death came as a wake-up call to President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev.
The two men understood that the chance for war was high and that their decisions had potentially devastating consequences.
Anderson’s passing led the two leaders to the negotiating table instead of the war room.
The most intense and dangerous moment of the Cold War passed peacefully.
McNamara and billions of others would live to see many more sunsets due to Rudy Anderson’s death.
The heavy tensions that weighed on Americans were lifted, the Crisis complete.
Anderson’s life was sacrificed so that the rest of the world could carry-on.
Time has shown, however, that Sevareid’s prediction could not be further from the truth.
Even in the immediate aftermath of the events of October 1962, Anderson was regularly referred as simply “the U-2 pilot,” with more emphasis placed on the platform than the man.
Only one of his fellow pilots is still alive, the rest having succumbed to disease or old age.
Few outside of Anderson’s hometown of Greenville, South Carolina even recognize his name, and fewer still know an 5 rthing about him other than the fact that he died in the skies over Cuba.
Maybe the quiet, hard-working man, who did not seek attention and said that he would continue to serve even if he was not being paid to do so, would prefer to be forgotten.
His saerifiees in life and death ensured that national leaders had the tools they needed to make decisions of grand strategic importance.
While Rudy did not want to be a hero and did not seek fame or glory, he should be remembered.
In 1997, Anderson’s Clemson Reserve Officer Training Corps classmate and friend, Frank Sherard, wrote a letter to Senator Strom Thurmond, beseeching the Senate to award Rudy the Medal of Honor.
Sherard’s efforts did not gain traction, but the words he wrote should.
He wrote that we must remember Anderson “so that on other nights , no matter how dark and cold, no matter how desolate or alone, no matter how far from home or how great the odds may seem, other men will remember, if not the name of Major Anderson, the mere important fact that one man can make a difference.
In a world of intense eompetition and foeus on personal reeognition, Steve Heyser’s statement takes on a new meaning.
Rather than a negative eonnotation, the observation that Rudy Anderson was just doing his job that Oetober 4 Brigadier General Gerald Mellmoyle Interview, 2 Feb 2017.
He volunteered to take on an extra mission when he eould have eaneeled due to weather and joined the rest of the squadron on the golf eourse.
Rudy flew over the most heavily eontested part of Cuba, after knowing that his friend and fellow pilot was fired upon flying the same routing just two days prior.
Anderson did not do these things for glory or reeognition; he did them beeause they needed to be done and he had trained hard and prepared diligently to do them.
It is important to remember the way he lived his life, a life of integrity, never taking shortcuts or the easy way out; a life of service to his nation and those around him; a life focused on excellence in every endeavor in which he participated.
This legacy is the real story of Rudolf Anderson and the eleven men that took to the skies over Cuba in October of 1962 and is one that we must never forget.
Eisenhower, the CIA and Cold War Aerial Espionage, Newport, Rl: Naval Institute Press, March 2010.
Memoirs of the Men Who Experienced the Legend of the U-2 Spy Plane, Berkshire, UK: Helion, 2011.
America’s Secret Air War Against the Soviet Union, Novato, CA: Presidio Press, 2000.
High Altitude Strategic Bomber/Reconnaissance Weapon System"" Wright Patterson, Ohio: USAF , 1952.
Interviews/E-mails/Phone Calls Dobbs, Michael e-mail message to author, January 11, 2017.
Mcllmoyle, Brig Gen Gerald E in discussion with author, February 1, 2017.
Sherard & Sons, to the Honorable, J Strom Thurmond, letter, 11 June 1997.
Problems of Air Force Intelligence and Reconnaissance, Cambridge, MA: Lincoln Laboratories, 1952.
