Americans were supporting a rather corrupt regime under Fulgencio Batista, by the time the 1950’s rolled around.
CUBAN CRISIS BACKGROUND The Americans completely controlled the Cuban economy.
While the economy of Cuba was really productive when compared with other countries in Latin America, the wealth was not distributed fairly.
CUBAN REVOLUTION January 1, 1959 Many attempts had been made to try and reform the system peacefully.
But by the late 1950’s, it was obvious that no economic or social progress would avoid a violent revolution.
A lawyer, who had a liberal nationalist political background, organized a guerrilla force in the mountain regions.
CUBAN REVOLUTION On January 1, 1959, Fidel Castro and his forces overthrew the Batista regime.
CUBA & THE USA The relationship Cuba had with the USA did not take on a confrontational tone right away.
As the year continued, American-owned factories and plantations in Cuba became nationalized by Castro.
America made the first move in July of 1960, when they stopped buying Cuban sugar.
TRADE AGREEMENT Castro signed a trade agreement with the U.S.S.R in February, 1960.
The deal would see Cuban sugar going to the USSR, and aid and weapons going to Cuba.
To a certain extent, the USA had driven the Cubans straight into the arms of the Soviets.
In January of 1961, America broke off all of their diplomatic relations with Cuba.
It called for American support of Cuban exiles, to re-take and recapture Cuba.
The Americans offered their military base in Guatemala as a marshalling ground.
The small force of 1400 Cuban patriots were shamed by the Cuban forces…seeing as how none made it to shore.
THE MISSILE BUILDUP The U.S.S.R. decided to deploy missiles in Cuba, in the spring and summer of 1962.
THE MISSILE BUILDUP America was capable of launching I.C.B.M.'s (inter-continental ballistic missiles), but the Soviet range was limited to certain targets in Europe.
Khrushchev could equalize the situation if he got away with missile bases in Cuba.
Certain documents have been released in the 1960’s, proving that the USA really did have military plans for a invasion of Cuba.
THE MISSILE BUILDUP While these plans surely existed, be aware that the Pentagon had numerous plans for the invasion of many places.
Perhaps if the Soviets were to put missiles next door to the U.S.A., Khrushchev could convince the U.S.A. to remove missiles in Turkey.
That created significance each and every time the superpowers confronted each other.
However, this conflict was different from others in the Cold War because… SIGNIFICANCE OF THE CRISIS It was military and direct.
Protected by submarines, Soviet ships were fast approaching the American Navy.
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE CRISIS Other conflicts during the Cold War had been once-removed… with the USA against one of the U.S.S.R.’s clients and vice versa.
Other crises, like Berlin, weren’t directly about the deployment of nuclear weapons.
Kennedy’s need for a complete victory increased the possibility of a direct military confrontation.
The manner in which Kennedy handled the “two letters” and the issue of the missiles in Turkey shows that he was practising brinkmanship.
SIGNIFICANCE OF THE CRISIS Brinkmanship is a form of diplomacy where the participants take events to the brink, or edge.
Some see the Cuban missile crisis as a form of “nuclear chicken”…where the point of the game is to see who will back down first.
Khrushchev finally agreed to remove the missiles at the height of the crisis.
Before, this kind of high tense showdown had only been seen in the movies.
RESULTS OF THE CRISIS Kennedy and Khrushchev set up a direct phone line between Washington and Moscow.
Communication between the two leaders had been very slow, since the letters needed translation.
The first letter that Kennedy received at the height of the crisis took six full hours from the time it was sent, to the time Kennedy read it.
RESULTS OF THE CRISIS Both agreed that to start a war, because communication was slow, would be stupid.
Nine months later, both Kennedy and Khrushchev agreed to sign an atmospheric test ban treaty.
RESULTS OF THE CRISIS As a result of the crisis, Cuba became a Soviet satellite.
