This is the first historical investigation of the Crisis in the context of Australian-American relations.
Its primary objective, therefore, is to fill a historiographical gap in Australia's Cold War history.
The thesis posits that the Menzies Government's management of Australian-American relations in this period is reflected in its response to the Crisis.
The factors that shaped its response, including its anxieties and dependencies, contribute to existing analyses of Australian-American relations.
This study, therefore, also illustrates who and what influenced Australian foreign policy at this time.
This thesis relies heavily on primary sources, predominantly declassified government records.
Almost all of the archived government records on the Crisis are contained in the files of the Department of External Affairs.
Only scattered references to the Crisis can be found in the personal correspondence and papers of Sir Garfield Barwick, Minister for External Affairs; the Cabinet files of the Menzies and Holt Ministries; and other files that include ministerial and departmental correspondence, particularly between the Departments of External Affairs and Prime Minister.
Secondary sources have been used in this thesis including the published memoirs of those who were Members of Parliament or representatives of the diplomatic corps in October 1962, and also, studies on the Crisis; Australian-American relations; and Australian foreign policy during the Cold War. lV This thesis documents the Menzies Government's response to the Crisis and reveals that the Menzies Government was circumspect in declaring its support for America's actions.
The Menzies Government pledged calculated support to the Kennedy Administration.
This reflected its need to balance, on the one hand, its desires to increase Australia's defensive capacity possibly through offensive weapons and bases to deal with the growing threat communism posed to stability and security in South-East Asia; and on the other, America's opposition to offensive .weapons and bases in Cuba, and the impact that this could have on Australian ambitions.
Australia's dependency on the American alliance for its defence, however, was considered paramount.
In simple terms, the Soviet Union had installed nuclear weapons and bases in Cuba.
America learned of the placement of medium-range ballistic missiles , capable of carrying nuclear warheads, through photographs taken by reconnaissance flights.
It quarantined ships bound for Cuba, with the endorsement of the Organization of American States , in an attempt to prevent a further build up of weapons.
For America, the missiles were perilously close, placing much of the east coast of America within range of a communist, nuclear attack.
For the Soviet Union, the missiles represented a strategic move to even the playing field; America had nuclear missiles in Europe directed at the Soviet Union.
For Cuba, the missiles offered protection from America which had expressed great consternation towards its conversion to communism; America had made several covert attempts to topple Dr Fidel Castro's regime since its establishment in 1959.
CIA Covert Operations 1959-62 , 2nd ed., The Secret War Series I . 1 which for them, brought the Crisis to a close.
Cuba, on the other hand, still maintains that the Crisis has not ended.
The studies of Michael Beschloss, Raymond Garthoff, Roger Hilsman, Arthur Schlesinger, and Theodore Sorensen, are some of the most notable of the last four decades.
Robert Kennedy's memoir, Thirteen Days, a straight forward but insightful account, never goes uncited in the literature.
He therefore provides new insight on the Crisis, including for example, on the reconnaissance flights, positioning of American ships during the quarantine, and storage location of nuclear warheads, which is absent in the earlier literature.
This is noteworthy, particularly in a post-colonial sense, as for a long period, the American narrative has overshadowed alternative standpoints on the Crisis.
In doing so, they have explicated the international dimension and significance of the Crisis.
Astonishingly, there has not yet been a dedicated historical investigation into Australia's response to the Crisis.
The relevant existing literature, including books, journal articles and biographical works, is superficial.
Prue Torney-Parlicki is the only scholar to have examined Australia's response to the Crisis.
Revisiting 'the Russo affair"", and biography of Peter Russo, Behind the News, detail the Menzies Government's reaction to what it considered were inflammatory comments made by the journalist, Dr.
Peter Russo of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation , on 29 October 1962.
Russo claimed that both the Americans and Soviets had been dishonest in their handling of the Crisis, and questioned the immediacy with which Australia declared its support for America's actions.
Through 'the Russo affair' case-study, Torney-Parlicki provided a useful insight into Australia's response to the Crisis, and importantly, she posited this response in the context of Australian-American relations.
In doing so, Torney-Parlicki revealed the sensitivity of the Menzies Government to supposed anti-American opinion, and its attempts to silence it.
Apart from scattered references to the Crisis as a key event in the Cold War timeline, studies on Australian-American relations; Australia, New Zealand, United States Security Treaty ; and Australian foreign policy during the Cold War, neglect to examine Australia's response to the Crisis.
The dispute over West New Guinea, the vulnerability of Thailand in light of instability in Laos, and the looming war in Vietnam, dominate the literature on Australia's involvement in international affairs in the early 1960s.
Scholars have noted that Australian foreign policy increasingly looked to America in this period, and although British foreign policy was kept in close view, the American alliance took precedence in consideration of Australia's national interest.
There are few references to the Crisis in the memmrs of those who were Members of Parliament or representatives of the diplomatic corps in October 1962.
Those who have commented on the Crisis have not provided insight of any real substance regarding Australia's response.
Instead, they have proffered interesting, if random, reflections on American President John F Kennedy's handling of the Crisis and the importance of this event in the Cold War.
Whilst this is helpful in identifying the attitudes and beliefs, even in hindsight, of those involved on the political front, their reflections raise more questions than answers.
In the absence of a framework within which to place such reflections, their value both inherent and to this thesis remains limited.
This thesis will therefore attempt to provide a framework for the following reflections.
In his first memoir, Afternoon Light, Sir Robert Menzies, then Australian Prime Minister, wrote of his admiration for Kennedy and his handling of the Crisis.
The historic moment of truth will come when the Soviet Chairman is confronted by a democratic leader who has the power and the personality to say ""You go no further"", and who is believed.
And the only man who can say this, and be believed, is a President of the United States.
Menzies, a self-confessed anglophile, 12 had great and passionate faith not just in Kennedy, but as he more broadly noted, in the American presidency.
This thesis will illustrate the extent of the faith in America held by the Menzies Government in October 1962, and subsequently, will attempt to demonstrate who, and what, influenced Australian foreign policy in this period.
An examination of the Caucus discussions show that it was the consensus that Khrushchev had bungled and that Kennedy had matched him in the missiles for Cuba plan of the Soviet.
Interestingly, this admiration for Kennedy and his response to the Crisis is similar to the view held by Menzies.
Sir Howard Beale, then Australian Ambassador to America, also reflected on Kennedy ' s handling of the Crisis in his memoir, This Inch of Time.
Beale acknowledged that the Crisis was a triumph for Kennedy, but unlike Menzies and Haylen, he did not write admiringly of Kennedy's approach.
In this, the second volume of his memoirs, Menzies is silent on Kennedy and Cuba.
Ultimately, he considered Kennedy's foreign affairs record an 'uneven one' and appears to have concurred with Dean Acheson, former United States Secretary of State and unofficial adviser to the Kennedy Administration during the Crisis, that Kennedy was simply 'lucky' as to the outcome.
Menzies albeit in retrospect appeared to have held greater confidence in Kennedy and his actions than did Beale, his American emissary.
A Biography, 16 claimed that this speech represented Fraser's anxiety over Australia's national security.
Like Beale, Renouf remarked that 'contrary to general opinion, Fraser drew no comfort from the outcome of the crisis' .17 Renouf and Ayres assessed that for Fraser, the Crisis symbolised that America and the Soviet Union were willing to use their nuclear weapons for their own interests, but would avoid encounters where a nuclear response could result.
Therefore, America would be inclined to retreat from what it may consider to be smaller disputes.
For Fraser, such disputes could be ones in which Australian interests would be threatened.
This speech highlighted Australia's dependence on its allies; according to Ayres, it demonstrated that the AustralianAmerican alliance was the essential component of Australian foreign relations in the l 960s.
Fraser claimed to have been told that after much debate among Cabinet members, Menzies declared that it was in Australia's interest to support its American ally; this was, Menzies believed, the only course of action Australia could have taken.
This thesis will examine the factors including anxieties and dependencies regarding Australia's national interest that were considered by the Menzies Government in determining its response to the Crisis; and consequently, Australian foreign policy in this period.
The limited literature on Australia's response to the Crisis suggests that this topic is worthy of historical investigation.
It represents the first study to examine the Crisis in the context of Australian-American relations.
Its primary purpose, therefore, is to contribute to the history of Australia's Cold War by filling a historiographical gap.
The timing of this study is also noteworthy, as aside from Torney-Parlicki's studies, the majority of existing literature was written during the Cold War.
Historians now have the benefit of assessing the Cold War from outside rather than from within, and at a time when most of the archived government records have been declassified.
In examining Australia's response to the Crisis, this thesis will not detail either the high drama or the private and public negotiations between America and the Soviet Union, including the intricacies of the various resolutions tabled in the UN Security Council.
Rather, the emphasis in this thesis will specifically be on how the Menzies Government managed its relations with America in light of the Crisis.
Alexander Trapeznik and Aaron Fox , 13 . 8 research; offer fresh insight into the Australian-American alliance relevant to Australia's involvement in other international affairs during this period; demonstrate the factors which shaped and influenced Australia's response; and provide a framework for, and add depth to, the memoirs of those who lived this experience.
As much as the build up of Soviet arms in Cuba troubled America, it came as no surprise this communist collaboration over weapons began in July 1961.
From the American standpoint, Cuba no longer had defensive but offensive weapons, capable of delivering nuclear warheads into the southern and eastern parts of America.
Kennedy and his closest advisors privately contemplated these actions and their response for the next week before they made an announcement to their population and most of the world.
In that time, his advisors had divided into ""doves and hawks"" as they considered ways to remove the threat the weapons posed.
The former advocated diplomatic negotiation through the UN; the latter, prompt military action followed by invasion.
After much deliberation, Kennedy decided to first strike with words, not force, via his televised address to the nation on 22 October 'Day Seven' of the Crisis.
It was only from this point that Australia learnt of this potentially catastrophic event; due to Australia's longitudinal position, this was Tuesday 23 October.
This communique received by the DEA at 3:35am on Tuesday 23 October (Australian Eastern Standard Time ) was the first to alert the Menzies Government of an impending crisis.
The urgency of the subject, Munro felt, was also reflected in Kennedy's scheduled meetings with the National Security Council, the Cabinet and Congressional leaders of both political parties, who were in the midst of campaigning.
Increased American naval presence in the Caribbean hinted at a regional crisis.
Munro advised the DEA that he and other Heads of Mission had been called to a meeting at the State Department immediately preceding Kennedy's broadcast.
Under two hours later, Munro further advised that the subject was Cuba and its 'offensive capability'; he correctly assumed that he would be briefed that evening on America's plans to deal with it.
Ritchie, Canadian Ambassador to America, confirmed this, although claimed to be uninformed.
Ritchie, he noted, 'spoke in terms of the ""crunch"" (a favourite Dean Rusk word) coming for the United States of America with an assessment of offensive 29 capacity, and said that there had recently been a good deal of intelligence material on this'; Munro suspected that Ritchie had been in contact with United States Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, or his staff.
Suggestions of British and Canadian awareness of the Crisis indicated that, on the morning of 23 October, Australia was literally in the dark.
Before lOam, Menzies received a personal message from Kennedy, which included an ° advance copy of his announcement.
Kennedy emphasised that the placement of missiles had shifted weapons from being defensive in nature which the Soviets had previously guaranteed to aggressive.
If at any time the Communist build up in Cuba were to ... become an offensive military base of significant capacity for the Soviet Union, then this country would do whatever must be done to protect its own security and that of its allies.
Kennedy's message was delivered to Menzies by William C Battle, American Ambassador to Australia.
The DEA later instructed Plimsoll, as Kennedy requested, to ""'speak forthrightly"" in support of the resolution (we assume this means in event questions comes to Assembly)' .33 Munro attended the intelligence briefing given by George W Ball, United States Under Secretary of State, and Roger Hilsman, Director of the United States State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research, with Heads of Mission of America's multilateral and bilateral allies.
Ball explained America's aerial reconnaissance of Cuba, evidencing the missile build up.
He told attendees that their Heads of State would receive the same briefing in their capitals, where advance copies of Kennedy's television address would also be available.
There is no evidence, however, that Menzies received such a briefing; he relied on Kennedy's personal assurance and Munro's second-hand briefing, which Munro likely assumed would supplement other information sources.
The Heads of Mission then listened to Kennedy's televised address to learn of America's proposed response, which the briefing did not cover; 35 the Menzies Government, therefore, had the same information on America's response as the general population.
In his broadcast, Kennedy described the evidence of missile sites in Cuba, and thus its conversion into an 'important strategic base', as having no other purpose 'than to provide a 32 Ibid.
There is no evidence that Howard Beale, Australian Ambassador to America was briefed; Munro, however, attended the State Department briefing for Heads of Mission.
He emphasised Soviet deceit as to the nature of the weapons and asserted their placement in Cuba breached the Rio Pact, joint resolutions of Congress, and the UN Charter.
We no longer live in a world where only the actual firing of weapons represent a sufficient challenge to a nation's security to constitute national peril.
Nuclear weapons are so destructive and ballistic missiles are so swift that any substantially increased possibility of their use or any sudden change in their deployment may well be regarded as a definite threat to peace .... regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States requiring a full retaliatory response on the Soviet Union .36 He added that America's allies had been alerted.
Further to the course of action outlined in his message to Menzies, Kennedy requested an urgent meeting of the Organization of American States to consider 'regional security arrangements' .37 In direct contrast to Kennedy's pronouncements, Munro noted that Hilsman then told Heads of Mission that America had no evidence of nuclear warheads in Cuba.
Nevertheless, the State Department advised that the missiles would be pointless without nuclear warheads, which could be easily hidden, and they believed storage for them was under construction.
By 8 November, Stevenson and John J McCloy, advisor in the Kennedy Administration, noted in a briefing to allies that 'Khrushchev had not explicitly confirmed or denied presence in Cuba.
He had, however, implied they were there and they would be removed ' ; see cablegram UN1622, Plimsoll to 14 Munro asked Hilsman how many ballistic missile bases there were, but Hilsman refused to disclose this secret information.
He was advised though that all surface-to-air missile sites, one of three intermediate-range ballistic missile sites, and four MRBM sites, would be operational in a week.
It was the most detailed information the Menzies Government had received at that point; it gave Munro an opportunity to access evidence of the missiles, such as photographs taken a day apart that demonstrated the pace of site constructions.
This was the first evidence of the missile build up in Cuba sighted by a representative of the Menzies Government.
Declassified government records have illustrated that Australia had no knowledge of the Crisis until 23 October.
A closer examination of the communique revealed its true date 29 October.
Not only was this noted on the final page of the communique, but its content pertained to matters post-23 October.
An initial shipment arrived in Cuba on 4 October, and another arrived on 23 October the CIA spotted this latter ship on 19 October but believed it was of no importance and that it contained dry cargo.
In reality, America informed Australia of the Crisis only a few hours before it notified the rest of the world.
Nimmo, Deputy Secretary to the Department of Prime Minister, queried the implications of the Crisis for Australia, if any, with Sir John Bunting, Secretary to both the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet.
Nimmo was apprehensive about Australian participation in a quarantine, and more generally, support for American actions.
Any endorsement by Cabinet of the latest U.S . action should be in terms of support of a principle which in no way leaves us open to be called upon by the U.S . to play a part in these physical activities.
Barwick noted that the Soviets had objected to bases with offensive capability for a long time and had demanded their dismantlement.
They anticipated that the Soviets would create a fuss over missiles in Turkey, including Formosa, given recent conversations they knew Rusk had had with Andrei Gromyko, Soviet Foreign Minister, as to the locations of American bases in 45 Europe.
However, the greatest concern of Barwick and Tange was the possible impact the Crisis could have on future Australian-American cooperation over missile bases.
Presumably vulnerable to a Soviet blockade of any American offensive weapons which may be located on Australian soil at some future time and targeted on the Soviet Union.
Tange and Barwick stated that Australia's foreign policy position was that it had 'a distinct interest in preserving the right of powerful allies to put bases and offensive weapons in Australia if we want them' .47 Australia, therefore, was willing to host offensive American weapons and bases as per America's definition of those in Cuba not simply ones for defensive purposes.
Australian anxieties were concentrated on the threat posed to regional security and stability by the spread of communism in South-East Asia.
These arrangements satisfied Australian desires for 'defence on the cheap' it was considered in Australia's national interest to invest in alliances, more so than in its own military capacity to secure Australia's defences.
The Menzies Government embraced this strategy throughout the 1950s, and subsequently, defence spending in 1962-63 totalled only 2. percent of gross national product, down from 5.1 percent a decade earlier.
However, Australia sought to expand its offensive capabilities, proportional to the growing threat to its geostrategic interests, from 1961.
Barwick and Tange' s conversation suggests that Australia's geostrategic interests could be met through hosting offensive American weapons and bases on its territory, and accordingly, Australia would support the rights of powerful allies to do so.
However, Barwick and Tange believed that the Menzies Government could not permit this policy to affect its position on Cuba; 53 this would have amounted to Australian endorsement of Soviet actions in Cuba to install offensive weapons and bases on the territory of its ally, which contradicted American policy.
A Reinterpretation (Carlton North, Victoria: Red Rag Publications, 2001), 69.
Consequently, this would have been to the detriment of Australia' s defence policy, and more generally, its national interest.
In their development of Australia's position on Cuba, Barwick and Tange determined that the maintenance of Australian-American relations, in light of Australia's dependency on this alliance for its defence, were paramount to any risk that Australia could be subjected to a Soviet-imposed quarantine should it host offensive American weapons and bases in the future.
The DEA sought advice as to the legality of America's quarantine as distinguished from a pacific blockade.
Tange was briefed on the conflicting legal perspectives on pacific blockades and was warned that the opinions of theorists appear to have been overruled by state practice.
He was advised that pacific blockades are serious, but justified, measures when enacted under the UN Charter to prevent the outbreak of war; outside the parameters of the UN Charter, many jurists considered it illegal.
If this advice was received prior to Australia's decision to support America's UN resolution, then it is arguable that this shaped the Menzies Government's calculated response.
Thus, by declaring support for a UN resolution, Australia sanctioned American actions which, should the resolution pass, would have had legal foundation.
America's submission of a UN resolution showed that it, too, was seeking to legitimise its actions.
Eastman, Australian Senior Officer to the DEA in London, to obtain the British Cabinet's reactions and attitude on the quarantine, and Kennedy's declaration that missiles launched from Cuba against any country in the Western Hemisphere would be considered a Soviet attack warranting retaliatory action against it.
Harry attempted to do so at 2pm, and noted that Menzies would address Parliament at 3pm, but Eastman did not return Harry's call until 7pm.
Time differences meant that it was 4am in London when Harry called Eastman, who responded at 9am; a reply before Sam was an unreasonable expectation.
It also confirmed that Menzies should make a statement to Parliament, which 'at this stage should not be more detailed than necessary' .58 Such comments aligned with Nimmo's views and reflected the DEA's concerns as to the legality of the quarantine, as well as the uncertainty surrounding possible implications for Australian foreign and defence policies.
Ralph Harry prepared Barwick for questions on Australian obligations under ANZUS in relation to the Crisis.
He further stated that a literal interpretation of Articles 4 and 5 on 'armed attack on the metropolitan territories of any of the parties in the Pacific area' , would have no application, as no part of American metropolitan territory had been subjected to an attack.
Last of the Mandarins (Crows Nest, New South Wales : Allen & Unwin , 2006), 84.
See also Ralph Harry, The North was Always Near, Australians in Asia no.
Australia had its national interest in focus; it did not want to read ANZUS too narrowly on this occasion in case America would one day interpret it similarly, and in effect, limit its obligations to come to Australia's defence.
Unsurprisingly, 'International affairs' was the leading item on Parliament's agenda on the afternoon of 23 October.
Menzies mentioned Kennedy's personal message and acknowledged Kennedy's reference to the significance of regional defence arrangements.
Menzies reiterated that America's UN resolution called for the missile bases and other offensive weapons in Cuba to be withdrawn under UN supervision.
Indeed the whole matter will serve to test whether the Soviet Union's constant advocacy of peace possesses either sincerity or substance.
According to Millar, the establishment of the naval communications base at North West Cape meant that it could be assumed that Australia' s western seaboard was within the scope of the Treaty; see Millar, Australia 's Foreign Policy, 119.
Afterwards, Menzies received a message via Nimmo advising that William C Battle, American Ambassador to Australia, and Donald W Lamm, First Secretary to the American Embassy in Canberra, heard his statement and expressed their personal appreciation.
Battle also publicly acknowledged Menzies' 'marvellous, firm and unhesitating support' at a dinner hosted in his honour by the Australian American Association.
According to Truscott, the majority of Australian newspapers had expressed sympathy towards America's response; 67 thus, the general absence of disapproval indicated that the Menzies Government's response was accepted in the Australian print media.
The calculated nature of Australia's response is apparent when contrasted against the Philippines' response.
The Australian Government's deliberate statement of support to America's UN resolution indicated that Menzies had faith in the UN as a forum for dispute resolution.
This would surprise Howard Beale, Australian Ambassador to America, who felt that the negative experience Menzies gained from his involvement in the U2 Affair of May 1960, resulted in him having 'no high opinion of that body as an impartial deliberative assembly' .69 In that sense, the Menzies Government's response to the Crisis, that is, its desire for a UN solution, 70 may be unexpected.
According to Maynard Ghent, John Diefenbaker, the Canadian Prime Minister, also wanted a UN solution to the Crisis, but felt that Kennedy simply sought UN + . 71 approva1 1or is act10ns.
The DEA also requested information on the 69 Beale, This Inch of Time, 141.
Menzies included with his message his statement made in Parliament earlier that day. 24 reactions of the British, West European and leading Latin delegations, in an effort to gauge how its response fared to other nations.
We should have to oppose such a resolution' .75 Whilst Australia did not want America to be held hostage to Soviet weapons, it did not want to eliminate the possibility of hosting American bases and weapons on Australian soil in the future; the Menzies Government believed that the attainment of American weapons and bases would conform to its forward defence policy, and therefore, its geostrategic interests.
Also on the evening of 23 October, the DEA received a cable from the Australian High Commission in London regarding a press statement issued by the British Foreign Office immediately following Kennedy's address.
Scott, the historian of Britain's response to the Crisis, the British learnt of the Crisis on 19 October, possibly as early as 17 77 October.
Britain, according to Munro, was sworn to secrecy, 78 and it did not provide Australia with any indication of this news.
Whilst America and Britain were Australia's closest allies, it did not share with either nation the special relationship that America and Britain shared with each other.
This was supplemented by comprehensive briefings just prior to the President's speech for all the NATO, OAS, SEATO and mission chiefs here.
Like the British Foreign Office's press statement, Rusk's communique did not reflect the different treatment America's allies actually received; some heads of states received greater notice and in-person briefings Menzies received neither.
These allies were provided with additional and more detailed information.
At this point, Australia still relied on information from the day before provided by Munro.
This suggests that adverse reactions were not anticipated in Australia' s region, nor required its involvement; but at the time, differences in America's communications with its allies were not known to Australia.
The DEA had limited information regarding the reactions of NATO members, but believed they had 'grave misgivings' over America's handling of the Crisis.
It was also concerned about implications for American bases abroad and possible retaliation against Soviet actions involving NATO or other allies.
Although Cuba is outside the geographical bounds of NATO, America's claims as to its offensive capacity which could seemingly strike America' s mainland brought the Crisis, in the DEA's view, within the bounds of the NATO Treaty.
Furthermore, an attack on North America or Europe would be considered 'an armed attack against them all'; 82 this exacerbated Australian uncertainty as to the support it was expected to provide to its Western allies should the Crisis escalate.
Like Australia, Britain recognised the need to stand firm with its Western allies.
Sir Kenneth Strong, Director of the Joint Intelligence Bureau; Sir Hugh Stephenson, Chairman of the Joint Intelligence Committee; Sir Burke Trend, Cabinet Secretary-designate; and Thomas Brimelow of the British Embassy, Washington.
Furthermore, Kennedy had instructed Dean Acheson to brief in-person French President, Charles de Gaulle and the NATO Council.
He detailed a variety of possible scenarios that could unfold, including that Khrushchev might instigate some sort of response in other parts of the world, for example, in Berlin, or to Australia's alarm, South-East Asia.
The primary concern of Macmillan though, was that the Soviets would take any opportunity available to them to exploit the differences of interest between America and her European allies.
I should be most glad to have your reactions and I think we should keep in close touch as the situation develops.
For your private information, if the situation were to get enlarged beyond the purely Caribbean context I should feel it my duty to take some action to try and prevent any possible escalation to war.
But I certainly do not intend to take any initiative in the present uncertain circumstances.
Macmillan's message, and Britain's official response which Australia received the following 84 day, verified that Australia and Britain held the same initial views on the Crisis; both pledged support for America's UN resolution, but simultaneously, they wanted to keep their distance given the uncertainty surrounding the Crisis and thus their involvement.
Menzies also noted that Australia was conscious of the uncertainties you mentioned in your letter and we are keeping developments under close study.
Above all, however, I agree with you that we must avoid giving the Russians opportunities for exploiting any differences, however small, amongst members of the alliance.
Scott, the historian of Britain's response to the Crisis, claimed Britain was informed.
Apart from Munro's suspicions that the British and Canadians knew on 23 October, such assumptions could explain why there is no evidence of any angst or anger on the part of the Menzies Government as to when it acquired knowledge of the Crisis.
It was unconscious of its unprivileged situation, having found out about the Crisis on 23 October four days later than Britain.
On 24 October, Dr W De Comtes, Charge d' Affaires of the Austrian legation, met with Harry.
In their discussion on Cuba, Dr De Comtes expressed his surprise that Menzies was in a position to respond so swiftly, compared to Western European states.
I pointed out that because of the longitude of Australia, Mr Menzies had had several hours in which to study the matter and the Australian Cabinet considered the issues before he made his statement yesterday afternoon.
Apart from this initial occasion, time differences were to Australia's disadvantage.
Macmillan stated that for Britain, this made receiving and disseminating news 'quite complicated' .94 For Australia this proved even more difficult; it was more than nine hours behind events as they unfolded in America and Europe, which affected its ability to keep abreast of issues and engage with its allies in a timely manner.
The other question without notice to Barwick from Max Fox, Liberal MP, pointed out that South-East Asian states, and not just Australia, may seek to host weapons and bases of their allies.
Most of the countries which accept aid from the Soviet follow a non-alignment policy and have been quite consistently opposed to the establishment of nuclear weapon bases in their areas.
Barwick noted that India, Ceylon and Burma had all received Soviet aid and had pledged that they would not manufacture or house nuclear weapons.
However, there were Asian countries in closer proximity to Australia, which the Menzies Government would have considered more likely to have become Soviet satellite states.
Barwick's reply did not convey the Menzies Government's unease over the possibility that some South-East Asian states may draw inspiration from Cuba.
Therefore, Australia's concerns regarding the ramifications it might face should it host American weapons and bases, were amplified by its uncertainty as to whether its South-East Asian neighbours had like desires.
Menzies and Calwell's parliamentary statements of the previous day had been passed to the US State Department.
Whilst Menzies' statement may have been the first public declaration of support, Australia was not the first to pledge its support to America.
By advising Australia that it was the first to respond, the State Department possibly gave Australia a false sense of importance in its relations with America.
This study has clarified that Australia was encouraged to believe that the swiftness of its response was more significant than it perhaps was, which furthered Australia's belief that its relations with America were stronger and closer than in reality.
Plimsoll cabled the DEA outlining a conversation between himself and Eric Lauw , South African Foreign Minister, on 24 October.
Lauw approached Plimsoll regarding his misgivings about Kennedy's statement.
Lauw felt that the transfer of weapons from one country to another did not amount to aggression; America, he thought, was being hypocritical.
Plimsoll attempted to convince Lauw otherwise; he highlighted the threat the offensive weapons posed to America and claimed it was illogical to compare similar actions by other states in different corners of the globe.
We had to look at the total world picture and recognise that there was a delicate balance of power in the world as a whole which is made up of disparate elements on each side.
Anything which upset this delicate balance by radically altering a single major element was like a stone setting off an avalanche and constituted danger to world security.3 Plimsoll provided Louw with Menzies' parliamentary statement, which prompted Louw to ask, if the present situation escalated to conflict, whether Australia would be in it 'boots and all' with America.
Firstly, Fraser adopted like comparable views on Australia's national security to Plimsoll, and in a speech to Parliament in 1964, Fraser posited that as a result of the Crisis, America would be reluctant to enter into issues which largely did not affect its own interest.
In other words, their primary concern was that Australia's national security could be jeopardised if America would hesitate in coming to Australia's defence.
Plimsoll made it plain that Australia did not want to invoke any such hesitation in its relations with America on whom its policy of forward defence depended.
Secondly, it appears that Plimsoll interpreted his Government's instructions to do ""all in his power"" to support America's UN resolution, perhaps more broadly than intended.
Whilst Australia's support for America was unequivocal, Plimsoll's comments did not reflect the Menzies Government's cautious response, which stemmed from its significant concerns as to how the Crisis could impact on its national interest.
Australia's policies on issues, which differed markedly from American policy, included the West New Guinea dispute, the United Kingdom's application to join the European Economic Community, and discussions over non-recognition of China.
Recent events in Laos, Thailand and Vietnam had increased the likelihood of regional instability.
Australia had become ever more dependent on the American alliance for its security and the Menzies Government had come to accept that such dependency had a price.
In 1962, in particular, it actively sought to do all it could to confirm America's commitment to Australia's defence and the security of its region as well as relieve any tension in its bilateral relations.
This is evidenced by its commitments to Thailand and Vietnam, and importantly, the approval of the establishment of an American naval communications base at North-West Cape in Western Australia in May that year.
The Crisis, therefore, presented itself as another fitting opportunity for Australia to support its most important ally, America, and maintain goodwill in its relations; ultimately in furtherance of Australia's geostrategic interests.
Gregory Pemberton, All the Way; and Barclay, A Very Small Insurance Policy.
According to Plimsoll, Khan thought that America would not consider U Thant, Acting Secretary General of the UN, appropriate for the role of mediator given he was a national of a neutral state.
Khan asked Plimsoll to advise the Americans on his behalf that he would be available he did not want to approach them directly.
In his conversation with Barrington, Plimsoll received an update on the views of uncommitted countries.
A criticism, noted by Barrington, was that America should have sought a UN solution to the matter before having acted so fast.
Plimsoll told Barrington this was America's only option due to the speed at which the missile bases were being constructed, which Barrington did not believe was possible.
Plimsoll added that he had viewed the photographs and had found them convincing; however, Barrington had not seen them, and claimed that the Americans had not talked to him since the Crisis arose.0 In some respects, this was encouraging for Australia; compared to Barrington, Plimsoll was in regular communication with the Americans.
Plimsoll advised the DEA that he spoke to the Americans on behalf of Khan.
He also advised the Americans of his conversation with Barrington, and noted his impressions from talking to many representatives ... that a lot more had to be done to convince them that a real and immediate threat existed to the United States and also to satisfy doubt (such as Barrington's) about the speed at which the threat could arise.
I said that the Americans ought to show the photographs to as many persons as possible from the uncommitted countries.
I suggested that they ought to do this also down the line to junior persons in delegations from NATO, SEA TO and CENTO because quite junior persons could influence delegations in corridor conversations and my feeling was that even in countries allied to the United States there was some disbelief down the line.
In Parliament on 25 October, Bill Hayden, Labor MP, stated that Britain did not consider itself committed to America.
It is likely that Menzies had this in mind when he refused to respond to Hayden's question.
Les Johnson, Labor MP, then asked Menzies whether Australia had consulted with Britain prior to his statement in Parliament on Tuesday.
We did not propose to remain silent on a matter of this kind or to fail to discharge the duty to inform honourable members of the view taken by the Govemment.5 This was the reality Australia responded promptly and expressed its own view.
What Menzies did not disclose, however, was that it had unsuccessfully attempted to consult Britain over its reaction to the Crisis, and that Australia opted to respond promptly, unaware of British views.
Whilst Australia's alacrity may have intimated to the Opposition that the Government slavishly followed American foreign policy, its response was a considered, not generic, one.
It puts the onus, it is true, on the other people to dismantle these offensive weapons and to refrain from supplying them, but it also states that if this is done, the quarantine measures adopted could be lifted and should be lifted, and that the whole matter should be dealt with under United Nations supervision.
That seems to us to be a method admirably within the spirit of the Charter and admirably consistent with the general policy of the Govemment.7 Thus, further to his statement on 23 October, Menzies reiterated his faith in the UN system from which he hoped a solution would prevail.
Skripov reiterated his wish and noted that the Soviet Union could and would not accept particular American actions.
He then asked for Australia's position on a summit conference, which Barwick said was an issue for the Americans and Soviets.
This suggests Barwick' s reluctance to become overly involved in the Crisis.
It also implies that Barwick needed time to obtain American and British positions on a summit conference before Australia pronounced its own views.
He aimed to protect Australia's national interest by ensuring that he did not give Skripov any ammunition with which to exploit any differences of opinion on summit conferences between Australia and its allies.
According to Woolcott's record of conversation, Ivanov asked him what, for example, would happen if the Soviet Union imposed a blockade on say, Turkey or on Australia if she was to accept American nuclear weapons on her territory and if the Soviet navy at the request of China imposed a naval blockade of Australia.2 The Soviet representatives also maintained that 'offensive nuclear weapons' were not m Cuba, despite Menzies' reference to them in his parliamentary statement.
Woolcott noted that according to Lessiovski, only Australia had made such a citation.
The Soviets, Woolcott believed, had adopted a divide and conquer approach.
In response, Woolcott focused on the undoing of the 'delicate nuclear balance' as Plimsoll had done with Louw which had been maintained between the two parties to date.
The Soviets, though, dismissed his argument stating that for years America had encircled the Soviet Union with nuclear weapons.
Woolcott noted that the Soviets had put this argument forcefully to Afro-Asian states who were not unmoved by such views; this was in addition to claims that the weapons in Cuba were defensive and deterred American invasion.
This also furthered Australia's trepidation that America's resolution would face a difficult path in the UN, which undercut the Menzies Government's hopes for a UN solution to the Crisis.
Support from the Afro-Asian states was considered essential in ensuring that the American resolution would pass if brought before the UN General Assembly.
The United States Embassy requested Alan Renouf, Australian High Commissioner in Lagos, and other Commonwealth High Commissioners, to encourage Balewa, in order to guarantee his support.
Renouf was also asked to share Menzies ' parliamentary statement with Balewa.
The Menzies Government had only a few hours advance notice of the Crisis before Kennedy informed the rest of the world.
In contrast to Britain, France, and West Germany, which had more notice and information, Australia was in the dark unbeknown to itself.
It relied on Kennedy's personal reassurances and the evidence sighted by its embassy in Washington regarding the build up of missiles.
It sought British views on the matter, in vain, and thus was uninfluenced by them.
Yet none of these factors prevented the Menzies Government from promptly and publicly declaring its position on the Crisis on the same day it became aware of it.
The Government pledged calculated support for America's UN resolution, which perhaps unexpectedly, reflected Australia's desire for a UN solution.
Within the UN courtesy of its active representative, Plimsoll Australia's support was more broadly pronounced, although not to the detriment of its national interest; this possibly enhanced Australian-American relations, at least in UN circles.
Therefore, the Menzies Government's position on the Crisis was shaped by its national interest.
This was reflected in its uncertainties and concerns and its growing dependency on its forward defence policy essentially the American alliance which was demonstrated by its eager support for American interventions in 40 South-East Asia in this period.
The Crisis, in short, was another chance for the Menzies Government to entrench its relations with America.
He had already sent Menzies a copy of his speech made that day in the House of Commons.
Thus a weak settlement may easily do more harm than good to the long term prospects of peace.4 By no means did Macmillan want the Crisis to become a point-scoring opportunity for the Soviets.
Thirdly, in light of Soviet deceit, Macmillan claimed that trust was not enough in international relations and stressed the need for verification in future exchanges with the Soviet Union.
Australia had done itself a service by distinguishing itself from Britain.
The Menzies Government responded promptly to America's claims and relied on the photographs of missile sites viewed by Munro m Washington on 22 October, and Kennedy's personal reassurance that the evidence was beyond disrepute.
In contrast, Britain, which was aware of the Crisis days prior and armed with further information, was less forthright than Australia in responding to the Crisis.
Kennedy intended to exhaust the UN process, presenting an opportunity for Khrushchev to avoid humiliation.
A proposal in the UN for nuclear free zones in both Latin America and Africa was one of the 'larger issues' that arose during the Crisis.
Munro originally had an appointment with Alexis Johnson, Deputy Under Secretary for Political Affairs, but due to Johnson's schedule, it was arranged for Munro to meet instead with Harriman.
Munro ensured the DEA that his meeting with Harriman was in no way of lesser value because Harriman was involved in high level discussions within the State Department, and the Australian Embassy , Washington, had been informed that the senior State Department officials worked as a team.
Munro obviously felt a need to clarify that whilst he was bumped from Johnson's schedule, Harriman had access to important and credible information on the Kennedy Administration's position that would be useful for the Menzies Government.
For the Menzies Government, however, calls in the international community for nuclear free zones most likely caused unease over whether its desires to bolster Australia's defensive capacity with offensive weapons under its forward defence policy would be hampered.
Such apprehension was reflected in Munro's question to Harriman over possible implications of nuclear free zones in South-East Asia.
Harriman advised that there were no implications because China was engaged in the region and was not a UN member.
Nevertheless, nuclear free zones remained an issue for the Menzies Government into the following year when, in the lead up to the 1963 election, the ALP campaigned on a nuclear free zone in the southern hemisphere.
Finally, in response to Munro's further questions, Harriman also advised that discussion on bases could not be excluded.
This was yet another 'larger issue' which would have furthered the Menzies Government's concerns regarding its forward defence policy, and thus its regional interests.
On 26 October, the DEA also received information from Sir James Plimsoll, Australia's Permanent Representative to the UN, advising it to expect discussion on bases.
The DEA received another cable from Plimsoll that day with his views on the legality of the quarantine.
He agreed with the DEA's position that one way America could have justified its quarantine, in the absence of UN approval, was to rely on OAS endorsement.
In other words, America acted in self-defence and this was paramount to any conflict with principles of international law.
Plimsoll agreed that it was possible that America would intervene militarily to dismantle the bases and oust Castro, although he had · not received any communication to that effect.
Plimsoll also felt that the DEA had overlooked an important factor regarding the missile build up in formulating its position on the Crisis.
Plimsoll noted that although the DEA had referred to the threat the missiles posed to American security in earlier communiques, he thought that the DEA could have been more forthright and, subsequently, felt that Australia had given insufficient attention to the serious impact the Crisis could have on Soviet policy worldwide, and thus, the global balance of power.
His impressions stemmed from unofficial speculation that Khrushchev's recent delays on Berlin were prompted by a desire to wait until Cuba had been built up, not as a bargaining counter in itself but as lead in to a basic readjustment of relative strategic strength.6 This was in contrast to information the Menzies Government received from the Australian High Commission, London, who advised that some British officials, felt Khrushchev's actions were for the purposes of bargaining, and not a more general attempt to adjust the balance of power.
On 27 October, following its correspondence with Plimsoll regarding Australian foreign policy, the DEA sent a cable to some of its legations to clarify Australia's position on the Crisis.
The DEA emphasised that it did not want the Crisis to distract the Americans and Europeans from matters arising in South-East Asia or inhibit its allies' 'capability to take effective action' to maintain regional security.
The China-India border dispute was, for the Menzies Government, a timely example of such concerns.
Miller, 'Australia and the Indian Ocean Area, 1961-1965 ', in Greenwood and Harper, Australia in World Affairs, 432.
Furthermore, when questions were asked about this 46 regarding the quarantine, the DEA did not refer to the quarantine in any further detail in this communication it was an issue that Australia did not want its legations to entertain.
Rather, it preferred that its legations focused on the clandestine acts and deceit of the Soviet Union; the importance of regional defence arrangements; and the hypocrisy of the Soviet Union's own statements in that it had previously declared that it did not need 'missile bases outside her own territories' .140 On the contrary, Foss Shanahan, New Zealand's Permanent Representative to the UN, thought that whilst the American position was not perfect, international legal considerations regarding for example, the quarantine, were irrelevant.
Shanahan also thought that the Crisis was one which the UN was unable to manage; thus it would be resolved by the 'two great powers' and that other states, particularly Afro-Asian states, would have little impact.
In light of the uncertainty surrounding Soviet actions and intentions regarding Cuba and Berlin, the DEA felt it pertinent to keep a close watch on Soviet activity in its region.
On the evening of 27 October, the DEA sent another communique to its legations to ascertain the views of foreign offices on possible ramifications of the Crisis in South-East Asia.
The DEA advised legations that it considered that the Soviets would have wanted to avoid initiating disturbances that were not within its full control, and that it would have discouraged its allies, in particular North Vietnam and China, from augmenting international hostilities.
The Australian High Commission advised that the British Foreign Office, albeit in the absence of a detailed assessment, identified South East Asia 'as an area where the West is vulnerable and that it must therefore be included with other possible areas where pressure could be applied at this time' .144 This underlined the Menzies Government's concerns that there could be repercussions from the Crisis in its region, which could involve instability.
American and European preoccupation with Cuba and Berlin amplified Australian anxieties that its allies on whom its defence arrangements depended may not come to its aid.
The Kennedy Administration's statement acknowledged that within the last 24 hours, 'several inconsistent and conflicting proposals' had been made by the Soviet Union.
That afternoon, 28 October, before the DEA learnt of the nature and content of Khrushchev's letters, it received the text of Kennedy's reply to Khrushchev dated 27 October.
Kennedy welcomed Khrushchev's intentions 'to seek a prompt solution to the problem' as noted in his first letter.
Stevenson confirmed that on the evening of 26 October, Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev which advised that the Soviets would accept the proposed solution.
However, on the morning of 27 October, an additional message from Khrushchev to Kennedy was broadcast via Tass and sent to Washington.
This second message introduced the issue of American bases in Turkey, and therefore, broadened the context of discussions.
United Kingdom; France; Canada; Germany ; Norway; Italy; Japan; Turkey; Iran ; Haiti ; Chile and Venezuela (Latin American members of UN Security Council). 49 this additional one.
Khrushchev's demand for the removal of Turkish bases complicated matters; the Jupiter missiles in Turkey were installed by NATO and thus, Stevenson asserted, could only be dealt with by the NATO Council and with Turkey's consent.
According to Plimsoll, such a proposal 'would unbalance the defence structure of Europe', and this would undoubtedly have global repercussions.
It was noted that the White House statement 'was not intended as a rejection', and in Kennedy's reply to Khrushchev which the DEA had seen before it received Plimsoll' s notes on his meeting with Stevenson it was posited that the Turkish bases would inhibit a quick resolution of the Crisis over Cuba.
Plimsoll wrote that it was possible that America would be happy to discuss general disarmament 'but that Cuba was a separate question' .150 It was clear that the second letter had baffled the Kennedy Administration.
We ought also to get across the point that it was not only the United States that had been deceived by the Soviet Union but all others countries as well.
As late as yesterday, some Africans were saying to me that they remained unconvinced that there were any missile installations on Cuba despite the photographs, and another representative had told me, after talking to the Russians, that he had no reason to think there were any Russian military on the island.
Khrushchev himself had pulled the rug from under the feet of such persons.
The missiles in Italy and Turkey were stationed as a result of a NATO Council decision in December 1957.
Again, Plimsoll demonstrated his confidence amongst his colleagues, particularly the Americans, in suggesting strategies for gaining the support of non-committed countries Stevenson requested what the Americans wanted the representatives to do and Plimsoll suggested how they should do it.
Plimsoll's desire to ensure the non-committed countries were onside also reflected the Menzies Government's concerns regarding its neighbours and its national interest; for Australia, this was an attempt to guarantee that South-East Asian states would not become Soviet satellites in its region.
In fulfilment of his promise to stay in touch, Macmillan sent Menzies two messages on 28 October.
Macmillan wanted to share with Menzies, a message he had sent to Khrushchev regarding his second letter to Kennedy.
Macmillan expressed to Khrushchev Britain's willingness to discuss other issues such as disarmament and test bans, which Khrushchev had raised, but emphasised that the priority was to deal with the missiles in Cuba at first instance.
Australia had thus received requests for support from both of its great and powerful friends during the Crisis.
It has been demonstrated in this chapter that the Menzies Government found out about the letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev in a disjointed manner, mainly due to time differences.
This made it more difficult for Australia to follow the Crisis as it unfolded.
Plimsoll was able to clarify events, although Soviet intentions remained unknown.
Britain was particularly interested in disarmament and sought the Menzies Government's support on this matter; thus, Australia had to juggle the requests and interests of both its allies.
It believed disarmament and nuclear free zones would inhibit its geostrategic plans to increase its defensive capacity, such as through the attainment of American offensive weapons and bases, which again, reflected its concerns over instability in South-East Asia.
Australia was concerned that American and European fixation on Cuba and Berlin would leave its region vulnerable to the communist bloc.
In his reply to Khrushchev and his White House statement, Kennedy welcomed Khrushchev's decision and emphasised UN verification of the dismantlement of weapons and bases, in order for the quarantine to be lifted.
Perhaps now, as we step back from danger we can, together make real progress in this vital field.
Time differences meant that Australia went to bed on 28 October with the world on the brink of thermonuclear war and awoke on 29 October to reports that the Crisis appeared to be over; for Australia, the Crisis seemed to have ended as quickly as it had begun.
Plimsoll noted in a cable to the DEA that, in a press conference, Dean Rusk, United States Secretary of State, requested the press not to boast about the outcome of the Crisis.
He was concerned that if the Crisis were depicted too much as a Soviet defeat, Khrushchev could feel pressured to restore his glory by undertaking action elsewhere.
On 29 October, William Battle, American Ambassador to Australia, forwarded a message from Kennedy to Menzies in response to Menzies' letter dated 23 October.
Kennedy stated he was 'most pleased and grateful' for Menzies' letter and his forthright parliamentary statement on the Crisis.
Such prompt and vigorous support from your government comes as no surprise, but it is specially reassuring to know that we can count on active assistance from our closest friends during the troubled days that lie ahead.7 The Menzies Government's anti-communist views, and the dose relations that had developed between Australia and America in the previous decade, meant that America was convinced it had Australia's support before it had so declared.
Australia had previously demonstrated to America that it could respond swiftly to requests for support.
Thus, it appears that the Kennedy Administration did not feel it had to gain Australia's support for this Crisis.
Whilst America may have overestimated the extent of Australia's support for its actions its pledge was not an open-ended one Australia nonetheless met American expectations, and it did so more quickly, and with less evidence, than America provided to other allies.
Munro described his conversation with Averell Harriman, Assistant Secretary of the Far East, on 29 October which, given recent events, did not focus on possible repercussions in South-East Asia whilst America was preoccupied with Cuba, but rather, on post-Crisis impact in the region.
Harriman's general attitude appeared to be that the Cuban crisis could have repercussions in South East Asia and the Far East, not so much because of communist countries in the area seeking to take advantage of the United States preoccupation with Cuba as because of conflicting attitudes within the bloc itself.9 Harriman added that even if Cold War tensions were lessened and this had a positive effect on issues such as Berlin and disarmament, he thought this was unlikely to extend to the Far East because of the Soviet Union's influence over China and Vietnam.
Therefore, like the British Foreign Office, Harriman believed that there could be ramifications in South-East Asia about which Australia should be concerned, although Harriman did not attribute such ramifications to the Crisis, but to relations between the communist states.
Irrespective of their catalyst, consensus from Australia's most important allies that it could face repercussions in its region, would likely have exacerbated existing concerns of the Menzies Government.
Munro also asked Harriman whether a deal over bases in Cuba and Turkey was possible.
Munro and Harriman only met once that day however, Munro reflected the different issues discussed in separate cablegrams; 2871and2879.
Harriman confirmed that America was open to the idea of them and could see their advantages in Latin America and Africa, but maintained that China would obstruct such a zone in the Far East.
Harriman had requested Australia's views on such zones which prompted Munro to seek instructions from the DEA on the Menzies Government's position.
Nuclear free zones in Africa and Latin America would have limited locations for housing nuclear weapons.
Again, Australia was faced with the challenge of wanting to adopt its own position on the issue at hand against the need to maintain its relations with its most important ally, America both required careful consideration of Australia's national interest.
Some sections of Australian society responded directly to Barwick over the Menzies Government's position on the Crisis.
America endorsed Brazil's proposal for a nuclear free zone in Latin America on 30 October; see cablegram 2885, Australian Embassy Washington to DEA, 30 October 1962, DEA fil e 262112/8/l part 3.
Truelove of the Australian High Commission, Wellington, and K Piddington, European and American Affairs Division, New Zealand DEA, Wellington.
Compared to the public reaction in America and New Zealand, Australia fared in between; more striking was that very few cables were received.
On 31 October, Macmillan sent another message to Menzies and attached the parliamentary statement he had made that afternoon.
He emphasized the need for verification in dealings with the Soviet Union, as well as China, in light of Soviet duplicity regarding the Crisis.
I had felt it important myself to make our public position from the beginning one of unequivocal support for the President.1 Australia's pledge of support for America was indeed unequivocal; it had given deliberate support for America's UN resolution.
The extent of Australian support beyond the realms of the UN, however, was not made plain.
Menzies' reiteration of his firm support for Kennedy buries the doubt and uncertainty shared privately by officials of the DEA, and also the Department of Prime Minister, particularly regarding the legality of the quarantine and expectations as to Australia's participation in it.
Thus, Menzies' comments to Macmillan could reflect his more personal views, rather than the apprehension expressed by Barwick and other departmental officials who appear to have carried the burden of Australian foreign policy formulation and diplomacy during this Crisis.
Barwick had decided to make a statement in Parliament on the Crisis when it resumed.
The DEA suggested it would be useful to include in the booklet of documents to be tabled in Parliament, the messages exchanged between Kennedy and Menzies.
It is likely that the DEA wished to publish these messages as it believed they highlighted Australia's importance to America, and moreover, the strength of Australian-American relations.
Menzies, however, refused permission for their publication after much communication between the eager DEA, and the reluctant Department of Prime Minister.
The friction between the DEA and the Department of Prime Minister, outlined in Edwards' biography of Sir Arthur Tange, is also apparent in the departmental correspondence over publication of these messages.
It is particularly revealing that the Department of Prime Minister, rather than the DEA, still managed relations with the United Kingdom a relationship that apparently required the direct involvement of the Prime Minister.
The Menzies Government's management of American and British influences during the Crisis also involved dealing with divergent views in Canberra towards Australia's allies.
As the Crisis itself receded, larger issues, such as nuclear free zones, became increasingly problematic for Australia.
There were other challenges too, including ones that required the Menzies Government to look inwards.
A close reading of correspondence between the Departments of External Affairs and Prime Minister revealed tensions over the management of Australia's relations with America and Britain.
Also revealed is that Kennedy expected Australia's support on the Crisis; such expectations were not unreasonable given Australia's recent support for American interventions in South-East Asia.
Kennedy, however, most likely overestimated the extent of Australia's support.
As has been argued, the Menzies Government had serious reservations over the Crisis, especially regarding possible repercussions in its region.
These were mostly expressed by officials in the Departments of External Affairs and Prime Minister.
Menzies does not appear to have made a significant personal contribution to the Crisis, and thus it is difficult to determine his faith in the Kennedy Administration throughout the Crisis.
Some members of the Australian public also had reservations, which were directed at the Menzies Government's handling of the Crisis; they did not, however, appear to present challenges for it.
November-December 1962 On 1 November, Sir Ronald Walker, Australian Ambassador to France, informed the DEA that he had spoken about the Crisis to Charles Lucet, Director General of Political Affairs at the French Foreign Ministry.
Regarding ramifications from the Crisis in South East Asia and the Far East, specifically Laos and Vietnam, Walker advised that Lucet believed that America's handling of the Crisis had enhanced its position in the region.
Whilst the DEA may have found this news promising, Lucet's comments did not appear to be based on any rigorous assessment, and thus, his positive outlook was probably insufficient to diminish Australian concerns supported by American and British views -that the Crisis could have repercussions in South-East Asia.
That afternoon, the DEA received a cable from the Australian Embassy in Washington, outlining a discussion its officials had with Ronald I Spiers, Chief of the Office of Political Affairs in the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, on 31 October.
Spiers confirmed America's interest in nuclear free zones; it favoured their development through regional agreements external to the UN framework and believed that they would have greater weight if developed in this manner.
The creation of nuclear free zones there would not go counter to the global requirement for balanced disarmament.
It might not be possible particularly in Africa to obtain the signature of all states (e.g. there would be the difficulty of the Portuguese territories) but the exception would not be of vital significance to the issue of East West balance.
He also argued that the agreements need not be without provisions for supervision.6 In light of Spiers' comments, Australia could be deemed to have overreacted.
There was still every possibility that its Asian neighbours could host nuclear weapons, but nuclear free zones in Africa and Latin America would not significantly alter the current state of affairs.
This further highlighted that Australia would need to give careful consideration to the impact its conflicting views on nuclear free zones could have on American relations.
The DEA received a telegram from the Australian High Commission in London regarding nuclear disarmament.
Pemberton-Pigott of the British Foreign Office, suggested to Australian officials that now was the time to try to take steps forward in this area.
Clearly Australia was concerned about the effect nuclear disarmament could have on the South-East Asian region.
Parliament sat on 6 November; it was the first sitting since 25 October.
In his statement to Parliament, Barwick, rather than Menzies, provided a summary of the key events in the Crisis and detailed the Government's policy; Prime Ministers Harold Macmillan of Britain, John Diefenbaker of Canada, and Keith Holyoake of New Zealand had already made similar statements.
However, disaster was averted due to, he stated, America's swift action in collaboration with its allies in the OAS and the bringing of the matter before the UN; he also acknowledged the restraint exercised by Kennedy and Khrushchev throughout negotiations to resolve the Crisis peacefully.
The Menzies Government credited America and its OAS partners for their cooperation over regional defence, which was of great importance to Australia.
Britain did not think that nuclear free zones in either area would impair the West' s strategic position.
Peoples in many parts of the world are allied for defence with the United States.
This, Barwick claimed, would have given the Soviets grounds to repeat their 'monstrous blackmail' elsewhere.
Secondly, Western allies united when faced with this Soviet nuclear threat.
The impact the Cuban regime would have on the complete resolution of the Crisis was still unclear; missiles and bases were still in the process of being dismantled and removed from Cuba and Castro had been uncooperative over permitting verification of this by UN observers.
Australia will continue to do so but it does mean that every proposal must be examined realistically and due safeguards for performance insisted upon at every stage.6 Australia, thus, had declared its position on disarmament and nuclear testing.
The Menzies Government apprehensive as to what disarmament would mean for Australia's geostrategic interests yet again gave a calculated expression of support in preservation of its national interest.
The now less critical period permitted consideration of whether the Kennedy Administration's response to the Crisis was well chosen to meet its aims.
Nevertheless, the blockade and other actions were taken in the grand manner of traditional power politics.
The political reaction within the nation and the alliance has been gratifying to the Administration, but it is misleading because it is not the same as private reaction.
He asserted that despite America receiving prompt statements of support from its allies, there was a great deal of suspicion about American intentions, particularly among British officials.
Munro felt that this could have negatively influenced the unity of the Western alliance if the Crisis were protracted.
Such suspicions were compounded by concerns, especially British ones, that the outcome of the Crisis would tempt America to 'act brashly and impetuously', and consequently, lead the Western alliance into unnecessary conflict with the communist bloc.
The Menzies Government remained uncertain of American actions throughout the Crisis and this was reflected in the calculated support it provided the Kennedy Administration.
In Parliament on 6 December, Bill Hayden, Labor MP, questioned Menzies as to whether Cuba had become 'a strategic target of paramount importance' when bases capable of launching nuclear missiles had been installed there, and whether American actions to remove such bases were justified.
Menzies had embarrassingly overlooked this description by the American President.
I do not propose to speculate on the attitude of unnamed countries to the hypothetical situation of nuclear bases being established in this country at some time in the future, especially since I have indicated on previous occasions that Australia has no nuclear bases in its territory and does not at present seek them.
However, until such time as agreement is achieved on general and complete disarmament, this Government does not intend to deny itself in advance the right to ensure by whatever means may be necessary the effective defence of this country.3 So whilst Menzies claimed that Australia had not sought nuclear bases, it had given this issue serious consideration; it had time before agreement on general and complete disarmament would be reached.
It did not want to close the door on any possible options for securing Australia's defences but Menzies could see that the door was closing.
This chapter has demonstrated that in November and December 1962, the broader, if related, issues of nuclear free zones and disarmament were receiving as much attention as the aftermath of the Crisis.
It was clear that America favoured nuclear free zones, and Britain, disarmament.
The Menzies Government, however, was concerned about what both issues could mean for Australia's national interest; it accepted that its relations with its allies would need careful management in light of its differing views.
It is unlikely that the Government's anxiety was eased by suggestions that the introduction of nuclear free zones, for example, would not significantly alter the current state of affairs in its region.
It did not announce its stance on nuclear free zones in December when it declared its position on nuclear tests and disarmament its views were calculated, just as they were over the Crisis.
Barwick believed that Australia could remain confident that America would come to its defence if faced with a Soviet threat, as evidenced by the determination shown by the Kennedy Administration during the Crisis to defend itself and its regional partners.
Australia though, had also focused heavily on its national interest; so much so that Menzies had failed to recall that for America, Cuba represented an important strategic base.
The missiles and bases in Cuba had been dismantled, crated and returned to the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev had also agreed to remove the Ilyushin-28 bombers, which had increased tensions over whether they, too, were offensive in nature.
The quarantine was lifted but American aerial surveillance of Cuba continued.
Kennedy was frustrated that the Soviets had been unable to persuade Castro to agree to UN inspection of missiles sites; as such, Kennedy claimed that his agreement with Khrushchev had not been fulfilled.
Subsequently, Khrushchev did not obtain the noninvasion of Cuba pledge from Kennedy that he sought.
It was later revealed that during the darkest days of the Crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev secretly dealt over the Jupiter missiles in Turkey in exchange for the removal of missiles in Cuba.
The Americans and Soviets ultimately ended the Crisis with a quid pro quo; a settlement in which the Cubans were absent.
It did not receive significant advance notice of the Crisis as previously suggested.
The Menzies Government learnt of the Crisis only a few hours before Kennedy's televised address from Washington on 22 October, and at that point, received limited information.
It was oblivious to the fact that other allies, namely Britain, France and West Germany, had received more privileged treatment from the Kennedy Administration.
The tension between these departments regarding the management of Australia's relations with America and Britain was evident in this study.
The speed of Menzies' public declaration of support for America's UN resolution in Parliament on 23 October inclined some to believe that Australia had rushed to the aid of its great and powerful friend, having taken little time to give the matter proper consideration.
It also sought Britain's position on the Crisis, although without success.
This suggests the importance the Government placed on ensuring the Kennedy Administration received a prompt response, rather than wait for British views; as a result, Australia's position was not influenced by Britain.
The calculated nature of the Government's pledge of support for America's UN resolution reflected its private reservations over America's actions; it was not in Australia's national interest for it to give America open-ended assurances.
It wanted to strengthen its defensive capability to respond to the increasing threat communism posed to regional security and stability, including through offensive means.
It thought that it would be in Australia's best interests to host American weapons and bases on Australian soil.
In this respect, Australian foreign policy did not align with American foreign policy over the actions of the Soviet Union in Cuba.
The Government, however, could not afford to apply its policy 70 to the situation in Cuba and risk jeopardising its relations with its most important ally, on whom it depended for its defence.
The Crisis had shown Australia that in the face of a Soviet threat, it could depend on America.
This was demonstrated by the Menzies Government's support for American interventions in South-East Asia at this time the Crisis presented itself as yet another opportunity for the Menzies Government to embed its relations with America.
Thus, it was not surprising that Kennedy expected Australia's support over the Crisis.
This was despite his decision to act unilaterally with little consideration for, and consultation with, its allies.
Kennedy, however, probably overestimated the extent of Australia's support and underestimated the extent to which the Government was principally focused on Australia's national interest.
This was especially reflected by its regional concerns that its South-East Asian neighbours could become Soviet satellites like Cuba, and that its allies' preoccupation with Cuba and Berlin could leave Australia vulnerable to actions of the communist bloc.
In light of its anxieties over the intentions of its neighbours, Australia worked feverishly in the UN to persuade uncommitted countries to support America's UN resolution.
Its proactive approach in the UN which was perhaps at times beyond the scope the Government intended and the deliberate nature of its support, also suggested, perhaps unexpectedly, that the Menzies Government sought a UN solution to the Crisis.
Britain, however, was focused on disarmament, and sought the Menzies Government's support on this issue.
Therefore, late in 1962, the Menzies Government had to juggle the requests and interests of both its key allies.
When the Menzies Government announced its position on nuclear tests and disarmament, its support for such initiatives was again calculated, just as it had been over the Crisis.
Its apprehensions about the effect both matters could have on its national interest, for reasons similar to those associated with the Crisis, highlighted that Australia would need to continue carefully to manage its relations with Britain, and most importantly, with America.
Last of the Mandarins (Crows Nest, New South Wales: Allen & Unwin, 2006) Escalante, Fabian The Cuba Project: CIA Covert Operations 1959-62, 2nd ed., The Secret War Series 1 Fruhling, Stephan ed.
Australia, New Zealand and the United States 1940-1970 Harper, Norman A Great and Powerful Friend: A Study of Australian American Relations Between 1900 and 1975 Harry, Ralph The North was Always Near, Australians in Asia no.
A Reinterpretation (Carlton North, Victoria: Red Rag Publications, 2001) Lowe, David Australian Between Empires: The Life of Percy Spender (London: Pickering & Chatto, 2010) Lowe, David Menzies and the 'Great World Struggle': Australia's Cold War 1948-1954 Marr, David Barwick, 2°d ed.
