The Cold War After World War II, the United States and U.S.S.R. quickly became adversaries in the “Cold War” that would last more than 40 years.
The Cold War was “cold” only in the sense that, because of nuclear weapons, the two superpowers never confronted each other in open warfare.
The Cold War  The global competition of the superpowers led to frequent world crisis and regional confrontations on every continent.
The Yalta Conference Churchill , Roosevelt and Stalin met a the Yalta Conference in February 1945 to discuss post war reconstruction of Europe.
They agreed that Germany should be divided into four separate occupation zones.
They also confirmed the structure of the new United Nations, which had been negotiated five months earlier at the Dunbarton Oaks Conference.
The Potsdam Conference After President Roosevelt died in April 1945, President Harry Truman met with Stalin in Postsdam Germany in July/August 1945 to decide on the treatment of Germany, the final campaign against Japan, and future of Europe.
The two countries did not resolve some key issues, particularly related to the future of Eastern Europe.
Winston Churchill told Americans in a speech in 1946 that an “Iron Curtain” had fallen, closing off Eastern Europe from the West.
Russia responded by blockading the old capital of Germany, Berlin, which was deep inside the Soviet zone.
West NATO formed in 1949 – United States and its Western allies agreed to defend each other in the event of attack.
Nuclear Proliferation In 1945, the United States was the sole nuclear power.
The superpowers embarked on a strategy of mutually assured destruction.
Neither party could use its nuclear weapons, or the other would destroy them.
This conflicted with Truman’s strategy to avoid a direct conflict with the the Communists in China.
China In 1949, the Communist Chinese, led by Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-Tung) defeated the Nationalist Chinese lead by General Chiang Kai-Shek.
PART 2 The Red Scare Beginning in the late 1940’s Congress began investigating possible United States domestic communism in the House Committee on Un-American Activities.
The Red Scare The Hollywood Ten consisted of ten screenwriters and directors who refused to answer questions from this committee.
They were fired by their employers and had trouble finding work for a decade.
The Red Scare In the early 1950’s, Senator Joseph McCarthy from Wisconsin, became especially prominent in Congress’ anti-communist investigations.
Many people questioned his methods and said McCarthy ruined peoples lives and reputations without adequate proof of being communist.
Cold War – Kennedy & Eisenhower Dwight Eisenhower was a five-star general in the United States Army and served as supreme commander of the Allied Expeditionary Forces in Europe.
He was responsible for planning and supervising the invasion of North Africa in Operation Torch in 1942–43 and the successful invasion of France and Germany in 1944–45, including D-Day.
Cold War – Kennedy & Eisenhower In 1954 President Eisenhower committed to containing communism in the Middle East.
Under this doctrine, 15,000 United States troops were sent to Lebanon in 1958 to support its pro-Western President against the threat of communist revolution.
Cold War – Kennedy & Eisenhower Nikita Khrushchev became leader of the U.S.S.R. in 1953, after the death of Joseph Stalin In 1957, the Soviet Union launched the first man made satellite into space.
Cold War – Kennedy & Eisenhower In 1959, Fidel Castro and his guerrilla fighters overthrew the Cuban dictator, Batista.
His government nationalized/confiscated private property, and turned it over to his government.
President Eisenhower’s administration planned an invasion of Cuba, but that plan was not executed until John F Kennedy became President.
Cold War – Kennedy & Eisenhower The Bay of Pigs Invasion was the United States plan to assist and arm Cuban exiles in an invasion of Cuba in order to topple Castro’s government.
They complained the United States did not supply air support during the invasion.
Cold War – Kennedy & Eisenhower In October 1962, United States spy planed detected the Cubans preparing to install Soviet missiles in Cuba.
This confrontation brought the superpowers dangerously close to a nuclear war.
Khrushchev agreed to withdraw Cuban missiles in exchange for a US promise to not try to invade Cuba again.
Between 1959 and 1962, more than 200,000 Cubans fled Castro’s repressive government for the United States Air travel was restored between the two countries from 1965 to 1973, and another 368,000 Cubans fled to America.
In 1980, Castro permitted another 100,000 Cuban Marielitos to flee from the port of Mariel, in Cuba.
Cold War The Space Race was the competition between the U.S.S.R. and the United States for advancements in space technology.
The Soviet Union beat the United States to have the first human in earth orbit, Yuri Gagarin, on April 12, 1961.
In 1962, President Kennedy proposed a United States priority to land a human on the moon by the end of the decade.
This goal was achieved in July 1969 when Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin became the first humans to land on the Moon.
It was a concrete and barbed wire wall constructed to prevent East Berliners in communist controlled territory from fleeing to the West.
