Cuba would have become the first nuclear power in Latin America 50 years ago, if not for the dynamics captured in this remarkable verbatim transcript — published here for the first time — of Fidel Castro’s excruciating meeting with Soviet deputy prime minister Anastas Mikoyan, on November 22, 1962.
Even with the pullout of the strategic missiles, the tacticals would stay, and Soviet documentation reveals the intention of training the Cubans to use them.
Khrushchev had not consulted or even informed Castro about any deals with the Americans — Fidel heard about the missile withdrawal from the radio.
The Cuban leader refused to go along with any onsite inspections in Cuba, and raised further demands.
They had to take back what the Americans called the “offensive weapons,” get the United States to confirm its non-invasion pledge, and most importantly, keep Cuba as an ally.
Mikoyan arrived in Cuba on November 2, 1962, and over 20 days of often-bitter conversations with Cuban leaders — culminating in this tense meeting — Mikoyan began to appreciate the danger tactical nuclear weapons posed if they were left on the island, especially in Cuban hands.
On one day, Castro would refuse to see Mikoyan; on another, Fidel would order his anti-aircraft crews to shoot at the American surveillance planes.
SUBSCRIBE NOW The final straw apparently came on November 20, when Castro sent instructions to Cuba’s representative at the United Nations, Carlos Lechuga, to mention “we have tactical nuclear weapons, which we should keep” — partly as leverage in negotiations over inspections, also to establish the fact that the weapons were in Cuban possession.
Extremely worried, Mikoyan cabled the Soviet Presidium that he now planned to inform the Cuban leader that all tactical nuclear weapons would be withdrawn from Cuba.
Mikoyan had to break this unpleasant news to his hosts, and he had to do it in such a way that they would remain Soviet allies.
This four-hour conversation on November 22 provided the final blow to the Cuban revolutionaries, now that the Soviet Union was removing all the weapons for which Cuba had to suffer so much.
Castro opened the conversation saying that he was in a bad mood because Kennedy stated in his speech that all nuclear weapons were removed from Cuba, but surely the tacticals were still on the island.
Mikoyan confirmed that “the Soviet government has not given any promises regarding the removal of the tactical nuclear weapons.
But the Soviet government itself, said Mikoyan, not under United States pressure, has now decided to take them back.
Mikoyan tried to persuade Castro that “as far as Il-28s are concerned, you know yourself that they are outdated.
Castro was very emotional and at times rough with Mikoyan — he criticized the Soviet military for failing to camouflage the missiles, for not using their anti-aircraft launchers to shoot down United States U-2 spy planes, essentially allowing them to photograph the sites.
But the Soviets did not treat the Cubans as a partner, they caved in under United States pressure, and did not even consult the Cubans about the withdrawal.
In desperation, Castro almost begged Mikoyan to leave the tactical warheads in Cuba, especially because the Americans were not aware of them and they were not part of the agreement between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Castro claimed that the situation now was even worse than it was before the crisis — Cuba was defenseless, and the United States non-invasion assurances did not mean much for the Cubans.
Ironically, if the Cubans were a little more pliant, and a little less independent, if they were more willing to be Soviet pawns, they would have kept the tactical nuclear weapons on the island.
But they showed themselves to be much more than just a parking lot for the Soviet missiles.
Mikoyan treated his Cuban hosts with great empathy and respect, while being highly critical of his own political and military leadership.
He admired the genuine character of the Cuban revolution, he saw its appeal for Latin America.
But he also saw the danger of the situation spiraling out of control probably better than other leaders in this tense triangle, and thus brought about the final resolution of the crisis.
The following transcript was prepared by a Soviet note-taker, with the Soviet ambassador to Cuba, Alexandr Alexeyev, translating for Mikoyan.
