The Operations Evaluation Group is charged withrincreasing the peacetime and wartime effectiveness of the Navy and Marine Corps through operations research.
It engages in studies dealing with current and' near-future problems in tactics, strategy logistics, force composition and weapons employment.
Leight, Operations Evaluation Group 30 April 1965 This study represents the view of the Operations Evaluation Group at the time of issue.
It does not necessarily reflect the official opinion of the Chief of Naval Operations except to the extent indicated in the forwarding letter.
It includes information of an operational rather than a technical nature, and should be made available only to those authorized to receive such information.
Enclosure to CNO ltr Ser 005P03 Dated 30 April 1965 Prepared by the OPERATIONS EVALUATION GROUP Center for Naval Analyses DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY ^ OFFICE OF THE CHIEF OF NAVAL OPERATIONS \j WASHINGTON 25.
Enclosure , prepared by the Operations Evaluation Croup of t ter T or ^ al Analyses, is provided for information and retention.
The study represents the best opinion of OEC at the time of issue. lxi.il 2.
The Chief of Naval Operations approves this study for review and consideration by those commanders responsible for surface surveillance operations.
Tf additional copies are required, thev will be forwarded upon request.
Thejjolitical and military considerations of the operation increased force requirements by a f actor of aTTeastflToverHEhjDse required for surveillance ohTyTTnuiTcc^^ Barriers from Puerto Rico and Bermuda could have been about twice as efficient if they had been designed for maximum effectiveness against westbound traffic.
P3A aircraft, in a major operation for the first time, were used to take advantage of their longer range to do a job that P2 and P5 aircraft could not do.
P3 aircraft identification coverage could not be determined from available data.
Search and track of special interest ships took 16 percent of the aircraft effort and 9 percent of the cruiser -destroyer effort.
About 86 percent of merchantmen bound for Gulf -Caribbean ports from Europe, and 72 percent of those from North America were identified.
Intelligence had an important effect on the character of the operation.
The analysis produced us eful planning. factor :s_..and-histQxical insightsj Jipwstudy-The-Tesults of future large operations would produce a large rmpro-vementr ~— — —-"""" ■■■' — ■■ JOWNGRADED^TO AJWfttjl )WCLAi RECOMMENDATSONS Standby analysis teams should be organized and become prepared to begin analysis at the start of future major operations.
During this crisis the Navy supported at least 3 major activitiesthe quarantine and its surface surveillance; prosecution of many Soviet submarine contacts; and preparation and positioning of units to invade Cuba, if required.
Reference , analyzing the anti-submarine operations, and reference , dealing extensively with carrying out the contingency plans, cover other major aspects of these operations not considered here.
References , , and include the original OpNav requests for OEG work; reference , in particular, requested that OEG analyze and evaluate the force mix used in the Cuban Quarantine and assess the'P3A aircraft contribution.
The general goals of this study were to evaluate the over -all effectiveness of the surveillance operations and to relate their results to the effort expended.
Other purposes were to derive improved planning factors and reporting methods from the experiences of Cubex.
This will contribute to force requirement estimates, provide better inputs for future planning studies, and contribute to readiness for future large surveillance operations.
The data for this analysis were transcribed from the records of ships and aircraft which operated principally in the area bounded by 12° N to 33 °N and 52 W to 87 W The data include aircraft sorties and ship positions from 21 October through 21 November 1962.
However, due to time and manpower limitations, ship detections and identifications were recorded only from 21 October through 7 November.
On the other hand, orders were given to ""locate, identify, report, and photograph all shipping in the Atlantic"" by reference , which specified systematic search coverage.
Time and discretion do not often permit the highest command level to inform forces participating in an operation of all the goals or considerations affecting its orders.
Consequently, the lower levels may not have attached the same value to early location of specific ships at the expense of more ""effective"" and systematic over-all surveillance.
DESCRIPTION AND CRITIQUE -■•This section describes the surveillance operation and concludes that the special circumstances of the Cuban crisis led to use of much larger forces than would have been necessary for surveillance without these constraints.
References and contain a detailed history of the Cuban crisis and a description of the quarantine plot in CinCLant Headquarters at Norfolk.
However, a review of the more important aspects of the situation and brief chronology are given so that this report will be reasonably self-contained.
Chronology The Cuban crisis resulted from Soviet introduction of medium range ballistic missiles into Cuba, and abnormally high Soviet submarine activity in the area, confirmed in mid-October 1962.
These measures, and the President's insistence that the Soviet missiles and IL-28 bombers be removed from Cuba, were successful.
From 5 to 11 November, the missiles were removed and on 20 November the USSR announced that it would remove the IL-28's within 30 days.
The quarantine forces, although not engaged in a full blockade, induced Russian ships carrying arms to stop and return.
This was apparently the result of the demonstrated United States ability to intercept them, and of our obvious intention and ability to use force if necessary.
The operation then evolved into an attempt to locate all ships which might be carrying prohibited materials to Cuba.
For this, the surveillance forces tried to examine and identify every ship in the approaches to Cuba.
Constraints on Quarantine Forces As an operation to detect and, if necessary, stop ships carrying prohibited military materials to Cuba, the quarantine was effective.
Since the intercepting ships acted on information from aircraft, aircraft searches were required still farther from Cuba.
A line closer to Cuba would have provided very little time for the President and his advisors to act, and might have necessitated decisions by lower commanders which the higher authorities preferred to reserve to themselves.
Force Dispositions and Missions Air coverage was concentrated in 3 basic zones.
The first ran north and south from Puerto Rico to Bermuda, and to the east and west of Bermuda A second zone was from Puerto Rico to Jacksonville along the Bahamas and ""off the Florida and Georgia east coasts.
Flights from Guantanamo toward the Bahamas also contributed to this coverage.
The third area was just outside Cuban waters covered from Key West and Guantanamo.
In addition, flights from Laies in the ' Azores covered selected mid -Atlantic areas.
Ships also patrolled passages such as Florida Straits and Windward Passage.
They altered the systematic search pattern and took forces away from prosecution of one submarine contact.
These flights observed the activities of the Russian ships enroute to Cuba in an attempt to determine Soviet intentions at a critical period when the President was considering an invasion of Cuba.
Navy ships were also assigned to intercept and follow ships of special interest.
When 16 of the Soviet ships enroute to Cuba stopped and eventually reversed course, the effectiveness of the quarantine was demonstrated.
The close coverage of Soviet ships which didnot turn around gave juwrnawuhu to FIGURE 1 the USSR additional proof of the United States control of the situation, as well as satisfying the United States that prohibited war materials were not continuing to reach Cuba.
After the USSR agreed to remove its missiles from Cuba, further special search and tracking missions were sent to verify and count the number of missiles removed.
The effect of this diversion of forces from the systematic coverage can be estimated, as discussed in appendix A If the ships and aircraft on special search and tracking missions had been used as the other surveillance units were, the number of merchantmen identified might have increased"" slightly, but not in proportion because coverage was already near saturation.
In addition, the requirement to identify all shipping in the surveillance area forced the use of search tracks which were less effective against inbound traffic than cross -over barriers, specifically designed to detect westbound traffic only, would have been.
THE NAVAL EFFORT This section presents statistics on the effort involved in the quarantine The data include records from units which had no direct part in the operation and from some units which were assigned surveillance duties for only part of the period or as an incidental effort.
Efforts during the quarantine can be measured in terms of aircraft flight hours and ship-days in the quarantine area.
A description of the effort must'show the types of aircraft and ships present, to what missions they were assigned how the effort was distributed geographically and what changes occurred in these distributions.
General Surveillance Effort Surveillance was primarily done by patrol aircraft , with assistance from ships and carrier aircraft.
These flights could locate and identify inbound Bloc ships far enough from Cuba to permit surface intercepts to be made with sufficient decision time and beyond range of Cuban forces.
This was the first full-scale operation for the P3A aircraft, which were used to take advantage of their ability to operate at longer ranges than the other patrol aircraft, as discussed below.
The carrier aircraft spent nearly as many flying hours on surveillance as did patrol aircraft, but this effort occurred in limited sectors and intermittently.
Much of the ship effort was devoted to support or amphibious operations, rather than to search.
Ocf-7 Nov 1962 %£0 Mission Ocean Special Ship ASW Task Group A/C Type Surveillance Search & Track.
TABLE ll-B AVERAGE NUMBER OF PATROL AIRCRAFT AIRBORNE BY MISSION AND TIME OF DAY 21 Oct-7 Nov 1962 Mission Ocean Special Task Group Time of Day Surveillance Search & Track.
The missions tabulated are ""ocean surveillance, "" to locate and identify all merchant ships in the search area; ""special ship search and track, "" flights to locate or track specific ships; ""ASW search, "" including area search and prosecution of contacts; ""task group escort, "" also primarily an ASW mission; and ""miscellaneous, "" including ferry, transport, and other non-surveillance flights.
During the first 18 days, about 55 percent of the patrol flying hours were on ocean surveillance and special search and track, while 44 percent were on various ASW missions.
However, during the following 2 weeks the ASW effort was considerably reduced.
The average number of surveillance flying hours per day increased slightly during the last 14 days.
P2 aircraft flew 72 percent of the patrol aircraft flying hours and accounted for over half the flying hours in each major mission.
The many ship days devoted to transit are due to the operations of amphibious and logistic support ships.
It is clear that the buildup for the quarantine was not complete until 24 October.
Sjoa -* vo o co •* -C a O CO u a CD CO CD CN ^ VO Jh <U CN £ g CO CO CO d • CD S^ .-i Q, ft cx-3 cu a) co -'CO q5 cu 2 3t.
Cru rriers 3erway [er Log ; Others 3 •S 1 o V ^aW44 <d ess ra3w«S CO QU\2»©J33 2 Cinoipc CN o o -h m co c h CN — ^ _ TJX <JJ «' 2 ■% co o — i in vo m CO o o OM<Oh m 5 u < o CO co -h vO lO to 1-1 Z CO . to CI 00 co t^ Tf co m £ 2 CO -1 -1 CO o h Z <N -X O O ra CQ < "" to > h co 03 o cn m \o CN > LU > ° <z m CO ^ <u CO i *■ CO < ^ h "" ^o u_ 0<n"" rth Z s°* ■<* -H Os ££ S-H D CU CO CO at.
October, 1962 Date Nov.62 Employment of Desfroyers and Cruisers , ficu^ 2 UNCLASSIFIED DiJWNffiftpED TO C*®^ "" ~~;*et JJNCLASSIJF1EQ IV EFFECTIVENESS OF THE SURVEILLANCE EFFORT This section describes the surveillance results.
The first part describes and analyzes the contacts by source, location, time of day, and so on.
The measure of effectiveness here is completeness of coverage, measured by the fraction identified among all ships entering the surveillance area.
Merchant Ship Analysis To accomplish the surveillance mission, all shipping in the areas of interest had to be examined.
The information obtained on ships entering the surveillance area differed greatly.
The most complete identification included name, type, origin, destination, etc., not all of which could be obtained from the ships or aircraft reporting.
For this analysis, an identification was considered as ""positive"" when the name and type of the ship were obtained.
In some cases failure to obtain registry resulted in ambiguity; for example, there are 6 ""Santa Maria's"" in Lloyd's Shipping Index Voyage Supplement of 16 November 1962.
However, the name and position of a merchant ship, usually permits identification when combined with intelligence.
In many cases, less information on a ship may be sufficient for the type of identification desired.
Merely knowing that a ship, such as a United States tanker, is not one of the special class in the Cuban trade might be satisfactory.
The negative identifications account for approximately 11 percent of the total number of identifications reported.
In contrast, the positive identifications and naval vessels identified account for a total of 4,758 ships.
The cable also shows the distribution of ships by reporting source, and indicates the predominant contribution of the land -based aircraft.
Aircraft made nearly two-thirds of all the positive identifications; patrol aircraft (including Air Force) made slightly more than one-half of all the positive identifications.
The number of contacts depends on both the opportunities, as measured by shipping densities and the search effort expended, measured by ship-days, flying hours, or length of barrier patrolled.
From 21 October through 7 November 1962, 2 CVA and 3 CVS contributed to ocean surveillance.
Carrier aircraft also flew surveillance missions from Guantanamo and Key West.
The difference in identifications per hour is attributed to differences in employment, rather than significant differences in aircraft capabilities.
Identifications per flight hour is a misleading measure of the effectiveness of carrier aircraft due to overcoverage of the area near the carrier.
Ship density was assumed to be evenly distributed within each of the 5x5 degree areas shown in figure 8, Estimated Number of Ships at Sea.
The number of contacts represents the total reported by carrierbased aircraft on all types of missions, 21 October through 7 November.
He can receive Tacan and radar targets simultaneously; plot the range and bearing of the target from the carrier; fly out and identify tne target and then return to voice communications range to make or relay his report.
It might therefore have been more efficient to use the carriers for surveillance and ASW in areas where shipping was more concentrated, rather than in the open ocean areas between the Bahamas and Bermuda, other missions permitting.
One measure of ship surveillance efficiency is the fraction of ships passing through the quarantine line which were identified.
Of a sample of 90 ships on westbound courses from Europe and the Mediterranean to Caribbean ports 26, or 29 percent, were identified by ships of the quarantine line.
Thirteen of these were identified before October 30 on the Walnut Line, and 13 after October 30, when the shorter Chestnut Line was manned.
However, the varying merchant ship densities, the presence of ship lanes, information passed by aircraft, the use of ships for trailing and interception, all affected the efficiency of the ship search.
Also, some data were transcribed inconsistently, affecting the accuracy of the estimates of identifications per day.
As pointed out earlier, a few ships made most of the identifications because they were in areas of high shipping density.
Finally, many identifications were made without approaching close enough to read the ship's name.
The fractions identified by signaling or by radio and visually by close approach are not iaiown.
PERCENT AND NUMBER OF S.HIP.S MAYING IDENTIFICATIONS SE^ET UWGLASSiHLD mc LAmm V PATROL AIRCRAFT OPERATIONS In this section several aspects of patrol aircraft operations are analyzed.
Ocean surveillance is an assigned mission for patrol aircraft, and many of the crews are accustomed to keeping detailed records.
Separate portions of this section deal with search and identification rates, ordnance expenditures and failures, the use of the P3A, and aircraft utilization.
When they detected ships, they flew toward them to identify them visually, after which they resumed their surveillance tracks.
For some planning purposes, it is useful to know, how many square miles per hour an aircraft could cover in this mission.
The data received were sufficient to make estimates of the surveillance rate for P2 and P5 aircraft, but not for the P3.
Here the term ""identification width"" refers to the sweep width for identification, not for detection.
In addition, the shipping density in various areas has been estimated by ONI; figure 8 is a tabulation for October 1962.
With such information, the value of an identification sweep width mav be estimated.
The ONI survey shows numbers of ships within regions bounded by parallels and meridians in multiples of 5 degrees.
The estimated number of ships per region varies from one region to another, and the areas of regions differ with latitude.
Patrol tracks, particularly from Guantanamo and Key West, were at times so close to land that the ocean area surveyed was reduced.
If a patrol track includes' or excludes a dense traffic, estimates of identification sweep width can be much larger or smaller than expected for a uniform density in a region.
Some of the Guantanamo and Key West flights also included considerable overlap.
The assumptions of uniform -random distribution of shipping and nonoverlapping flight tracks, with no surveillance of land, appear most valid north of Puerto Rico to Bermuda.
According to reference , a sample comparison between ships' positions and those estimated by dead -reckoning ships along shipping lanes showed a mean deviation of 88 miles from the lanes.
Ships with many origins and destinations transit this area, so they tend to be more uniformly distributed in it.
The estimates are for positive identification by name; negative identifications would increase the values shown by less than 10 percent.
With perfect coverage, an identification width of 90 miles would be expected; achieved identification widths were about 1/2 of this.
Although it is not possible to explain or isolate every reason why actual performance falls short of the theoretical, several contributing factors may be considered.
First, the tracks do overlap themselves, which is unavoidable when the tracks all emanate from two points.
The greatest overlaps occur near Burmuda and Roosevelt Roads, where the aircraft also have land in sight.
Consequently, estimates of identification width were made after deleting regions closest to the bases.
About one-third of the tracks in the sample were in the 2 deleted areas adjacent to the bases.
For those tracks the combined identification width was 15 miles, whereas the combined identification width in the remaining areas was 48 miles.
On the basis of track lengths and shipping density, the deleted adjacent areas should have accounted for 45 percent of the identifications, but actually provided only 21 percent.
Another possible reason for the number of contacts near base to be lower than expected is that an aircraft near its endurance limit must return to base without investigating all contacts on the remainder of its route.
This effect evidently did exist in this operation, as is shown by table X Weather also occasionally degraded search.
The speed of advance of patrol aircraft on surveillance depends mainly upon the aircraft's cruising speed and the number of contacts it must investigate.
To estimate the speed made good along surveillance tracks, the total mileages of the individual tracks were measured.
Then the average contacts per hundred miles of track and the average speed of advance along each track were computed.
The P2 SOA is reduced 1.36 knots for each additional contact per 100U miles of track, which implies about 5 minutes ""lost"" per additional contact.
The corresponding figure for the P5 is somewhat larger, being 7 minutes.
DOWNGRADED TO UblCLASSlOJEtf UNCLASSIFIED P3A aircraft were sent on missions where their greater range was essential.
On special ship search and track missions, the P3A's averaged 5. hours in transit to and from station, and 5. hours on station.
At this radius the P2 would be able to stay on station for only an hour or two and the P5 capability disappears.
This is undoubtedly a major reason why so much P3A effort was spent on special search and track missions.
It shows a very short average sortie time for surveillance because of many short transit flights during which the aircraft also rigged ships.
The P3A special search and track and ASW flights were slightly longer, on the average, than those of other aircraft.
However, because of the P3A's higher speed to and from station, their total tracks were longer.
Quban Quarantine provided an excellent data source for planning factors on the ordnance expended by VP aircraft in realistic ASW and surveillance operations.
These data can assist in estimating logistic requirements for similar operations, determining ordnance reliability, and examining aircraft loading requirements.
It is assumed' here that if an aircraft reported at least one expenditure, it reported all of them.
Sorties having what was thought at the time to be a submarine contact are listed separately.
Total expenditures by type are shown in table XIII with the reported reliability and average expenditures per sortie.
Because of the great variability of ordnance expenditures per sortie, as evidenced in figure 11 for both ASW missions and non-ASW missions, no valid planning factors for ordnance can be derived.
OVER-ALL EFFECTIVENESS Previous sections of this report dealt with the effort expended in the quarantine and associated surveillance operations and with the resulting contacts and identifications.
Some important aspects of the over-all effectiveness of the operations are treated here.
Therefore, groups of ships which had about the same exposure must be studied.
The method used was to select samples of ships with roughly similar exposures and then to determine whether, when, and where each ship was identified.
Examination of the data showed that patrol aircraft surveillance was not fully mounted until October 24, the day the quarantine began.
It is sufficient to select a sample, if it is large enough, and without discrimination or bias.
Ships listed in Lloyd's Shipping Index Voyage Supplement which made trips from Northern Europe to Caribbean and Gulf of Mexico ports.
Voyages with the same origins and destinations as sample 1, but outbound from Gulf and Caribbean ports to Northern Europe.
SOUTH AMERICA Arrows show the geographic sequence, and numbers abreast selected ports indicate the numerical sequence of ports listed.
Ships outbound from Caribbean and Gulf ports to Southern Europe and Mediterranean ports.
Ships southbound from the east coast of North America to Caribbean Ports and the Panama Canal.
It was difficult in many cases to determine whether a ship identified and reported was the same as one of those on the sample lists because ship names were frequently misspelled or garbled.
In particular, the Cyrillic letters of Russian ship names caused considerable difficulty.
A computer program was written to compare reported names with each other to be properly designated.
Basically, this program associates two names if they differ by no more than two letter substitutions and/or letter transpositions.
The program worked well to associate spellings such as Port Hudson and Fort Hudson.
There were also spellings such as BEADBACK for BEJ10B0&CK , where the correct association was made only with luck.
Some names reported were so. distorted that it was not possible to identify the ship.
The differences between inbound and outbound fractions identified, or east and westbound were not statistically significant at the 5 percent level.
A x test of the hypothesis that the probability of identification was the same for all 4 samples did not reject the hypothesis, even at the 10 percent level.
Thus, aggregating samples is justified, yielding a common probability of .86 that a ship steaming between European or Mediterranean ports and the Caribbean Sea would be identified.
Grozny was identified 17 times and Karl Marx 14 times because they were subject to special search and tracking, greatly increasing the frequency of sighting.
These two have been omitted from figure 13, showing the frequency distribution of ship identifications.
These results indicate effective coverage of the ships going to and from the Caribbean and Gulf Ports or to Europe and the Mediterranean.
The proportions identified are lower, rather than upper, estimates of effectiveness for the following reasons, considering that there is now rather complete knowledge of those ships in the area and available for identification.
The high probability that a ship would be sighted and reported indicates that most, but not all, negatively identified vessels were probably also given a positive identification.
Most of these were transits and would not be expected to produce many identifications, and many of the ships which these aircraft may have identified were also identified by other units.
Nevertheless, any missing data could only increase the estimates of over-all effectiveness.
Finally, some ships' names were transmitted with errors that now preclude identifying them.
FREQUENCY . jQfjjWI ^CLASSIFIED 1MNTIFICATIONS PER SHIP UNCl^Si 'WED The sampling data may also be used to indicate in more detail the relative contributions to surveillance of the several force components.
The identification results in the tables have been separated according to whether they were made on the eastern or western side of the barrier.
As planned, aircraft made over three -fourths of the first identifications on the westbound ships in the outer zone.
Seventy-one percent of the westbound ships were first identified in the outer zone; 11 percent were first identified in the inner zone.
The distinction between zones is not particularly significant for eastbound ships.
Because of duplications and multiple identifications, the numbers and percentages of identifications do not add up to those identified by the combined effort.
For example, considering the 90 westbound ships, -landbased air identified 58 by the time they reached the quarantine line.
For example, there were 6 westbound ships identified only by ships east of the quarantine line; 15 westbound ships were identified only by ships west of the line; and 8 westbound ships were identified only by ships during their transit through the entire surveillance area.
Although carrier air contributed substantially to surveillance, and identified about 20 percent of the transiting ships, their incremental effect was only 2 ships beyond those identified by land-based air and ships.
Thus, landbased air identified a total of 64 of the westbound transitors; without that air effort 27 of the identified transitors would not have been identified, but the remaining 37 were also identified by either ship or carrier air.
A smaller fraction of sfMP3Mfi^riS''fth*'spflth. runs was*cf§t||g:ed than on eastwest voyages, as shown in table XVII, because the surveillance width in the north-south direction was about 1300 miles, compared to 2000 miles east and west.
More important, however, was the disposition of forces, particularly ships, in a manner to intercept ships between Europe and Cuba.
Finally, much of the flying was east of the track between North American east coast ports and the Gulf -Caribbean area.
Not only was there a lower percentage of ships identified while transiting north-south or south-north, but there were also fewer repeat identifications.
Again, the marginal contribution of carrier air was small, due to their deployment.
IMPROVEMENT OF FUTURE ANALYSES Future analyses of this type could be improved by insuring better and more complete data.
The Cubex data were not transcribed until 4 months after the operation, and many of those responsible for transcribing it had had little to do with the aspects of the operation under study.
Consequently, when information was missing or obviously wrong, little could be done to supply or correct it.
The quality of data can be much improved if the analysis team is present during the operation and can examine the data being generated.
Preferably, an analysis team should be organized in advance and become ready to report promptly in a significant operation.
Such a team could be named or mentioned in appropriate OpPlans and check-off lists.
At the very least, an earlier decision should be made on the scope and nature of analyses.
In analyses of this type, the nature of the operation is unlikely to be precisely known in advance and it is not possible to anticipate all the reporting needs for analysis.
It is impossible to report routinely all data required by every conceivable contingency.
Hence, many reports are to be filled out only in specific circumstances.
Such reports will contain some discrepancies when filled out the first few times.
Thus, iris desirable that basic information, essential in most analyses, be reported routinely and that special reporting requirements be minimized and simplified.
There is a basic body of information needed for nearly all reports and analyses, pieces of which may be available at different places and to different people.
This makes it difficult or impossible to assemble information without some redundancy, and information from original forms must be transcribed to one coherent form.
For example, ship's course, speed, and position is normally logged on the bridge.
Information about an ECM contact is logged in CIC Both sets of information may be available in both places, but the information is recorded separately.
Much information now being recorded could be entered on a form which permits easy conversion for machine analysis.
It may contain courses or headings, speeds, positions, times, and changes in these.
All of these could be recorded on a standard form with a special marking pencil, so that the completed forms could be handled automatically without further transcription.
Thus, it would be possible to enter the history of a ship's movements into a computer, eliminating much clerical labor and the possiblity of transcription or coding errors.
Narrative information would still be required and could be entered beside or between sections of numerical data.
It appears possible to standardize this type of record considerably for machine use and at the same time reduce, or at least not increase, routine record-keeping.
Commander Antisubmarine Warfare Force, United States Atlantic Fleet ser 00187/43 of 5 Nov 1963 to Chief of Naval Operations w/encl.
The aircraft on special search and track missions averaged less than 2 identifications per flight, while the aircraft on surveillance missions averaged 7.
Moreover, identifications made by aircraft on special missions were likely to be duplicated by other units on routine surveillance missions.
This agrees well with the actual result of 86 percent of the sample identified.
This might have led to an increase in the total of 2085 identifications made by patrol aircraft by 195, or slightly over 9 percent.
Since the number of destroyer and cruiser ship-days devoted to special search and tracking was also about 10 percent of that devoted to ocean surveillance, it is convenient to consider the potential effect of increasing by 10 percent the percentage of identifications achieved by each component.
The data forms showing primary mission of the ship reported 14 days on ocean surveillance and 10 days on special search and track.
However, the aircraft carrier's reports of missions showed very little time on special search and track.
The results on over-all effectiveness in the main body of this report show that carrier aircraft to a large extent duplicated identifications by the patrol aircraft and ships.
However, this would have removed carrier air from other missions, such as ASW and air support, which they were to perform.
Therefore, only the effects of additional contributions from ships and patrol aircraft have been considered here.
Thus, a 10 percent increase in the effectiveness of individual forces would be expected to result in a less than proportional increase in the overall effectiveness, mainly because the coverage was already near saturation.
The length of each flight is 2 L miles and it takes 2 L/V hours, where V is aircraft speed.
In a strip of width Ax parallel to the track at distance x, the expected number of targets identified will be L • s • tx • P and the distribution will be Poisson.
Since the sum of random variables with ' Poisson distributions is a random variable with Poisson distribution where the combined mean is the sum of the individual means, then the expected number of ships identified at all ranges from the aircraft's track will be WLs.
In order to select suitable values for the coefficients a desirable to minimize the variance.
By differentiating V, 2 with respect t , it can readily be shown that is the desired estimate.
Specifically, 1/2 1/2 1/2 C L l s l W l + L 2 S 2 W 2 jl/2 1/2 may be considered as a normally distributed variable with mean and variance 1 to test the hypothesis of no significant difference between W and W 9 at any specified level of statistical confidence.
ORIGINATING ACTIVITY Center for Naval Analyses of the Franklin Institute, Operations Evaluation Group 2o.
Other qualifie* users shall request through their sponsoring government agency to the Office of the Chief of Naval Operations . tIs 12.
In late 1962 Navy ships and aircraft intensively patrolled large Atlantic and Caribbean areas to locate and track Soviet Bloc ships suspected of carrying intermediate range missiles and support equipment to Cuba.
This study analyzes the effectiveness of these quarantine operations and the contributions of the several naval components.
Because of the special circumstances of the Cuban crisis, the operations were carried on under conditions which greatly increased the force requirements.
Automatic downgrading in specified rective 5200.10 end Armed Forcea Industrial Manu the group number.
Also, when applicable, show th markings have been used for Group 3 and Group 4 3.
