For many months, this argument was offered by Administration officials to explain why they would not yet pursue serious negotiations with senior leaders of the Afghan Taliban.
More recently, Administration officials are saying that they have moved significantly.
Washington is eager to make happen – perhaps more eager than most Americans realize.
United States officials have quietly dropped the Bush administration’s resistance to talks with senior Taliban and are doing whatever they can to help Karzai open talks with the insurgents, although they still say any Taliban willing to negotiate must renounce violence, reject Al Qaeda, and accept the Afghan Constitution.
The Administration’s shift – if real – is tremendously good news for ending the war.
But even if this accurately reflects the intentions of the Administration, the arguments made earlier against serious negotiations are still politically powerful, in part because the Administration made them, and will likely be thrown back in the Administration’s face by some of its Republican critics if efforts at a negotiated settlement begin to bear fruit.
Therefore, these arguments still need to be countered, even if the Administration is no longer making them.
Regarding the first point – not every negotiation that ends a war follows a military defeat – a key obstacle to moving the debate forward in the United States is that most Americans don’t know much diplomatic history.
That’s part of the diplomatic history that we don’t spend much time studying in school.
This ignorance makes us vulnerable to facile slogans that assume the all-conquering efficacy of military force and dismiss the possible efficacy of alternatives.
For the neocons in both parties, all you need to need to know about the diplomatic history of the world since Adam and Eve were expelled from the Garden is that diplomatic efforts to avert the Second World War failed in Munich in 1938.
For the neocons, every argument is a noun, a verb, and Neville Chamberlain.
But Fredrik Stanton has recently published a corrective to our ignorance.
In each of these negotiations, with the exception of the Congress of Vienna, the United States was a key protagonist.
Among these episodes, the Portsmouth Treaty speaks most directly to our present predicament in Afghanistan, insofar as the Portsmouth Treaty most clearly ended a war without one side having defeated the other militarily.
Between the February 1904 Japanese attack on Russian forces in Manchuria and early 1905, the Russo-Japanese war had cost more than 150,000 lives, Stanton reports.
President Roosevelt believed that continued fighting would make both sides worse off, but until mid-1905, neither side shared his view, each thinking they would benefit from continued fighting.
In May 1905, Japan and Russia agreed to Roosevelt’s proposal for negotiations.
Each side knew they had something to lose from continued fighting, and that a negotiated settlement might not be very different from what they could accomplish through force.
The bloodshed had turned world opinion sharply against the war, and this had begun to affect the ability of Russia and Japan to raise money for the war.
Yet when the negotiations began, there was no cease-fire, and it was far from obvious that the negotiations would succeed.
Both sides had difficulty finding delegates, because insiders believed that the negotiations would fail and that the negotiating officials would be ruined politically.
The chief Russian delegate to the peace conference, an opponent of the war, didn’t believe that Russian leaders sincerely wanted to end it.
If some folks in the White House fear they might pay a political price for an agreement ending the war that doesn’t ""smell like a win"" but will ""end in an argument"" – as Gen.
But in fact Komura did make concessions to secure an agreement, and although the concessions were wildly unpopular in Japan – the Japanese public had been led to believe, for example, that war reparations from Russia were in the offing – he lived to tell the tale, and his career does not seem to have suffered, as he continued to serve as a Japanese diplomat for several more years, receiving promotions and honors, and signing agreements with other countries on behalf of Japan.
If Richard Holbrooke succeeded in making a deal with the Afghan Taliban, one suspects that most Americans who were paying any attention would be grateful.
The majority of Americans, the Washington Post reported in June, say the war is not worth fighting – a far cry from the war fever of Japanese public opinion during the Portsmouth talks.
If you can get people to have unrealistic goals, it’s easy to argue against a diplomatic settlement.
But further military combat won’t result in unicorns and ponies either.
To declare that one won’t support a diplomatic settlement because it won’t achieve a goal that is very unlikely to be achieved by military force is something akin to believing that you are not overweight because you haven’t been on a scale lately.
With an occupying army largely ignorant of local history, tribal structures, language, customs, politics and values, the United States cannot, through social engineering, win over, in the foreseeable future, sufficient numbers of the Afghan Pashtun on whom depends.
They aren’t going to magically transform an existing balance of forces into something completely different.
Any ""cup of poison"" you have to drink at the diplomatic table, as Ayatollah Khomeini described the UN-mediated truce between Iran and Iraq in 1988 that ended the Iran-Iraq war, is almost certainly a ""cup of poison"" you would otherwise eventually would have had to drink on the battlefield, with greater loss of life.
Not surprisingly, a persistent theme in Stanton’s book is the need to have realistic assessments of the interests and capabilities of one’s adversaries and interlocutors.
In lobbying the kingdom of France to take America’s side against Britain, Franklin did not appeal to the Rights of Man; Franklin appealed to France’s evident self-interest in weakening the British Empire.
In negotiating the Louisiana Purchase, Jefferson and Monroe knew that Napoleon needed money for expected war in Europe, and suspected that a deal would be in France’s interest insofar as it could put Louisiana permanently beyond the reach of the British.
But France knew that Jefferson was under extreme pressure to resolve the problem of New Orleans.
France had ordered authorities in New Orleans to block American goods from passing down the Mississippi, bringing half of America’s trade to a halt.
Residents of western states called for war and threatened secession if Washington failed to act.
A Senate resolution demanding an immediate United States attack on New Orleans failed narrowly.
Then as now, there were influential people who were extremely skeptical about the possibility of a diplomatic solution.
Its acquisition is of immense importance to France, and has long been an object of her extreme solicitude.
But Hamilton was far from the only influential American who was pessimistic about the possibility of a diplomatic solution.
But despite his pessimism, Jefferson pressed for a diplomatic solution, because he believed the alternative was a war with France for New Orleans that would take seven years and cost over a hundred thousand lives.
But, as Stanton recounts, while publicly President Kennedy struck the pose of standing firm, in his private diplomacy with Premier Khrushchev and the Soviet Union, Kennedy was determined to create and maintain a realistic path for the Soviet Union to stand down from the confrontation without ""defeat"" or humiliation.
To avoid war, in exchange for the removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba, President Kennedy was ready to agree to a United States commitment not to invade Cuba – a commitment that all subsequent United States presidents honored – and to remove United States missiles from Turkey.
When the Soviet ship Bucharest neared the United States quarantine line on October 25, 1962, President Kennedy decided to let the ship pass.
President Kennedy carefully avoided turning the outcome into a public humiliation for the Soviet Union.
During the 2008 presidential campaign, Barack Obama was often compared to President Kennedy.
