It was not until 1963 that the ostentatious nature of that defiance finally overrode United States intelligence doubts.
The strength of the cognitive bias existing within the United States intelligence community was such that, when not dismissed outright, these Romanian outreach efforts continued to be assimilated into current interpretational paradigms, making Washington very slow to respond.These biases were intentionally exploited – and reinforced – by targeted Soviet disinformation.
For example, within two months of Gheorghiu-Dej’s extraordinary approach to Minister Thayer, the United States legation in Bucharest received intelligence that the entire Romanian approach was part of an elaborate Soviet plan to subvert the West, with Bucharest acting as Moscow’s Trojan horse.
Evaluating the information on Romania’s role in the Soviet conspiracy to undermine the West as an intelligence “coup,” Thayer advised Washington not to respond to Bucharest’s outreach by concluding any economic arrangements with it during the rest of his tenure.In consequence, Romanian actions were regularly discounted in United States intelligence assessments by questioning their motivation and intent.
For example, a United States National Intelligence Estimate of February 1958 acknowledged that:Since the Hungarian revolt, the Romanian regime has in some ways gone farther than the other orthodox satellites in the general direction of post-Stalin reform.
Further, Romania’s relations with Yugoslavia have consistently been better than those of other orthodox satellites and it has renewed its pre-Hungary campaign to improve relations with the US.Despite this, the same Estimate then continued by asserting that:These developments have prompted some optimistic Yugoslav and Polish observers to suggest that Rumania is gradually attempting on its own initiative to move toward autonomy.
Crawford, as one of the United States government’s top experts on the communist world at the time of his appointment to the United States Legation in Bucharest, was thus uniquely qualified to judge Romanian developments within the Bloc-wide context.Describing the impact of cognitive biases formed at the end of World War II and during the Stalinist period, Crawford noted that the greatest obstacles to US-Romanian communication and cooperation arose from the United States side rather than from the Romanians.
As Crawford explained:It’s awfully easy back in the Department to recall the situation in a country as it was when you were there, and especially in the case of a Communist country where things usually move very slowly, and are unlikely to change much.
As of October 1962, however, Soviet crews and equipment were still responsible for transporting Romanian leaders during international excursions.This created a serious problem when Soviet authorities requested approval on 21 October 1962 for the party to overfly Chinese territory from India in order to briefly visit Moscow on their return a day later.
Gheorghiu-Dej took the opportunity to castigate Khrushchev indirectly by pretending to continue to believe earlier Soviet negations and characterizing such international media allegations of missile deployments in Cuba as completely crazy.
Khrushchev admitted in further attempts to excuse his failure to notify Bucharest that he had told Ulbricht, Gomułka, Novotny and Husak beforehand Along with the conviction with which the Romanian delegation left Moscow on 24 October 1962 – that Khrushchev was trying to kill them and that he was provoking a war into which Romania would be drawn unawares, and possibly a nuclear one at that – Bucharest had two very major problems.
Likewise, Prime Minister Ion Gheorghe Mauer explained to Romanian party activists that the Soviet missiles were placed in Cuba without Romania’s knowledge while the Soviet command of the Warsaw Pact had ordered the Romanian Armed Forces “placed in a state of alert”:There is an article 3 in the Warsaw Treaty text binding all signatory countries to mutual consultation regarding important international political issues.
At least, we were not.As United States Ambassador Crawford later recalled, in expressing the Romanian perspective Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej used the illustration of “a contest between two big bulls on which they hadn’t been consulted and in which they had no desire to become involved”:In our subsequent discussions with high Romanian officials it became clearer than ever that they had not been taken into the confidence of the Russians nor been given any inkling of their plans to install missiles in Cuba.
Confirmation of this came a few hours after the Bucharest was allowed to pass through the quarantine line, when it was followed by the East German passenger liner Völker Freundschaft , carrying East German students and Czechoslovak technicians.Further confirmation, at least in Romanian leadership opinion, was provided in the persistent mention of the Soviet tanker Bucharest by name on Romanian-language Radio Moscow broadcasts during the 25th and 26th of October.
Romania was in fact the only Soviet ally with a blue water navy that had not been informed of the missile deployments before they became public.While it does not appear that Washington was ever misled into associating Romania with the Soviet tanker despite its name, the Bucharest did indeed come close to becoming the first test of the blockade and the center of the first intentional US-Soviet shooting incident in the Cold War.
Clearly, the obligatory consultations stipulated in the Warsaw Pact had proven themselves insufficient.
Up to that point Bucharest had been battling Soviet efforts to give the Pact a supra-state character or to expand it from a purely defensive alliance against military aggression in Europe into an instrument of Soviet power projection.Thus, Romania was responsible for blocking Mongolia’s admission into the alliance – sponsored by the USSR – in July 1963.
Explicitly referring to the precedent set in the North Atlantic alliance, Bucharest advocated a “two-key arrangement” of the sort that NATO employed, whereby United States nuclear weapons deployed on the territory of another NATO member could not be fired without their approval, as part of this reform.
First announced by Prime Minister Maurer in the journal of the socialist community in November 1963, it was reaffirmed in what has become known as Romania’s “declaration of independence” in April 1964.
As Podgorny underscored in their 11 July 1964 session:Abnormal phenomena began appearing in Romania even from the end of 1962.
Romania did not approve of the Soviet missile deployments; noted that Romania would only participate in defense operations, and specified that it would carefully consider the nature of the call for assistance by fellow alliance members before sending its troops outside of Romanian territory; stressed that the Romanian Armed Forces were fully under national control, giving several specific details on how this was guaranteed; and explicitly noted that Romania did not and would not ever host nuclear missiles on its territory, whether from the Soviet Union or the United States.
Given resistance elsewhere in the State Department and especially in the United States intelligence community, this stance was neither universally shared nor uncontroversial.
Preoteasa was in Moscow’s bad graces for promising International Red Cross access to former Hungarian leader Imre Nagy while he was being held under Soviet guard in Romania after the 1956 revolt.
The conference brought together members of Romania’s UN delegation at the time of the crisis ; diplomats working at the Romanian Foreign Ministry at the time; and members of the entourage that accompanied Gheorghiu-Dej to Indonesia, Burma, India, and then to Moscow, before returning to Romania.
For an inside description of some of these efforts see Paul Niculescu-Mizil, România şi Războiul Americano-vietnamez , Bucharest, Editura Roza Vânturilor, 2008.
In contrast, Romania’s objections were circulated beforehand and the Romanian delegation also raised its pointed questions during the discussion.
It certainly made no impact on CIA or community-wide intelligence analyses, which presumed from 1963 until 1990 that Romania would participate in a Soviet offensive against the West.
Through an award winning Digital Archive, the Project allows scholars, journalists, students, and the interested public to reassess the Cold War and its many contemporary legacies.
By Federico Pachetti on February 21, 2022Blog postCold WarNo, Not Only Nixon Could Go to ChinaBy Pete Millwood on February 21, 2022One Woodrow Wilson Plaza1300 Pennsylvania Ave.
