Russians are discovered installing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba when an American U-2 RECON spy plane returns with intelligence photos catching Khrushchev red-handed.
Khrushchev categorically denied it until Adlai Stevenson, an American statesman, showed the photos to the United Nations.
This angered Khrushchev to the point that he took his shoe off and pounded on the table in an effort to gain attention.
He also imposed a naval blockade on Cuba to prevent further Soviet shipments of offensive military weapons from arriving there.
The stand-off lasted for a day or two after the United States blockade against Cuba.
He recalls lots of flying time in the C-47 Gooney Bird taking Army VIP's down to Key West, Florida.
Nike missiles were installed in preparation to shoot down any Russian missiles should they appear over the horizon.
Most of his work that he did while stationed there is still classified.
While Army brats wore dog tags in case the world went up in smoke and we needed some identification, a couple of Navy brats living across the street, twins Kevin and Ken, disappeared overnight.
I asked at the bus stop that morning and was told their family were given eight hours notice to bug out.
A U-2 is almost shot down over Russia when it strays into Soviet airspace. Sunday, October 28 Soviets agree to move missiles out of Cuba if the United States makes a public statement not to invade Cuba.
One of Kennedy's primary advantages over the Soviet Union was that he was in possession of a series of reports from a spy named Col.
Oleg Penkovskiy, who had 'defected' to the CIA and remained in Moscow to provide information.
Penkovskiy's reports had, for several months, indicated unequivocally that the Soviets were, in fact, nowhere near as advanced in their missile technology and deployment as American analysts and policy makers had thought them to be.
While this alone would not necessarily have doomed him, he had been for some time bolstering the Soviet position through brash assertions of nonexistent forces.
The exposure of the Soviet Union's weak hand, as evidenced in its withdrawal from no more than an achievement of parity, nailed some of the final brads into Nikita's political coffin.
Still, it was right and proper for Kennedy to oppose the Soviet maneuver.
To fail to do so would have indicated either that the United States hadn't the political will to back its claims, and/or that the Monroe Doctrine had no weight.
Forcing either a diplomatic solution or a ground mop-up operation to ensure they had all been destroyed. Still not totally safe, as the Soviets had also installed SAM sites and MiG fighter jets to protect the missiles A blockade of the island to prevent more weapons from coming in and attempting to negotiate with the Soviets about removing the missiles.
Pros Puts the least amount of lives at risk Could be undertaken with relative speed The United States looks like the good guy Cons Relies on convincing the Soviets to pull out the missiles and might lead to extending the crisis even longer. Giving major concessions might be seen as a victory for the Soviets. Seeking a diplomatic solution might be seen as a sign of weakness. Possibility of a major incident, such as a ship full of medicine tries to run the blockade and then is sunk by United States forces, killing many innocents on board.
It was not as though President Kennedy could just ignore the missiles in Cuba, not only were they a danger to the people of the United States, but the mere existence of a crisis was also a threat to the people of Berlin.
The city of Berlin lay inside Soviet-controlled territory and construction of the Berlin wall had begun one year earlier, splitting the city in half.
The plight of the people of Berlin was always close to the minds of the people in the Kennedy administration, especially since they could all recall the Berlin blockade that had taken place only 12 years earlier.
Kennedy himself had also written a book in 1940 entitled Why England Slept about the failure of appeasement the need for military response against totalitarian regimes.
Many of Kennedy’s advisors felt that the movements in Cuba were just a precursor or a feint for a larger operation.
If the Americans ignored the missiles or showed any weakness, then Khrushchev would see this as an opening to attack Berlin.
If the Americans staged an assault on Cuba that destroyed Russian missiles and killed Russian missile crews, then Khrushchev could use that as a pretense to attack Berlin.
That’s what it would seem to me.McNamara: We have United States troops there.
Guess you have to.Secretary of State Dean Rusk: You’d have to start at least with tactical nuclear weapons if he tried to attack Berlin.
It must be made clear the several different ways that the Crisis could have led to a major nuclear exchange.
Not only was there the Berlin scenario, where any sort of military attack on Berlin would have triggered an immediate nuclear response, but also the possible response by the Russian missile teams in Cuba once they realize they’re under attack.
Choosing to call it a “quarantine”, all ships attempting to enter Cuba were stopped and searched by the American military.
Negotiations were opened with the Soviets with the implicit threat that if they did not proceed smoothly, air strikes would commence to take out the missiles.
A SAM site also shot down an American U-2 reconnaissance plane over Cuba, only adding to the tension.
The Soviets initially demanded that the United States remove nuclear missile installations that had been placed in Turkey in the 1950s.
After several tense days of negotiation the Soviets officially agreed to dismantle the missiles under the watch of United Nations weapons inspectors, while asking only that the United States agreed to never again invade Cuba.
Unofficially, the United States had also agreed to pull their Jupiter missiles out of Turkey, but one of the stipulations of this decision was that it was never to be broadcast.
The Jupiter missiles were dismantled in April 1963, under the guise of the United States upgrading their European arsenal.
At the same time, an American Polaris missile submarine took up residence in the Mediterranean.
When faced with real evidence of weapons of mass destruction, the American President chose not a military solution that would have caused the deaths of thousands of people and mired the United States in a difficult occupation of another country, but instead ended the situation peacefully.
In 1962 the world came to the brink of nuclear war, as the United States found out that the Soviet Union had emplaced nuclear weapons in Cuba.
If launched, the missiles could have annihilated several major American cities.
The Kennedy administration put Cuba under blockade, and contemplated an invasion.
The crisis was ended when the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles on the condition that the United States pledge not to invade Cuba and remove their Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
The purpose of this essay is first to analyse the reasons for the Soviet Union sending the missiles to Cuba and second to assess how successful Khrushchev was in attaining his goals.
I shall argue that the two major reasons for the Soviet action was to redress the imbalance in nuclear capability between the Soviet Union and the United States and to protect Cuba from American invasion.
I adopt the position that Khrushchev failed in meeting his first objective, but was successful in the second.
The missile crisis was also a success for the Soviet Union in an unexpected way the Soviet Union's position as the other superpower was acknowledged even though it was militarily inferior to the United States.
The United States had recently learned that the Soviet Union's supposed superiority in nuclear weapons was a myth.
The Soviet Union would have considerable difficulty in reaching parity.
Positioning missiles in Cuba presented the Soviet Union just such an alternative.
Taubman points to Khrushchev's view on nuclear deterrence he thought the Soviet Union only needed a few nuclear weapons to deter the Americans.
The official Soviet reason for positioning missiles in Cuba was the protection of Cuba.
The United States had attempted to topple the Castro regime in the Bay of Pigs incident, and the Soviet Union had every reason to believe that the United States would invade again.
The United States conducted a large military exercise in the Caribbean in the autumn of 1962, and Congressmen called for an invasion.
Cuba was the only socialist country in the Western Hemisphere, and its survival was important for Soviet prestige.
A successful defence of Cuba could project a powerful image of the Soviet Union to other countries in Latin America , perhaps suggesting that the United States could no longer enforce the Monroe Doctrine.
The Soviet Union needed other countries to think it and communism were making advances; a successful communist revolution in America's backyard could surely be used to back this up.
Allison criticizes this explanation by arguing that if the Soviet Union feared an invasion of Cuba, surely conventional military forces would have been at least as good a deterrent as nuclear weapons, comparing such a possibility to the presence of American troops in Berlin.
However, surely the American capability to launch nuclear attacks was at least as big a deterrent on the Soviet Union as American troops in Europe; and similarly the Soviet capability to annihilate American cities would have been a powerful deterrent against an American invasion of Cuba.
Even if Soviet troops in Cuba might discourage the United States from invading, nuclear missiles in Cuba offered a much stronger guarantee of this.
These factors surely contributed to Khrushchev's willingness to take the huge risks involved in sending missiles to Cuba.
If, as I have argued, a major reason for Khrushchev to decide to send nuclear weapons to Cuba was to redress the strategic imbalance between the Soviet Union and the United States, the Cuban missile crisis was a failure for him.
His relations with the military were already strained, and these were exacerbated by the events in Cuba.
If one accepts the defence of Cuba as a reason for the Soviet Union sending missiles to the country, then the Soviet Union was successful in this respect.
Of course, as Gaddis points out, Khrushchev did not send the missiles to Cuba only to bring them back a few weeks later ; the Soviet Union achieved its goal but not in the way it had envisioned.
In a curious respect the missile crisis can be seen as successful from the Soviet perspective in a way the Soviet Union did not intend.
Having come to the brink of nuclear war and mutual destruction, both the United States and the Soviet Union sought detente.
The ""hot line"" set up between the White House and the Kremlin can be seen as a mutual acceptance of both countries' special status.
The Soviet Union achieved diplomatic and political parity with the United States, even though it clearly lacked the military capability to back this up.
It should be pointed out that this did not mean that Khrushchev had achieved his goal regarding the strategic imbalance.
His objective was to change the military situation to enhance the Soviet Union's ability to launch nuclear attacks against the United States.
What happened was that the diplomatic advantage was gained, but the United States retained a much greater capacity to attack the Soviet Union than vice versa.
Khrushchev's decision to send missiles to Cuba was made in the context of the ""old"" Cold War, but it ended up changing this context, not enhancing the Soviet Union's position in the old conflict.
Conclusion The conventional perception of the Cuban missile crisis as a total failure for the Soviet Union and a total success for the United States is, I think, incorrect.
The successes the Soviet Union did have came about in ways that were not anticipated.
In a broad strategic sense the outcome of the crisis was a success for the Soviet Union.
America in the Age of Soviet Power, 1945-1991 Gaddis, John Lewis; 1990.
It gains this status by being the climax of the period in human history when the threat of the complete annihilation of humanity was an everyday reality.
The intrinstic importance and profundity of this event seems belied by descriptions of the banal bureaucratic and tactical happenings which constituted it.
This is until you realize that its profundity lies entirely in the fact such processes could, if they'd gone wrong, have obliterated mankind.
It all began in May 1962, when Nikita Khrushchev took the decision to send medium-range ballistic missiles to Cuba.
It's not possible to entirely know his objectives, but we make pretty accurate guesses.
The USSR still couldn't carry out a debilitating first strike, and its strike capacity wasn't massively increased by the move.
If America could station missiles in Turkey, so the Soviet logic went, then the USSR had a right to station missiles in Cuba.
This option was even more attractive because it would help Cuba defend itself.
The Castro regime held a special place in the heart of many Bolsheviks.
It was the only country on the planet to have gone Communist and enter the Soviet bloc without the imposition of the Red Army.
Only 90 miles from the coast of Florida, the Cuban regime was a sure signal to the Soviets that nowhere in the world was safe for capitalism any longer.
They were especially keen that the flower of the revolution in Cuba not be squashed by the Americans, who had attempted to overthrow the Castro regime at the Bay of Pigs.
The Soviet military build-up in Cuba was not limited to strategic weapons.
Clearly this couldn't proceed unnoticed, and even before the 15 October discovery of the MRBM launch sites the United States knew something was afoot.
Republicans in Congress angrily denounced Kennedy's acquiesence in the Soviet military build-up, and JFK continued to deny the magnitude of the deployment.
Indeed, its full scale would not be known until the opening of Soviet archives in the 1980s.
This is lucky, because had the scale been known then the crisis would undoubtedly have been more serious the withdrawal of the tactical nukes, for example, would be almost impossible to verify.
The Soviet infiltration operation had been carried out with honed skill, as befitted a military that had now spent over fifteen years creeping where it was not wanted.
However, it was nigh on impossible to hide the missile bases from U-2 RECON planes.
Combining pictures taken with base construction manuals leaked by Colonel Oleg Penkovsky, America's premier Cold War spy, a positive identification could be made of the MRBM sites only hours after the photographs were taken.
They also allowed the Americans to see that the bases were not yet operational, giving crucial time to act.
This was the first miracle of the crisis, meaning that rather than leaping straight to offensive action the administration sat down and considered its options.
The strategy eventually decided upon was a blockade of Cuba, to which the Soviets responded with nothing more than a political offensive by denouncing it in their propaganda.
As the blockade had the approval of the Organization of American States, Soviet denunciation proved ineffective.
This blockade went into effect on 22 October, and many Soviet ships immediately turned back or changed course.
The Russians were not keen on the thought of the Americans capturing a ship with their latest military equipment onboard, and nor were they willing to escalate the incident by commencing military action especially when the MRBM bases were not operational.
He had taken this risk partly to appease those in his inner circle who believed he was too soft on the West.
This meant if he was going to back down he'd need an excuse, or he risked being overthrown by hard-liners.
Some members of the Soviet Presidium had fallen for their propaganda in believing the USA was planning a decisive and cataclysmic confrontation with the Communist world and they wished to steal a march by striking first.
Khrushchev, by a process largely closed to us, managed to overrule those who were willing to risk local or general war over Cuba.
He was helped by faulty intelligence he received suggesting the United States was planning to invade Cuba on the night of 26 October.
This threw the reality of the situation into sharp focus for the Soviet side, as an invasion of Cuba was bound to result in general war.
At this point he ordered a stand down and started pushing hard for a diplomtaic solution.
It seems that the local commander who ordered the shooting down of the U-2 RECON on 27 October had sour grapes, but luckily this didn't lead to any further escalation.
Khrushchev's demands were telling first, a pledge by the United States not to invade Cuba and secondly, the withdrawal of nuclear missiles from Turkey.
In fact, the Soviets had gained a small quid pro quo, but that this outcome was seen as unfavourable was shown by Khrushchev's overthrow shortly afterward.
It's often stated that Kennedy and Khrushchev held the fate of the world in their hands, but anyone who has seen Dr.
The crisis put power in the hands of multiple men, and fate herself, to bring about nuclear war.
Before the crisis, the CIA was running a program called Operation Mongoose designed to destabilize the Cuban regime by aiding exiles with an axe to grind.
On 7 October one such group of exiles decided, entirely on its own authority, to blow up a factory.
Luck played a decisive role in this encounter, which made the introduction of those red telephones afterward even more comforting.
Both powers had come so close to the nightmare of nuclear holocaust that they blinked, woke up as if from sleepwalking, and pondered how they'd got in such a state.
We wouldn't be here today if this defining moment in the history of the world had gone even slightly wrong.
