Remembering the Thirteenth Day Arms and influence The political uses of violence, for good or bad.
Counterterrorism is easier, part III Exploding myths A terrorist nuclear attack is inevitable.
Captured terrorists have information that could help stop an imminent attack.
Doing something and having the right values are the measures of leadership.
The Constitution doesn't fit the new reality of war against terrorists.
We are fighting a single insurgency in Iraq that's part of the global terrorist network.
Since Americans now live in a time when we are intensely focused on our current wars, it's worth resurrecting the tradition of marking past conflicts with a day of remembrance.
Generic holidays, like Memorial Day and Veterans Day, serve their own, somewhat different function, reminding us of the sacrifices that the men and women in our armed forces have made on our behalf.
A national day of remembrance for a particular conflict would remind us of the lessons of a past war.
There is no better way to ensure that the blood and treasure spent in these struggles will benefit more than a single generation.
I therefore propose a day of remembrance for the Cold War, the most recent of our past conflicts.
It also more closely resembles our current antagonisms than the massive clashes across entire continents that characterize the two World Wars and the American Civil War.
If there's a lesson to be learned from past wars, we should look back on those that most resemble our current generation of conflict.
The Soviet Union smuggled intermediate-range ballistic missiles , medium-range ballistic missiles , IL-28 bombers, MiG fighters, and anti-aircraft batteries into Cuba, under the noses of the United States military and intelligence services.
In September, the United States Intelligence Board submitted a report that noted a number of Soviet ships entering and leaving Cuban ports, but it missed the clues that they were carrying nuclear weapons.
A few weeks later, the intelligence community pieced together a more accurate picture of what was happening from aerial photographs, signal intercepts, and other sources.
Revolutionary Cuba had gone from an annoying mosquito close to America's shores to a deadly threat.
The intelligence community corrected a grievous error, but no witch hunt resulted from their failure.
The missile deployments had occurred under such secrecy that even the Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, did not know about them until United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk told him an hour before Kennedy told the world of their existence.
Once it learned the awful truth, the Kennedy Administration immediately took action.
The United States Navy set up a blockade around Cuba, threatening to sink the Soviet cargo ships, en route from the USSR, loaded with further missiles.
American missile silos, bombers, and submarines were put on high alert.
A tense series of threats and counter-threats began between the White House and the Kremlin.
Decades later, at a conference where Soviet and American leaders in the Crisis exchanged notes, there was mutual agreement that the risk was higher than any other time during the Cold War—as high a probability as one out of three.
As simultaneously determined and fearful as the two adversaries were, the top decision-makers in both governments enforced caution and level-headedness among their own ranks.
The White House extended that principle to the American public, preferring to announce the Soviet missiles in Cuba in the most sober fashion possible.
With only minutes from the launch of a nuclear missile to its detonation over a target, the time in which to order a response to a presumed attack was dangerously compressed.
The Strategic Air Command immediately dispersed long-range bombers and fighter-interceptors from their normal bases, but it failed to inform air defense units—also on high alert—about these flight plans.
It more than quintupled the number of B-52s kept airborne, but in order to do so may have flown some with nuclear weapons whose arming circuitry had not yet been certified as safe.
Minuteman missile crews, under pressure to bring these new silo-based ICBMs on line as quickly as possible, bypassed normal safety procedures, in effect ""hot wiring"" their weapons in ways that risked unauthorized launches.
Reports of saboteurs attempting to penetrate an air force facility near Duluth set of an aircraft launch alarm at another base in Minnesota where nuclear-equipped F-106s scrambled, only to be stopped from taking off at the last minute when the Duluth infiltrators turned out to have been a lone inquisitive bear.
Another such measure was Kennedy's decision to move the naval blockade closer to Cuba.
This redeployment put American warships within range of enemy aircraft in Cuba, but it also gave the Soviets more time to reconsider turning back their cargo vessels before they reached the American cordon.
Eventually, the Soviets backed down, agreeing to remove the missiles from Cuba, under humiliating United States supervision.
As is usually the case, the first news reports were wrong—or, at least, missing important pieces of the story.
To borrow Gaddis' phrase, we now know that the Soviets were far weaker in a strategic nuclear conflict than the general public at the time realized.
Although Kennedy was elected on the platform of a presumed ""missile gap,"" with American nuclear forces weaker than the Soviet arsenal, the reverse was actually true.
In fact, one of the Soviet motives for deploying the missiles in Cuba was to offset this nuclear imbalance.
While the real missile gap might reinforce the conclusion that the Soviets ""blinked,"" that conclusion would be largely wrong.
In fact, Kennedy made concessions to Khrushchev, such as the removal of American Jupiter missiles that had been recently deployed in Turkey.
Kennedy worked hard behind the scenes, often against his more hawkish advisors, to ensure that the Soviets had a way of retreating with at least some of its dignity and interests intact.
Equally important was the way in which the Kennedy Administration handled an explosive situation, with the worst calamity in human history looming as a real possibility.
Decisiveness and flexibility, courage and caution, open-mindedness and skepticism, coercion and compromise—rather than seeing these as contradictions, we should understand them as the capabilities we want in our leaders and government, at any time, but especially during a crisis.
When the stakes are high—and they were arguably higher in 1962 than any time in human history—we need our leaders to be have whichever among these skills the moment requires.
Had Kennedy and his closest advisors lacked even one of these skills, the events of October 1962 might have turned out far worse.
It is possible to handle the threat of nuclear weapons without exaggerating that threat.
Those who use the threat of violence, from a suicide bomber to the head of a nuclear-armed government, cannot be defeated unless the target of their attacks refuses to be frightened by them.
During times of national crisis, leaders and their subordinates need to be constantly checking each other's assumptions and information.
Too many great historical failures to ignore were the tragic result of the statement, It must be so, because we want it to be so.
The threat or use of force is only justified if it produces the desired outcome.
Acting tough is a means, not an end, even when dealing with our most mortal enemies.
If you agree with my argument for marking October 28th as an important anniversary, I urge you to make the case in other online forums, conversations about current affairs, letters to newspapers, or wherever else may be appropriate.
