Khrushchev believed that the United States government would do nothing When Intelligence Made a Difference about the deployment if it did not recognize what was happening until the missiles were in Cuba and on — Cold War — combat ready status.
To do that, the Soviet military created an elaborate deception program to conceal the missile deployment.
The Deception A robust deception plan must include four eleSoviet Deception ments.
And, there must also be denial, deceit, and misdirection, to lead the opponent away from the full or actual truth by Robert M Clark toward a false picture (in deception terminology, the “story”) of what is happening.
The Cuban deception I n 1960, Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev was had all four elements. facing a serious threat that had to be dealt with.
During 1958 and 1959, the United States had deployed its Jupiter MRBMs in Turkey and Italy, posing a strategic Truth The story for the missile deployment was that the Soviet shipments to Cuba contained only nonmilitary cargo.
Their ICBMs capable of reaching the United States were still in biles, tractors, and harvesters were placed on the top development.
And though the Soviets had their own decks so that imagery of the ships would convey the supply of MRBMs, those posed no threat to the United States if impression that they had only agricultural equipment based in the USSR.1 and consumer goods aboard.
VOANews.com regularly reported that the Soviet Union was supplying Cuba with machine tools, wheat, agricultural machinery and fertilizer.
For IMINT denial, military cargo was loaded onto the ships under cover of darkness.
Upon reaching Cuba, the concealed weaponry was unloaded only at night Cuba, however, offered an attractive option for and moved directly a fait accompli.
If the Soviets could somehow place to the deployment bases along back roads, again their nuclear-equipped SS-4 and SS-5 missiles in Cuba, during darkness. they could counter the United States strategic edge.
A Medium Range Ballistic Missile is defined as having a range of from 1,000 to 3.000 kilometers ; an Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile of 3,000 to 5,000 kilometers SS-5 a range of 3,200 to 3,700 kilometers.
Journal of United States Intelligence Studies Page 67 Deceit It is standard practice, of course, to attempt to deceive the opponent.
There were some flaws, their own troops and even senior military leaders and in the end the effort unraveled. who might be HUMINT targets.
The operation was In 1961, COMINT analysts at the United States National designed to appear to be a military exercise in northern Security Agency began to see a troubling trend.
The cargo manifests were for the Cuban assignment were informed that an blank, causing suspicion that the shipments could be exercise would be held in a cold region and outfitted carrying cargo of military significance.
Missile experts assigned appeared to be heading for Cuba after reporting to the project were told that they would be working another destination and declaring less cargo than on ballistic missiles in the Soviet arctic test range at the ships could carry.
Officers and missile specialists travintercepts indicated that the Cubans were unloading eled to Cuba as irrigation and agricultural specialists ships at night and taking unusual precautions to keep or machine operators.
In one communication, Cuban declarations when exiting the Black Sea and the Bosport authorities mentioned the arrival of tanks; in porus.
They altered the cargo records and declared others, Cubans discussed “highly unusual aircraft” tonnage well below what was being carried.
They often and radars. listed Conakry, Guinea, as their destination before During 1962, the pattern of suspect deliveries proceeding to Cuba. continued, and United States leadership became concerned.
If the military deliveries were purely for defensive During September, Soviet diplomats gave repeated purposes, that was a problem, but not one that called assurances to top United States officials (including President for military action; Cuba had the right to defend John Kennedy) that they had no intention of putting itself.
If offensive weapons were being delivered, that offensive weaponry in Cuba. was another matter entirely.
But the most • The freighter Poltava was observed enroute to innovative misdirection was one that few intelligence Cuba on September 15.
The Soviets leaked informato deliver ballistic missiles. tion about the deployment to mask it.
Other refugees had made simiidentified the crates; they were identical to lar claims in newspaper reporting.
Soviet intelligence ones used in shipping the fuselages of IL-28 saw an opportunity to misdirect by adding to that medium bombers. flood.
They funneled accurate details about the misThe discoveries prompted top United States leaders to order sile deployment through counterrevolutionary Cuban U-2 reconnaissance flights over Cuba.
The Soviets had a and DIA analysts did not regard the groups as credible; standard way of building a missile launch facility, and and in fact, those analysts dismissed the subsequent they kept that design intact in building the Cuban sites. stream of reports about missiles in Cuba – a few of On October 15, NPIC analysts received U-2 imagery of which were valid – as just being more of the same. a facility at San Cristobal, and immediately identified it as an SS-4 launch site.
NSA Center for Cryptologic History, “NSA and the Cuban Missile /vol46no1/article06.html.
The Inside Story of the Cuban MisPage 68 Intelligencer: Journal of United States Intelligence Studies Winter-Spring 2021 On October 22, President Kennedy announced a never deployed nuclear weapons outside their direct naval “quarantine” of Cuban ports to prevent further control, and United States analysts assessed that they would deliveries.
After several days of tense negotiations, the not do so by deploying nuclear warhead-equipped President and Premier Khrushchev agreed to a solution missiles in Cuba.
It detected the deception and identified The Cuban missile crisis is a notable exception.
It the deployment so that policymakers could act in nevertheless has occasionally been called an intellitime – that is, before the missiles could reach operagence failure.
After all, four times in the nine-month tional status. period leading up October 15, United States National Intelligence Estimates assessed that Soviet activities in Cuba were Robert M Clark is the author of several books on meant to deter an American attack there, not to estabintelligence.
Counterdeception lish an offensive base in Cuba. and Counterintelligence with William L Mitchell, CQ Press, 2019.
In the next issue of The Intelligencer, we’ll examine a later case where the opponents had better success with exceptionally well executed until its final stages.
CIA Director John McCone All statements of fact, opinion, or analysis expressed are those of the author and do not reflect the official positions or views later estimated that only six of them were accurate. of the Central Intelligence Agency or any other United States GovFaced with a mass of misleading raw intelligence, anaernment agency.
Before 1962, the Soviets had material has been reviewed by the CIA to prevent the disclosure of classified information. sile Crisis , 73.
Available as a thank you for donations are the new AFIO breathe-easy logo face masks These soft, form-fitting, washable, non-medical grade fabric face masks have a double-layer tight weave with wide behind-the-ear elastics to make long periods of wear comfortable.
The masks do not have a nose wire but are sculpted, shaped, and sewn to fit most users.
The all-cloth composition allows the masks to be washed or steam-disinfected without concern over metal wires.
For tax-deductible donations of $50 you will receive a receipt and our thank you gift of two of these newly-arrived face masks.
We wish all members and donors continued good health, safe social distancing, and warmly appreciate any support you are able to provide the association.
