Kennedy had just two weeks before these Soviet missiles were operational.
Kennedy Ladies and Gentlemen, President John F Kennedy requests your services.
He asks that you sit on the newly established Executive Committee of the National Security Council in order to provide advice and guidance on an emerging crisis.
The freedom, liberty and lives of millions of your fellow Americans and the SAFETY OF THE ENTIRE WORLD depend on your abilities.
Kennedy Our U2 spy-planes have photographed Soviet missile sites under construction in Fidel Castro’s communist Cuba, only 90 miles from the United States coast.
Kennedy Although we have photographic evidence showing Medium Range Ballistic Missile sites the soviets are denying that there are any offensive weapons on the island.
You have been selected to sit on this special committee because you are the best and brightest in the country.
I trust that you will weigh up ALL of the available options thoroughly and without prejudice in order to ensure that freedom and peace continue to reign in this country of ours.
Force the Soviets to remove the missiles from Cuba before they become operational.
Let Khrushchev and the Soviets think that they have won a victory in Cuba 4.
Be made to look like the aggressors in Cuba Complete the options form before leaving today’s meeting Advantage Disadvantage 1) Do nothing.
Thu 25th Oct 1962: Mon 22nd Oct 1962: Fri 26th Oct 1962: Tues 23rd Oct 1962: Sat 27th Oct 1962: Wed 24th Oct 1962: Sun 28th Oct 1962: The day before the What was the time on the worst day crisis, the clock was set of the crisis: at 11.53pm NEWSFLASH October 16th, 1962 U2 spy-planes have discovered more nuclear missile sites on Cuba.
NEWSFLASH October 24th, 1962 Most soviet ships en route to Cuba have slowed down or turned around One ship is continuing towards the blockade line.
Despite this the USSR denies their presence NEWSFLASH October 25th, 1962 Photographs show that the missile sites are still being constructed NEWSFLASH October 26th, 1962 The government has received this communication thought to be from Chairman Khrushchev.
We will send no more weapons to Cuba and those within Cuba will be withdrawn or destroyed.
NEWSFLASH October 27th, 1962 The government has received a second communication from Moscow thought to be from Chairman Khrushchev.
A direct communication line between Washington and Moscow was set up, this became known as the ‘hotline’ August 1963: Test Ban Treaty was signed by USA, Britain and USSR, all 3 countries agreed not to test nuclear weapons in outer space, underwater or in the atmosphere 1967: Outer Space Treaty signed – USA & USSR agreed that as the ‘Space Race’ developed, Space would not be used for military purposes, specifically putting nuclear weapons into orbit 1968: Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty was signed to stop the spread of nuclear weapons.
