The 50th anniversary of the crisis is about to be observed; that it continues to fascinate us, including those who have no memory of it, should come as no surprise.
But contrary to received wisdom, the confrontation did not end in resounding triumph for the United States when, on Oct., Premier Nikita Khrushchev caved and agreed to pull his missiles out of Cuba.
Instead, as Coleman demonstrates, “Khrushchev’s capitulation had not brought the finality to the crisis that many had hoped for.
Apparently the only people who knew about this system were his secretary, Evelyn Lincoln; “the Secret Service agents who installed and maintained the system”; aide Kenneth O’Donnell; and Robert Kennedy and his secretary.
John F Kennedy,” but the ones that Coleman uses in “The Fourteenth Day” were not released by the Kennedy library until early this year.
These are the voices of John and Robert Kennedy, Robert McNamara and Dean Rusk, and all the other members of “ExComm” as they charted the country’s way through and beyond one of the most dangerous moments in its history.
Precisely what inspired Khrushchev “to put Soviet nuclear missiles just ninety miles off the continental United States” is not known and probably never will be, but we do know that he had humiliated Kennedy at their summit meeting in Vienna in 1961.
Probably he felt he had the upper hand; probably he wanted to bolster the position of Fidel Castro in Cuba; probably he wanted “to retaliate for American-made NATO missiles deployed close to the borders of the Soviet Union” in Turkey.
Whatever the reasoning of this “mercurial and stubborn” man, the result was a challenge that Kennedy had no choice but to accept and that, on the whole, he handled coolly and imaginatively.
It was a benchmark he referred to repeatedly in the days following the crisis.
Whether the issue was American surveillance overflights, sending weapons inspectors to Cuba to conduct on-the-ground inspections, or having the Red Cross inspect Soviet ships leaving Cuba, it reverted to the same basic problem.
Thus the acting secretary general of the United Nations, U Thant, volunteered to go to Cuba and inspect the missile sites himself.
There also were problems involving the IL-28 planes that the Soviets had sent to Cuba; they were cumbersome aircraft that probably posed little actual risk to the mainland United States, but they had high symbolic value as evidence of the continuing Soviet presence in Cuba, and Kennedy knew that their removal was important to reassuring the American people that the threat had dissipated.
By late November these and other issues had been reduced to acceptable compromises, but as John McCone, director of the CIA, made plain, “the United States was always going to have a ‘missiles in Cuba’ problem,” in the sense that Soviet-Cuban relations were going to pose challenges to the United States, no matter what form they took.
The greatest problem Kennedy faced, though, was not in Cuba but in West Berlin, which, as an enclave in the middle of deeply hostile East Germany, posed innumerable complications for Kennedy and his somewhat unreliable European allies.
It was a central element in the shifts of the cold war in 1963 that culminated in early moves toward detente.
The neutralization of the Berlin problem was not the only development that made detente possible, but it was a crucial one.
