The series documents the facts and events that contributed to the formulation of policies and includes evidence of supporting and alternative views to the policy positions ultimately adopted.
The Historian of the Department of State is charged with the responsibility for the preparation of the Foreign Relations series.
The staff of the Office of the Historian, Bureau of Public Affairs, plans, researches, compiles, and edits the volumes in the series.
Official regulations codifying specific standards for the selection and editing of documents for the series were first promulgated by Secretary of State Frank B Kellogg on March 26, 1925.
These regulations, with minor modifications, guided the series through 1991.
The statute requires that the Foreign Relations series be a thorough, accurate, and reliable record of major United States foreign policy decisions and significant United States diplomatic activity.
The statute also requires that the Foreign Relations series be published not more than 30 years after the events recorded.
The editors are convinced that this volume, which was compiled in 1990-1991, meets all regulatory, statutory, and scholarly standards of selection and editing.
Structure and Scope of the Foreign Relations Series This volume is part of a subseries of volumes of the Foreign Relations series that documents the most important issues in the foreign policy of the 3 years of the administration of John F Kennedy.
The subseries presents in 25 print volumes and 5 microfiche supplements a documentary record of major foreign policy decisions and actions of President Kennedy's administration.
This volume presents the documentary record of the Cuban missile crisis and its aftermath as well as United States policy toward Cuba during the period October 1962 to December 1963.
Volume X, Cuba, 1961-1962, covers the period January 1961 through September 1962 and includes documentation on the Bay of Pigs incident and United States courses of action in response to the unsuccessful invasion.
A separate microfiche supplement will contain additional documentation on the crisis and United States policy toward Cuba for the period 1961-1963 regarded by the editors as significant but not warranting inclusion in this printed volume or Volume X The microfiche publication will also include documentation supplementing Volume XII, American Republics.
Each editor, in consultation with the General Editor and other senior editors, determines the particular issues and topics to be documented either in detail, in brief, or in summary.
Some general decisions are also made regarding issues for which space does not exist in the volume but which will be included in a microfiche supplement.
The following general selection criteria are used in preparing volumes in the Foreign Relations series.
Individual compiler-editors vary these criteria in accordance with the particular issues and the available documentation.
In selecting documentation for publication, the editors gave priority to unpublished classified records, rather than previously published records, which are accounted for in appropriate bibliographical notes.
Major foreign affairs commitments made on behalf of the United States to other governments, including those that define or identify the principal foreign affairs interests of the United States; 2.
Major foreign affairs issues, commitments, negotiations, and activities, whether or not major decisions were made, and including dissenting or alternative opinions to the process ultimately adopted; 3.
The decisions, discussions, actions, and considerations of the President, as the official constitutionally responsible for the direction of foreign policy; 4.
The discussions and actions of the National Security Council, the Cabinet, and special Presidential policy groups, including the policy options brought before these bodies or their individual members; 5.
The policy options adopted by or considered by the Secretary of State and the most important actions taken to implement Presidential decisions or policies; 6.
Diplomatic negotiations and conferences, official correspondence, and other exchanges between United States representatives and those of other governments that demonstrate the main lines of policy implementation on major issues; 7.
Important elements of information that attended Presidential decisions and policy recommendations of the Secretary of State; 8.
Major foreign affairs decisions, negotiations, and commitments undertaken on behalf of the United States by government officials and representatives in other agencies in the foreign affairs community or other branches of government made without the involvement of the White House or the Department of State; 9.
The main policy lines of intelligence activities if they constituted major aspects of United States foreign policy toward a nation or region or if they provided key information in the formulation of major United States policies, including relevant National Intelligence Estimates and Special National Intelligence Estimates as may be declassified; 10.
The role of the Congress in the preparation and execution of particular foreign policies or foreign affairs actions; 11.
The main policy lines of United States military and economic assistance as well as other types of assistance; 13.
The political-military recommendations, decisions, and activities of the military establishment and major regional military commands as they bear upon the formulation or execution of major United States foreign policies; 14.
Diplomatic appointments that reflect major policies or affect policy changes.
Focus of Research and Principles of Selection for Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, Volume XI The original research and compilation of this volume was completed in 1992, and additional documents were added after access agreements permitting further research were concluded with various agencies.
The editors of the volume focused much of their selection on documenting the most serious United States -Soviet confrontation of the Cold War, the Cuban missile crisis and its aftermath.
The editors included the major policy option papers that Kennedy and his advisers were examining as part of these discussions.
Only a small fraction of the extensive intelligence material relating to the crisis was included; most of the important intelligence documentation is in the microfiche supplement with footnote and editorial references in the print volume.
Much of the documentation printed in this volume relates to discussions with key Soviet officials through a variety of channels ranging from Kennedy-Khrushchev letters to communications through an American newsman with a Soviet official.
Because of space constraints, the editors have included only the most important examples of the frequent and detailed consultation with key allies regarding the crisis.
Less well-known in published works was the second dangerous crisis over the removal of Soviet IL-28 bombers from Cuba, which the United States insisted were ""offensive weapons"" and thus subject to the October 28 agreement.
The editors have given full attention to this second crisis using the same methodology used for the missile crisis.
The editors gave special emphasis to the negotiations regarding the removal of Soviet bombers from Cuba and the establishment of procedures for the verification of Soviet compliance not only because they consider them an important if unsuccessful epilogue to the crisis, but also because the records of these talks were not available until they were declassified for this volume.
In the concluding portion of the volume documenting United States policy in 1963, the editors focused on United States concern with Cuban President Fidel Castro.
They also included documentation on a highly secret preliminary effort to explore a possible rapprochement with Castro through intermediaries at the United Nations, as part of the negotiations for the return of the prisoners captured in the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961.
Only a representative amount of finished intelligence on the viability, strength, and weakness of the Castro regime has been selected for publication here or in the microfiche supplement.
United States efforts to prevent Cuban subversion in the rest of Latin America are documented in Volume XII, American Republics, released in July 1996.
Editorial Methodology The documents are presented chronologically according to Washington time or, in the case of conferences, in the order of individual meetings.
Memoranda of conversation are placed according to the time and date of the conversation, rather than the date the memorandum was drafted.
Editorial treatment of the documents published in the Foreign Relations series follows Office style guidelines, supplemented by guidance from the General Editor and the chief technical editor.
The source text is reproduced as exactly as possible, including marginalia or other notations, which are described in the footnotes.
Texts are transcribed and printed according to accepted conventions for the publication of historical documents in the limitations of modern typography.
A heading has been supplied by the editors for each document included in the volume.
Spelling, capitalization, and punctuation are retained as found in the source text, except that obvious typographical errors are silently corrected.
Abbreviations and contractions are preserved as found in the source text, and a list of abbreviations is included in the front matter of each volume.
The amount of material not declassified has been noted by indicating the number of lines or pages of source text that were omitted.
Entire documents withheld for declassification purposes have been accounted for and are listed by headings, source notes, and number of pages not declassified in their chronological place.
The amount of material omitted from this volume because it was unrelated to the subject of the volume, however, has not been delineated.
All brackets that appear in the source text are so identified by footnotes.
An unnumbered source note to each document indicates the document's source, original classification, distribution, and drafting information.
This note also provides the background of important documents and policies and indicates whether the President or his major policy advisers read the document.
Every effort has been made to determine if a document has been previously published, and this information has been included in the source footnote.
Editorial notes and additional annotation summarize pertinent material not printed in the volume, indicate the location of additional documentary sources, provide references to important related documents printed in other volumes, describe key events, and provide summaries of and citations to public statements that supplement and elucidate the printed documents.
Information derived from memoirs and other first-hand accounts has been used when appropriate to supplement or explicate the official record.
The Advisory Committee monitors the overall compilation and editorial process of the series and advises on all aspects of the preparation and declassification of the series.
Although the Advisory Committee does not attempt to review the contents of individual volumes in the series, it does monitor the overall process and makes recommendations on particular problems that come to its attention.
Declassification Review The declassification review of this volume at the Department of State and other agencies resulted in decisions to withhold less than 1 percent of the documentation selected.
The review was conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in Executive Order 12356 on National Security Information, which was superseded by Executive Order 12958 on April 20, 1995, and applicable laws.
The principle guiding declassification review is to release all information, subject only to the current requirements of national security as embodied in law and regulation.
Louis J Smith did the research for the volume and he and Charles S Sampson selected and edited the portion of the volume dealing with the Cuban missile crisis.
Edward C Keefer selected and edited the portion of the volume beginning with November 1962 through to the end of 1963.
All three editors worked under the general supervision of then Editor in Chief John P Glennon.
Kerry E Hite, David C Geyer, and Donna Hung coordinated the declassification of the documentation, and Vicki E Futscher, Deb Godfrey, and Rita M Baker did the copy and technical editing.
The editors believe that in terms of access this volume was prepared in accordance with the standards and mandates of this statute.
The editors were able to use intelligence-related files maintained in the Bureau of Intelligence and Research.
When this volume was compiled, all Department of State records consulted were still under the custody of the Department, and the footnotes citing Department of State files suggest that the Department is the repository.
Many of the Department's decentralized office files covering this period, which the National Archives deems worthy of permanent retention, will also be transferred from the Department's custody to Archives II over the next several years.
The editors of the Foreign Relations series also have full access to the papers of Presidents Kennedy, Johnson, and Eisenhower and other White House foreign policy records.
Presidential papers maintained and preserved at the Presidential libraries include some of the most significant foreign affairs-related documentation from other federal agencies including the National Security Council, the Central Intelligence Agency, the Department of Defense, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Department of State historians also have access to records of the Department of Defense, particularly the records of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and the Secretaries of Defense and their major assistants.
Since 1991, the Central Intelligence Agency has provided expanded access to Department of State historians to high-level intelligence documents from those records in the custody of that Agency.
This access is arranged and facilitated by the History Staff of the Center for the Study of Intelligence, Central Intelligence Agency, pursuant to a May 1992 memorandum of understanding.
This access arrangement was concluded in connection with the research of volumes for the 1961-1963 triennium and in order to enlarge the scope of coverage as required by the 1991 law.
Department of State and CIA historians continue to work out the procedural and scholarly aspects of identifying the key portions of the intelligence record.
The variety of documentation made available to Department of State historians and ultimately selected for publication in the volumes has expanded.
Sources for Foreign Relations, 1961-1963, Volume XI All sources for this volume are briefly identified in the list below.
Within it the Memoranda and Meetings Series, the records of the Executive Committee and the National Security Council Standing Group were key.
Also extremely valuable were the records in the Country Series for Cuba and the Soviet Union as well as the files of Kennedy's key advisers such as Arthur Schlesinger and Theodore Sorensen.
The sound quality is often poor and it is occasionally difficult to determine the identity of the speakers.
The transcripts were used only when no written account of the meeting had been found.
These transcripts are not a substitute for listening to the tapes themselves, which provide context and nuance that cannot be adequately reflected in a verbatim text.
The files of Clifton, who was Military Aide to the President, include the memoranda of most of the President's meetings with the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Some important materials are also available in Department of State files.
The most valuable Department of State collections are the lot files, as described below.
Lot 65 D 438, the most concentrated Department of State collection on the missile crisis.
Also consulted and listed below were several relevant files in the Department's decimal and subject-numeric indexed central files.
This extensive collection on the missile crisis includes material that, for reasons of space and redundancy, was not included in the volume or microfiche supplement.
Prominent among these are handwritten notes on EXCOM meetings by Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric and Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Paul Nitze.
Also contains drafts of messages and memoranda to the President and Secretary of State about the correspondence.
Also contains background material from 1961 and 1962, including documentation on Operation Mongoose.
Secret and Top Secret records of the United States Mission to the United Nations with extensive material on the post-missile crisis negotiations.
Includes files of the Secretary of Defense, the Deputy Secretary of Defense, and the Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs.
The Department of State takes no responsibility for the accuracy of these memoirs nor endorses their interpretation of events.
