The mission of the book, Blue Moon over Cuba, is to tell the story of how low-level photographic reconnaissance assisted President Kennedy to resolve, peacefully, the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War.
Kennedy, Khrushchev, and Castro on the Brink of Nuclear War: We are fortunate to have Mr Dobbs, former Washington Post reporter and prolific author of many books, write a magnificient introduction to our book.
His combat experiences in the Pacific form the basis for his leadership in VFP-62.
Squadron history from FASRON 3 in 1949 through the 50's with VC-62's F2H-2P Banshees and F9F-6&8P Cougars, culminating with the F8U-1P photo-Crusaders and becoming VFP-62 in 1956 and the move to NAS Cecil Field.
The history of the Bay of Pigs is told and how fateful both incidents were on the eventual Soviet military build-up in Cuba.
The Soviets provided military armaments, including nuclear missiles, and training to Fidel Castro in early 1962.
Fortunately, the CIA was sending U-2s over the island and caught them in the act.
This chapter tells of the difficulties intelligence agencies had in gathering the intelligence and how the need for low-level high-resolution photography became apparent.
The photographic evidence showed that the Soviets had introduced a defensive-ring of surface-to-air and medium-range ballistic missiles around the island, which caused great alarm in Washington.
Also told was how VFP-62 got selected for the first missions over Cuba, and how photo interpreters analyzed the aerial photography, providing President Kennedy with the bad news of the expansion of missile sites.
The chapter includes stories of the evacuation of Gitmo dependends by VFP-62's PN3 George Montgomery and culminates with President Kennedy's address to the nation and world on Oct., delcaring the naval blockade of Cuba.
This chapter captures VFP-62 mission planning, tactics, and first-hand ""in-the-cockpit"" mission accounts by Captain Ecker and Lt.
Also included, are accounts of the VFP-62 ground crew and how the film was couriered to Washington from NAS Jacksonville photo lab.
The story of Captain Ecker's debrief of his mission to the Joint Chiefs of Staff and various intelligence agencies in Washington after his mission.
It tells how the Air Force had to obtain Navy cameras to obtain useable photography.
The presentation of the photographic evidence to the world and the high drama confrontation between Ambassador Adlai Stevenson and Soviet Ambassador Valerian Zorian at the UN Security Council provides insight into how powerful aerial photography was to gather support for United States unilateral military action in Cuba.
The story of the Marine squadron VMCJ-2 joining VFP-62 missions over Cuba told by VMCJ-2 pilots Col.
Dick Conway and LCPL Jack Hayden providing colorful stories of their contributions.
Wayne Whitten provides historical information on the squadron and its electronic counter meassures around Cuba.
Jerry Coffee's story of how he photographed the presence of tactical nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Tad Riley and Captain Ecker describe what VFP-62 was doing during this important period, including the harrassment effects that the Crusaders were having on Cuban and Soviet morale and their attempts to shoot them down.Personal accounts of the ground crew activity is provided by Vinnie Zabicki and Richard Flake.
This chapter celebrates and presents a tour de force of the RF-8A Crusader, including Maj.
John Glenn's speed run in Project Bullet, fighter pilot stories of escorting the unarmed photo planes, the dangers and joy of flying and working around the Crusader, Cdr.
Newby Kelt's accidents and includes comments by VFP-63 pilots on photo mission tactics.
Jim Curry's night photo missions from the USS Enterprise over Guantanamo Naval Base checking out the perimeter defenses for the base commander.
While a serious mission, it has some humorous incidents surrounding it.
Tad Riley tell about VFP-62 missions during this period, including a dramatic story of how MiG-21s jumped Lt.
Also included are the diplomatic struggles to get the Soviets to complete their commitments.
Captain Ecker tells about the awarding of Distinguished Flying Cross medals, the Navy Unit Commendation, and other kudos from the President and others after the crisis.
This tells the story of Captain Ecker's involvement with the movie that tells the story of the crisis, including VFP-62's mission on Oct. and Captain Ecker's debrief in Washington.
It critiques the movie's positives and negatives as well as shows how scenes involving the Crusader were made.
A summary of the crisis, including an analysis of the intelligence successes and failures, President Kennedy's conflicts with the military brass, the aftermath of the crisis and events in 1963.
In addition, a critique of post-crisis efforts against Cuba and failed attempts to normalize relations between the United States and Cuba.
The chapter concludes with the story of the end of VFP-62, including the burial of the time capsule at NAS Cecil Field and the subsequent discovery of it by former AT2 Greg Engler in 2011.
Speeches by President Kennedy, three maps of Cuba, including the ranges of Soviet missiles, over 60 photos and color plates, and a complete VFP-62 roster of officers and enlisted men are included.
