Missile crisis letters to go public U.S., Soviet leaders had several exchanges.
The official, asking not to be identified, said the Kennedy letters might contain some clarifications of the agreements Moscow and Washington reached in late October 1962 when the crisis was resolved.
One official said some of the letters had remained classified because they contained references to Berlin, a key point of U.S.-Soviet contention during that period.
Officials said the government's decision to release the Kennedy letters was linked to a long-planned conference on the missile crisis the Cuban government is holding in Havana starting Thursday.
For 13 days in October 1962, a confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union brought the world to the brink of nuclear destruction.
Clouds Over Cuba was created in partnership with the Martin Agency and Tool of North America.
The account will allow a new generation to understand one of the most trying times in American history, and to offer a realistic perspective of the fear and danger felt by President Kennedy, his advisors and the American people.
In an effort to make the account as historically accurate as possible, @JFK1962 has borrowed largely from the secret EXCOMM tapes and declassified material to portray the most accurate representation of life during those perilous two weeks.
Started in 2010 with President Kennedy's 1960 campaign, this social media project has used news clips, material from the Library archives, and JFK's own words to retell the 1,000 days of President Kennedy's administration from his own viewpoint.
Visitors listen in as President Kennedy and his advisers work furiously to avert a nuclear war and solve the crisis through strategic diplomacy.
Original documents, artifacts, and photographs complement the tapes, breathing humanity into this milestone 20th century event.
Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum to create a free mobile app based on the ""To the Brink"" exhibit currently on display at the National Archives.
Zoom in on President Kennedy's notes, read the actual classified memos, and listen to President Kennedy's words as he alerts the nation to the crisis in Cuba.
In a televised address on October 22, 1962, President John F Kennedy disclosed to the world the discovery of Soviet missiles armed with nuclear warheads in Cuba, announcing an American blockade to intercept vessels from Soviet bloc countries bound for Cuba.
Likely intended as a criticism of President Kennedy's policy decisions in Cuba, Rape of the Sabine Women's classical subject and allusions to earlier masterpieces also allow it to carry a more universal message--an outcry against war itself as senseless and destructive.
This 13-day confrontation tested, as no other Cold War encounter, the mettle and resolve of both Kennedy and Khrushchev.
As it turned out, after much blustering, the Russian finally blinked and had removed, against the objections of Fidel Castro, what were clearly offensive weapons aimed at United States cities.
In accordance with a secretly drafted agreement, the Russian missile systems were removed by Dec., thus ending the most perilous face-off of the Cold War.
Kennedy had first learned for sure of Soviet intentions to construct offensive missile sites in Cuba on Sunday, Oct., 1962, when he was given photographic proof of their construction.
Both communist leaders, ever since the unsuccessful Bay of Pigs fiasco of April 1961, feared another United States invasion attempt.
Unlike his actions during the Bay of Pigs invasion, Kennedy now acted quickly and decisively.
He established a special committee, composed of his top advisers, top military commanders, and importantly his brother Robert Kennedy, and instructed it to make recommendations as to the U.S. reaction to this obvious threat.
The military, almost unanimously, demanded a nuclear airstrike to destroy the missile sites.
However, after much thought and soul-searching, the president agreed with his brother that such a military strike could well precipitate a nuclear war.
Instead, he instituted a naval blockade of Cuba , which was successful in convincing Khrushchev to back down.
Up to Oct., when Kennedy received the photographic proof of the missile sites’ construction, the Russians, especially Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin, who openly lied to Kennedy in a face-to-face encounter, but also Khrushchev, repeatedly stated that the Soviets were not supplying Castro with offensive missiles.
Finally, however, the Soviet premier, having been caught with his “hand in the cookie jar,” saw the folly of supplying missiles to Castro and agreed to their removal.
Kennedy wisely gave Khrushchev a face-saving out by agreeing to the removal of, what were obsolete, United States missiles in Turkey and stating that the United States was not contemplating an invasion of Cuba.
He went against the advice of the military and many of his advisers to pursue a peaceful, but as it turned out, eminently successful solution to what could well have ended in a nuclear conflict.
For those too young to remember the only direct nuclear confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union, Frankel's short and graceful account is an excellent introduction to a vital part of our recent past.
For those already steeped in missile crisis lore, Frankel offers new insights based on his personal memories and newly available archives.
Nuclear missiles were being secretly placed off Florida by a dangerous adversary seeking a fundamental change in the balance of power.
High-altitude photographs identified the missiles before they were deployed.
But within hours after the missiles were discovered by a U-2 flight on Oct., 1962, Kennedy decided that the deployment of such weapons was unacceptable.
During the first week of the crisis, no one but a small group of advisers knew about the missiles.
The importance of this total secrecy cannot be overestimated; a rush to action under public pressure could easily have resulted in a catastrophic mistake.
As in other accounts, Frankel's Kennedy is the most careful person in the ExCom, always searching for a solution that would meet his absolute bottom line while giving Khrushchev a fig leaf -the promise not to invade Cuba -to cover his retreat.
There was one other issue, which has been denied, debated and finally revealed bit by bit.
This concerned the removal of 15 obsolete medium-range missiles from Turkey.
But a public ""trade"" of the Soviet missiles for the American ones in Turkey would have been a substantial propaganda victory for Khrushchev.
So Kennedy set out to construct a fully deniable ""non-deal deal"" on the Jupiters.
On that darkest day of the Cold War, a Soviet missile team in Cuba shot down a U-2, killing its pilot; the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended immediate military retaliation; and Castro asked Khrushchev for urgent help against an invasion.
It was a night of fear in both Washington and Moscow, but a private deal was struck.
In history's only nuclear confrontation between superpowers, the United States was fortunate to have a chief executive who handled the crisis with coolness and skill.
Frankel brings it all back for those who lived it, but, more important, also for a generation who did not.
President Fidel Castro, who was in power at the time, is also expected to attend.
The crisis, marking the Cold War's tensest moments, was defused when Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles discovered on the Caribbean island just 90 miles from Florida.
Cuban Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez, an organizer of the conference that will bring together American and Cuban players of the Cold War standoff, was an army commander when Castro put 400,000 soldiers in position to repel a possible invasion of the communist-run island.
Earlier in the day, some 2,500 relatives of United States forces stationed at Guantanamo Bay were given 15 minutes to pack a bag each before being evacuated to Norfolk, Va.
With a new threat of war looming -this time with Saddam Hussein's Iraq -dozens of reporters from the United States and other countries have been coming to Cuba to take a look back at those days of nuclear brinksmanship.
Castro interview ABC's Barbara Walters, who interviewed Castro over several days 25 years ago, met Monday with the 76-year-old Cuban leader.
Bay of Pigs During a similar conference here last year, Cuban organizers worked with the National Security Archive to release a wealth of United States and Cuban documents about the unsuccessful CIA-backed invasion attempt known as the Bay of Pigs.
Under Castro's command, Fernandez led Cuban ground troops at the Bay of Pigs a year before the missile crisis.
He also played a key organizing role in last year's Bay of Pigs conference.
The missile crisis conference will feature morning and afternoon seminars on Friday and Saturday.
Fernandez said he hoped the conference would teach the world more about Cuba's experience with the missile crisis.
Intelligence sources insist there is no ambiguity about the missile's presence in Cuba, one of the world's last communist bastions.
All SS-20s were banned by the 1988 INF Treaty, and all must be destroyed by May 31.
Apart from that, the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement ending the 1962 Cuban missile crisis barred offensive missiles from Cuba, any and all kinds.
Bush administration officials are trying to develop a plausible theory for what they view as audacious conduct by the Soviet military and Cuban President Fidel Castro.
Few Soviet actions could stir the patriotic juices along the Potomac as quickly as the transfer of SS-20s to the Caribbean island dictatorship.
That is partly why the news is being held top secret while President Bush considers a July summit with Mikhail Gorbachev and special aid for his crumbling country.
The only explanation would appear to be linked to a minor proviso in the INF treaty that permits what is called ""museum piece display"" of the SS-20, set up for viewing in unarmed deployment.
But the treaty demands full Soviet government consultation with the United States before putting any weapon on public display.
One United States official told us that there is absolutely nothing to substantiate the ""museum piece"" explanation.
This same little-known proviso was employed by the Soviets and Cubans when a treaty-banned SS-4 medium-range missile was anchored in Cuban soil near Havana last year over strong United States objection.
When the Soviet Foreign Office earlier told the United States that Moscow wanted to send an SS-4 to Cuba for that purpose, the State Department protested.
Despite the INF treaty, it said, even a missile for sightseers, capable of firing warheads against the United States, would damage relations with the Soviets and generate a strong political backlash from American politicians, particularly conservative Republicans.
Then-Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze assured the United States in July that no-SS 4 would be sent to Cuba.
The latest CIA studies suggest that the Soviet Union, riven by the divisive nationality issue, a bankrupt economy and the collapse of Gorbachev's reform programs, is still mass-producing strategic weapons, including mobile missiles, that dwarf anything being produced in the United States.
Intelligence findings suggest Cuba, with Soviet backing, may be developing a nuclear reactor capable of producing weapons-grade fuel in a new facility near Cienfuegos, the same area in which the one or more outlawed SS-20s have been placed.
The Soviets have long had a facility there suspected of handling nuclear warheads to arm their strategic nuclear submarines.
Sudden, inexplicable spasms are natural in the life of expiring organisms, including empires.
The savagely split and dying Soviet system may be producing just such aberrations today.
But authoritative Bush administration officials are not likely to accept that as any final answer to Castro's missiles of April.
They will soon be demanding a definitive response, and Gorbachev will be compelled to give it.
But he ruled out any further efforts at direct diplomacy between the United States and Iraq.
Diplomats from other countries and the United Nations are expected to keep trying to negotiate a settlement.
And Iraqi President Saddam Hussein may blink at the final moment and withdraw his troops from Kuwait by next Tuesday's United Nations deadline.
Several administration officials and members of Congress said diplomacy or Hussein's backing down were still possible outcomes even though Secretary of State James Baker and Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz got nowhere in their talks in Geneva Wednesday.
House Armed Services Committee Chairman Les Aspin, D-Wis., has drawn a parallel between the current crisis and the Cuban Missile affair and suggested that this showdown could end in much the same way the earlier one did.
President John F Kennedy raised the chilling prospect of nuclear war between the United States and Soviet Union on Oct., 1962, when he demanded that Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev remove Soviet nuclear missiles being installed in Cuba and aimed at the United States, or risk war.
The crisis ended six days later when Khrushchev backed down and agreed to remove the missiles, meeting Kennedy's ultimatum.
Unannounced at the time was a secret concession Kennedy made to remove United States missiles in Turkey that were aimed at the Soviet Union.
Aspin argued that, as in the case of the Cuban missile crisis, Bush could promise to address Iraqi concerns but only after Kuwait is liberated.
These concerns include Iraq's dispute with Kuwait over borders and rights to a shared oil field and its demand for an international conference on the PalestinianIsraeli conflict.
Bush insisted anew Wednesday that he would not pursue any public or secret diplomacy with Hussein that could be viewed as a prewithdrawal concession.
But that does not prevent other parties from trying to cut deals on behalf of the United States.
French President Francois Mitterrand, in a different position than Bush, has sided with Iraq in its demand that there be an international conference on the Middle East.
Bush does not oppose the idea of a conference but will not endorse one now because it would look like a reward for Iraq's withdrawal from Kuwait.
Mitterrand, who spoke on the telephone with Bush twice Wednesday, hinted that Bush might be satisfied with the start of an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait by Tuesday even if it were not completed by that deadline, after which the United Nations has authorized the use of military force to drive the Iraqis from Kuwait.
United Nations Secretary-General Javier Perez de Cuellar, who also spoke with Bush by telephone, said he was weighing a trip to Baghdad before the deadline in a final attempt to settle the crisis peacefully.
Bush already had ruled out serious negotiations, and Aziz is regarded in the West as merely a high-level messenger who is not a close Hussein adviser.
Yet despite these low expectations, the gloomy expression on Baker's face after the session and his disclosure that Aziz would not even accept a letter to Hussein from Bush caused a palpable sense of fear in Washington.
Just because Khrushchev blinked 28 years ago does not mean Hussein will do the same.
Straus acknowledged that as Hussein and Bush go eyeball-to-eyeball during the next six days, the Iraqi leader may change his mind.
The crisis erupted in October 1962 when former President Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States.
Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorenson are also attending the conference.
Former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, who interpreted the now famous American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba, will also be present.
The former defense secretary refused to draw parallels between the missile crisis and President Bush's current calls for a pre-emptive strike on Iraq, saying he could not second-guess a sitting United States leader.
Among the Cuban actors expected to participate in the conference are 76-year-old Castro, then a young revolutionary leader in power for just three years.
Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez, a key organizer of the conference and a military commander at the time of the crisis, will also attend.
For two days, the men who made critical decisions during those nerve-racking days, will study newly declassified documents with officials from the National Security Archive in Washington, which brought much of the historic paperwork to light.
The group will travel on Sunday to sites related to the crisis, including a missile silo in the western province of Pinar del Rio.
More than 40 were to be emplaced, capable of obliterating nearly every major United States city.
The two superpowers confronted each other at the brink of nuclear holocaust.
Much has been written about the 13 days of the missile crisis, and the heroes who helped avert Armageddon.
He skillfully forced Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev to capitulate by devising a patient strategy of carrots and sticks.
Several members of the president's team of advisers have also been heralded.
Khrushchev, except for the fact that he had belligerently provoked the crisis in the first place, might be thought of that way; he recognized that retreat, and the disgrace that accompanied it, were preferable to war.
His disarmingly personal correspondence with Kennedy during and after the crisis reflected a man deeply troubled by what he had wrought.
Another Russian, Oleg Penkovsky, was indisputably one of the heroes of those frightening days.
A colonel in military intelligence, he was ""the spy who saved the world"" according to the authors of a book by that title.
He provided American and British intelligence with blueprints and detailed information about Soviet missile systems.
So, when CIA analysts studied U-2 photography taken on Oct., 1962, they knew almost immediately, and with certainty, that the vague tracings of a large excavation near San Cristobal in Pinar del Rio province in western Cuba had all the earmarks of a missile base under construction.
Yet for many years, students of the crisis wondered why the U-2, soaring for just a few minutes over a thin slice of Cuban territory, was directed to that exact location.
When they did, I was not surprised to discover that it was McCone himself who wanted to talk to me; he would not leave it to a subordinate.
The secret he was protecting would be kept for many more years, and the full details would not be disclosed by the CIA until 1992.
It turned out the epochal U-2 flight had nothing to do with Penkovsky or elaborate technical intelligence collection systems.
Rather, the secret of San Cristobal was broken by three Cuban heroes, arguably the most indispensable of all the heralded figures of those 13 days.
Their identities have not been revealed by the CIA, and they have never come forward to claim the fame and respect they earned.
One was a covert CIA agent, a resident of Havana, identified only as ""Julio"" in a book by the CIA's chief officer in Miami at the time.
Soon, two Cuban refugees with corroborating information arrived in Miami and were interviewed at the Opa-Locka debriefing center manned by bilingual intelligence officers.
One described a Soviet military convoy he had seen before departing Cuba.
The third anonymous Cuban hero had observed a similar tableau before emigrating.
Traveling from his home in Havana to Pinar del Rio, he also saw a large Soviet military convoy.
With such specific information, from three independent sources, the CIA scheduled the U-2 specifically to photograph the San Cristobal area as the suspected location of a strategic Soviet missile installation.
Sadly, however, the identities of the three Cubans arguably among the most important heroes of the missile crisis remain, even today, locked away in CIA archives.
JOHN DORSCHNER And MIMI WHITEFIELD Herald Staff Writers Section: FRONT 1618 Words Page: 1A OpenURL Link At the Epiphany parochial school in Miami, each child was asked to bring a bedsheet and can of fruit juice to school at the height of the missile crisis.
A teacher assured her students that the items were only for a ""social living"" project.
South Florida leaders were facing the prospect of nuclear war with a brave innocence, convinced that they could prepare for mushroom clouds the same way they prepared for any other disaster.
The children, however, weren't so sure that this new threat was that simply met.
Thirty years later, social scientists are still trying to determine what the long-term effects of the crisis had on a whole generation of children.
One study, by Harvard psychiatrist John Mack, has shown that the threat of nuclear destruction created the idea in the minds of young children in both America and the Soviet Union that The Bomb would cut short their lives.
Thirty years ago today, as school kids were struggling to cope with the concept of nuclear disaster, the Americans and the Soviets were playing a nuclear game of chicken on the high seas.
Officers aboard a United States Navy destroyer decided the tanker was carrying no military equipment and allowed it to proceed on to Cuba.
Meanwhile, off the coast of Cuba's Pinar del Rio province, a CIA mother ship, piloted by Miami exile Eugenio Martinez, was preparing to put ashore a team that was supposed to sabotage the Matahambre copper mine.
In Washington, some military leaders were pushing for a quick air strike to get rid of the missiles.
Maxwell Taylor, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, noted that an air attack against all Cuban targets could be carried out within 12 hours.
Joyce, now a nurse in Alabama, recalls that, as a firstgrader at Sunset Elementary, she and the other kids practiced crouching under their desks.
After two weeks, she says, the adults seemed to relax, and she's not certain if the incident had any lasting influence on her psyche.
Kids also had a strong feeling of helplessness -whatever they did wouldn't be enough to overcome The Bomb.
In fact, many Baby Boomers postponed having children until they were well into their 30s, when the danger of nuclear war had diminished.
The image of nuclear holocaust, Mack suggests, may have influenced the arts as well.
Michael Hughes, a Miami child psychiatrist, says that studies have shown that children incorporated the nuclear bomb into their fantasies about the possibility of dying young.
So you go from nuclear threat and missile crisis to Vietnam war and hedonism.
One news report stated that from blastoff in Cuba to explosion in Miami would be less than 15 minutes.
They bought water purification tablets and rushed off to one of the eight CD courses being offered.
In many Florida cities, people were preparing for the crisis by buying guns.
That was not true, however, in Dade, where most guns shops reported no increase in sales.
Officially, the American government still believed in Civil Defense, in the assurance that people could get ready for a nuclear attack the same way they prepared for an attack by conventional bombs.
At the time of the missile crisis, only eight of 24 planned sirens had been installed in Dade.
Most people would not be able to hear the sirens if they were ever to warn of nuclear attack.
At one point, officials thought Miami should be evacuated in case of imminent attack, and evacuation route signs were put up.
Outdoors, a culvert that can be blocked off at the ends will furnish protection.
One company obtained 15 ""firm orders,"" and probably would have gotten many more if it had been able to build the shelters more quickly than the estimated eightweek timetable for construction.
A six-person underground shelter approved by the Defense Department was a stiff $2,500 -the price of a decent new car, or about $11,000 in 1992 dollars.
One contractor noted that it was possible to get FHA financing for a shelter, but it might take weeks for approval.
Faced with such difficulties, one North Miami family decided to take matters into its own hands, cleaning out an old, unused septic tank buried in the backyard and making it into a tight-squeeze shelter.
If Americans seemed to be earnestly trying to prepare for the nuclear threat, the residents of Cuba seemed to be much more fatalistic.
When Blight asked the official if he felt fear, the Cuban replied, ""No, not really.
I do recall feeling sadness at the prospect of the death of my wife and children.
In Pinar del Rio province, militia men scared off the Mongoose sabotage team, which had to fight to retreat to the CIA mother ship off-shore.
Meanwhile, in Washington, CIA Director John McCone informed the White House that some of the missiles in Cuba were now considered operational.
He ordered the United States Navy to stop and inspect a Soviet ship the next day.
