All other staff and students are only entitled to browse the material and should not download and/or print out a copy.
This Digital Copy and any digital or printed copy supplied to or made by you under the terms of this Licence are for use in connection with this Course of Study.
You may retain such copies after the end of the course, but strictly for your own personal use.
Except as provided for by copyright law, no further copying, storage or distribution is permitted without the consent of the copyright holder.
The author has moral rights in the work and neither staff nor students may cause, or permit, the distortion, mutilation or other modification of the work, or any other derogatory treatment of it, which would be prejudicial to the honour or reputation of the author.
History offers no parallel to those thirteen days in October 1962, when the USA and the Soviet Union paused at the nuclear precipice.
For thirteen days, the USA and the Soviet Union stood 'eyeball to eyeball', each w ith the power o f mutual destruction in hand.
Having peered over the edge o f the nuclear cliff, both nations edged backwards towards detente.
Never again was the risk o f war between them as great as it was during those last tw o weeks o f October 1962.
An understanding o f this cris is -h o w it arose and how it was resolved-is thus essential fo r every serious student o f foreign affairs.
The Soviet governm ent first began supplying arms to Cuba in the autum n o f 1959.
The Soviet Presidium approved Cuban requests fo r a substantial increase in weapons in April 1962, and the pace o f shipments accelerated.
The first Soviet medium range ballistic missiles designed to deliver nuclear war­ heads reached Cuban soil on 8 September, having been secretly transported beneath the decks o f Soviet ships.
In the days that followed, additional MRBMs, missile trailers, fuelling trucks, special radar vans, missile erectors, and nuclear warhead storage bunkers arrived and were rushed to construction sites.
The final decision to put missiles in Cuba was made in the Soviet Presidium, but the details o f the o p e ra tio n -th a t is, the path from the general decision to the actual emplacement o f operational missiles in C u b a -w e re delegated to appropriate organizations w ithin the Soviet government.
Secrecy deprived each organization o f inform ation about other organizations and made it difficult fo r anyone to keep the w hole operation in view.
The clandestine shipping, unloading, and delivery o f the missiles to the construction sites was a m ajor organizational success, eluding detection by American intelligence agencies.
Once the weapons and equipm ent arrived in Cuba, however, control o f the operation shifted to the Group o f Soviet Forces in Cuba.
A successful effort to camouflage the operation could have been possible.
Reprinted by permission of the John F Kennedy Presidential Library, Boston, MA. never camouflaged construction projects in the Soviet Union.
Moreover, w hile construction managers were aware that the mission was secret, they were under orders to com plete the project in an accelerated tim etable.
Better ca m o u fla g e -w h ich could have been achieved by w orking under netting o r plastic covers in the tropical heat o r w orking stealthily at n ig h tw ould have slowed the pace o f construction and risked failure to meet th e ir deadline.
Had the operation been managed by an intelligence agency, a different choice w ould likely have been made, but a fie ld organization in the business o f deploying missiles could be expected to focus first on preparing a site fo r possible com bat, particularly when that directive came w ith a deadline.
A US U-2 spy craft had flow n over the areas where the missiles were deployed on 14 October.
But, Gribkov recalled, 'M oscow had sent them to Cuba to defend against air attack, not espio­ nage.
Standing orders to air defence units told them to fire only if attacked, to avoid provoking any incident o r unwanted attention before the nuclear missiles were operational.
These orders were undoubtedly w ritten by someone not present when Khrushchev expressed his concerns, causing the Soviet leader's intentions never to enter the relevant organizations' operational directives.
Pliyev suspected that the missiles had been discovered on 14 October, and told Gribk­ ov about his suspicion fo u r days later.
However, fo r 18 O ctober there is no evidence that the Soviet governm ent learned o f Pliyev's misgivings.
Indeed, when Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko met w ith Kennedy on 18 October, he saw no sign that the Americans knew w hat was going on.
Fearing that Kennedy was about to announce an invasion o f Cuba, the Presidium drafted an instruction authorizing Pliyev to use tactical nuclear weapons to repel it.
Operationally, he had full control o f those nuclear weapons, since PALs (permissive action links), w hich require a code from higher authorities to unlock the weapons, had not yet been installed on Soviet weapons.
But when Pliyev reported his move to his superiors in Moscow, they sharply reminded him that he needed to w ait fo r authorization from Moscow before using any weapons.
When they convened at 11:50m. on Tuesday 16 October, Kennedy's senior advisers considered these questions.
Cuban defence An analyst who knew nothing about the Soviet Union, except that it was a powerful country, and that one o f its im portant allies, Cuba, was at risk o f attack by a large threatening neigh­ bour, m ight infer that the powerful country had sent missiles to come to protect its weak friend.
Although persuasive, attempts to explain Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba w ith the Cuban defence hypothesis do not withstand careful examination.
If deterrence, meaning the pre­ vention o f a m ajor attack on Cuba by threatening a response that w ould impose unaccepta­ ble costs, had been the objective, a sizeable contingent o f Soviet troops in Cuba w ould have been sufficient.
If fo r some reason the Soviets believed that a nuclear deterrent was necessary, the tactical nuclear weapons then deployed provided a better solution.
They could not only be brought to Cuba more quickly, but w ith considerably less likelihood o f being discovered.
Cold War politics The defining feature o f the Cold W ar was global com petition between American and Soviet values and interests.
President Kennedy fell back on ju st this hypothesis o f global politics when he responded to Defense Secretary Robert McNamara's initial assessment that the Soviet missiles in Cuba had little m ilitary significance.
Kennedy's response m ight remind us o f debates over the use of're d lines'in international relations today.
First, the Soviet Union wanted to demonstrate that it was capable o f bold action in support o f a com m unist revolution, impressing China and healing a split between Moscow and Beijing that had widened since 1959.
Second, the Soviets sought to radically redefine the context o f the Berlin problem.
To challenge American intentions and firmness, even a few MRBMs threatening the entire south-eastern USA (including Washing­ ton) should have sufficed.
But the num ber o f missiles and character o f their deploym ent show that making them a fait accompli was not a high priority.
At no point on the globe outside the continental USA were the Soviets so m ilitarily disadvantaged vis-a-vis the USA as in the Caribbean.
Moreover, this arsenal was being rapidly expanded by the Kennedy administration.
M oving its existing nuclear weapons to locations from w hich they could reach American targets was one option fo r addressing this problem.
Khrushchev could use the missiles to solve the Berlin prob­ lem on his own terms.
If the Americans did nothing, Khrushchev w ould force the West Germans out of Berlin, confident that the missiles in Cuba w ould deter the Americans from starting a war.
Since Berlin was immeasurably more im portant to the Soviet Union than Cuba, that trade w ould also be a w in fo r Khrushchev.
First, each o f the fo u r hypotheses assumes that the Soviet decision to emplace missiles led to a coherent plan fo r implementing that decision.
This w ould require comprehensive air defences and camouflage to avoid detection until the weapons were emplaced.
He planned to visit the USA and unveil his triu m p h in the second half o f November.
By then the installation o f the missiles should have been completed; but, even on the round-the-clock construction schedule adopted after the United States announcem ent that the missiles had been dis­ covered, only the MRBMs w ould be in place by that time.
Why American blockade After discovering ballistic missiles in Cuba, President Kennedy assembled a select circle of advisers designated as the Executive Com m ittee o f the National Security Council, also known as the 'ExComm', from 16 to 19 October.
Because the W hite House meetings were secretly taped, unbeknow nst to participants except fo r the President and his brother, Robert Kennedy, we have unprecedented evi­ dence abo u t w hat members o f the United States governm ent w ere seeing, doing, and th in kin g th ro u g h o u t the crisis.
Strategic risks aside, failing to act forcibly could produce a num ber o f undesirable political outcomes.
First, it w ould underm ine the confi­ dence o f his adm inistration, especially those members w ho in previous weeks had so firm ly defended his policy towards Cuba.
The entire circle o f pressures to w hich Kennedy as president had to be responsive pushed him in a single d ire ctio n -vig o ro u s action.
The Joint Chiefs o f Staff wanted an invasion to elim inate the missile threat, thereby finally putting an end to a main Soviet outpost in the western hemisphere.
For Dean Rusk, the Secretary o f State, the face o f the issue was diplom atic.
He saw an o p p o rtu n ity to persuade Castro to push the Soviets out.
Rusk proposed warning the Cuban leader that the Soviets were putting his regime in m ortal danger and w ould in the end happily sell him out fo r a victory in Berlin.
McNamara raised the idea o f blockading future weapons shipments to Cuba, but his suggestion did nothing about the missiles already deployed there except to warn the Soviets not to use them.
National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy was uncharacteristically ambivalent.
On 18 O ctober he advocated taking no action, fearing that the Soviets w ould retaliate in kind against Berlin.
But th e fo llo w in g day, after a g o nizingfurtheroverthequestion, Bundy changed his mind and supported an air strike against the missiles.
As new overflights revealed fo r the first tim e that IRBMs had also been shipped to Cuba, Taylor jo in e d his JCS colleagues in support o f an invasion to fo llo w up the air strikes.
But the most telling argum ent fo r President Kennedy, w hich he w ould repeat over the days to come, was the one he outlined fo r his subordinates on 18 October.
An attack on Cuba w ould cause a retaliatory attack on Berlin, w hich in return w ould instantly present Kennedy w ith no meaningful m ilitary option except nuclear retaliation.
On the m orning o f 19 O ctober President Kennedy met w ith the JCS and found them ada­ mantly in support o f an im m ediate air attack against Cuba that w ould retain the m ilitary advantages o f surprise.
A ir Force chief o f staff Curtis LeMay, confident in his own political base o f support on Capitol Hill, was boldest in confronting the President.
The blockade w ould be coupled w ith an ultim atum demanding removal o f the missiles.
Treasury Secretary Douglas Dillon and McCone then supported this option.
Rusk sug­ gested a fourth option o f a blockade, which, instead o f accompanying an ultim atum or an offer to trade United States assets, w ould be intended purely to freeze the situation.
In drafting his address to be delivered to the American people the fo llo w in g day, Kennedy sided fu rth e r w ith the b lo cka de -u ltim a tu m faction.
First, he decided, they w ould see how Khrushchev dealt w ith the missiles in Cuba.
First, it was a m iddle course between inac­ tion and attack-aggressive enough to comm unicate firmness o f intent, but not as precipitous as a strike.
By flexing its conventional muscles, a blockade also perm itted the USA to exploit th e th re a t of subsequent non-nuclear steps in which it w ould enjoy significant local superior­ ity.
At 7m. on 22 October 1962, President Kennedy delivered the most significant foreign policy address o f his career.
Excerpt from JFK's address to the American people, 22 October 1962 M y fellow citizens, let no one doubt that this is a difficult and dangerous effort on which we have set out.
The cost o f freedom is always h ig h -b u t Americans have always paid it.
President Kennedy signs the Proclamation for the Interdiction of the Delivery of Offensive Weapons to Cuba.
Why Soviet withdrawal of missiles from Cuba President Kennedy's announcem ent o f the blockade emphasized that it was an initial step in a series o f moves that eventually threatened air strikes o r invasion.
Hundreds o f United States tactical fighters moved to airports w ithin easy striking distance o f targets in Cuba.
The next day, 24 October, Khrushchev issued a flat, unyielding response to Kennedy's demands.
By the m orning o f 25 October, Kennedy had sent the Soviets a tough, terse reply.
He prom ptly sent instructions to accept UN Secretary-General U Thant's proposal fo r avoiding a confrontation at the quarantine line, prom ising to keep Soviet ships away from this line.
Excerpts from Khrushchev's letter to JFK 1 k_____________________________________________________________________ « You are worried over Cuba.
The lengthy and discursive 'Friday let­ ter' suggesting the withdrawal o f Soviet missiles fo r a non-invasion pledge was sent secretly and considered bytheExComm in secret.
The'Saturday letter1not only changed the terms o f the deal, adding a new dem a n d -th e withdrawal o f Turkish missiles as w e ll-b u t it did so in a public mes­ sage , making it politically impossible for Khrushchev's American counterparts to accept this compromise w ithout losing face.
But the problem was how to answer Saturday's proposal to trade NATO missiles in Turkey fo r Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy could simply reject it, as many members of the ExComm urged; but he found that unaccepta­ ble.
Before the USA had made a final decision about m ilitary action, Khrushchev had begun to move.
W arning signs o f im m inent com bat in Cuba arrived in Moscow during the day o f 27 October.
In a letter to Khrushchev from the previous night, Castro asserted that an American attack in the next tw enty-four to seventy-two hours was'almost inevitable'-probably a massive air strike, but possibly an invasion.
Khrushchev's worries were heightened when, the very next day, Soviet guards manning the SAMs shot down American U-2 reconnaissance pilot Rudolf Anderson.
As Anderson flew through Cuban airspace, General Pliyev had been off-duty, givingthe low-level Soviet officers manning the SAMs free rein to use them.
Ken­ nedy had decided earlier that any SAM used against United States aircraft w ould be met w ith retaliatory strikes on Soviet air defences, and orders had been issued to that effect.
Nonetheless, Kennedy held back, correctly surmising that the attack m ight have been a mistake.
In a letter to Khrushchev on 28 October, Castro seemed unconcerned about the possibly disastrous consequences o f the shootdow n and indifferent to the risks o f nuclear escalation.
Meanwhile, President Kennedy asked Robert Kennedy and Theodore Sorensen to compose a response to Khrushchev.
I mentioned four or five m onths-l said I was sure that these matters could be resolved satisfactorily.
Shortly thereafter, Soviet leaders broadcast an urgent message over the radio announcing that they w ould w ithdraw their missiles from Cuba.
Only when coupled w ith the threat o f further m ilitary action and sweetened w ith the prospect o f rem oving th e ju p ite r mis­ siles in Turkey did it succeed in forcing Soviet withdrawal o f the missiles.
The m iddle road,e. the blockade, may have provided tim e fo r the Soviets to adjust to A m eri­ can determ ination to w ithdraw the missiles, but it also left room fo r the Soviet Union to bring the missiles to operational readiness.
W hat narrowed that room was Khrushchev's belief that he faced a clear, urgent threat o f America moving up the ladder o f escalation on the one hand, o r the opp o rtu n ity to achieve withdrawal o f United States missiles from Turkey if he backed down.
In thinking about problems o f foreign affairs, professional analysts as well as ordinary c iti­ zens proceed in a straightforward non-theoretical fashion.
The concluding section o f this chapter revolves around three central propositions that the Missile Crisis helps to illustrate.
Professional analysts and o rd in a ry citizens th in k ab o u t problem s o f foreign p olicy in term s o f largely im p lic it conceptual m odels th a t have significant consequences fo r th e c o n te n t o f th e i r th o u g h Explanations o f events reflect underlying assumptions that subconsciously guide our think­ ing.
These assumptions affect how we perceive the character o f puzzles, the categories in w hich problems should be considered, the types o f evidence that are relevant, and the driv­ ers o f events.
Explaining the event logically requires the use o f conceptual models to isolate the critical determinants that led to one state o f the w orld rather than another.
Our default posture is to understand events in foreign affairs as purposive acts o f unified national governments acting rationally.
Predictions about w hat a nation w ill do are produced by calculating what a rational actor in this certain situation w ould do, given specified objectives.
Although Model I has significant predictive power, it clearly must be supplemented by frames o f reference that break the government down into the organizations and political actors involved in the policy process.
Thus, in explaining what an actor did, o r in making bets about what he/she is likely to do, an analyst must consider not only the actor's objectives, but also his/her options, the costs and the benefits associated w ith each option, and the actor's readiness o r reluctance to take risks.
Here are some core questions a Model I analyst seeks to answer in explaining a government action o r estimating the likelihood o f an action.
Although Model I gives us considerable predictive power on little inform ation, it must be supplemented by frames o f reference that disaggregate the governm ent into its constituent organizations and actors.
M odel I's grasp o f national purposes and the pressures created by problems in international relations must confront the intranational mechanisms and pres­ sures from w hich governmental decisions emerge.
Two alternative conceptual models, the Organizational Behaviour Model and the Governmental Politics Model , provide a basis for improved explanation and predictions.
According to the Organizational Behaviour Model, w hat Model I analysts characterize as 'acts' and 'choices' are thought o f instead as outputs o f previously established organizations fo llo w ­ ing pre-existing patterns of behaviour.
Faced w ith the fact o f Soviet missiles in Cuba, a Model II analyst focuses on the relevant governm ent organizations and their standard operating pro­ cedures fo r acquiring inform ation, defining feasible options, and im plem enting a programme.
They are not ju st the president, or leaders, but a conglomerate of loosely allied organizations, each w ith a substantial life o f its own.
Government leaders sit form ally on to p o f this conglomerate, but governments perceive problems through organi­ zational sensors.
Therefore, governmental behaviour can be understood, according to the second conceptual model, less as deliberate choices and more as outputs o f large organizations func­ tioning according to predetermined standard patterns o f behaviour.
Dramatic organi­ zational change can occur in response to m ajor disasters, but both learning and change are influenced by existing organizational capabilities and procedures.
Governments are thought o f as if they were an individual person, animated by particular purposes.
Instead, the subjects in M odel II explanations are organizations; their behaviour is accounted fo r in terms o f organizational purposes and practices com m on to the members o f the organization.
Model Il's grasp of government action as organizational output, partially directed by leaders, enlarges Model I's efforts to understand governm ent behaviour as the choices o f a unitary deci­ sion maker, but beyond the Model II analysis lies a further, more refined level o f investigation.
Rather, each individual in a group is, in his/her own right, a player in a competitive game.
M odel III focuses on the individual players that compose a governm ent and the bargain­ ing among them.
For this model, events in foreign affairs are characterized neither as unitary choices nor as organizational outputs.
W hat happens is understood instead as a result of bargaining games am ong players in the national governm ent.
The proposition reflects the fact that power in governm ent is most often shared.
A Model III analyst has explained the event when he/she has discovered w ho did w hat to w hom that yielded the action in question.
M ost players repre­ sent a departm ent o r agency along w ith the interests and constituencies that organization serves.
For an anal­ ogy, consider similarities between using the three models to examine governmental behav­ iour and looking at a leaf through a microscope.
Model I considers the entire leaf as a single functional body that converts sunlight into stored energy.
Model II examines the leaf through a lens that al lows one to see chloroplasts, i n effect 'organ izations' w ith in each cel I that function in concert to store energy.
The advance o f science, however, has largely been a story o f further clarification through disaggregation.
Each o f the three models combs out a lim ited num ber o f causal strands that are woven into our explanation o f the event.
Moreover, each emphasizes different factors in explaining the central puzzles o f the crisis.
Model I defines the broader context, the larger national patterns, and the shared images.
For example, in preparing fo r President Kennedy's meeting w ith Foreign Minister Gromyko on Thursday 18 October, the question arose o f whether Gromyko and his colleagues in the Soviet central circle expected the USA to discover the missiles being installed in Cuba before they became operational.
Moreover, the extraordinarily effective disguise o f the missiles during shipment from the Soviet Union to sites in Cuba, on the one hand, and the absence o f any equivalent cam ou­ flage at the sites, on the other, suggested to some analysts that the Soviets wanted the USA to discover the missiles at about this time.
If the adm inistration had accepted this Model I judgem ent, it m ight have developed a different script fo r the conversation w ith Gromyko.
W hile Model I assumes that the Soviets acted out o f an assessment o f national interests, M odel II notes that different Soviet governm ent organizations controlled the shipm ent and emplacement o f the missiles at different stages o f the o p e ra tio n -re su ltin g in differing levels o f secrecy.
This caused the Soviets to 'accidentally' act in a way detrim ental to th e ir'M o d e l I'calculations.
Here, Model II competes directly w ith M odel I and the tw o yield precisely contrary conclusions.
The USA responds affirm atively to the first Khrushchev letter, but says that, first, missiles now in Cuba must be rendered inoperable and urges quick agreement.
At this point, if not a step or tw o earlier, the Soviet governm ent w ould be intensively consid­ ering possible pre-em ptive nuclear strikes against the USA, especially comm and and control centres such as Washington, in order to lim it the damage inflicted by the overwhelm ing first strike they fear could come at any m om ent.
As a nuclear safety officer observed, 'by an inadvertent act', a single p ilo t carrying out this o rd e r'w o u ld have been able to achieve the full nuclear detonation o f the ,9 weapon.
Unknown to the destroyer's commander, there was a 10-kiloton nuclear torpedo stacked in the submarine's bow.
W ith the push o f a button, Shumkov could have fired the weapon, w hich had an equivalent destructive force to the nuclear bom b dropped at Hiroshima.
Model II and Model III analysts caution against confidence in the im possibility o f nations stum bling into the use o f nuclear weapons, in the manageabil­ ity of nuclear crises, o r in effective crisis management.
Through a M odel II lens, the USA's suc­ cess included crucial organizational rigidities and even mistakes.
If not fo r the organizational and political factors that delayed an im m ediate m ilitary attack on Cuba, the probability of w ar w ould have been much higher.
If not fo r the organizational and political dynamics that produced sufficiently persistent displays o f American resolve to tilt Khrushchev's oscillating estimates o f American determ ination, Khrushchev m ight have proceeded w ith his plan to stage a nuclear confrontation in Berlin that could have proven even m ore dangerous.
The options presented to the leaders are much narrower than the menu analysts might con­ sider desirable, and exhibit unavoidable rigidities o f SOPs.
In a crisis scenario, the overw helm ing problem w ill be controlling large organizations and coordinating between them.
If a president and his/her associates have to manage a nuclear crisis, the inform al machinery, free-wheeling discussions, and devil's advocacy exemplified by ExComm have many advantages; but the mix o f personality, expertise, influence, and te m ­ perament that allows such a group to clarify alternatives, even w hile it bargains over separate preferences, must be better understood.
It is a situation in which we w ill most likely be forced, ultimately, to make a choice between attacking Iran and accom m odating a new nuclear state.
The current deal between the P5 + 1 and Iran, though the best o f many bad options, w ill most likely serve only to 'lengthen the fuse'on Iran's breakout to a bomb.
Just as in the Cuban case, M odel II and III explanations for Iranian behaviour are invaluable to policymakers as they navigate an opaque governm ent decision-m aking process.
As the United States confronts this and other policy challenges in regimes such as Vladim ir Putin's Russia and Xi Jinping's China ove rth e com ing years, these lessons w ill become ever more valuable.
Presidents Obama and Bush agree that nuclear terrorism is the single largest threat to American national security.
This book illuminates the internal decision making of both sides of the crisis based on seldomconsulted classified documents.
This volume brings to light significant re-evaluations of the crisis and, in some cases, truly startling challenges to the conventional wisdom surrounding much of the crisis.
This book offers an insightful look into the executive power of American presidents, thereby accounting for the 'agency' around foreign policy decisions.
