The United States president elected to transmit this sensitive message through his brother, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, who met in his office at the Justice Department with Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
That meeting has long been recognized as a turning point in the crisis, but several aspects of it have been shrouded in mystery and confusion.
United States officials maintained that neither John nor Robert Kennedy promised to withdraw the Jupiters as a quid pro quo, or concession, in exchange for the removal of the Soviet missiles from Cuba, or as part of an explicit agreement, deal, or pledge, but had merely informed Dobrynin that Kennedy had planned to take out the American missiles in any event.
While Thirteen Days depicted RFK as rejecting any firm agreement to withdraw the Jupiters, this was also the first public indication that the issue had even been privately discussed.
The first authoritative admission on the United States side that the Jupiters had actually been part of a ""deal"" came at a conference in Moscow in January 1989, after glasnost had led Soviet former officials to participate in international scholarly efforts to reconstruct and assess the history of the crisis.
At that meeting, former Kennedy speechwriter Theodore Sorensen admitted, after prodding from Dobrynin, that he had taken it upon himself to edit out a ""very explicit"" reference to the inclusion of the Jupiters in the final deal to settle the crisis.
Now Dobrynin's original, contemporaneous, and dramatic cable of the meeting, alluded to in some accounts by Soviets (such as Anatoly Gromyko, son of the late foreign minister) with special access, has been declassified and is available at the archives of the Russian Foreign Ministry.
It is reprinted in translation below, along with relevant excerpts from the other publications mentioned above.
The Dobrynin cable's first publication in English, a copy obtained by the Japanese television network NHK, came last year in an appendix to We AII Lost the Cold War, a study by Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Stein, whose commentary is also excerpted.
I told him first that we knew that work was continuing on the missile bases in Cuba and that in the last few days it had been expedited.
I said that in the last few hours we had learned that our reconnaissance planes flying over Cuba had been fired upon and that one of our U-2s had been shot down and the pilot killed.
He had done everything possible to avoid a military engagement with Cuba and with the Soviet Union, but now they had forced our hand.
Because of the deception of the Soviet Union, our photographic reconnaissance planes would have to continue to fly over Cuba, and if the Cubans or Soviets shot at these planes, then we would have to shoot back.
This would inevitably lead to further incidents and to escalation of the conflict, the implications of which were very grave indeed.
He said the Cubans resented the fact that we were violating Cuban air space.
I replied that if we had not violated Cuban air space, we would still be believing what Khrushchev had said— that there would be no missiles placed in Cuba.
In any case, I said, this matter was far more serious than the air space of Cuba—it involved the peoples of both of our countries and, in fact, people all over the globe.
We had to have a commitment by tomorrow that those bases would be removed.
He should understand that if they did not remove those bases, we would remove them.
President Kennedy had great respect for the Ambassador's country and the courage of its people.
Perhaps his country might feel it necessary to take retaliatory action; but before that was over, there would be not only dead Americans but dead Russians as well.
However, I said, President Kennedy had been anxious to remove those missiles from Italy and Turkey for a long period of time.
He had ordered their removal some time ago, and it was our judgment that, within a short time after this crisis was over, those missiles would be gone.
I said President Kennedy wished to have peaceful relations between our two countries.
He wished to resolve the problems that confronted us in Europe and Southeast Asia.
However, we could make progress on these matters only when the crisis was behind us.
Probably at this very moment the President is sitting down to write a message to Chairman Khrushchev.
We want to ask you, Mr Dobrynin, to pass President Kennedy's message to Chairman Khrushchev through unofficial channels.
President Kennedy implores Chairman Khrushchev to accept his offer and to take into consideration the peculiarities of the American system.
Ambassador Dobrynin felt that Robert Kennedy's book did not adequately express that the ""deal"" on the Turkish missiles was part of the resolution of the crisis.
So I took it upon myself to edit that out of his diaries, and that is why the Ambassador is somewhat justified in saying that the diaries are not as explicit as his conversation.
Later , accepting a proposal from Dean Rusk, Kennedy instructed his brother to tell Ambassador Dobrynin that while there could be no bargain over the missiles that had been supplied to Turkey, the president himself was determined to have them removed and would attend to the matter once the present crisis was resolved—as long as no one in Moscow called that action part of a bargain. [p.
Concerned as we all were by the cost of a public bargain struck under pressure at the apparent expense of the Turks, and aware as we were from the day's discussion that for some, even in our own closest councils, even this unilateral private assurance might appear to betray an ally, we agreed without hesitation that no one not in the room was to be informed of this additional message.
As far as I know, none of the nine of us told anyone else what had happened.
Earlier in the week Bobby Kennedy told Ambassador Dobrynin that if the missile were not withdrawn immediately, the crisis would move into a different and dangerous military phase.
In his book Khrushchev Remembers, Khrushchev states that Robert Kennedy told Dobrynin that the military might take over.
Khrushchev either genuinely misunderstood or deliberately misused Bobby's statement.
Obviously there was never any threat of a military takeover in this country.
In framing a response [to Khrushchev's second letter of Saturday, October 27], the president, Bundy, McNamara, Bobby Kennedy, and I met in the Oval Office, where after some discussion I suggested that since the Jupiters in Turkey were coming out in any event, we should inform the Russians of this so that this irrelevant question would not complicate the solution of the missile sites in Cuba.
Shortly after we returned to our offices, I telephoned Bobby to underline that he should pass this along to Dobrynin only as information, not a public pledge.
Bobby told me that he was then sitting with Dobrynin and had already talked with him.
R Kennedy said that he realized that we had different approaches to these problems and it was not likely that we could convince each other.
The cable testifies to the concern of John and Robert Kennedy that military action would trigger runaway escalation.
Such an admission seems illogical if the administration was using the threat of force to compel the Soviet Union to withdraw its missiles from Cuba.
It significantly raised the expected cost to the United States of an attack against the missiles. thereby weakening the credibility of the American threat.
To maintain or enhance that credibility, Kennedy would have had to discount the probability of Soviet retaliation to Dobrynin.
That nobody in the government was certain of Khrushchev's response makes Kennedy's statement all the more remarkable.
At the very least, Kennedy suggested that he thought that Soviet retaliation was likely.
It seems likely that Kennedy was trying to establish the basis for a more cooperative approach to crisis resolution.
The pressure on the president to attack Cuba, as Kennedy explained at the beginning of the meeting, had been greatly intensified by the destruction of an unarmed American reconnaissance plane.
The president did not want to use force, in part because he recognized the terrible consequences of escalation, and was therefore requesting Soviet assistance to make it unnecessary.
This interpretation is supported by the president's willingness to remove the Jupiter missiles as a quid pro quo for the withdrawal of missiles in Cuba, and his brother's frank confession that the only obstacle to dismantling the Jupiters were political.
Khrushchev would have to cooperate with the administration to keep the American concession a secret.
This was a deliberate attempt to defuse as much as possible the hostility that Kennedy's request for an answer by the next day was likely to provoke in Moscow.
On this occasion, Dobrynin indicates, the attorney general kept his emotions in check and took the ambassador into his confidence in an attempt to cooperate on the resolution of the crisis.
This two-pronged strategy succeeded where compellence alone might have failed.
It gave Khrushchev positive incentives to remove the Soviet missiles and reduced the emotional cost to him of the withdrawal.
