The Traditional and Revisionist Interpretations Reevaluated RICHARD NED LEBOW For more than a quarter of a century, there have been two diametricall opposed points of view about why Cuba was a crisis and why it was resolved The traditional interpretation, enshrined in the writings of Theodore Sorensen, Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., and Elie Abel, describes the Cub missiles as an intolerable provocation.
President John F Kennedy had compel the Soviet Union to withdraw the missiles to defend the balance of power, preserve NATO, and convince Nikita S Khrushchev and the world of American resolve.
Sorensen, Schlesinger, and Abel laud the ""quarantine"" the ontimal strateev. deoict the outcome of the crisis as an unaualified American triumph, and attribute it to Kennedy's skill and tenacity.
Th revisionist interpretation, primarily associated with the writings of I F Stone, Ronald Steel, Barton J Bernstein, and James Nathan, contends that Kennedy needlessly risked war for domestic political gain.
Revisionist condemn the blockade as irresponsible and explain the resolution of the cris as the result of Soviet moderation and American good luck.
The new evidence that has become available in the last several years compels us to reevaluate the competing claims of these divergen interpretations.
The traditional interpretation vie response to the threat posed by the m to communicate American resolve to Khrushchev but avoided the violence of the air strike, which might have compelled a Soviet military response.
He chose the quarantine in preference to an air attack because it demonstrated resolve without violence and thereby provided the Soviets room to maneuver and a peaceful way out of the crisis.
Sorensen is also effusive in his oraise of Kennedy's ahilitv to keen his emotions in check.
He stressed Ken corresponding need to get th emphasized the importance o that Khrushchev would never Cuba.
For both of these reason private overture to Khrushc believes that such an overture would have led to resolution of the conflict and avoided the crisis.
Within the scholarly community, the revisionist interpretation has received its fullest expression in the writings of Stanford historian Barton Bernstein.
In a series of carefully researched articles, Bernstein has portrayed Kennedy and his most intimate advisers as men driven by the perceived necessity of impressing Khrushchev and other Soviet leaders with American resolve.
Som now willing to acknowledge this truth John Kenneth Galbraith, Kennedy's about the role domestic politics played blockade.
If the administration tolerated the missiles, he it would be faced with a revolt from the military, from the hardliners in other departments, both State and CIA, from not only Republicans on Capitol Hill but some Democrats, too; that it would be faced with all this opposition at home just at the time that it would be undergoing deep and very dangerous challenges from the Soviets brought on by die alteration in the balance of power wrought by their successful introduction of missiles in Cuba, and which might well put the United States in mortal danger.
For Hilsman, domestic politics was only one component, albeit an important one, of Kennedy's decision to seek a showdown with Khrushchev.
Theodore Sorensen now acknowledges the existence of these political influences but downplays their significance.
He maintains that the pressures pushing Kennedy toward a confrontation were always offset by those pulling him in the opposite direction.
Public opinion was indeed divided in its response to the blockade; there were some Americans who believed that Kennedy was needlessly courting nuclear war.
There was also a sizable minority who believed he was not being tough enough.
Kennedy heard complaints to this effect from the senators, some of them prominent Democrats, with whom he met prior to his announcement of the blockade.
The Politics of Foreign Policy in the Administration of John F Kennedy , 196.
Almost any leader in harbor second thoughts about that people often resort to bol the residual anxiety they gene of ""spreading the alternatives. of their chosen policy will be and the costs of rejected altern to his brother may have been a about accepting it at face value Even if Kennedy's concern ab to a very real concern for th policy.
McGeorge Bundy sug Keating —and, much Richard M Nixon—would ha administration.
The Nature of International Crisis (Baltimore, 1981); and Robert Jervis, Richard Ned Lebow, and Janice Gross Stein, Psychology and Deterrence , chaps.-4,9.
The assertion that domestic politics were never referred to in the Ex Comm is in any case incorrect.
The announcement —we didn't say we'd go in and not, and kill them, we said we'd act.
Well, first place, we carry out open surveillance, so we know what they're doing.
Because, as I suggested, I don't believe it's primarily a military problem.
Some Ex Comm members disagreed strongly with McNamara, insisting that the missiles did have strategic significance.
But no one challenged his assertion that the president confronted a serious political problem.
Bundy's comment, and that of the unidentified speaker, indicated agreement.
The general discussion that ensued made it apparent that neither the president nor his advisers was at all certain about the military importance of the missiles.
McNamara told the Ex Comm that he had put the question to the chiefs and found them perturbed by the military threat the missiles would pose.
He did not believe that the missiles would make no military difference.
The United States could be attacked by ICBMs stationed in the Soviet Union and Moscow would significantly augment the size of this force in the course of the next few years whether or not it was able to keep its shorter-range missiles in Cuba.
The only advantage of the Cuban deployment was that it allowed the Soviets to close the missile gap a few years earlier than they would in any case.
In the ensuing week, two memorandums on the missiles were submitted to the president and secretary of state.
But the first serious evaluation of their military implications only became available to the Ex Comm on 27 October in the form of a memorandum, prepared by Raymond L Garthoff, special assistant for Soviet bloc politico military affairs in the State Department.
This advantage would be in part offset by the missiles' vulnerability to a United States first strike.
Garthoff s memorandums are of academic interest only because by the time they were submitted the decision in favor of the blockade had already been made and implemented.
Both interpretations address only the expected costs to the president of not challenging the Soviets in Cuba.
He was sensitive to the likelihood that the Republican opposition—and Democrats like Senators Russell and Fulbright, who wanted an invasion of Cuba—would almost certainly turn on him the moment American military operations met with serious resistance.
Kennedy would have remembered the fate of his Democratic predecessor, Harry S Truman.
Ohio Senator Robert A Taft, leader of the Republican opposition, was initially full of praise for Truman's decision to come to the aid of South Korea.
But within weeks, he and other Republican senators were derisively referring to the conflict as 'Truman's War ""38 Truman's siihsftnnp.nl rlftrisinn In r-mss thp thirtv-ftiohfh narallftl anil occupy North Korea was primarily a response to domestic political pressures.
But as soon as Douglas Mac Arthur's advancing forces ran into the Chinese and were forced into an ignominious and costly retreat, the Republicans turned on Truman and successfully made his conduct of the Korean War a major campaign issue.
Kennedy's desire to avoid this kind of political trap was probably one important reason why he shied away from an air strike and sent his brother to tell Anatoly A Dobrynin that he was prepared to pull the Jupiter missiles out of Turkey.
It also may have influenced his apparent willingness to consider further concessions if they became necessary to resolve the crisis.
This is an u contemplated concessions at th war reveals nothing about his Soviet missiles at the outset between the role domestic po dénoument.
The second issue dividing revi concern for demonstrating essential to convince Khrushc administration in particular, co that Kennedy's concern for his any objective foreign policy ne Revisionists are nndoiihtedlv correct in seeintr something extraordinary about Kennedy's thoroughly documented propensity to see Khrushchev's assessment of his resolve as an important component of all of his foreign policy initiatives.
From the very beginning of his presidency, Kennedy felt the need to convince Khrushchev of his resolve.
For the president and his advisers, the Cuban missiles were confirmation of their worst fears.
Soviet testimony indicates that Kennedy's understanding of Soviet foreign policy expectations was wrong in two fundamental respects.
Khrushchev's provocations were neither opportunity driven nor prompted by his lack of respect for Kennedy's resolve.
Khrushchev's foreign policy was a response to Soviet fears about the consequences of their own strategic and political weakness, fears that were only intensified by American efforts to demonstrate strength and resolve.
It was not Kennedy's performance in Vienna, acceptance of the Berlin Wall, or failure to commit troops to the Bay of Pigs that led to the Cuban missiles but rather his deployment of Jupiters in Turkey, proclamations of strategic superiority, and political-military nressures aeainst Castro.
Kennedy's failure to grasp Khrushchev's motives was due in large part to the conceptual biases he and most of his advisers brought to the analysis of Soviet foreign policy, biases that were derived from the experience of the 1930s.
At the outset of the Cold War, American policymakers treated Stalin's Russia as the linear descendant of Hitler's Germany.
Like Na assumed to be ideologically motivate And like Hitler, Stalin and his succe opportunists, constantly probing for w that could be exploited to extend their Kennedy gave every indication of vi prism of the 1930s.
It is probably not view as largely shaped by the fiasco o hand in exposing its political and mor to the Court of St.
The twenty time with his father in England, used thesis, published under the title W indictment of England's lack of prepa associated with it.
The young Kenne his father's commitment on the other in the war that followed made him even more committed to the so-called lesson of Munich and its relevance to Soviet-American relations.
In fairness to Kennedy, we must recognize that whatever predisposition he had to see parallels between Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union was undeniably abetted by Khrushchev's bullying speeches, boasts of superiority, and crude displays of force.
All of this evoked memories of Hitler and had the effect of legitimizing the hold of the lessons of the 1930s on American minds.
We know today that Khrushchev's bellicose posturing was primarily designed to mask Soviet inferiority.
But Kennedy did not know this and his analogical reasoning led him to put the worst possible interpretation on Khrushchev's rhetoric and behavior.
Khrushchev's admittedly threatening behavior cannot in itself account for Kennedy's doubts about his own reputation for resolve.
Kennedy's comments to advisers and newsmen are revealing for their one-sided fixation on events and policies that he believed conveyed an impression of weakness to Khrushchev.
The Bay of Pigs was admittedly ambiguous in its implications, but Vienna and the Berlin crisis could only be interpreted this way by someone prepared to distort reality to confirm his unjustified fears.
By all accounts Kennedy had been tough at the Vienna summit; even Khrushchev had come away impressed by his bravura performance.
The kindest explanation for Kennedy's fixation on his resolve is cognitive.
Its starting point is his use of the images and lessons of the 1930s as his organizing principles for understanding international relations.
These images and lessons led him to draw analogies between the 1930s and the 1960s and to predict that Khrushchev would behave aggressively if he had a military advantage or doubted the resolve of his adversaries.
When Khrushchev took the offensive in Southeast Asia and Berlin, Kennedy assumed that it was the result of his belief in Soviet strategic superiority and his lack of respect for Kennedy's resolve.
Khrushchev's repeated assertions that the ""correlation of forces"" increasingly favored the Soviet Union appeared to confirm the first of these assumptions.
It directs our attention to Kennedy's personal insecurities and the ways in which they might have distorted his understanding of Khrushchev's motives.
To the extent that Kennedy had deep-seated doubts about his own courage and capability he may have projected them on to Khrushchev and interpreted his actions in terms of them.
Whichever explanation is correct—and perhaps they both are—the effect was the same.
Kennedy's analysis of his successive encounters with Khrushchev in terms of the assumptions he made about both himself and Khrushchev only served to confirm the validity of those assumptions in his mind and to tighten their grip on him.
This process blinded him to the possibility that Khrushchev might be motivated by any defensive reason, or combination of reasons.
To this point, our review of the evidence offers considerable support for the revisionist interpretation of the origin of the crisis.
Kennedy unquestionably misunderstood Soviet motives and had an exaggerated and largely counterproductive concern for demonstrating resolve.
His vulnerability on Cuba and Republican efforts to exploit it led him to define the introduction of ballistic missiles into Cuba as unacceptable.
Theodore Sorensen has made a remarkable admission about the calculations that entered into Kennedy's warnings to the Soviets.
The president had no qualms about his warnings, according to Sorensen, because he did not believe that Khrushchev had any intention of introducing missiles into Cuba.
I say that beli would have been an act of prudence, not wea one reason the line was drawn at zero was Soviets weren't going to deploy any there an Whether Kennedy would have drawn the there are good political reasons for d indicate the extent to which the presi domestic political, not a military threat. response to the discovery of Soviet m public outrage—directed against himself him of the need to secure the missiles' wit before knowledge of the missiles beca Comm to help him formulate the best m end itself was not subject to debate.
He a of avoiding political loss, not in the expe is simply not true, as some revisionists a of the world to improve his political stan the Democratic party.
The difference between avoiding loss a Sorensen's remarks indicate that Kennedy situation in which he would have to c confrontation and political loss.
His desir motivated his public and private warni line at the introduction of ballisti ivnrusncnev mai ne wouia not oppose me ongoing soviet conventional buildup in Cuba.
This was a major concession given the American public's opposition to that buildup.
It stands as a clear indication of the president's willingness to incur real political costs in the hope of forestalling a more serious confrontation.
To seek such a confrontation in the hope of gain would have been as anathema to Kennedy as it is to the revisionists.
Revisionists also err in ignoring or dismissing the strategic and foreign policy implications of tolerating the Cuban missile deployment.
It is by no means clear that their military consequences were so minimal—the evidence indicates otherwise—but this was not why Kennedy opposed the missiles.
But in evaluating fundamental distinction bet the introduction of missiles i Even if Khrushchev's dec nothing to do with his assess oppose them could have rai Cuba was entirely different implications of those incide marginal because it was not been engaged.
But in Cub staked his reputation on def Soviet missiles into Cuba would have revealed his well-publicized commitment to have been a bluff.
Khrushchev's apparent failure to take this dimension of the problem into account when formulating his policy does not mean that he would have remained blind to it in its aftermath.
The domestic political consequences of tolerating a Cuban missile deployment would have been enormous.
Kennedy's presidency would have brén crippled and the Republicans might even have won control of Congress in November.
Kennedy's willingness to accept these losses in preference to the risks of a Soviet-American crisis would have communicated a clear and dangerous message to Khrushchev.
It could have emboldened him, as Kennedy feared, to embark upon further provocations.
The revisionists are wrong to dismiss the serious international implications of the deployment just as the traditionalists err in ignoring their domestic political consequences.
The third issue on which the traditionalists and revisionists disagree is Kennedy's decision to impose a ""naval quarantine"" of Cuba as the preferred means of compelling the Soviets to withdraw their missiles.
Traditionalists view the blockade as a judicious and successful choice.
Revisionists believe that it unnecessarily risked war for a goal that could have been achieved by purely diplomatic means.
Here the evidence seems to support the traditionalists, but not necessarily for the reasons they advance.
Traditionalists insist that quiet diplomacy was ruled out by the need to act before the missiles became operational, which would make military action against them immeasurably more costly.
But we know that the pressure on the president to act had little to do with the status of the missiles.
Kennedy rejected a secret overture to believe it would succeed in halting work the removal of the missiles.
To gain the believed they would have to threaten mili was better to present Khrushchev with that would allow him time to prepare a cou Kennedy also viewed a secret overture a needed to be taught a lesson, not just r tempted to renew his challenge of the U.S diplomacy succeeded in convincing Khrush would not have conveyed American reso believed essential to moderate future Sovi opted for a full-fledged confrontation 5i cp.rirwic and nnHpcimH rick nf xuar The evidence indicates that Kennedy acted from a combination of motives.
He was troubled by both the foreign policy and domestic political implications of the Cuban missiles.
He chose the blockade because it conveyed resolve without violence and was less likely than an air strike to lead to runaway escalation.
The blockade represented a tradeoff between the imperatives for action, which pushed him up the ladder of escalation, and the risks of a confrontation, which pulled him down.
The Ex Comm's Soviet experts, Charles ""Chip"" Bohlen and Llewellyn ""Tommie"" Thompson, argued unsuccessfully for a private overture to Khrushchev.
During the Ex Comm discussions on 17 and 18 October, Bohlen proposed that Kennedy write a letter to Khrushchev asking him to withdraw the missiles and then decide whether to proceed with a blockade, air strike, or invasion on the basis of Khrushchev's response.
They were unable to find a way of expressing American indignation and the demand that the missiles be removed in a manner that would not provoke the kind of crisis the letter was meant to avoid.
None of the revisionists offers any reasons to support the contention that Khrushchev would have responded positively.
One argument that could be made, and it seems implicit in Lippmann's formulation of the problem, is that backing down in response to a private rather than a public ultimatum would have been less costly for Khrushchev, and hence more attractive.
It might also be argued that a secret overture would have changed Moscow's estimate of the risk involved in continuing wiin me missue uepioyment. ryaor uuriaisxy is convincea uiai a crisis could have been avoided if Kennedy had told Gromyko that the United States had discovered the Soviet missiles and would tolerate them.
It is certainly possible that Khrushchev might have been persuaded by a combination of threats and promises to dismantle his missile bases in Cuba.
The revisionists are correct in asserting that the public foreign policy costs to Khrushchev of backing down in an ""eyeball to eyeball"" confrontation could have been avoided by a private accommodation.
But this was by no means the only or the most important price to Khrushchev of withdrawing the missiles.
Evidence from the Soviet side indicates that the two most critical constituencies for Khrushchev were Fidel Castro and the Soviet political and military officials upon whom he relied for internal political support.
Malinovsky and other Soviet hard-liners felt the same way and almost eeiiaiiny wuuiu nave accuseu rviirusncnev or cowaruice ana or selling our Castro had he agreed to dismantle the missile sites and withdraw t missiles in response to a secret ultimatum from Kennedy.
The crisis probably necessary to convince both Castro and Soviet hard-liners Khrushchev had absolutely no choice but to remove the missiles or face w with the United States.
The crisis also softened the blow for Khrushc politically by allowing him to secure a noninvasion pledge from Kenn and a private commitment to withdraw the American Jupiter missiles fr Turkey.
Bec crisis, and the promise to rem years later, most Americans did not view the pledge as craven accommodation but as a statesmanlike gesture to end the confrontation by allowing a defeated adversary to save face.
There is also the important question of Kennedy's objectives to consider.
Kennedy also sought to teach Khrushchev a lesson, something he did not believe he could accomplish by quiet diplomacy, even if it led to the withdrawal of the missiles.
Rightly or wrongly, the president sought a dramatic public confrontation as the only means of accomplishing this end.
Like every other aspect of Cuba, its significance for the subsequent course of Soviet-American relations has been hotly debated.
The traditional interpretation views Cuba as a notable American victory with long-term beneficial consequences for Soviet-American relations.
Revisionists agree that Kennedy imposed his will on Khrushchev but insist that his victory was a pyrrhic one because it prompted the subsequent Soviet strategic arms buildup.
They further contend that Kennedy's successful use of coercive diplomacy led ineluctably to American intervention in Vietnam.
Kennedy's immediate reaction to the resolution of the crisis was relief, not triumph.
He instructed all members of the Ex Comm and government that no interview should be given, no statement made, which would claim any kind of victory.
Typical of their self-congratulatory analyses was Zbigniew Brzezinski's arrogant assertion in 1967 that Cuba reaffirmed American strategic supremacy.
The outcome of the crisis was closer to a compromise than to a one-sided 63Kennedy, Thirteen Days, 128.
In addition to a public privately agreed to withdraw the Am considered making a public declaration to tough"" for another day or two, Kennedy favorably to an appeal from UN Secretar on the basis of a missile swap.
Soviet testimony reveals that Khrushchev was acting in response to his own country's perceived weakness and seeking to prevent loss.
Kennedy's bargaining reputation, considered the most important determinant of credibility by deterrence theorists, seems to have been largely irrelevant to Khrushchev's expectation that his provocation would succeed.
If the missile deployment was neither triggered nor abetted by Soviet doubts about American resolve, then a demonstration of resolve was unnecessary to forestall this or other challenges.
Indeed, such demonstrations helped to bring it about Bundy, Rostow, and Schelling are nevertheless right in seeing Cuba as an important turning point in Soviet-American relations.
The most fundamental reason why there has been only one Cuba has to with the origins of the crisis.
Khrushchev acted out of a sense of despera He was willing to embark on a high-risk challenge to the United St because he believed that the consequences of inaction would be m detrimental to Soviet strategic and foreign policy interests.
We have neve had another crisis of the magnitude of Cuba because neither superpower h ever felt as threatened by the other as the Soviets did in the spring summer of 1961.
Western analysts generally agre that the Soviet ""ultimatum"" that triggered that crisis was issued in respo to Soviet fears that a continued Israeli advance would result in a humiliati defeat of their client state Egypt and the possible overthrow of its leader It is the absence of acute needs, not of opportunities, that has been respons for the lack of acute crises.
His emotional arous clouded his judgment and made empathy with President Kennedy and constraints under which he operated all but impossible.
It also ruled o uiuiuugu aim uidpaddiuuau/ ^vaiuauun ui urn ltjA/i^uaawjiia ui a v-uuan missile deployment.
We have only spotty evidence ab subsequent Soviet leaders, but it supports the su combination of anger and threat are a potent catalyst for foreign policies.
Brezhnev's decision in October 1973 to t in the Middle East was made in such circumstances, as 1978 to invade Afghanistan.
To put Cuba in its proper perspective it is also necessa personality of Nikita Khrushchev.
He gambled, often with little apparen Cuba fits this pattern of behavior.
It should be seen in t bluff about the potency of Soviet strategic forces, his B his virgin lands program.
Together with Cuba, these ""harebrained schemes"" that his politburo colleagues refer of his dismissal.
Soviet pronouncements after the c interest in reducing Cold War tensions.
Many Kennedy officials have testified to the way i look down the barrel of the nuclear gun rekindled their some way to reduce the chances of war.
James Nathan, who has traced the impact of the missile crisis on Vietnam policy, has identified four ""lessons"" of the crisis that disposed American policymakers to intervention in Southeast Asia.
These are ""that success in international crisis was largely a matter of national guts; that the opponent would yield to superior force; that presidential control of force can be 'suitable,' Ipctivp crisis management and execution are too dangerous and events move too rapidly for anything but the tightest secrecy—all these inferences contributed to President Johnson's decision to use American air power against Hanoi in 1965.""75 from tne perspective or a quarter or a century, cuoa increasingly nas tne air of a lost opportunity.
It created the mood and determination that were necessary for the test ban and hot line agreement But this momentum did not carry the superpowers much further along the road to accommodation.
Perhaps this was because Kennedy was assassinated in November 1963 and Khrushchev was removed from power in October 1964.
Their successors had neither their commitment to bury the Cold War hatchet nor their special intimacy, both of which were essential prerequisites for this objective.
American and Soviet officials agree that the missile crisis created a unique bond between the two superpower leaders.
It was based in part on having guided the destinies of their respective nations through the most acute confrontation of the nuclear age.
Only Kennedy and Khrushchev really knew what it was like to make decisions that might determine the survival of their countrymen.
More important still was the personal relationship the two men had developed during the course of the crisis.
His image of the willing to risk the peace o communism's sphere of influen a man who was as concerned a countrymen and motivated by moved him.
