By Rachel Dobbs National Security Archives National Security Archives July 10, 2012, 2:24 PM Fifty years on, it is difficult to comprehend just how high Cold War tensions were in the summer of 1962, and to recall how that evolved into the crisis of October, when the world's most powerful states were on the brink of nuclear war.
In 1962, the nuclear stockpile of the United States, consisting of more than 3,500 warheads, was six times that of the Soviet Union.
The most powerful weapons -Intercontinental Ballistic Missiles -had ranges greater than 8,600 miles and were capable of hitting targets almost anywhere within the Soviet Union from American soil.
Although much lower than the long-range missiles held by the Americans, these weapons still represented a nuclear power between 7,560 to 14,280 times greater than the Hiroshima bomb.
Fifty years on, it is difficult to comprehend just how high Cold War tensions were in the summer of 1962, and to recall how that evolved into the crisis of October, when the world’s most powerful states were on the brink of nuclear war.
The United States also held significant superiority in its strategic bombing forces.
At the end of the crisis in October, a total of 1,306 American bomber planes were deployed with the ability to deliver 2,962 nuclear weapons.
By the time the Strategic Air Command reached its maxiumum strength on November 4, these weapons were either continually in the air or on a fifteen minute alert.
The deployment of arms abroad was another crucial factor in the balance of international power.
By 1962, 30 “Jupiter” Medium Range Ballistic Missiles had been stationed in Italy by the United States, with a further 15 in Turkey.
This was in addition to 60 “Thor” medium range missiles deployed in Britain, each with equivalent power and range to the Jupiter.
Medium range missiles stationed in the Soviet Union were of little danger to the United States but, if placed in Cuba — just 90 miles from the United States mainland — they would pose an immediate threat to American territory similar to that felt by the Russians.
National Security Archives – image shows an R-12 missile in Red Square, Moscow.
Referred to as “SS-5s” by the CIA, these never reached Cuba as the ships carrying them turned around in the Atlantic on October 23.
These were tactical weapons capable of firing nuclear cruise missiles at targets such as the United States Guantanamo naval base and any potential American landing sites.
These were considered tactical nuclear weapons, to be targeted at potential landing sites.
Within the United States these were referred to as “FROGs” due to the road-based mobility of the missile launchers.
As the events of 1962 unfolded, this mixture of force and fallibility would push two superpowers to the very edge of mutual destruction.
Although much lower than the long-range missiles held by the Americans, these weapons still represented a nuclear power between 7,560 to 14,280 times greater than the Hiroshima bomb. <\/p> <p> The United States also held significant superiority in its strategic bombing forces.
This was in addition to 60 \""Thor\"" medium range missiles<i> <\/i>deployed in Britain, each with equivalent power and range to the Jupiter.
