A Psychoanalytic Perspective1 Blema S Steinberg2 This paper examines the major explanations for deterrence failure and propo an additional explanatory variable drawn from psychoanalytic theory-the ex rience of shame and humiliation by foreign policy leaders.
Decision-makers have undergone such experiences may be inclined to challenge the status quo order to restore their sense of self-esteem, even when such behavior violate precepts of rational deterrence theory.
The foreign policy behavior of Nik Khruschev and John F Kennedy, during the Cuban missile crisis, is examine detail to demonstrate the way in which feelings of shame and humiliation frequently followed by narcissistic rage that expresses itself in acts of aggres in an attempt to alleviate those painful affects and increase feelings of self-wor The evidence suggests that placingforeign policy leaders in positions of hum tion may stimulate their desire for revenge, invite retaliatory behavior, a particularly in times of crisis, run the risk of all-out war.
For t is only one of s Policy-makers that push them by peaceful me balance.
Thus d attention to the military capabi If it is not ext perceived vuln tions they enge & Stein, 1987). need to offset behavior.
Stei 1969 and 1973 s Sinai before de Egyptian milita escalating dome were erased by Humiliation ap these failures h continued feeli 1973 and Arge deterrence failu ate its adversar and Austro-H (Lebow, 1981, This paper will Crisis both as a explanation of vious experienc important and this crisis.
While political tion for superp with its empha critics of ratio deterrence nor 3A more complete pass such additiona defensive styles.
Different models are requ anomalies in behavior that rational deterrence th dicting or explaining.
Shame involves feelings ranging in intensity from bashfulness to embarrassment, as well as the experience of bein down, dishonored, disgraced, humiliated, or mortified.
Thus it i speak of the ""shame family of emotions"" (Lewis, 1971, Nath 4For a detailed treatment of the debate between proponents of rational deterrenc cates of comparative case analysis, see ""The rational deterrence debate"" (1989 5Indicative of the need for psychoanalytic insights, Blight and Welch c cognitive orientation of much of the psychological literature on crisis behavi references to Freud.
He and links it to and fecal prod comes a lasti claims that th things is the b humiliation.
From this perspecti cissistic wishes are abruptly disappointed, and when unexpectedly violated.
Others assert that narcissism includes the i aggressive as well as libidinous feelings.
According to Piers and Singer , in the expe drop in self-esteem occasioned by the failure to live ideal contains a core of narcissistic omnipotence-gr ideals, the sum of the positive identifications wi awareness of the ego's potentialities and goals.
Where a defect or failure of the s shame carries with it a decrease in narcissistic self-e affect of shame arises when the individual perceives 71n an effort to distinguish between the two closely related conc Morrison argues that the ego ideal represents the classif object representations which an individual internalizes as a ch himself.
When a child is chastised, some aspect of the idealized omniscient parent is lost, but in order to maintain a stable-if no longer real-object image, the ego introjects a sense of parental omniscience which is retained in the superego.
Kohut (1968, 1971) maintains that many shame-prone people do not possess strong ideals; most are exhibitionistic and driven by ambition.
Shame, from his perspective, is not about the failure of the ego to live up to the ego ideal.
Rather, it is a reaction to the loss of grandiosity and omnipotence of early childhood and, later, to the loss of narcissistic supplies afforded by idealized objects which take the role of real loved objects.
The current interpersonal unresponsiveness of an external object may not be what determines shame; rather it may be the repeated developmental experiences of emphatic failure during development.
Aggression may be construed as a pure accumulation of a special type of psychic energy without intrinsic direction.
In becoming functional, it must have a target, whether it be the subject's own ego or an external object, or the ego's projection.
The phenomenon of narcissism, the lever for externalization of aggression, is thus critically important.
It contributes decisively to the sense of differentiation of the self from the outer world, and later,-in its balance and interaction with object love-, to the modes, directions and degrees of externally directed aggression.
In Freud's first lengthy treatment of the subjec aggression seemed to be a component of the sexu not until later that Freud gave separate a aggressive and destructive instincts.
He focused thanatos-the death instinct which carries each of that man's natural aggressive instinct is the deriv the death instinct which exists alongside Eros.
Whether or not there is a latent primary aggressive drive, Stone suggested that the prolonged helpless state of human infancy may be viewed as especially conducive to the mobilization of aggression.
Waelder argues more forcefully that the drive for mastery is a major motivation and purpose of aggression-part of the self-preservative complex and an ego function.
Self-psychologists also challenge the view that a tendency to kill is deeply rooted in man's psychological make-up and stems from his animal past.
For Rochlin , the important question, is not what makes people aggressive and hateful, but what makes them prone to feeling vulnerable and humiliated.
Humbled by others, we are likely to attack them when we ourselves fail.
A lowering of self-esteem mobilizes aggression in such a way that increased demands are made upon a relationship for relief from the overpowering sense of diminished worth.
Although Anna Freud documents the way in which the individual frequently engages in ""identification with the aggressor"" as a powerful defense against being a victim, Rochlin declares that she ignores the role aggression plays in enhancing self-esteem, by enabling the individual to overcome threats and injuries to his narcissism.
There are two instances in which we are prone to the most violent aggression.
Interstate conflic for a combination of the wounded narcissism of decision-makers and the behavior of foreigners to unleash hostility.
A study of some of the great classics of literature documents the understanding their authors had about the relationship between aggression and injured narcissism.
In the great classic of the international crisis literature, the Cuban missile embroglio, the characters of John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev also provide us with clear and painful evidence of these same lessons.
A study of the Cuban missile crisis allows us to explore the context in which Khrushchev and Kennedy each experienced narcissistic injury and humiliation at each other's hands, and how each then attempted to repair his wounded self-esteem using the power of his respective state as an instrument of aggression.
THE ROLE OF SHAME AND HUMILIATION Orthodox interpretations of Khrushchev's decision in the summ place missiles in Cuba have tended to ignore psychological variables instead on Soviet calculations of costs and benefits-a rational actor model.
From this perspective, three principal explanations emerged to explain the Soviet emplacement.
The first and most widely accepted was that the Soviet Union was fearful of the political implications of the unfavorable shift in the global balance of power that was taking place.
Soviet leaders, according to this argument, knew that their oft-proclaimed assertion of strategic missile superiority was bluff.
In response to growing American strategic superiority, the Soviet leadership decided to place mediumand intermediate-range missiles in Cuba in order to give themselves a ""quick-fix,"" a way of compensating in the short term for Soviet strategic inferiority.
Although the missiles would be vulnerable to nuclear and even conventional strikes from the United States, their existence, nevertheless, was seen as complicating a United States attack, and thereby strengthening the Soviet 8Allison analyzes the Soviet missile emplacement and the American imposition of a blockade using a rational actor model first, and then two additional models-bureaucratic politics and organizational processes-to demonstrate the limitations of the rational actor model.
Other analysts who studied the missile crisis using alternative models include Janis , using group dynamics, Steinbruner , cybernetics, and Snyder , cognition.
According to the orthodox interpreters, the weapons systems introduce also weakened Khrushchev's justification for his actions.
The medium-ra ballistic missiles had a range of 1100 miles; the intermediate-range ballistic missiles had a range of twice that distance.
Between the they could target almost any important population center or military installat in the United States.
If all that Khrushchev sought was the defense of Cuba less formidable strategic force-one capable of hitting only parts of the sout eastern United States-would have been preferable; it would have helped allay American anxieties.
The Soviets could have attained this capability with a lim 9At least two Western analysts accepted Khrushchev's explanation at face value.
Similarly, Stuart Chase commented that it was n impossible that Soviet willingness to withdraw their missiles from Cuba was part of a plan to sec a pledge against invasion.
These explanations of Soviet behavior focus p and political considerations and presume that So that is that they engaged in purposeful behavio benefit and cost-risk calculations.
Lebow is al assumption and comments that it is curious why convince himself in the face of all indications t nedy's carefully worded warnings-that he could siles into Cuba.
In his view, what seems to have failure to communicate its intentions clearly, bu perception that the American commitment was v rooted less in Kennedy's presumed weakness,' 0 a to achieve specific foreign policy objectives.
Leb policy leaders may be predisposed to challenge t grave foreign and domestic threats, even when a benefits would dictate otherwise.
Having been publicly shamed in this fashio superiority shot down in flames-Khrushchev was humiliation that United States demands might impose unwilling to postpone the need to restore his dam the next generation of Soviet ICBMs to be deplo A successful Soviet installation of missiles in Cuba would have added twothirds to the total Soviet nuclear arsenal; no doubt Soviet leaders hoped and even expected that such a dramatic increment to their strategic military power would have political and military dividends for an activist Soviet foreign policy.
Its contribution, however, to resolving Soviet strategic inferiority and to strengthening the Soviet offensive capability would have been extremely limited given the vulnerability of these soft target missiles to conventional and nuclear attacks from the United States, and the difficulty in coordinating their use with Soviet ICBMs in a first-strike attack.
A more likely reason for the Soviet attempt to increase their strategic military power was almost certainly a perceived need to prevent the United States from using its growing strategic superiority to compel Soviet concessions on various issues under contention.
At the very least, they would have complicated the American ability to launch a first strike and would have enabled the Soviets to avoid having to make any humiliating concessions to the Americans.
But what e Several well-pl Sergei Khrushc ican invasion w vation for the Welch, 1989, p can intent the the OAS, that i revolutionary not occurring, attempts to ass invasion.
I'm not su was more an e bases around latsky recount on the Black S ample lunch.
I'm going to stick it to him too-maybe then they'll know what it feels like.
In subsequent correspondence with Lebow, he indicated that he had been unable, as yet, to provide additional confirmation; Garthoff reports a similar conversation whose source is also Fedor M Burlatsky.
Khrushchev's own memoirs would also seem to support Burlatsky's account.
And it was high time America learned what it feels like to have her own land and her own people threatened.
It may also explain, in part, why t were in excess of the 14 obsolete Jupiters in Turke to defend Cuba, and yet still insufficient to redre balance.
THE PRELUDE TO THE MISSILE CRISIS If the pain of having been humiliated, the fear of future humiliatio wish to retaliate by inflicting humiliation on his superpower opponen Khrushchev's behavior vis-at-vis the United States, such emotions also Kennedy's behavior.
To appreciate the role that shame and humiliation Kennedy's response to the American photoreconnaissance discovery 14, 1962, that Soviet mediumand intermediate-range missiles placed in Cuba, it is important to understand the psychological contex these actions occurred.
Cuba was an issue on which Kennedy felt particularly vulnerable for a number of reasons.
It began to assume prominence for him as the 1960 presidential campaign entered its final phase.
The Senate internal security sub-committee, dominated by conservative Democrats, released a report charging that Cuba ""was handed to Castro and the communists by a combination of Americans in the same way that China was handed to the Communists"" (Horowitz, 1965, p.8).21 Following publication of the report, Kennedy made the Cuban issue a major part of his campaign.
At the same time that he criticized the administration for supporting the Batista dictatorship, he noted, with approval, that Ambassadors Gardiner and Smith had warned that communism was a moving force in the Castro leadership, but that the administration had failed to heed their advice.
Although neither his youth, his wealth, nor defeat Kennedy in his race to the White Hou arms, had dealt him a humiliating blow.
Ken seen as having ""lost"" Cuba, since, by his optio solution while failing to go far enough, nam adequate American military support to overt tinued to regard Castro's retention of power suggested by his administration's decision to program, ""Operation Mongoose,"" to overthrow no more successful than the Bay of Pigs.
Kennedy's experiences of humiliation at the hands of b shchev produced highly affective responses.
Thus, it is har discovery of the missiles in Cuba, just over a year later, restore his damaged self-esteem by administering his own Cuba and the Soviet Union.
THE ROLE OF SHAME AND HUMILIATION For many in the White House, the discovery of Soviet intermed medium-range missiles in Cuba on October 14, 1962, raised anew the Moscow's intentions.
From the outset, discussions in th 23 suggested t its members were concerned with the strictly military-strategic signific missiles being rushed to completion in Cuba.
Secretary McNamara, initially, and for two or three days thereafter, Soviet missiles in Cuba made no real difference.
More complete are available from the Kenn 24Among those who dissented from this perspective was Paul Nitze, then assistant defense for international security affairs, who argued that the manned bomber force States Strategic Air Command was based largely in the southern part of the United Sta would be very vulnerable.
In a te indicated his s we these missiles so because if they we Soviet Union.
But appeared to-and Twenty-five crisis which t the president' teners that a warned, with Cuba.
What was a to the security of the United States, but the hu suffer in the face of Soviet deception and defia drawn.
To be publicly exposed on the eve of a co been duped was bad enough; even worse w powerlessness in this situation.
Even if rational deterrence theory c the removal of the missiles in Cuba and Americ Soviet move against Berlin or elsewhere, it is le the missiles had to be removed in a public confr Career diplomat and Soviet expert Charles Boh tiations first.
On 17 and 18 October, when the E tactics to secure the removal of the missiles, Bo communicate first with Khrushchev privately and response, on whether a blockade, invasion, or ai No one can guarantee that withdrawal can be achiev it .. .seems essential that this channel be tested out before Llewellyn Thompson, another Soviet expert and this course of action, as did Ambassador to the Stevenson joined the ExComm deliberations o a political solution to the impasse.
The ExComm, however, seemed committed to a hardline posture emphasizing a requisite measure of force.
Although the possibility of seeking withdrawal of the missiles by straightforward diplomatic negotiation received some attention with the State Department, it seems scarcely to have been aired in the Ex Com.
Kennedy's insistence upon the use of force may be explicable by the canons of rational deterrence theory.
But Kennedy's emotional reaction to the discovery of the missiles suggests that his response was more than that of a rational actor calculating what would be strategically appropriate; it also reveals the pain of someone who has been profoundly humiliated and wants a modicum of revenge.
According to nearly all of those close to him, the swift, secret, and deceptive nature of the Soviet move had intensely angered Kennedy.
Even before any discussion of costs and benefits could take place in the ExComm, Sorensen noted that ""the President had rejected this course [a diplomatic solution] from the outset"" , scarcely the hallmark of a rational decisionmaker.
The opportunity to humiliate the Russians by facing them with a public show of force must have seemed too inviting for Kennedy and some of his advisers to pass up.
It would compensate for their earlier Cuban failure, redress the sense of powerlessness over Berlin, and underline the courage and commitment of the administration.
In Kennedy's broadcast on October 22, announcing the blockade of Cuba, there was a highly personal and affective tone.
If the issue had been solely one of standing up to the Soviet challenge, ""it is not self evident why the blockade was preferable to the diplomatic route"" , since a diplomatic ultimatum did not foreclose imposing a blockade should the former fail to work.
Bundy may be right that a diplomatic solution would not have worked; my argument is that the president opposed it from the outset and that it was not explored with the same degree of rigor as the blockade and airstrike options.
Bundy could have exp advice as to wh Soviet construction at the missile sites.
He would have been under enormous pressure to decide on early action, but in a far less favorable situation that the one in which he found himself for a few days, starting October 16 .28 But the deadline can also be explained by Kennedy's fear of further humiliation on the Cuban issue.
He was already on public record that the missiles in Cuba were only for defensive purposes; the discovery of ""offensive"" systems would raise serious doubts about Kennedy's credibility before an important congressional election, only three weeks hence.
Bundy writes that the moment Americans knew what Khrushchev was doing, the overriding question would be what their own government was going to do about it.
Had he failed to act forcefully, Kennedy would have had to confront the wounded narcissism of the American people and their shame and humiliation at being challenged in a way they did not expect.
He suggests that Kennedy felt that the American people demanded a demonstration of force, given their purported frustration over Cuba.
Nevertheless, Kennedy's own sense was, as his brother Robert pointed out, that if he did not 28Bundy also suggests that Kennedy opposed testing Khrushchev by a diplomatic exchange before choosing a course of action since he did not want to open communication until he knew what action he would take.
Whether or not Kennedy really beli matic rather than a military strategy would have le really the issue; Kennedy's thoughts about impeachm in part, of his deep-seated fear of the humiliation perception of weakness or inaction.
Kennedy's concern about impeachment as ""the"" conciliatory course in the crisis suggests that he w analytic or rational-actor paradigm (Steinbruner, 1 come would have appeared as a rare limiting case.
I readily accounts for the existence of firm, categoric the presence of intense uncertainty (Steinbruner, 19 a rational analytic process is the ability to order pr trade-offs.
Pursuit of a compellent strategy justified in terms of ""risk war now"" to avoid ""certai 357), thus seeming to satisfy the requirements of If, as the evidence indicates, Kennedy functione maker rather than as an analytic one, an important was the need to avoid any further damage to hi suffered a number of humiliating experiences, t Summit, the Berlin Wall, and the deceptive installa potential loss of the forthcoming congressional elec presidency, may have seemed too much to bear.
In narcissistic injury, Kennedy attempted to turn ""pa from being the humiliated victim to that of the vict the tables on Khrushchev.
By October 16, Kennedy knew the Russians had deployed missiles in Cuba.
Instead of confronting Soviet Foreign Secretary Gromyko with the evidence, while the Russian was carefully reassuring the president that missiles were not being installed, Kennedy chose to listen without comment.
As Nathan observes, Instead of using private channels to warn the Russians that he knew and intended to act, Kennedy chose to give notice to the Russians in a nationwide TV address.
After that a Soviet withdrawal had to be in public, and it almost had to be a humiliation.
We would have t Concessions must 1965, 811) As Nathan comments: ""An agreement would have confounded the issue of will"" , and, by implication, Kennedy's need to stand up to Khrushchev.
In the final act of the crisis, Kennedy accepted one of two letters sent on two consecutive days by Khrushchev.
The second letter, dated October 27, contained the demand for removal of the Turkish missiles; the first, dated October 26, did not.
Kennedy responded with a public letter to Khrushchev, on October 27, in which he accepted he more favorable terms of the first letter.
But this procedure of publishing the private terms of an interchange with another head of state was a considerable departure from diplomacy.
SHAME AND HUMILIATION IN ABEYANCE Confronted with Kennedy's acceptance of his first offer to withd weapons systems from Cuba in exchange for a pledge not to inva Khrushchev dropped his insistence upon a public American pledge to re Jupiters from Turkey and acquiesced and accepted the additional sweeten private assurance of an American intention to remove the missiles from 30Bundy argues that the administration had little room for maneuver since nei leaders nor the Turks seemed prepared to propose a withdrawal of the missiles from Turk of resolving the crisis.
Garthoff notes that the evidence suggests that there was a previously unreported earlier meeting on October 26 between Robert Kennedy and Ambassador Dobrynin in which the importance of the Turkish missiles to the Russians was discussed.
Kennedy left the room and after consulting with the president by telephone, confirmed the president's intention to remove the missiles from Thrkey, if the overall situation was normalized.
His support for the trade merely repeated the understanding that Robert Kennedy had already conveyed to Dobrynin.
The American response to their discovery-a public showdown in the form of a blockade of Cuba-further enraged Khrushchev.
It remains unclear, however, whether Mikoyan reversed or circumvented the decision on his own or persuaded Khrushchev of its perils.
In either case, Khrushchev's behavior offers yet another example of the way in which his experience of being humiliated provoked his narcissistic rage and promoted his decision to run the blockade as a way of reducing the damage to his self-esteem.
Notwithstanding his aggressive behavior, Khrushchev seemed to be fully cognizant that the missiles could not remain in Cuba and that his job was to secure the best withdrawal deal possible.
As predicted by rational deterrence theory, he was able to assess the potential costs and benefits of leaving the missiles in Cuba and to decide that the humiliation involved in their removal was clearly preferable to the danger that the conflict could escalate, perhaps even to the nuclear level.
It now appears increasingly probable that 20 nuclear warheads of the 40 planned had already arrived in Cuba; the other 20 warheads seem to have been en route on the Poltava when their arrival in Cuba was interdicted by the blockade.
These nuclear-equipped missiles were not, moreover, under any double-lock system and thus could have been fired by Soviet commanders in Cuba without authorization from Moscow in the event of an American air strike.
Although Castro had no control over th message, if, in fact, it did occur,34 could have further f shchev's awareness of how easy it was to lose control an completely out of hand.
Soviet strategic inferiority in conju iation that this engendered combined to produce a narcis shchev attempted to repair with a deceptive emplaceme efforts to restore his self-esteem failed.
Two factors seem of critical im shchev's ego functioning, his ability to engage in reality intact that he understood that once the Americans had decided that the missiles had to go, the result was simply a question of time and the best deal he could fashion under the circumstances.
Although Kennedy had forced Khrushchev to back down and accept the public humiliation of crating up the Soviet missiles and bombers and returning them home, the prospect of a reciprocal American action, even if not an an integral or public quid pro quo, made it easier for Khrushchev to accept the American ultimatum.
American public pledges not to invade Cuba, and private assurances that the missiles in Turkey would be withdrawn, provided Khrushchev with enough of a psychological fig leaf.
Contributing to this development as well was Khrushchev's ability to absorb the narcissistic injury of being seen as publicly backing down, without escalating the crisis further by a move elsewhere,e., against Berlin.
Khrushchev, moreover, must have understood that to have allowed his wounded self-esteem further reign could have resulted in a direct Soviet-American confrontation involving nuclear weapons and the potential destruction of both Soviet and American societies.
Although Khrushchev ordered the removal of the missiles, some of the sense of shame and rage he experienced clearly lingered on.
Kuznetzov assured Mc34The Castro story was denied most bluntly by Alexsandr I Alekseyev, who was the Soviet ambassador to Cuba in 1962, and to whom Fidel Castro dictated his telexes to Moscow.
The true story ma have to await the release of classified Soviet documents from that period.
Kennedy was also prepared to offer Khrushchev a public no-invasion pledge of Cuba in exchange for the withdrawal of Soviet missiles, but he refused to concede publicly to Khrushchev's demands for a Cuba-Turkey missile swap.
Was the world only a few hours away from an air strike and potential nuclear war because of Kennedy's need to ensure that no one could doubt his courage and commit35Stanislav Kondrashov, a prominent Soviet journalist linked the nuclear arms race, in part, to the Cuban missile crisis.
Until recently, all that was kno narcissistic needs could only be attained at a pr caust-that he was ultimately unwilling to pay.
L ego strength had remained sufficiently intact so potential nuclear disaster, his reality testing was n CONCLUSIONS The Cuban missile crisis is, in part, the story of two political lea whom had suffered shame and humiliation at the other's hands, an whom then attempted to humiliate his opponent in order to restore ing self-esteem.
It is also a story of two individuals, President Ken Chairman Khrushchev, whose ego strength and reality testing rem ciently intact to allow them to limit the demands for revenge impo prior experience of narcissistic injury.
There are a number of important insights that the Cuban missile crisis highlights.
The first addresses psychoanalytic issues of shame and humiliation as manifested in international crisis, the second and third focus on issues of international crisis prevention and the efficacy of alternative models in explaining deterrence failures.
Psychoanalytic explanations for shame and humiliation that focus on intrapsychic conflicts involving id-ego or id-superego phenomena (a defense against unacceptable sexual and exhibitionistic impulses) could not be evaluated for either Khrushchev or Kennedy, in the absence of more detailed knowledge and information.
Khrushchev's and Kennedy's behavior in the Cuban missile crisis, and the role that feelings of shame and humiliation played, do suggest, however, the relevance of an object-relations approach, and, more importantly, an emphasis on issues of narcissism and self-esteem.
Khrushchev and Kennedy each experienced an awareness of being weak, not in control of events, and of having their relative lack of power rubbed in their faces by their superpower opponent.
Their inability to control the opponent's behaviour (i.e., American threats failed to stop the emplacement of Soviet missiles in Cuba, nor did Soviet commitments to Cuba stop American attempts to overthrow the Castro regime) engendered feelings of shame and humiliation on both sides.
Object-relations theorists, with their emphasis on the infant's need for and dependency upon the ""other,"" and the 36Rusk expressed the opinion that ""the Andrew Cordier ploy"" would have been attempted on Monday if Khrushchev had not agreed to remove the missiles on Sunday, but McNamara was less certain that the president would have gone to the public trade.
In cont psychoanalytic models are very useful in explaining t that the deductive logic of the rational deterrence mode less successful, however, in generating predictions in behavior.
Restrictions and transformation of scoptophilia in psychoneu marks on analogous phenomena in folk-psychology.
C Garthoff, R (198 Brookings Institut George, A., Hall, D Brown and Co.
Vicissitudes of their infantile cathexis and their influences on ideational and affective development.
The meaning of humiliation and its relationship to fluctuations in self-esteem.
