People Making a Difference Monitor Daily Stronger Perception Gaps Rethinking the News Photo Galleries About Us Your Account Log in Log out Manage subscription Change password Change email Your subscriptions Subscription FAQ Contact customer service Support the Monitor Subscribe Give a gift subscription Give a gift subscription Support Monitor journalism Free offers Sign up for Monitor newsletters One month free trial to the Monitor Daily Get stories that empower and uplift daily.
Looking ahead, leaders must avoid that trap again with Iran and other critical issues.
What humans live through in the present – economic struggles, political contests, national crises – drifts to the ground and slowly gets buried under the strata of more recent events.
When Graham Allison reviews October 1962 with people under the age of 50, their usual reaction is dropped-jaw amazement.
It just seems incredible to people who didn’t live through those times,” says Dr.
The Cuban missile crisis, which unfolded 50 years ago this week, was the closest the human race has come to nuclear holocaust.
It is often explained as an eyeball-to-eyeball confrontation between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev.
To Allison, who has spent a career examining strategic decisionmaking, the crisis was a turning point in understanding that even the sharpest minds and best teams of advisers are prone to misperception and miscalculation.
US leaders didn’t know, for instance, that Mr Khrushchev was under pressure at home from hard-liners when he sent short-range missiles to Cuba.
The missiles were meant to be hidden, but Russian technicians had failed to camouflage them.
The United States didn’t know that tactical nuclear weapons were already on the island and that Soviet commanders were authorized to use them if United States troops landed.
There were dozens of other factors – from the inability of Moscow to control Cuba and its leader, Fidel Castro, to domestic political calculations in the US, where Kennedy was trying to live down the Bay of Pigs fiasco.
No single leader can master all the complexities or manage all the players, especially during a fast-moving conflict – especially when ultimatums are issued.
Out of the Cuban crisis came a hot line connecting Washington and Moscow, the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the Non-Proliferation Treaty, several generations of strategic arms reduction treaties, and healthy skepticism about military capability, security strategy, and the trustworthiness of intelligence.
But creativity, compromise, and face-saving might lead to other solutions.
Iran, Allison says, might win the right to enrich uranium in exchange for full transparency and clear verification that it is not moving toward nuclear weapons.History shows that we can bury ourselves by misperception and miscalculation.
My work in Kenya, for example, was heavily influenced by a Christian Science Monitor article I had forced myself to read 10 years earlier.
If you were to come up with a punchline to a joke about the Monitor, that would probably be it.
We’re seen as being global, fair, insightful, and perhaps a bit too earnest.
The Monitor is a peculiar little publication that’s hard for the world to figure out.
We’re run by a church, but we’re not only for church members and we’re not about converting people.
We’re known as being fair even as the world becomes as polarized as at any time since the newspaper’s founding in 1908.
We’re about kicking down the door of thought everywhere and saying, “You are bigger and more capable than you realize.
If you’re looking for bran muffin journalism, you can subscribe to the Monitor for $15.
You’ll get the Monitor Weekly magazine, the Monitor Daily email, and unlimited access to CSMonitor.com.
