Secretary General Khrushchev deploys nuclear missiles on the allied socialist island of Cuba where they can reach large parts of the U.S.A. within just a few minutes.
For Moscow, it is a question of the atomic and political balance of power.
If it had come down to a nuclear exchange between the super powers, the divided Germany and Berlin would have been affected.
That morning Dowling, the American ambassador in Bonn, requested a most urgent meeting with Adenauer.
Adenauer was shown close-ups which clearly show that launch pads for rockets armed with nuclear warheads were being erected in Cuba.
Dowling further informed Chancellor Adenauer that aerial reconnaissance had detected 25 Soviet ships that were on their way to Cuba.
President Kennedy announces a naval blockade in a televised speech, but only as a first step.
If the Soviet ships loaded with more rockets didn't turn around and if the nuclear build-up was not stopped, United States forces were prepared for any countermeasures.
Chancellor Adenauer recommends the United States government show strength.
In West Berlin Mayor Willy Brandt calls for emergency meetings with his advisor Egon Bahr.
EGON BAHR: \""If it is critical there, it will become critical in Berlin.
It will become critical in Berlin, because it's the weakest and most geographically isolated point, surrounded by the armed forces of the GDR and the Soviet Union.
In Moscow there are increasing indications that the U.S.A. will not accept nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev fears an escalation, offering Kennedy negotiations in a personal letter.
As the situation threatens to go out of control, Khrushchev backs down.
President Kennedy responds by removing the Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
The world was never closer to the verge of nuclear war than in October, 1962.
Inspire your inbox – Sign up for daily fun facts about this day in history, updates, and special offers.
Enter your email Subscribe By signing up for this email, you are agreeing to news, offers, and information from Encyclopaedia Britannica.
Be on the lookout for your Britannica newsletter to get trusted stories delivered right to your inbox.
