Forgoing the option of a Cuban invasion or air strikes, Kennedy asked&nbsp;Russian Premier Nikita S Khrushchev to remove all weapons from the island, and on Oct., 1962, Khrushchev conceded, halting the standoff.
Here, Khrushchev’s son, Sergei Khrushchev, visiting professor of Slavic languages at Brown, reflects on the diplomatic lessons.</p> Sergei Khrushchev “The greatest lesson ... is that you have to negotiate with your enemy.
The perspective of the crisis has changed over time and today the history of the crisis is more focused not on the confrontation, but on cooperation.
And today that is very unusual, because we think we can only negotiate with friends.
Today, we impose unconditional surrender and nobody surrenders unconditionally until fully defeated.
I don’t think that President Kennedy liked Khrushchev more than President Obama likes the leaders of the Iranian republic, but Kennedy wanted to negotiate with Khrushchev.
If we want to resolve the nuclear crisis in the Middle East, we have to sit together, and I hope that in some period of time we will find some resolution to that situation.
Khrushchev sent missiles to Cuba not because he wanted to change the balance of power or because he wanted to infiltrate in southern America.
When President Castro officially declared in 1961 that he joined the Soviet Bloc, the Soviets had an obligation to protect all their allies.
So Khrushchev sent missiles to Cuba as a signal to President Kennedy that no one could invade the island.
Khrushchev needed assurance that America and its allies wouldn’t invade Cuba.
President Kennedy agreed to this so there was no need for the missiles’ presence in Cuba.
Americans thought that Russians and Europeans would kill each other through nuclear exchange.
Khrushchev, like Kennedy, used the nuclear weapons as a political tool.
President Kennedy used his wisdom and opposed all of these people, thanking them for their advice but deciding the opposite, deciding to negotiate.
The greatest lesson to come out of this is that you have to negotiate with your enemy.
If you negotiate with your enemy, there is a good chance that you will come to some conclusion that will satisfy both sides.
