His Finest Hour Now By JAMES A NATHAN* INTRODUCTION H ISTORIANS know there is a rhythm to their craft.
New understandings emerge and stand, at least for a while; and then comes another tide of re-evaluation.
The Kennedy Administration's shimmering hour—the Cuban missile crisis—has just begun to have its luster tarnished by critics.
Yet few have subjected the event to a complex review of its meaning in terms of the assumptions, policy processes, and relationships of the cold war.
My contention is that the crisis became something of a misleading ""model"" of the foreign policy process.
The international environment is a constant collision of wills that is a surrogate of war and, at the same time, takes place at the doorstep of war.
The skills of personality, training, and organizational expertise that have been developed in the national security machinery during the past twenty-five * Most of the arguments contained in this article appeared in a paper delivered at the 1974 Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, Chicago, August 29-September 2, 1974.
Although crises are a characteristic of the international system, the domestic system is one of order and consensus, and is insulated from the necessities of international politics.
Public opinion can be controlled to lend support for a particular foreign policy; but rarely do appurtenances of the domestic sector have their own imperatives.
An essential element of crisis management is the ability to reconcile the inherent forward dynamic of violence, threats of violence, and the instruments of violence with negotiation.
Political crises therefore terminate by definition, almost like medical crises.
The Soviets seldom negotiate serious matters except under extreme duress.
After the Cuban missile crisis, there were the beginnings of detente with the Soviet Union.
The test-ban treaty, the hot line, and a more civil exchange between the two powers are widely believed to stem from the favorable resolution of the missile crisis.
Yet the model and [ the usual inherent assumptions on the meaning of Cuba can be challenged.
Nevertheless, the Cuban missile crisis stands as a watershed of the cold war and in the history of the contemporary international "" system.
By far the most intense experience in East-West relations occurred in October 1962, when the Russians were discovered to have placed fortytwo medium-range missiles in Cuba.
In Khrushchev's apt description, it was a time when ""a smell of burning hung heavy"" in the air.
Academic and government analysts have viewed Kennedy's response as a highly calibrated dissection of alternatives instead of seeing his actions as largely an intuitive response to a threat to his administration's electoral future, pride, and strategic posture.
Nevertheless, the dominant lesson Americans have drawn from the Cuban experience has been a joyous sense of the United States regaining mastery over history.
For many years Americans had felt threatened by the Soviet challenge to world order—especially since that challenge had been reinforced by growing Russian strategic capability.
But after Cuba, the fears of precipitate expansion of a Soviet-American dispute into a final paroxysm of nuclear dust were dissipated.
Each rung could be ascended or descended with the proper increment of will and control.
Although court chroniclers of the Kennedy Administration have pored over each detail, the impression now is not one of all choices having been carefully weighed and considered.
Rather, in retrospect, there appears to have been a gripping feeling of uncertainty and pressure.
Tense, fearful, and exhausted men planned and held together the American policy response to the Russian missiles.
The consensus of most behavioral research is that men operating under such acute stress are scarcely capable of considered judgment.
Kennedy's calm public face, discipline, and cool control gave a sense of intellectual engagement in the crisis which yielded no hint of the mute wasteland he was contemplating.
But his private anxiety is well recorded, and a case can be made that dispassionate analysis or problem-solving was all but precluded by the psychology of the situation.
The military and the ""hawks""—a term coined by journalistic descriptions of the ExCom deliberations—were pushing for actions ranging from a ""surgical strike"" to an all-out invasion of Cuba.
Such options would have demanded the stark choice of an even greater Soviet humiliation or a Soviet response in kind.
Ironically, a ""surgical strike"" was not really practical, for there was no guarantee that more than 90 percent of the missiles could be extirpated.
Even after an American air attack, some of the missiles could have survived and been launched.
It is no wonder that President Kennedy estimated the world's chance of avoiding war at between one out of three and even.
The illusion of control derived from the crisis was perniciously misleading.
Although many Americans shared the belief of historian Schlesinger that the Cuban crisis displayed to the ""whole world . . . the ripening of an American leadership unsurpassed in the responsible management of power . . . combination of toughness . . . nerve and wisdom, so brilliantly controlled, so matchlessly calibrated that dazzled the world,""14 President Kennedy's control was in fact far from complete.
For example, the main instrument of pressure was the blockade run by the Navy.
McNamara had sensed the Navy's lack of responsiveness to civilian commands and had gone to the ""Flag Plot,"" or Naval Operations Center, where he could talk to ship commanders directly by voice-scrambled radio.
McNamara pointed to a map symbol indicating that a ship was in a spot where he had not wanted it.
Chief of Naval Operations Anderson picked up a Manual of Naval Regulations and rose to defend the Navy against any implied slight about Navy procedure.
McNamara retorted, ""I don't give a damn what John Paul Jones would have done.
The voluble Soviet leader, perhaps half-convinced that Wall Street really manipulated American policy, gave a frightening summary of the strategic situation in the Caribbean.
He warned that if the United States Navy began stopping Soviet ships, the Soviet subs would start sinking American ships.
That, Khrushchev explained, would lead to World War III.18 Only a little later, the Navy began to force Soviet subs to the surface in order to defend its blockade—well before Kennedy had authorized contact with surface vessels.
Abel interviewed the witnesses to this episode, some of whom did not agree as to Anderson's exact words.
Knox, ""Close-up of Khrushchev During a Crisis,"" New Yor\ Times Magazine, November 18, 1962, 128.
Events were only barely under control when at the height of the crisis, on October 26, an American U-2 plane fixed on the wrong star and headed back from the North Pole to Alaska via Siberia.
To compound matters the Alaskan Air Command sent fighter-bombers to escort the plane home, and the United States fighters and the spy plane met over Soviet territory before proceeding back.
To survive a Strangelove series of incidents like these, even given the assumptions of the day, can hardly be characterized as more than luck.
The answer is found, in part, in one of the unacknowledged necessities in the conduct of American international affairs—domestic political considerations.
The Kennedy Administration's sense of its own precarious electoral position, the coming of the November mid-term elections, and the place Cuba had occupied in public debate, all augured for an immediate and forceful response, no matter what the strategic reality was of having Russian missiles near American borders.
The imperatives of American domestic politics during an election year had been building for some time.
On August 27, 1962, for example, Republican Senator Homer E Capehart of Indiana declared, ""It is high time that the American people demand that President Kennedy quit 'examining the situation' and start protect19 Kennedy , 55.
Stone despaired in his Weekly that Cuba was a bogey which shook Americans, in the autumn of 1962, even more than the thought of war.
If the missile installations were completed earlier, there would be, arguably, both a strategic and an electoral problem facing the administration.
To Robert McNamara, the Secretary of Defense, it seemed that ""A missile is a missile.
To Khrushchev, the missiles offered the appearance of what former State Department analyst Roger Hilsman called a ""quick fix"" to the Soviet problem of strategic inferiority.
Khrushchev was under enormous pressure from the Russian military who rejected his ""goulash communism"" and were pushing for a vast increase in the Soviet arms budget.
The Cuban missile ploy was probably Khrushchev's response to the prospect of Russian strategic inferiority which was reported by the Kennedy Administration as it admitted that the Democratic preelection charge of a ""missile gap"" had not been based on fact.
The American announcement that the ""gap"" had been closed was accompanied by a Defense Department plan, dated October 19, 1961, for production of over one thousand missiles by 1964.
One purpose of the Soviet moves in Cuba was, therefore, to gain 33 3 George , 89.
The employment of twenty-four MRBM's and eighteen IRBM's seemed to be a dramatic movement in that direction.
But such an increase posed no real threat to American retaliatory strength, or to increasing American superiority.
As Henry Kissinger noted at the time, ""The bases were of only marginal use in a defensive war.
As Kennedy later reflected, they were not ""intending to fire them, because if they were going to get into a nuclear struggle, they have their own missiles in the Soviet Union.
Indeed, beginning in 1970, Soviet submarines and tenders began to visit Cuban ports.
And by 1973, Soviet submarines with Polaris-type missiles were regularly stopping in Cuba.
Perhaps he ; felt that the American people demanded an energetic response, given their purported frustration over Cuba.
The administration's evaluation '• of the public mood supported the notion that firmness was a requisite ' of policy.
According to the authoritative Aviation Wee\, the Russians also began to schedule regular stops of long-range aircraft at about the same time.
Nevertheless, sporadic press reports indicate that Soviet nuclear submarines are putting into Cuba up to this day.
I felt that he had not acquitted himself well on this occasion and that he had permitted Khrushchev to say many things which should have been challenged right there on the spot.
Khrushchev may indeed have been surprised at the forceful reaction of Kennedy, particularly after the young President had accepted the Berlin Wall in August 1961 with no military response and had temporized in Laos in 1961 and 1962.
Perhaps, as Hilsman has argued, the Soviets assumed that the fine American distinctions between ""offensive and defensive"" missiles were really a de facto acknowledgment of the Soviet effort in Cuba.
One could conjecture that this was what led Khrushchev to promise, and to believe that Kennedy understood, that no initiatives would be taken before the elections.
In any case, Kennedy's concern about his ""appearance"" and the national appearance of strength kept him from searching very far for Soviet motivation.
His interpretation was that it was a personal injury to him and his credibility, as well as to Amer44 Reston, ""What Was Killed Was Not Only the President But the Promise,"" New Yor\ Times Magazine, November 15, 1964, 126. i5 Neu> Yor\ Times, September i, 1970; New Yor\ Daily News, August 31, 1970.
What worried him was that Khrushchev might interpret his reluctance to wage nuclear war as a symptom of an American loss of nerve.
Some day, he said, the time might come when he would have to run the supreme risk to convince Khrushchev that conciliation did not mean humiliation.
Gritty American determination had become the respected and expected stance of American statesmen under stress in confrontations with the Soviets from the earliest days of the cold war.
The United States must use that language in order that Soviet leaders will realize that our government is determined to uphold the interest of its citizens and the rights of small nations.
According to Adam Yarmolinsky, an inside observer of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, ""90 per cent of its time"" was spent ""studying alternative uses of troops, bombers and warships.
Yarmolinsky confesses that it is curious that no negotiations were considered.
Nor were economic pressures ever suggested by the foreign affairs bureaucracy.
Only a series of military plans emerged, and they varied from a blockade to a preemptive strike.
But, instead of facing Soviet Foreign Secretary Gromyko with the evidence while the Russian was giving the President false assurances that missiles were not being installed, the President blandly listened without comment.
Whether or not the Russians believed that Kennedy must have known, the effect of the charade was an absence of serious negotiations.
Instead of using private channels to warn the Russians that he knew and intended to act, Kennedy chose to give notice to the Russians in a nationwide TV address.
When the Soviets attempted nonetheless to bargain for a graceful retreat, their path was blocked.
He did not want a compromise to be tied to the central issue of what he conceived to be a test of American will and resolve. ""e must stand absolutely firm now.
Concessions must come at the end of negotiation, not at the beginning,"" Robert Kennedy cautioned.
In other words, the Soviets had to submit to American strength before any real concessions could take place.
When Khrushchev offered to exchange the Cuban missiles for the Jupiter missiles stationed in 50 Yarmolinsky, The Military Establishment , 127.
Kennedy, however, did not want to appear to yield to Soviet pressure even when he might give little and receive a great deal.
One contained the demand for removal of the Turkish missiles; the other did not.
Khrushchev's second letter began with a long, heartfelt, personal communication and made no mention of a quid pro quo.
Kennedy's response was a public letter to Khrushchev, temperate in tone, in which he accepted the more favorable terms he preferred and further detailed American conditions.
Compromise is almost foreclosed by such a device, because any bargaining after the terms have been stated seems to be a retreat which would diminish a statesman's reputation.
Since reputation was the stake in Cuba as much as anything else, Kennedy's response was hardly more than a polite ultimatum.
As a result of the crisis, force and toughness became enshrined as instruments of policy.
The source of the story, it was widely rumored, was President Kennedy himself.
The policy of toughness became dogma to such an extent that nonmilitary solutions to political problems were excluded.
A ""moderate"" in this circumstance was restricted to suggesting limited violence.
Time and time again, during the crisis, the military seemed obsessed by the opportunity to demonstrate its potential.
When the crisis ended on Sunday, October 25th, one of the Joint Chiefs suggested that they go ahead with a massive bombing the following Monday in any case. ""he military are mad,"" concluded President Kennedy.
T h e article was by Stewart Alsop and Charles Bartlett, ""In Time of Crisis,"" Saturday Evening Post, December 8, 1962.
It is reported that President Kennedy roared with laughter upon reading this fictitious account.
Ironically, while the military was increasingly thought to be rather loutish and ill-prepared, civilians were starting to rely more and more on military instrumentalities in the application of which, with few exceptions, they were not trained, and whose command structure they despised as being second-rate at best.
To many observers, as well as to these managers, the ""failures"" of the Cuban missile crisis were not failures of civilian judgment but of organizational responsiveness.
The intelligence establishment, for instance, had not discovered the missiles until the last minute.
U-2 flights were sent near the Soviet Union to ""excite"" Soviet radar at the height of the crisis; until Kennedy ordered their dispersal, American fighters and bombers were wing to wing on the ground, almost inviting a preemptive Soviet blow.
Moreover, American tactical nuclear weapons and nuclear-tipped IRBM's in Turkey and Italy were discovered to be unlocked and lightly guarded.
All this led observers and policy-makers to believe that crisis management demanded the President's organizational dominance and control, because the military and intelligence organizations were inept and their judgment was not reliable or at times even sane.
T h e fictitious paper, written by James Thompson, also took on the whole Vietnam decision-making team.
For a period before the crisis there had been a national reexamination.
There were fears of national decline in the face of startling Soviet economic growth.
Advances in Russian rocketry had led Americans to believe that not only were they in a mortal competition with the Soviets, but that the outcome was uncertain.
Although Khrushchev may at one time have believed otherwise, the Cuban crisis demonstrated the limits of Soviet capabilities.
Actually, Luce had been on record with this message from the age of twenty.
No doubt the historic American sense of divine purpose and the almost Jungian need to be the guarantor of global order received a strong fillip from the Cuban crisis.
The Soviet Union reached the same conclusion as the United States—that a preponderance of military power, ranging across the spectrum of force from PT craft to advanced nuclear delivery systems, was the sine qua non of the successful exercise of political will.
CUBA AND DETERRENCE After Cuba, the Soviet military, responding to the humiliating American stimulus, demanded a higher priority to strategic arms and a cutback on the agricultural and consumer sectors of the Soviet economy.
Although Khrushchev and Kennedy were by then moving toward a detente—best symbolized by the signing of the test-ban accords of mid-1963—many in the Kremlin saw this as but a breathing spell in which the Chinese might be isolated and Soviet arms could catch up.
Naval preparations, especially the building of Polaris-type submarines, were intensified.
Soviet amphibian landing capability—something in which the Soviets had shown little interest before—was revitalized and expanded.
After Cuba, the pace of deployment picked up, bringing the total 69 Ibid.
McCloy secured an affirmation from Kuznetzov that the Soviets would indeed observe their part of the agreement to remove the missiles and bombers from Cuba.
But each time, the usable strategic leverage of the United States grew weaker.
Thus, the structure of the international system and international stability was shaken in three ways.
Second, nations, once cowed, are likely to be less timid in the next confrontation.
For weeks after the missile crisis, the Chinese broadcast their charges of Russian stupidity and weakness to the four corners of the globe.
The Chinese labeled Khrushchev an ""adventurist"" as well as a ""capitulationist,"" and therefore not fit for world Communist leadership.
The charge of who was the most capitulationist, the Chinese or the Russians, grew almost silly; but these puerile exchanges had their own dangers in terms of deterrence.
Third, once a threat is not carried out—even after an appearance of a willingness to carry it out has been demonstrated—the ante is upped just a bit more.
Morgenthau described a two-step process in nuclear gamesmanship, ""diminishing credibility of the threat and ever bolder challenges to make good on i t . . . . he psychological capital of deterrence has been nearly expended and the policy of deterrence will be close to bankruptcy.
The problem was that nuclear superiority had been useful, but each succeeding threat (since no nuclear threat has ever been carried out) would necessarily be weaker than the last.
Conventional and limited deployments of force became increasingly necessary as conventional force was considered less forbidding than the nuclear abyss.
And one way to demonstrate political will was through the resurrection of conventional force as an instrument of demonstrating ""commitment""—a commitment whose alternative form was a threat of nuclear holocaust.
The latter was bound to deteriorate with the advent of a viable Soviet retaliatory capability and the knowledge that the Soviets had collapsed once under a nuclear threat and might not be willing to be quite so passive again.
Many national security managers found they could navigate between the Scylla of nuclear war and the Charybdis of surrender with the serendipitous discovery of the ""lifeboat"" of the 1960's—limited war.
Of course, the assumptions of the planners of limited war—as they emerged victorious from the Cuban crisis—were as old as the cold war.
They dated from the Truman Doctrine's Manichean presentation of a bipolar global confrontation where a gain to one party necessarily would be a loss to the other.
A world order of diverse centers of power, with elements of superpower cooperation, where gains and losses would be less easily demonstrable, was not so demanding of military remedy.
Maneuver and negotiation, in such a world, would again become part of diplomacy.
But such a development was to come about only after the tragic failure of the military remedy had been demonstrated in Vietnam.
T H E BY-PRODUCTS OF SUCCESS There were other effects related to the exuberant reaction to the Cuban crisis.
As the United States began to feel that power and force were successful solvents to the more sticky problems of the cold war, the role of international law declined precipitously.
Our foreign policy has been reflected in our willingness to submit atomic weapons to international law, in feeding and clothing those stricken by war, in supporting free elections and government by consent, in building factories and dams, power plants and railways, schools and hospitals, in improving seed and stock and fertilizer, in stimulating markets and improving the skills and techniques of others in a hundred different ways.
Let these things stand in contrast to a foreign policy directed towards the extension of tyranny and using the big lie, sabotage, suspicion, riot and assassination as its tools.
The great strength of the United States is devoted to the peaceful pursuits of our people and to the decent opinions of mankind.
After the crisis was over, even lawyers began to see law as but another instrumentality of American policy.
T h e lawbreaker, unfortunately in the nature of things, always has t h e initiative, but the peacemaking peoples of the world can a n d will m a k e themselves strong enough to insist upon peace.
Kennedy, ""Let Us Call a Truce to Terror,"" address to the General Assembly of the United Nations, September 23, 1961, Department of State Bulletin, October 16, 1961, 619.
Americans, who had so long stroked the talisman of international law, now seemed to do so only when their interests were not jeopardized.
Otherwise, law became merely a rhetorical flourish of United States policy.
International law was still a part of the admonition that ""armed aggression"" and ""breaches of the peace"" cease and desist.
But, in back of these legalistic and moralistic injunctions, the armed cop became more and more apparent.
As General de Gaulle had observed earlier, the conclusion that American idealism was but a reflection of the American will to power became almost inescapable after the Cuban crisis.
Few obeisances about the need for law in international society disguised the sense that America had abandoned her ancient, liberal inheritance in the zesty pursuit of world order.
Another effect of the crisis was to differentiate the ""great powers""— the United States and the Soviet Union—from other states which were literally frozen out of a major role in structuring global politics.
After all, the major ""chips"" of big-power poker were simply not accessible to other governments—even those with modest and nominally independent nuclear forces.
But the nuclear trigger was still in the hands of the United States, and so was the final squeeze.
Not only were the weapons of great-power diplomacy increasingly inaccessible to other states, but the other tools of statecraft also receded from the grasp of those with modest resources.
The spy, for instance, was largely replaced by satellite reconnaissance.
Intellectual musings on great-power conflict became differentiated from other strategic thinking.
Gradually, the Soviets and the Americans created a shared private idiom of force; and a curious dialogue began between the congressional budget messages of the Secretary of Defense and the periodic revisions of Strategy by Marshal Sokolovsky.
Allies became mere appurtenances of power whose purpose, in the 87 Schlesinger , 824.
Thus, for example, the OAS was asked to validate the United States blockade at the same time the American quarantine was announced.
Similarly, Dean Acheson flew to Paris and other European capitals to confer with American allies about the coming confrontation over Cuba.
De Gaulle raised his hand in a delaying gesture that the long-departed Kings of France might have envied.
In spite of European gestures of support, the alliance received a shock from which it did not recover.
The French did not debate; they accelerated their nuclear programs while withdrawing from a military role in the alliance.
On the Soviet side, it was equally apparent that Russian interests would not be sacrificed to sister socialist states.
The weak promise tendered by the Kennedy Administration not to invade the island was probably cold comfort as Castro saw his military benefactors beat a hasty retreat from American power.
Embarrassingly, Castro began to echo the ""capitulationist"" theme of Chinese broadcasts.
Privately Castro said that if he could, he would have beaten Khrushchev to within an inch of his life for what he did.
Soviet Foreign Minister Mikoyan was dispatched to Cuba and stayed there for weeks, not even returning to the bedside of his dying wife, but Castro's fury was unabated.
Whatever the motive for Khrushchev's moves in Cuba, the Chinese were also enraged.
U l a m ( p p . 66870), suggested that Krushchev aimed at precluding both Chinese a n d G e r m a n acquisition of nuclear weapons.
The United States still cultivated the asymmetrical assumptions of the cold war, but the Soviet Union was at least admitted as a junior partner in a duopolistic international system which began to be characterized as detente.
The relaxation was favorable to Kennedy, who wanted to begin to deal with the Soviets without the ideological rancor that had poisoned previous relations, and who had a vision of Soviet ""responsibility"" which was to be enlarged upon by succeeding administrations.
Given their acknowledged strategic inferiority, they could hardly expect to be successful in another series of confrontations.
Moreover, the Chinese began to present formidable ideological and political difficulties for the Russians, whose new interest in improved relations with the United States caused intense fears in China of American-Soviet collusion.
At the same time, the Soviets began to fear a Sino-American agreement that would be detrimental to their interests.
At the same time the Chinese government makes feverish attempts to improve relations with Britain, France, Japan, West Germany, and Italy.
American paramountcy had been self-proclaimed; the seeds of detente had been sown by a shared vision of nuclear oblivion; and the ingredients for a great-power condominium were becoming clear.
If it had not been for the war in Vietnam, the present framework of international affairs might have been with us ten years earlier.
Tragically and ironically, the ""lessons"" of the Cuban missile crisis— that success in international crisis was largely a matter of national guts; that the opponent would yield to superior force; that presidential control of force can be ""suitable,"" ""selective,"" ""swift,"" ""effective,"" and 83 Ibid., 691.
The Cuban crisis changed the international environment but riveted American expectations to the necessities of the diplomacy of violence.
Even the language of the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution was almost identical to that which Kennedy's legal advisors had drawn up for the OAS in October of 1962.94 Although the Cuban crisis created substantial changes in distinguishing superpowers from other states, the realization of the equality of the superpowers and of the indications that they could join in a relationship which had some elements of condominium and some elements of the classic balance of power was suppressed until the American agony in Vietnam drew to a close.
