That option and the ªrst have been exhaustively analyzed over the years by Western scholars.
If Castro agreed to end his alliance with Moscow, demand the removal of the Soviet missiles, and disavow any further support for revolutionary subversion in the Western hemisphere, he could expect “many changes” in Washington’s policy toward Cuba, including an explicit non-invasion pledge and, implicitly, American aid or at least an end to the U.S.-led diplomatic and economic embargo.
Castro also would be assured of United States support if the Soviet Union and its hardline allies within the Cuban leadership tried to resist such a dramatic swerve in policy.The Kennedy administration chose, despite considerable misgivings, to employ the Brazilian government of President João Goulart as an intermediary in this highly sensitive and tightly concealed effort to reach Castro at the height of the missile crisis.
Kennedy at one point had regarded Goulart as a potential “New Frontiersman” and a valuable partner in the Alliance for Progress , but United States ofªcials increasingly viewed the Brazilian president with irritation, exasperation, and even suspicion for what they saw as his ªnancial mismanagement, political demagoguery, ºirtations with neutralism in foreign policy, and, most alarming, cooperation with and toleration of leftist elements.
Although some key United States officials, notably Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Central Intelligence Agency Director John McCone, had disagreed about the merits of the Brazilian proposal, the administration had tentatively decided to endorse it in light of evident tensions in Havana between Castro and pro-Soviet old-line Communists.
As it turned out, however, Castro politely deflected the Brazilian initiative, and the matter had proceeded no further as of mid-October 1962 when American U-2 reconnaissance planes suddenly discovered that the Soviet Union was secretly installing nuclear capable missiles in Cuba.At the outset of the crisis, President John F Kennedy and his advisers briefly considered, but then discarded, the option of sending a message directly to Castro to pressure him into seeking the removal of the Soviet missiles.
The Kennedy administration’s irritation at Brazil for its refusal to go along with measures to isolate and penalize Cuba exacerbated U.S.-Brazilian relations.
Far from bridging the gap betweenWashington and Havana, the attempts by Goulart and his predecessors to mediate the U.S.-Cuban conflict were notable mainly for the adverse effect they had on ties between Washington and Rio de Janeiro.
This was true in large measure because as far back as late 1959 United States officials had concluded that it would be impossible to live with Fidel Castro’s regime and were intent on getting rid of the Communist government in Cuba rather than reaching an accommodation.
That was the case in 1960, when Eisenhower and his administration politely turned down Brazil’s repeated offers of mediation and “good offices” to help resolve the U.S.-Cuban dispute.
The event was further obscured by the Cuban authorities’ refusal to permit correspondents based in Havana to make any reference to Albino’s presence.
Even within the United States government, some senior officials were puzzled.
On 5 November, Hilsman wrote to Rusk that “the exact nature of Brazil’s initiative is not known,” and he speculated that Goulart’s desire to assume the role of mediator had inspired the trip.Today, more than four decades later, confusion about the initiative persists.
Over the years, Portuguese-language Brazilian works have alluded to the genesis of the Albino mission, but these sources have had little inºuence on the English-language historiography.
Actually, as this article shows, the mediation had been requested and indeed had been carefully planned by Washington—and was then conveyed to the Brazilian government during the late-night meeting between Lincoln Gordon and Hermes Lima.
Even though changes in the situation and Brazil’s handling of the mission did mean that the message was not conveyed precisely as Washington had intended, the basic proposal unquestionably was implemented.The historiography of the Cuban missile crisis has been equally misleading in its references to Brazil.
Contrary to the implications of assertions in 1997 and 2001 by Ernest May and Philip Zelikow that the United States plan on 27 October for Brazilian mediation was “overtaken by the events” of the following day , the initiative did in fact produce the Albino mission and a conversation that might have led to the opening of a Brazilian-mediated dialogue between the Kennedy administration and Castro’s government.As it turned out, Castro’s insistence on an end to the United States military presence in Guantánamo prevented any movement toward a deal and guaranteed a negative United States response.
Moreover, at this critical juncture in U.S.-Brazilian relations, Goulart’s handling of the matter, especially his decision to entrust the mission to Albino rather than Bastian Pinto , further darkened the Kennedy administration’s impression of the Brazilian president and his inconsistent behavior during the crisis as a whole.
Castro had not previously known about the intended communication, but he recalled, “That day we were fighting,” firing at low-level United States reconnaissance flights and preparing to resist an American invasion.
