Interview with the former United States Secretary of Defense, who in the ’sixties invented the American nuclear defense system Interwiew whith Robert McNamara by Giovanni Cubeddu Robert McNamara Robert McNamara was the United States Secretary of Defense from 1961 to 1968.
His hawk-like positions in the Vietnam war gained him notoriety, but his clear cut view did not lack that dose of realism whereby he made Lyndon Johnson understand that the United States (which at a certain point did not exclude the use of the atomic bomb) would perhaps never win that war.
At a time in which this far sighted politics of disarmament does not find many followers, it was a comfort recently to hear again the voice of McNamara pointing out the dangers of nuclear proliferation and of a deterrence that makes an alibi of rearmament.
Today the number of nuclear warheads produced is less than in the past, the risk of an atomic clash between the two great Cold War powers is limited, and the West is more preoccupied by the “average nuclear powers”, open to the nuclear hypothesis of resolving regional controversies or of using this last card before succumbing definitively in the face of the threat of a regime change, imposed from without to “export democracy”… But today there is great hypocrisy underlying the debate about who can and cannot have nuclear technology, which one clearly gathers from McNamara’s words.
Meanwhile, not even at the last summit of the Chiefs of State and of Government for the sixtieth anniversary of the United Nations was it possible to mention in the final text a committment, even generic, to non proliferation.
We pledged to work in good faith toward the eventual elimination of nuclear arsenals when we negotiated the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1968.
The United States was focused, for understandable reasons, on persuading North Korea to rejoin the treaty and on negotiating deeper constraints on Iran’s nuclear ambitions.
But the attention of many nations, including some potential new nuclear weapons states, was also focused on the United States.
Keeping such large numbers of weapons, and maintaining them on hair-trigger alert, are potent signs that the United States is not seriously working toward the elimination of its arsenal and raises troubling questions as to why any other state should restrain its own nuclear ambitions.
Indeed the failure of the last NPT review conference has been sad and evident.
The five declared nuclear states stated that if nations that did not possess nuclear weapons agreed not to acquire them, the five declared nuclear states would give up theirs.
And of course the five declared nuclear states have not moved to give up theirs.
And other nations are reluctant therefore to be told that they should do so – they have strong opponents confronting them militarily, as perhaps declared nuclear powers do – but the declared nuclear powers with strong conventional forces nonetheless say that they need nuclear forces to safeguard their nations, but that the nations without nuclear forces are not to be allowed to get them.
That violates the basic agreement that underlay the non-proliferation treaty.
But according to the State Department, notwithstanding the substantial failure of the Conference, the NPT is still alive.
Far from reducing these risks, this administration is committed to keeping the United States nuclear arsenal as a mainstay of its military power—a commitment that is simultaneously eroding the international norms that have limited the spread of nuclear weapons and fissile materials for 50 years.
A picture of the opening of negotiations in Peking on the nuclear disarmament of North Korea, September 2005 It’s surprising to hear a former United States Secretary of Defense making such an assessment.
The Geneva Conventions have represented an agreement by nations that the application of military force will conform to principles, it will be proportional, that is to say, if a nation applies military force against another nation, it will not be exceeding the relation in regard to what that opponent has applied or intends to apply.
And it will be discriminatory, meaning that it will exclude civilians from the application of military force.
Clearly nuclear weapons initiated by a nuclear power cannot meet either one of those conditions, and therefore it’s both immoral and I say illegal.
I don’t believe that the United States in using nuclear weapons intended to target civilians, but certainly the United States should have anticipated that civilians would be killed in large numbers.
So whether you call it targeting civilians or not, it’s clear that in advance the United States should have anticipated the death of large numbers of civilians.
By the time the nuclear bomb was used of course, the killing of civilians by bombing in World War II had been undertaken by all of the major powers, the British attack on Dresden, for example.
I was assigned to the B29 units, and I was on the island of Guam, in March 1945, when General LeMay, commander of the B29s there, initiated the fire bomb raids, taking the B29s from high altitude bombing to low altitude bombing, using fire bombs instead of explosive bombs.
And in the first attack on Tokyo – I was there that night in March ’45 – I think about 80,000 civilians were killed.
As a matter of fact what could raise a very important question is whether it was militarily necessary to use the nuclear bombs to prevent the necessity of United States land invasion of Japan’s major islands, in view of the fact that so much of Japan had already been destroyed by the fire bomb raids.
Today, the United States deploys approximately 4,500 strategic, offensive nuclear warheads.
The “average” United States warhead has a destructive power up to 20 times that of the Hiroshima bomb.
We have been, and remain, prepared to initiate the use of nuclear weapons—on the decision of one person, the President—against either a nuclear or non-nuclear enemy whenever we believe it is in our interest to do so.
This has been and (as long as we face a nuclear-armed, potential adversary) must continue to be the foundation of our nuclear deterrent.
The American Ambassador Llewellin E Thompson and the Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs Andrei Gromyko sign the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the NPT, Moscow, 1 July 1968 During the Cold War there has been a sort of “theological anticommunism” and some people, not only in the United States administration, were eager to use the nuclear leverage to solve international disputes.
I didn’t use the term ‘apocalypse’ because it has a certain religious connotation.
I used it because of a rather common usage applying to terrible events.
There is a great danger today of inadvertent or accidental use of nuclear weapons and this would be an apocalyptic event in my terms, without any religious connotations.
By the way, there are however, I think, religious factors that should be considered here.
The Catholic bishops of the US, you are probably aware of this, published a report, I don’t remember exactly, in the late 1980s.
It was a report whose preparation was directed by Brian Hare, a Catholic priest from Massachusetts, still alive, and it’s the best statement by civilians that I’ve ever read on the moral and human problems associated with nuclear forces, and the report states that for the first time since Genesis the human race has the capability of destroying itself.
We must avoid that and I strongly agree that that’s where we should begin thinking about, talking about, proliferation; it’s absolutely contrary to all moral principles.
What I mean to say there is that there is no military utility for nuclear weapons today by any nation other than to deter one’s opponents from their use, and if one’s opponent does not have nuclear weapons there’s no military utility whatsoever.
That’s the first point; the second point is that even if one’s opponent has nuclear weapons, there’s no possible justification for initiating their use against a nuclear State; it would be suicidal.
And there’s no possible justification for using them against a non-nuclear State, it would be morally reprehensible and politically indefensible.
So the nuclear powers have to think through their justification for their nuclear weapons completely.
If they were to do so, I think they would arrive at the same conclusion as I have, that we should eliminate, or nearly eliminate, all nuclear weapons.
After my retirement from public service I decided to go public with some information that I knew would be controversial, but that I felt was needed to inject reality into these increasingly unreal discussions about the military utility of nuclear weapons.
According to the 2002 Nuclear Posture Review the United States government is authorized to do more research, more nuclear experiments, to make more warheads.
This is absolutely correct, and the Posture Review in my opinion is absolutely wrong in its conclusions and judgments.
It promotes the possibility of a spread of nuclear weapons, more deployable, more simple to use.
I think they proposed at least two new nuclear weapons, one a deep penetrating weapon and the other a new tactical nuclear weapon.
I think that would be a wrong judgment, wrong to go ahead with it, and I’m very hopeful that Congress will not authorize it.
There’s no link at all, no reality to this whatsoever … The attacks on September 11 don’t affect judgments about “whether” the United States needs nuclear weapons at all.
As a matter of fact, I think one can take the reverse position, that the attacks of September 11 in a sense established a new potential terrorist opponent, and one of the weapons that terrorists would wish to use are nuclear weapons or the fissile material, and we ought therefore to be doing everything we can to constrain the further development of nuclear weapons and fissile materials.
If the United States continues its current nuclear stance, over time, substantial proliferation of nuclear weapons will almost certainly follow.
However, if mistakes were to affect decisions relating to the use of nuclear forces, there would be no “learning curve” and entire nations would be destroyed.
I think both the Iranian and North Korean nuclear programs are very, very dangerous.
For the United States to attack North Korea would be disastrous because North Koreans could wipe out Seoul and large numbers of United States troops there, and similarly for the United States to attack Iran today under these circumstances, – we don’t have enough troops in Iraq, – is absurd.
So we must depend on diplomacy to resolve those two situations and that diplomacy so far has been relatively ineffective.
But diplomacy must address the problems which have led North Korea and Iran to move toward the development of nuclear weapons and one of those problems is their fear that the United States will move toward regime change.
They heard President Bush link Iraq, North Korea and Iran together as “evil”, as missions of an evil axis, and they saw the United States undertake regime change in Iraq.
I’m sure that there are some in North Korea and Iran that fear regime change there, so we must engage in bi-lateral negotiations to remove this fear.
Some, or all, of such nations as Egypt, Japan, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Taiwan will very likely initiate nuclear weapons programs, increasing both the risk of the use of the weapons and the diversion of weapons and fissile materials into the hands of rogue states or terrorists.
You were president of the World Bank for thirteen years, you had the possibility of seeing close up what poverty means, and who the poor are.
