This groundbreaking study shows why five central arguments promoting nuclear weapons are, in essence, myths.
This book will be widely read and discussed by everyone who cares about war, peace, foreign policy, and security in the twenty-first century.
Uranium enrichment has played a relatively quiet but important role in the history of efforts by a number of nations to acquire nuclear weapons and by a number of others to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
For many years the uranium enrichment industry was dominated by a single method, gaseous diffusion, which was technically complex, extremely capital-intensive, and highly inefficient in its use of energy.
As long as this remained true, only the richest and most technically advanced nations could afford to pursue the enrichment route to weapon acquisition.
Several new and far more accessible enrichment techniques were developed, stimulated largely by the anticipation of a rapidly growing demand for enrichment services by the world-wide nuclear power industry.
This proliferation of new techniques, coupled with the subsequent contraction of the commercial market for enriched uranium, has created a situation in which uranium enrichment technology might well become the most important contributor to further nuclear weapon proliferation.
A technical analysis of the most important enrichment techniques in a form that is relevant to analysis of proliferation risks; A detailed projection of the world demand for uranium enrichment services; A summary and critique of present institutional non-proliferation arrangements in the world enrichment industry, and An identification of the states most likely to pursue the enrichment route to acquisition of nuclear weapons.
The author examines the choices facing India from New Delhi's point of view in order to discern which future courses of action appear most appealing to Indian security managers.
The cold war ended more than two decades ago, and with its end came a reduction in the threat of nuclear weapons—a luxury that we can no longer indulge.
It's not just the threat of Iran getting the bomb or North Korea doing something rash; the whole complexion of global power politics is changing because of the reemergence of nuclear weapons as a vital element of statecraft and power politics.
He draws on his years of experience analyzing defense strategy to make the case that the United States needs to start thinking seriously about these issues once again, especially as new countries acquire nuclear capabilities.
He walks us through war-game scenarios that are all too realistic, to show how nuclear weapons are changing the calculus of power politics, and he offers an incisive tour of the Middle East, South Asia, and East Asia to underscore how the United States must not allow itself to be unprepared for managing such crises.
Frank in its tone and farsighted in its analysis, The Second Nuclear Age is the essential guide to the new rules of international politics.
Nearly thirty years after the end of the Cold War, today’s world leaders are abandoning disarmament treaties, building up their nuclear arsenals, and exchanging threats of nuclear strikes.
Serhii Plokhy’s Nuclear Folly offers an international perspective on the crisis, tracing the tortuous decision-making that produced and then resolved it, which involved John Kennedy and his advisers, Nikita Khrushchev and Fidel Castro, and their commanders on the ground.
In breathtaking detail, Plokhy vividly recounts the young JFK being played by the canny Khrushchev; the hotheaded Castro willing to defy the USSR and threatening to align himself with China; the Soviet troops on the ground clearing jungle foliage in the tropical heat, and desperately trying to conceal nuclear installations on Cuba, which were nonetheless easily spotted by U-2 spy planes; and the hair-raising near misses at sea that nearly caused a Soviet nuclear-armed submarine to fire its weapons.
More often than not, the Americans and Soviets misread each other, operated under false information, and came perilously close to nuclear catastrophe.
Now he shifts to climate change, which, Lifton writes, ""presents us with what may be the most demanding and unique psychological task ever required of humankind,"" what he describes as the task of mobilizing our imaginative resources toward climate sanity.
Thanks to the power of corporate-funded climate denialists and the fact that ""with its slower, incremental sequence, lends itself less to the apocalyptic drama,"" a large swathe of humanity has numbed themselves to the reality of climate change.
Yet Lifton draws a message of hope from the Paris climate meeting of 2015 where representatives of virtually all nations joined in the recognition that we are a single species in deep trouble.
Here, Lifton suggests in this lucid and moving book that recalls Rachel Carson and Jonathan Schell, was evidence of how we might call upon the human mind—""our greatest evolutionary asset""—to translate a growing species awareness—or ""climate swerve""—into action to sustain our habitat and civilization.
Most military thinkers in the years leading up to World War II saw the airplane as an afterthought.
In contrast, the bombing of Tokyo on the deadliest night of the war was the brainchild of General Curtis LeMay, whose brutal pragmatism and scorched-earth tactics in Japan cost thousands of civilian lives, but may have spared even more by averting a planned United States invasion.
Things might have gone differently had LeMay’s predecessor, General Haywood Hansell, remained in charge.
The Bomber Mafia is a riveting tale of persistence, innovation, and the incalculable wages of war.
After two or more decades of construction of nuclear power stations, this ceased in many countries, largely as a result of concerns for the environment and human health.
However, the pressing need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions is leading many countries to plan extensive new programmes of construction of nuclear power stations which serves to re-emphasise concerns over environmental impacts.
Known issues of nuclear accidents, the legacy of contaminated land and low level waste, and the decommissioning of nuclear sites are considered together with a more forward look at the deep geological disposal of high level waste and the pathways of radioactive substances in the environment and their implications for human and non-human organisms.
This topical work will be of interest to scientists and policy makers working within this field or related areas as well as advanced students.
But this policy failed utterly in the 1948 Berlin crisis, and at home the State Department opposed those scientists who advocated international cooperation on nuclear matters.
These editions preserve the original texts of these important books while presenting them in durable paperback and hardcover editions.
Kaplan’s historical research and deep reporting will stand as the permanent record of politics.
Discussing theories that have dominated nightmare scenarios from Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Kaplan presents the unthinkable in terms of mass destruction and demonstrates how the nuclear war reality will not go away, regardless of the dire consequences.
Located a mere seventy-five miles outside of Las Vegas in Nevada's desert, the base has never been acknowledged by the United States government — but Area 51 has captivated imaginations for decades.
Myths and hypotheses about Area 51 have long abounded, thanks to the intense secrecy enveloping it.
Some claim it is home to aliens, underground tunnel systems, and nuclear facilities.
The prevalence of these rumors stems from the fact that no credible insider has ever divulged the truth about his time inside the base.
In Area 51, Jacobsen shows us what has really gone on in the Nevada desert, from testing nuclear weapons to building super-secret, supersonic jets to pursuing the War on Terror.
This is the first book based on interviews with eye witnesses to Area 51 history, which makes it the seminal work on the subject.
Filled with formerly classified information that has never been accurately decoded for the public, Area 51 weaves the mysterious activities of the top-secret base into a gripping narrative, showing that facts are often more fantastic than fiction, especially when the distinction is almost impossible to make.
It killed a third of the population instantly, and the survivors, or hibakusha, would be affected by the life-altering medical conditions caused by the radiation for the rest of their lives.
They were also marked with the stigma of their exposure to radiation, and fears of the consequences for their children.
Nagasaki follows the previously unknown stories of five survivors and their families, from 1945 to the present day.
It captures the full range of pain, fear, bravery and compassion unleashed by the destruction of a city.
Susan Southard has interviewed the hibakusha over many years and her intimate portraits of their lives show the consequences of nuclear war.
Nagasaki tells the neglected story of life after nuclear war and will help shape public debate over one of the most controversial wartime acts in history.
Published for the 70th anniversary of the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombs, this is the first study to be based on eye-witness accounts of Nagasaki in the style of John Hersey's Hiroshima.
On August 9th, 1945, three days after the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, a 5-tonne plutonium bomb was dropped on the small, coastal city of Nagasaki.
The explosion destroyed factories, shops and homes and killed 74,000 people while injuring another 75,000.
Susan Southard has spent a decade interviewing and researching the lives of the hibakusha, raw, emotive eye-witness accounts, which reconstruct the days, months and years after the bombing, the isolation of their hospitalisation and recovery, the difficulty of re-entering daily life and the enduring impact of life as the only people in history who have lived through a nuclear attack and its aftermath.
Following five teenage survivors from 1945 to the present day Southard unveils the lives they have led, their injuries in the annihilation of the bomb, the dozens of radiation-related cancers and illnesses they have suffered, the humiliating and frightening choices about marriage they were forced into as a result of their fears of the genetic diseases that may be passed through their families for generations to come.
The power of Nagasaki lies in the detail of the survivors' stories, as deaths continued for decades because of the radiation contamination, which caused various forms of cancer.
Intimate and compassionate, while being grounded in historical research Nagasaki reveals the censorship that kept the suffering endured by the hibakusha hidden around the world.
For years after the bombings news reports and scientific research were censored by United States occupation forces and the United States government led an efficient campaign to justify the necessity and morality of dropping the bombs.
As we pass the seventieth anniversary of the only atomic bomb attacks in history Susan Southard captures the full range of pain, fear, bravery and compassion unleashed by the destruction of a city.
The personal stories of those who survived beneath the mushroom clouds will transform the abstract perception of nuclear war into a visceral human experience.
Nagasaki tells the neglected story of life after nuclear war and will help shape public discussion and debate over one of the most controversial wartime acts in history.
It is an account of where those weapons came from, how the technology surprisingly and covertly spread, and who is likely to acquire those weapons next and most importantly why.
The authors’ examination of post Cold War national and geopolitical issues regarding nuclear proliferation and the effects of Chinese sponsorship of the Pakistani program is eye opening.
The reckless “nuclear weapons programs for sale” exporting of technology by Pakistan is truly chilling, as is the on-again off-again North Korean nuclear weapons program.
Within that story is the incredible tale of the human conflict between Robert Oppenheimer, Ernest Lawrence, and Edward Teller-the scientists most responsible for the advent of weapons of mass destruction.
The story of these three men, builders of the bombs, is fundamentally about loyalty-to country, to science, and to each other-and about the wrenching choices that had to be made when these allegiances came into conflict.
Gregg Herken gives us the behind-the-scenes account based upon a decade of research, interviews, and newly released Freedom of Information Act and Russian documents.
Brotherhood of the Bomb is a vital slice of American history told authoritatively-and grippingly-for the first time.
Yuriko was happy growing up in Hiroshima when it was just her and Papa.
And while things are changing at home, the world beyond their doors is even more unpredictable.
World War II is coming to an end, and since the Japanese newspapers don’t report lost battles, the Japanese people are not entirely certain of where Japan stands.
Yuriko is used to the sirens and the air-raid drills, but things start to feel more real when the neighbors who have left to fight stop coming home.
When the bombs hit Hiroshima, it’s through Yuriko’s twelve-year-old eyes that we witness the devastation and horror.
This is a story that offers young readers insight into how children lived during the war, while also introducing them to Japanese culture.
Based loosely on author Kathleen Burkinshaw’s mother’s firsthand experience surviving the atomic bombing of Hiroshima, The Last Cherry Blossom hopes to warn readers of the immense damage nuclear war can bring, while reminding them that the “enemy” in any war is often not so different from ourselves.
By fully integrating the three key actors in the story--the United States, the Soviet Union, and Japan--Hasegawa for the first time puts the last months of the war into international perspective.
From April 1945, when Stalin broke the Soviet-Japanese Neutrality Pact and Harry Truman assumed the presidency, to the final Soviet military actions against Japan, Hasegawa brings to light the real reasons Japan surrendered.
From Washington to Moscow to Tokyo and back again, he shows us a high-stakes diplomatic game as Truman and Stalin sought to outmaneuver each other in forcing Japan's surrender; as Stalin dangled mediation offers to Japan while secretly preparing to fight in the Pacific; as Tokyo peace advocates desperately tried to stave off a war party determined to mount a last-ditch defense; and as the Americans struggled to balance their competing interests of ending the war with Japan and preventing the Soviets from expanding into the Pacific.
Authoritative and engrossing, Racing the Enemy puts the final days of World War II into a whole new light.
In a series of essays, RAND authors lend a farsighted perspective to the national dialogue on 9/11's legacy.
The essays assess the military, political, fiscal, social, cultural, psychological, and even moral implications of United States policymaking since 9/11.
Under threat of death, Vemork’s engineers pushed production into overdrive.
If the Allies could not destroy the plant, they feared the Nazis would soon be in possession of the most dangerous weapon the world had ever seen.
Based on a trove of top-secret documents and never-before-seen diaries and letters of the saboteurs, The Winter Fortress is an arresting chronicle of a brilliant scientist, a band of spies on skis, perilous survival in the wild, Gestapo manhunts, and a last-minute operation that would alter the course of the war.
Here, for the first time, former high-level defense analyst Daniel Ellsberg reveals his shocking firsthand account of America's nuclear program in the 1960s.
From the remotest air bases in the Pacific Command, where he discovered that the authority to initiate use of nuclear weapons was widely delegated, to the secret plans for general nuclear war under Eisenhower, which, if executed, would cause the near-extinction of humanity, Ellsberg shows that the legacy of this most dangerous arms buildup in the history of civilization--and its proposed renewal under the Trump administration--threatens our very survival.
No other insider with high-level access has written so candidly of the nuclear strategy of the late Eisenhower and early Kennedy years, and nothing has fundamentally changed since that era.
Framed as a memoir--a chronicle of madness in which Ellsberg acknowledges participating--this gripping exposé reads like a thriller and offers feasible steps we can take to dismantle the existing ""doomsday machine"" and avoid nuclear catastrophe, returning Ellsberg to his role as whistle-blower.
Strangelove story and an ultimately hopeful--and powerfully important--book about not just our country, but the future of the world.
In this hour-by-hour chronicle of those tense days, veteran Washington Post reporter Michael Dobbs reveals just how close we came to Armageddon.
Here, for the first time, are gripping accounts of Khrushchev's plan to destroy the United States naval base at Guantánamo; the handling of Soviet nuclear warheads on Cuba; and the extraordinary story of a U-2 spy plane that got lost over Russia at the peak of the crisis.
Written like a thriller, One Minute to Midnight is an exhaustively researched account of what Arthur Schlesinger, Jr. called “the most dangerous moment in human history,” and the definitive book on the Cuban missile crisis.
For all the effort to reduce nuclear stockpiles to zero, it seems that the Bomb is here to stay.
The issues are set against a backdrop of the changing international landscape, from the early days of development, through the Cold War, to the present-day controversy of George W Bush's National Missile Defence, and the threat and role of nuclear weapons in the so-called Age of Terror.
Joseph M Siracusa provides a comprehensive, accessible, and at times chilling overview of the most deadly weapon ever invented.
These pocket-sized books are the perfect way to get ahead in a new subject quickly.
Our expert authors combine facts, analysis, perspective, new ideas, and enthusiasm to make interesting and challenging topics highly readable.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty is a road map to nuclear zero, but it is a rudimentary one and it says nothing about the kind of zero to aim for.
Preferably, this would be a world where the inhibitions against reversal are strong enough to make it stably non-nuclear.
The literature on nuclear disarmament has paid little attention to this question.
This book seeks to fill a lacuna by examining the requirements of stable zero and their implications for the road map to that goal, starting from the vision to the present day.
The volume highlights that a clear conception of the goal not only is important in itself, but can shed light on what kind of disarmament process to promote.
It offers an accessible overview of the concept of nuclear weapons, outlines how thinking about these weapons has developed and considers how nuclear threats can continue to be managed in the future.
Coverage of nuclear testing, proliferation, strategy, global actors and disarmament.
Annotated further reading lists helping you to locate sources for essays and assignments.
Summaries, study questions and a glossary of key terms Free SAGE journal articles available on the Resources tab The author will be providing regular updates to his suggested web resources, so be sure to check the Resources tab for the most up-to-date.
The Politics of Nuclear Weapons is essential reading for both undergraduate and postgraduate students taking courses in Nuclear Politics.
Although the world’s attention has shifted to drone-controlled bombing and cyberwarfare, the threat of nuclear war still exists.
There are now fourteen thousand nuclear weapons in the hands of the nine declared nuclear powers.
Even though the world survived the Cold War, we need to understand what it means to live with nuclear weapons.
In this volume in the MIT Press Essential Knowledge series, Mark Wolverton offers a primer on nuclear weapons, from the science of fission and fusion to the pursuit of mutual assured destruction, the SALT and START agreements, and the Bomb in pop culture.
Wolverton explains the basic scientific facts, offers historical perspective, and provides a nuanced view of the unique political, social, and moral dilemmas posed by nuclear weapons.
He describes the birth of the Bomb in 1945 and its use against the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki; explains how a nuclear bomb works; recounts episodes when the world came close to waging nuclear war, including the Cuban missile crisis in 1962; discusses nuclear policy and nuclear treaties; and traces the influence of such films as On the Beach, Dr.
Following an introduction to the current nuclear state of play, the book addresses the challenge of nuclear weapons in three parts.
In the third and final part, the chapters discuss regional nuclear-weapon-free zones, NPT anomalies and, finally, assess the global governance architecture of nuclear security in light of the three Nuclear Security Summits between 2010 and 2014.
The concluding chapter argues for moving towards a world of progressively reduced nuclear weapons in numbers, reduced salience of nuclear weapons in national security doctrines and deployments, and, ultimately, a denuclearized world.
This book will be of much interest to students of nuclear proliferation, global governance, international organisations, diplomacy and security studies.
When Marie Curie, Enrico Fermi, and Edward Teller forged the science of radioactivity, they began a revolution that ran from the nineteenth century through the course of World War II and the Cold War to our current confrontation with the dangers of nuclear power and proliferation.
While nuclear science improves our lives, radiation’s invisible powers can trigger cancer and cellular mayhem.
Albert Einstein, Niels Bohr, J Robert Oppenheimer, Curtis LeMay, John F Kennedy, Robert McNamara, Ronald Reagan, and Mikhail Gorbachev, among others.
He reveals how Jewish scientists fleeing Hitler transformed America from a nation that created light bulbs into one that split atoms; Alfred Nobel’s dream of global peace; and how, in our time, emergency workers and utility employees fought to contain life-threatening nuclear reactors.
By tracing our complicated relationship with the dangerous energy we unleashed, Nelson discusses how atomic power and radiation are indivisible from our everyday lives.
Brilliantly told and masterfully crafted, The Age of Radiance provides a new understanding of a misunderstood epoch in history and restores to prominence the forgotten heroes and heroines who have changed all of our lives for better and for worse.
World in Chains is a collection of essays from well-reputed experts, all of which deliver engaging and analytical critiques of nuclear warfare.
I want those who come after my generation to know that, yes, we do know of the dangers of nuclear war, of climate chaos, of environmental destruction.
They need to be discussed in the pub, at the school gates and over the kitchen sink so that people are aware of the issues involved and have had the opportunity to think them through.
The nine nuclear weapon states are extending their commitments to nuclear 'deterrence' well into the second half of this century, despite treaty obligations and an 'unequivocal undertaking' to disarm.
The United States alone is expecting to spend up to $1 trillion upgrading its nuclear weapons over the next 30 years.
With around 15,000 nuclear weapons stockpiled worldwide, the risk of one going off by accident or design is increasing every day.
Timmon Milne Wallis explores the arguments in favour of nuclear weapons with a critical eye, cutting through the rhetoric and obfuscation to get to the real truth about these weapons.
It examines the legacy of nuclear weapons on United States thinking about some concepts of strategy and geopolitics, namely deterrence, extended deterrence, alliances, and arms control.
The purpose of this is to demonstrate just how fundamentally nuclear weapons have influenced American thinking about these concepts.
It argues that, given the extent of nuclear weapons' influence on these concepts and the implications for international security, further reductions beyond current Strategic Arms Reduction Talks levels, and the more absolute idea of nuclear disarmament, may not necessarily be prudent ideas.
Nuclear weapons have contributed to the avoidance of major war between states, made alliances more credible and last longer, and have made arms control relatively easier to conceptualize and manage.
As such, the author argues, these concepts may become even more difficult to manage in a world where nuclear weapons are marginalized.
Renewed calls for a nuclear weapons-free world have sparked a wide academic debate on both the attainability of such goal and the steps that should be taken.
Comparably less attention, however, has been paid to theoretically informed considerations of the consequences of nuclear abolition.
Comprising essays from leading scholars and experts within the field, this collection discusses the fundamental theoretical and conceptual foundations of nuclear disarmament and subsequently tries to assess its hypothetical impact in global and regional contexts.
The varied methodological approach of the contributors aims to advance a multi-theoretical and multi-perspectival view of the issue.
As a whole, the volume provides a detailed, complex overview of the risks and opportunities that are embedded in the vision of a nuclear weapon-free world.
This book will be of great interest to students of nuclear proliferation, arms control, war and conflict studies, international relations and security studies.
It starts from the observation that, although nuclear deterrence has long been dominant in debates about war and peace, recent events show that ridicule and stigmatization of nuclear weapons and their possessors is on the rise.
The idea of non-nuclear peace has been around since the beginning of the nuclear revolution, but it may be staging a return.
The first part reconstructs the criticism of nuclear peace, both past and present, with a particular emphasis on technology.
The second part focuses on the most revolutionary change since the beginning of the nuclear revolution, namely the Humanitarian Initiative and the resulting Nuclear Ban Treaty , which allows imagining non-nuclear peace anew.
The third and last part explores the practical and institutional prospects of a peace order without nuclear weapons.
If non-nuclear peace advocates want to convince skeptics, they have to come up with practical solutions in the realm of global governance or world government.
However, according to Shampa Biswas, these well-intentioned efforts to halt the spread of nuclear weapons deflect attention from a hierarchical global nuclear order dominated by powerful states and capitalist interests that benefit from the status quo.
In Nuclear Desire, Biswas proposes that pursuit and production of nuclear power is sustained by this unequal global order whose persistent and daily harmful effects are experienced by some of the most vulnerable bodies around the world.
In the end, the nonproliferation regime maintains a hierarchy of haves and have-nots, one that reinforces inequalities that run counter to the NPT’s broader goal.
Innovative, forcefully argued, and long overdue, Nuclear Desire moves beyond conventional critiques to give scholars and students of international relations new insights into how a more secure world might simultaneously be more peaceful and just.
Approaching the subject in a sensitive, inclusive and respectful way, each chapter is a newly commissioned piece covering a range of opinions and perspectives.
The volume is global in scope, something of increasing importance in the study of genocide.
Presenting genocide as an extremely diverse phenomenon, this book is a wide-ranging and in-depth view of the field that will be valuable for all those interested in the historical context of genocide.
Mastering the Emerging World of Connectivity, picks up where Malcolm Gladwell’s Tipping Point left off.
It is a how-to book for businesses, leaders, organizations, activists, and individuals, cracking wide-open humankind’s biggest trend in seven million years.
By understanding the roots and implications of “bottom up” and “top down” you’ll be better able to tap the incredible power of this trend, as the billionaire founders of Google, Facebook, Craigslist and Twitter have done.
Beginning with the 1st-century Sicari, it examines the commonalities that link apocalypticism, revolution, and terrorism occurring in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam past and present.
It is divided into two sections, 'This was Then' and 'This is Now', which together examine the cultural and religious history of oppositional violence from the time of Jesus to the aftermath of the 2016 American election.
The historical focus centers on how the movements, leaders and revolutionaries from earlier times are interpreted today through the lenses of historical memory and popular culture.
The radical right is the primary but not exclusive focus of the second part of the book.
At the same time, the work is intensely personal, in that it incorporates the author's experiences in the worlds of communist Eastern Europe, in the Iranian Revolution, and in the uprisings and wars in the Middle East and East Africa.
This book will be of much interest to students of religious and political violence, religious studies, history, and security studies.
Armageddon and Paranoia unfolds the full history of nuclear weapons that began with the arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union and now extends worldwide.
For decades, an apocalypse seemed imminent, staved off only by the certainty that if one side launched these missiles the other would launch an equally catastrophic counterstrike.
Still, though neither side actively wanted to plunge the world into nuclear wasteland, the possibility of war by misjudgment or mistake meant fears could never be entirely assuaged.
Both an exploration of Deterrence and the long history of superpower nuclear policy, Armageddon and Paranoia comes at a time when tensions surrounding nuclear armament have begun mounting once more.
No book until this one has offered so comprehensive a history of the topic that has guided--at times dominated--the world in which we live.
Perils of a World War and Preventive Measures ISBN-10: Author: Mahmoud Musa / Dr.
They remodeled the world map amongst themselves and affirmed that they will be guarantors of the international status-quo.
However, those who pledged to conserve peace are now breaking it, leading the planet to the edge of clash.
Potentially risky world war scenarios ; Dialogue between the West and Islam; New emerging superpowers; Psychological and Cyber Ware fare; Preventive mechanisms such as early-warning and preparedness operations.
It began with plutonium, the first element ever manufactured in quantity by humans.
Fearing that the Germans would be the first to weaponize the atom, the United States marshaled brilliant minds and seemingly inexhaustible bodies to find a way to create a nuclear chain reaction of inconceivable explosive power.
In a matter of months, the Hanford nuclear facility was built to produce and weaponize the enigmatic and deadly new material that would fuel atomic bombs.
In the desert of eastern Washington State, far from prying eyes, scientists Glenn Seaborg, Enrico Fermi, and many thousands of others—the physicists, engineers, laborers, and support staff at the facility—manufactured plutonium for the bomb dropped on Nagasaki, and for the bombs in the current American nuclear arsenal, enabling the construction of weapons with the potential to end human civilization.
With his characteristic blend of scientific clarity and storytelling, Steve Olson asks why Hanford has been largely overlooked in histories of the Manhattan Project and the Cold War.
Olson, who grew up just twenty miles from Hanford’s B Reactor, recounts how a small Washington town played host to some of the most influential scientists and engineers in American history as they sought to create the substance at the core of the most destructive weapons ever created.
The Apocalypse Factory offers a new generation this dramatic story of human achievement and, ultimately, of lethal hubris.
Since then the world has undergone a transition, both in terms of power dynamics and military warfare.
The emergence of New Nuclear and Threshold states has transformed the traditional military warfare, making it more asymmetric.
Though the concept of nuclear deterrence in the American strategic thought has diminished, but the Asian countries still consider nuclear weapons as an important strategy in combating conventional weaknesses.
This altered strategic space has created problems in the civilian and the military domains.
The emergence of economically strong China aiming for military modernization, to achieve global reach through precision missiles, is making Asia edgy.
A nuclear Pakistan which is constantly increasing its nuclear stockpile is creating stability-instability paradoxes in Asia.
India which is also emerging as a powerful state needs to approach this dynamic shift in a holistic manner.
A strategic churning has begun in Asia and whether this will be in India's favour depends on the strategic choices that India adopts.
China has revolutionized its Second Artillery through a process of “Informationization and Modernisation” and is diversifying the military technology which is having a cascading effect in Asia.
Pakistan through its nuclear policy of “First Use”, its alleged use of “Tactical Nuclear Weapons” is making South Asia vulnerable to nuclear terrorism.
These are a few questions along with others which this book will try to unravel.
