Building on the book, this blog offers insights, analysis, and facts about recent events.
Speaking to WKMG-TV, an Orlando CBS affiliate, Gore said, `I feel very good about.
Campaigns and Elections, government, political science, politics, presidency Tracker Many posts have discussed opposition research in campaigns.
One element of oppo consists of sending ""trackers"" to take video of what a candidate says and does.
Democratic tracker Will Urquhart writes that tracking is tedious work, requiring a great deal of time and patience.
One thing I’ve learned is that you truly never know when a seemingly innocuous statement will eventually emerge as a major issue.
In July 2011, I recorded an event in South Carolina with Michele Bachmann.
During the rally, Bachmann included a new talking point in her stump speech, claiming that 47 percent of Americans paid no taxes and suggested that everyone should pay something.
But more than a year later, that 47 percent talking point from the GOP is back in the news because of Mitt Romney.
It’s a tracker’s job to make sure we have it on tape, so that four weeks, or four months, or four years from now, if we need it, we have it.
In order to collect all of a candidate’s statements on camera means we spend a lot of time driving, about as much time waiting around, and, on good days, a solid amount of time furiously typing up a transcript of what a candidate just said.
In that way, a tracker’s job is similar to how it’s been in previous election cycles.
That means that if someone wants to put the footage we shoot in a TV ad, it’s high-quality video instead of grainy cell phone footage.
Then, when something noteworthy happens, we can do in hours what used to take days.
Just a few years ago, a tracker would have to actually physically mail their tapes back to headquarters.
Bachmann, Campaigns and Elections, government, Internet, mass media, opposition research, political science, politics, technology Voting from Overseas Reuters reports: With the United States presidential election too close to call, hundreds of thousands of Americans living in Europe have been posting their absentee ballots with a sense that they could truly make a difference on November 6.
From Berlin to Paris and London to Madrid, they have closely tracked the battle between Democrat President Barack Obama and Republican challenger Mitt Romney, though the emotional temperature is several degrees lower than four years ago, when most expats rallied behind Obama after two terms of George W Bush, whom many thought had tarnished the United States image abroad.
Both the Republicans and Democrats have courted the expat vote since 1988, when absentee ballots reversed the outcome of a Senate race in Florida, allowing Republican Connie Mack to pip Democrat Buddy MacKay, who had led when polling stations closed.
Absentee ballots also made the difference in another Senate race in 2008.
The tightness of the presidential race, with a Reuters/Ipsos tracking poll showing a dead heat , has made the expat vote arguably more important than ever.
Both Republicans Abroad and Democrats Abroad organisations have gone all out to get Americans registered and voting in their home states.
While a number of battleground states have reported dismal numbers of military absentee ballot requests in early counts, the western swing state of Colorado announced Monday that its ballot request totals for military and overseas absentee voters have already surpassed 2008 totals, with eight days to go until the election.
But early ballot request totals in a number of states showed an even more depressed military voting turnout than in 2008, and a bombshell report at the end of August from the Department of Defense Inspector General found that half of the new voting offices were unreachable by telephone or email.
Colorado is proving that low military voting does not have to be the status quo.
The office of Secretary of State Scott Gessler announced that 19,055 military and overseas ballot requests had been received, 2,804 more than in 2008.
The 8,320 completed ballots the state has already received from these voters amounts to a return rate 80 percent higher than in the 2010 election.
The improvement in numbers is attributed to a statewide project launched in 2010 that allows overseas voters to receive next-day ballots via email and mail them back at their convenience.
In 2009, the federal government passed the Military and Overseas Voter Empowerment Act.
The legislation led 47 states, including Virginia, to pass similar laws increasing enfranchisement of overseas voters.
Under the legislation, voters are no longer required to have absentee ballots notarized.
States are required to send absentee ballots to registered overseas voters at least 45 days prior to the election.
Electronic absentee ballots and registration applications must be made available online by each state in case hard copies don’t arrive, the law states.
Currently, 13 states allow online voter registration, according to a spokesperson for the Pew Center on the States; Virginia is not one of them.
Overseas Vote Foundation spearheaded the trend toward electronic registration in 2008.
Nearly 5 million people accessed the OVF webpage in 2008, including nearly 2 million in the October before the election, according to a report by the Pew Center on the States.Overseas Vote Foundation established an offshoot, Youth Vote Overseas , to target students going abroad.
The goal is to encourage students to register to vote before going abroad, explained Marina Mecl, Youth Vote Overseas outreach program director.
Contact with partner universities overseas helps YVO’s cause, Mecl said, especially in traditional hubs for exchange students.
Between July and October, the organization tallied its highest number of registrations abroad from the United Kingdom, Spain, Italy and France – four of the top five study abroad destinations from 2008 to 2010.
About three out of four voters registering on the site are between 18 and 24.
Campaigns and Elections, Colorado, early voting, election law, military, political participation, students, study abroad, turnout Tuesday, October 30, 2012 Sandy and a Split Election Outcome Previous posts have discussed the possibility of a split between the popular and electoral vote.
Property damage amounts to billion of dollars, and millions of people may not get electricity back for several days.
These problems could affect turnout in several ways.First, recovering from the disaster will be tough and time-consuming.
People will have to repair their homes, restock refrigerators full of spoiled food, and make up for lost work.
Though neither presidential campaign is putting resources into either state , many downballot campaigns and local party organizations were planning on door-to-door contact and electronic communication to mobilize supporters.
The hurricane will cost these efforts several days that they can't get back.
If similar numbers were headed for the polls this year, and if the hurricane depressed turnout by just one percent, that's a drop of 115,000 votes, of which about 65,000 would probably go to Obama.
In this scenario, he would still carry the two states, but in an extremely close election, his national popular-vote total might dip below Romney's.
Having set aside a planned weekend at his seaside home in Kennebunkport, Maine, Bush flew to the White House from Camp David, Md., for a high-profile meeting with top aides.
With cameras rolling, Bush stepped off his helicopter on the South Lawn and strode to the Cabinet Room for talks with Transportation Secretary Andrew Card, Deputy Defense Secretary Donald Atwood and members of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Earlier in the day, the Defense Department announced that the number of federal troops assisting in South Florida would be doubled to 14,000.
The president was showered with criticism from victims of Hurricane Andrew last week that the government was slow to respond to their massive loss of homes and businesses.
But a Newsweek poll released Saturday showed that 54 percent of Americans believe Bush has done a good job handling relief efforts.
At the same time, however, 57 percent said they think Bush is more concerned about matters in Iraq and Bosnia-Hercegovina than the plight of those in Florida and Louisiana.
Bill Clinton said today that an effort should be made to ""look into"" why problems have plagued the hurricane disaster-relief effort in Florida and Louisiana.
But I don't want to get into assessing the blame there because I don't know what the facts were.
The Bush Administration has been hit by complaints over the past several days that it moved ineptly and too slowly to aid the victims of Hurricane Andrew, particularly in Florida.
Today, the Bush campaign said that Mr Clinton, despite his claims to the contrary, was jumping on criticisms of the disaster relief for political advantage.
With a few deft words, President Bush threw the full weight of incumbency behind Florida's hurricane victims today, and showed in the process why even Presidents who lag in the polls are electoral forces to be reckoned with.
Seeking to recover from an early stumble in the Federal relief effort, Mr Bush flew Air Force One to the site of the worst storm damage and opened the Federal treasury to residents of South Florida.
He committed the Government to footing the entire cost of rebuilding the region's shattered schools, bridges, hospitals, roads and other public facilities, a tab that is likely to run double that of the $1. billion spent after Hurricane Hugo struck South Carolina in 1989.
He also pledged to rebuild Homestead Air Force Base, at a cost that could reach $500 million, even though some experts had concluded that if the judgment was based on military need, the base might never be reopened.
By day's end it was clear that this normally budget-conscious President, who has railed for months against unrestrained Federal spending, would spare nothing when it came to helping Florida's hurricane victims.
Though he lost the general election to Clinton, Bush won Florida by 1. percent.
We should have one Secretary of Business, instead of nine different departments that are dealing with things like getting loans to SBA or helping companies with exports.
Now, the reason we haven’t done that is not because of some big ideological difference.
It has something to do with Congress talking a good game about streamlining government, but protective about giving up their jurisdiction over various pieces of government.
The president spoke about reorganization in his 2011 State of the Union A year later, he did propose legislation enhancing the president's ability to reorganize the government.
Though he spoke about it at a January meeting of his Council on Jobs and Competitiveness, he said very little about afterward.
Article II, Section 1, clause 4 The Congress may determine the Time of chusing the Electors, and the Day on which they shall give their votes; which Day shall be the same throughout the United States.
Eight years ago, the Congressional Research Service addressed the question.
The United States Constitution does not provide in express language any current authority for a federal official or institution to “postpone” an election for federal office.
In addition to general contest, protest and challenge statutes whereby the results of elections to federal office are initially adjudicated in the States, a handful of States have provided in State law express authority to postpone or reschedule elections within their jurisdictions based on certain emergency contingencies.
The States’ authority within the United States Constitution appears to be sufficient to enact legislation to deal with emergency and exigent circumstances concerning federal elections, as long as such laws do not conflict with federal law enacted under Congress’ superceding constitutional authority.
Failure to make choice on prescribed day Whenever any State has held an election for the purpose of choosing electors, and has failed to make a choice on the day prescribed by law, the electors may be appointed on a subsequent day in such a manner as the legislature of such State may direct.
In such cases, the State had clearly “held an election,” but a choice was not necessarily made because the State has determined that the results could not fairly be ascertained.
There is no clear and definitive authority on this question, nor do there appear to be specific legal precedents bearing upon this issue.
Campaigns and Elections, Constitution, election law, Electoral College, government, political science, politics, presidency Standing Guard in a Hurricane A previous post noted that the military does not abandon the Tomb of the Unknown Soldier even in harsh weather, such as Hurricane Sandy: An earlier version of this post featured the photo below.
Although a number of news sites identified it as a current picture, it turns out to be one from September.
A BBC World Service opinion poll has found sharply higher overseas approval ratings for United States President Barack Obama than Republican challenger Mitt Romney.
An average of 50% favoured Mr Obama, with 9% for Mr Romney, in the survey of 21,797 people in 21 countries.
Only Pakistan's respondents said they would prefer to see Mr Romney win November's election.
The survey was conducted by GlobeScan/PIPA between 3 July and 3 September.
The 11th annual Transatlantic Trends survey out today reveals that transatlantic majorities still approve of United States President Barack Obama’s foreign policy, and that Mitt Romney is largely an unknown in Europe.
Transatlantic Trends 2012 shows 82% of Europeans said they had a favorable opinion of the American president.
President Obama is not as popular at home as he is in Europe, although a majority of Americans said their overall view of the president was favorable, 40% unfavorable.
If Europeans could vote in the United States election, 75% of EU residents would vote for Obama, and only 8% would vote for Romney.
The Republican candidate leads Obama 57 percent to 22 percent, the organizations' Peace Index for October found in its October survey.
The gap is especially marked among self-described right-wingers — 70 percent of whom prefer Romney — while Obama gets three times more support from Arab Israelis, 45 percent versus 15 percent.
The ad may not fall afoul of the tax code because it does not name any individual or party.
This case illustrates the complex relationship of religion and politics, as well as the unique circumstances of the 2012 election.
Despite his recent wish that he had steered clear of politics, Billy Graham has endorsed Mitt Romney, the first Mormon presidential nominee of a major party.
Bible, Campaigns and Elections, government, Mormon, political science, politics, religion, Romney, taxation Sunday, October 28, 2012 More Zombies in the News We've seen zombies in political protests, campaign ads, and information from the Centers for Disease Control.
Move over vampires, goblins and haunted houses, this kind of Halloween terror aims to shake up even the toughest warriors: An untold number of so-called zombies are coming to a counterterrorism summit attended by hundreds of Marines, Navy special operations forces, soldiers, police, firefighters and others to prepare them for their worst nightmares.
Hundreds of military, law enforcement and medical personnel will observe the Hollywood-style production of a zombie attack as part of their emergency response training.
In the scenario, a VIP and his personal detail are trapped in a village, surrounded by zombies when a bomb explodes.
The VIP is wounded and his team must move through the town while dodging bullets and shooting back at the invading zombies.
At one point, some members of the team are bitten by zombies and must be taken to a field medical facility for decontamination and treatment.
The Franklin County Department of Emergency Services used a zombie apocalypse theme for an emergency preparedness drill Saturday.
If you've been bitten by a zombie, you are going through and getting medication, which is M&M's,"" said Meghan O'Brien, Assistant Director for the Franklin County Department of Emergency Services.
Depending on what it is, volunteers would then tell those affected what kind of medication they would need and how to take it.
It is hard to believe, but all three old men would outlive the youthful chief executive.
Cuba, Eisenhower, foreign policy and national security, government, Hoover, Kennedy, political science, politics, presidency, Truman A Romney Path Without Ohio or Virginia It is just possible for Romney to win without Ohio or Virginia.
An independent poll finds that Obama and Romney are in a statistical tie in Minnesota.
If he can carry that state, along with Iowa and Wisconsin, then Romney could get the minimum 270.
For its part, Washington promised not to invade the Communist island, while pledging to dismantle its own missiles in Italy and Turkey.
Confident that the crisis was headed to a peaceful and satisfactory conclusion, Kennedy called former presidents Herbert Hoover, Harry Truman, and Dwight Eisenhower.
Cuba, foreign policy and national security, government, Kennedy, nuclear weapons, political science, politics, presidency Saturday, October 27, 2012 Deliberation and Ballot Measures Joe Mathews writes about California Governor Jerry Brown's efforts to win voter approval of a tax increase.
Here's how the LA Times described the conversation: ""In the cafe, located in the shadow of San Diego's Gaslamp Quarter, Brown asked employees whether they had heard of Proposition 30.
His concern about being overexposed seems genuine, and it's charming in an old-fashioned sort of way.
The world and California are much bigger places; the media universe is more crowded.
The occasional statement, or a big push late in campaign season, isn't enough to get the word out in this environment.
A governor who isn't constantly trying to cut through the clutter and get out a consistent message is, quite simple, a governor who isn't doing his whole job.
Air Force troop carrier squadrons are ordered to active duty in case an invasion is required.
Later that night, Robert Kennedy meets secretly with Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
In an additional secret understanding, the United States agrees to eventually remove the Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
If that’s the count when the electors cast their ballots on December 17, then the newly-elected House of Representatives will pick the winner in January.
Republicans currently have a majority of representatives from 33 states, and this election probably won't change that number very much.
But a tie on election night doesn’t necessarily mean a tie on December 17.
Contemplating the prospect that a deadlocked electoral college would send the decision to a GOP House, supporters of President Obama might try to get some GOP electors to change their votes.
Twenty-one states do not bind their electors to vote for the candidates to whom they are pledged.
Twenty-nine states and the District of Columbia do have such requirements, but there is serious doubt that the courts would uphold them.
When it became apparent that Al Gore won a popular-vote plurality in the 2000 election, a pair of students at Claremont McKenna College started a Website to persuade Republican electors to support Gore.
Although they attracted a lot of publicity, they got little support from Democratic political professionals, who were focusing on the vote count in Florida.
Things would be different this time, in part because Democrats are still seething about the 2000 result.
If the impetus for a vote-switching effort didn’t come directly from the Obama campaign or the Democratic National Committee, it would surely come from outside-spending groups or the progressive side of the Twitterverse.
In most states, people get to be electors because of long service to their party, so it would be hard to switch many of them.
But in case of a tie, it would only take a single defection to decide the election.
If a Republican elector or two seemed to be wavering, the Romney campaign would probably try to flip Democratic electors the other way.
One would guess, then, that both sides have contingency plans for an electoral-college whip operation, complete with up-to-date contact information for every elector.
I don’t know if this scenario would be good for the country, but it would be fascinating to watch.
In June of this year, the Federal Election Commission for the first time allowed political campaigns to accept campaign contributions via text message, and both of the major presidential candidates now allow supporters to contribute directly to their campaign using a cell phone.
In two surveys fielded in late September, we asked a series of questions aimed at determining how this new contribution model is fitting into Americans’ political giving habits.
Democrats are more likely to contribute online or directly from their cell phone, while Republicans are more likely to contribute in person, by phone call, or via regular mail.
State Department Spokesman Lincoln White, and Press Secretary to the President Pierre Salinger.
Cuba, foreign policy and national security, government, intelligence, Kennedy, mass media, military, nuclear weapons, political science, politics, presidency Evangelicals for a Non-Protestant Ticket Mitt Romney is a Mormon and Paul Ryan is a Catholic.
The Republican ticket is the first in the history of either party not to include a Protestant.
The Faith and Freedom Coalition has set an ambitious goal of reaching out to 17. million evangelical households in 12 battleground states to push them to vote.
Not all evangelicals are conservative, and the Obama campaign also has an outreach effort to rally religious voters.
But polls suggest that the president will not do as well among white evangelicals as he did in 2008.
But Obama has also lost support among some evangelicals for his support of same-sex marriage, and for policies perceived to be threatening to religious freedom, including a rule in his healthcare plan that would require some religious institutions to provide contraceptive services to their employees.
Barack Obama, Campaigns and Elections, Catholic, civic culture, government, Mormon, political science, politics, religion, Republican, Romney, Ryan, turnout Thursday, October 25, 2012 Electing the President: Nuts and Bolts The National Archives sets out key dates: November 6, 2012—Election Day -Registered voters cast their votes for President and Vice President.
By doing so, they also help choose the electors who will represent their state in the Electoral College.
Mid-November through December 17, 2012 - After the presidential election, the governor of your state prepares seven Certificates of Ascertainment.
Certificates of Ascertainment should be sent to the Archivist no later than the meeting of the electors on December 17, 2012.
The remaining six Certificates of Ascertainment are held for use at the meeting of the Electors on December 17, 2012.
December 11, 2012 - States must make final decisions in any controversies over the appointment of their electors at least six days before the meeting of the Electors on December 17, 2012.
This is so their electoral votes will be presumed valid when presented to Congress.
Decisions by states’ courts are conclusive, if decided under laws enacted before Election Day, November 6, 2012.
December 17, 2012 -The Electors meet in their state and vote for President and Vice President on separate ballots.
The electors record their votes on six “Certificates of Vote,” which are paired with the six remaining Certificates of Ascertainment.
December 26, 2012 -The deadline for receipt of the electoral votes by the President of the Senate and the Archivist is December 26, 2012.
If votes are lost or delayed, the Archivist may take extraordinary measures to retrieve duplicate originals.
On or Before January 3, 2013 -The Archivist and/or representatives from the Office of the Federal Register meet with the Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House in late December or early January.
January 6, 2013 - The Congress meets in joint session to count the electoral votes on January 6, 2013.
The Vice President, as President of the Senate, presides over the count and announces the results of the Electoral College vote.
The President of the Senate then declares which persons, if any, have been elected President and Vice President of the United States.
If a State submits conflicting sets of electoral votes to Congress, the two Houses acting concurrently may accept or reject the votes.
If they do not concur, the votes of the electors certified by the Governor of the State on the Certificate of Ascertainment would be counted in Congress.
If necessary the House would elect the President by majority vote, choosing from the three candidates who received the greatest number of electoral votes.
If necessary, the Senate would elect the Vice President by majority vote, choosing from the two candidates who received the greatest number of electoral votes.
If any objections to the Electoral College vote are made, they must be submitted in writing and be signed by at least one member of the House and one Senator.
If objections are presented, the House and Senate withdraw to their respective chambers to consider their merits under procedures set out in federal law.
Much public debate between the United States and the Soviet Union took place in the halls of the United Nations.
During the debate in the Security Council, the normally courteous United States Ambassador Adlai Stevenson aggresivrely confronted his Soviet United Nations counterpart Valerian Zorin with photographic evidence of the missiles in Cuba.
Posted by Pitney at 10:55 AM Labels: Army, Barack Obama, Campaigns and Elections, foreign policy and national security, government, military, political science, politics Bayonets ABC News reports: The most memorable line of Monday night’s debate was President Obama’s pointed “horses and bayonets” jab at Mitt Romney for questioning what Romney said was a shrinking United States Navy.
Obama responded that Romney “hasn’t spent enough time looking at how our military works.
Horses and bayonets quickly became a Twitter punchline, but while they may no longer be needed for bayonet charges, it turns out the Pentagon still owns a hefty arsenal of bayonets.
The Marine Corps has another 195,334 bayonets that it bought in 2004 and it plans on buying 175,061 more bayonets this year.
A Marine official says it’s not accurate to add the two totals together as the new ones will include replacements for ones already in service as well as additional stocks.
At The Wall Street Journal, Julian E Barnes writes: ""In 1916, Army and Marine Corps forces were relatively small, the World War I buildup having not begun.
It implied that United States and Soviet ships were in close proximity if not actually steaming straight for each other.
The men gathered around JFK on the morning of October 24 certainly thought that was the case; McCone even recorded a note later in the day that a United States Navy vessel had confronted a Soviet ship at virtually the same time he received the intelligence bulletin in the White House.
In fact, the two closest Soviet ships were more than five hundred nautical miles from the quarantine line and headed back to the Soviet Union.
Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson lays the matter before the United Nations Security Council.
After the Organization of American States endorsed the quarantine, President Kennedy asks Khrushchev to halt any Russian ships heading toward Cuba.
The president's greatest concern is that a United States Navy vessel would otherwise be forced to fire upon a Russian vessel, possibly igniting war between the superpowers.
Previous posts have discussed ways in which Facebook may influence political behavior.
Facebook advertisements are a popular way for candidates to connect with voters, but a recent academic study suggests they aren't actually that effective.
Nor were they more like to have a favorable impression of the candidate or vote for the candidate.
This still could be the most cost-effective campaign tactic out there,"" he said.
After returning to the White House, he met with Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and reaffirmed the decision he hadmade the day before to impose a blockade on Cuba.
Walter Sweeney, the head of the United States Air Force Tactical Air Command.
So when the planes returned home, some working Soviet missiles could still be pointed at the United States.
The group went line-by-line through the speech that Ted Sorensen had drafted for the president to give to the nation the next night, weighing the political and diplomatic consequences of every sentence.
Rusk noted that “The legal meaning of the two words is identical”; stopping ships on the high seas would constitute an act of war under international law regardless of what Washington called it.
He preferred calling what the United States was about to do a “quarantine,” however, because it would allow the administration to avoid unflattering comparisons to the blockade that the Soviets had imposed on Berlin in 1948 and 1949.
Kennedy accepted Rusk’s point and directed that the term “quarantine” be used.
Posted by Pitney at 7:12 AM Labels: Cuba, foreign policy and national security, government, intelligence, Kennedy, military, nuclear weapons, political science, politics, presidency Saturday, October 20, 2012 Unions and a California Ballot Measure Earlier this year, unions tried to recall Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker over his efforts to limit public-sector collective bargaining.
Now they're fighting a California measure to limit their ability to gather political money.
Mariel, on the northwestern coast of Cuba, served as a major port of entry for Soviet goods and as a Cuban naval base.
NPIC analysts monitored imagery of the port to gauge whether additional Soviet materials were brought in to add to the already growing threat.
The Soviets attempted to send four “Foxtrot” diesel submarines to Cuba during the crisis.
Intelligence gathering provided by NPIC and other agencies resulted in the United States Navy successfully forcing three subs to the surface before turning them around, with the fourth turning back in mid-journey, still submerged.
Cuba, foreign policy and national security, government, intelligence, journalism, Kennedy, mass media, military, nuclear weapons, political science, politics, presidency Friday, October 19, 2012 Social Media and Civic Engagement The Pew Internet and American Life Project reports: The use of social media is becoming a feature of political and civic engagement for many Americans.
Some 60% of American adults use either social networking sites like Facebook or Twitter and a new survey by the Pew Research Center’s Internet & American Life Project finds that 66% of those social media users—or 39% of all American adults—have done at least one of seven civic or political activities with social media.
Overall, there are mixed partisan and ideological patterns among social media users when it comes to using social media like social networking sites and Twitter.
The social media users who talk about politics on a regular basis are the most likely to use social media for civic or political purposes.
And the social media users who have firmer party and ideological ties—liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans—are, at times, more likely than moderates in both parties to use social media for these purposes.
Some of these activities are more likely to be pursued by younger social media users compared with the social media users who are ages 50 or older.
Younger users are more likely to post their own thoughts about issues, post links to political material, encourage others to take political action, belong to a political group on a social networking site, follow elected officials on social media, and like or promote political material others have posted.
Just a day before arriving in Springfield, Kennedy and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko met for two hours in the Oval Office where Gromyko told Kennedy Soviet aid to Cuba was meant only for defensive capabilities.
Despite the intense discussions and strategy sessions with his civilian and military advisors on how to respond to the situation, the White House thought that having Kennedy stay on his normal schedule would create the impression nothing was amiss.
In the meantime, the Joint Chiefs of Staff urged Kennedy to respond with military force, including an airstrike.
The day after he was in Springfield the president’s press secretary announced that Kennedy suffered from an “upper respiratory infection” and abruptly cancelled the rest of his trip.
On October 19, the CIA reported the construction of twelve SS-5 launch pads, likely to be operational in December, and more importantly, three SS-4 sites with four launchers each, two sites of which were reported to be operational already.
Central Intelligence Agency, Cuba, foreign policy and national security, government, intelligence, Kennedy, military, nuclear weapons, political science, politics Thursday, October 18, 2012 Religion and Hispanics Our textbook stresses the importance of religion in American politics.
Latinos are divided by religion in their preferences in the upcoming presidential election, according to the latest survey by the Pew Hispanic Center and the Pew Forum on Religion & Public Life, both projects of the Pew Research Center.
Three-quarters of Latino Catholics and eight-in-ten religiously unaffiliated Latinos support President Barack Obama’s re-election.
However, among Latino evangelical Protestants, who account for 16% of all Latino registered voters, just 50% prefer Obama, while 39% support his Republican challenger, Mitt Romney.
As the presidential election approaches, many Hispanic churchgoers say they are hearing from their clergy about various political issues and, to a lesser extent, about candidates and elections.
Roughly half of Latinos who attend religious services at least once a month say they have heard their clergy speak out about abortion, while 43% have heard from the pulpit about immigration, and 38% say their clergy have spoken out about homosexuality.
A smaller proportion, roughly three-in-ten, report hearing from their clergy about candidates and elections.
United States intelligence had already spotted offensive missiles in Cuba.
Earlier, he was specifically exempted form resolutions restoring the rights of other officials in the Confederacy.
He had served the United States long and honorably as a soldier, Member of the United States House and Senate, and as Secretary of War.
It is fitting that Jefferson Davis should no longer be singled out for punishment.Our Nation needs to clear away the guilts and enmities and recriminations of the past, to finally set at rest the divisions that threatened to destroy our Nation and to discredit the principles on which it was founded.
Our people need to turn their attention to the important tasks that still lie before us in establishing those principles for all people.
