John Ainslie, SCND, October 2012 On the evening of Friday 26 October 1962 General Issa Pliyev, Commander of Soviet Forces in Cuba, sent a report to his superiors in Moscow.
Pliyev was expecting American aircraft to launch a massive bombing campaign at dawn the next day.
He ordered the radar systems at Surface to Air Missile sites around the island to be switched on for the first time.
Nuclear warheads were moved from two central stores and deployed with their missile regiments.
Three FKR cruise-missile launchers were moved to their firing position, ready to launch a nuclear attack on the United States base at Guantanamo Bay.
The R-12 sites had been spotted by US reconnaissance planes on 15 October.
The aerial photographs had been displayed at the United Nations and flashed around the world.
Then, on 26 October, United States intelligence identified several Luna battlefield missiles.
The CIA were unable to detect any signs that the Luna missiles were nuclear-armed, but they were.
In addition, 80 warheads, half of Pliyev’s nuclear arsenal, were for FKR cruise missiles.
Despite frequent overflights, the American spy planes had spotted only one of the FKR sites and they thought this was a conventional facility.
The intelligence analysts also failed to correctly identify the two central stores where most of the nuclear weapons were held.
In summary, United States military planners grossly underestimated the number of nuclear weapons on the island, particularly the tactical nuclear weapons.
The one American aircraft which flew over Cuba on the morning of Saturday 27th October was not a bomber, but a U-2 reconnaissance plane.
Moscow had replied to Pliyev’s report by saying that his soldiers could open fire on United States aircraft, but only in self-defence.
The Russian officers in the Cuban command post thought that the U-2 was identifying targets which would be bombed a few hours later.
So they ordered that the plane be attacked by two missiles before it left Cuban airspace.
The downing of this aircraft and the death of the pilot, Rudolf Anderson, brought the crisis to a new level.
The American defence Secretary, Robert McNamara, had for days held at bay his generals, who had from the start been advocating a massive airstrike.
Now even McNamara was proposing a counter-attack, at least against the SAM site which had downed Anderson’s U-2.
United States forces were ready to strike Air Defence targets within 2 hours, to launch an all-out bombing campaign within 12 hours and to invade the island within 7 days.
United States nuclear forces had been moved onto Defence Condition 3 when President Kennedy addressed the nation on Tuesday 22nd October.
The following day Strategic Air Command took its forces up to DEFCON 2.
This meant that for 24 hours each day there were 65 B-52 nuclear bombers in the air, circling over the far North of America and the Mediterranean, waiting for their instructions to proceed to targets in the Soviet Union.
Over 1,000 other United States nuclear bombers were ready for take-off at airfields across the globe.
In England the RAF had 72 V-bombers loaded with 3 FKR Frontovaya Krylataya Raketa Frontline Cruise Missile.
In 1962 United States intelligence did not realise that this type of missile had a nuclear capability.
Thor nuclear missiles, under dual Anglo-American control, were prepared for action in East Anglia.
The United States Air Force was under the command of General Curtis Le May, architect of the fire-bombing of Tokyo in 1945.
Le May was the model for the character General Jack D Ripper in Stanley Kubrick’s film Dr Strangelove.
General Thomas Power, head of Strategic Air Command, was even more militant than Le May.
Power’s attitude was that if a nuclear war resulted in two Americans surviving and only one Russian, then the United States had won.
Power had covertly been bringing his nuclear forces to a very high state of alert since 20th October.
The crisis on Saturday 27 October deepened further because of an event far from the Caribbean.
While Russia and American were confronting each other over Cuba, they both continued with their programmes of nuclear tests.
The Russians detonated a nuclear bomb over Novaya Zemlya on 26 October.
Hours later an American U-2 plane was sent to the North Pole to monitor for radiation.
He lost his bearings because of the confusing coloured lights of the Aurora Borealis.
He finally realised his error as he heard Russian folk music over his radio.
In Russian minds this flight could easily have been making a final check of targets for the bombers circling over Alaska.
Six MIG-16 fighters were scrambled to intercept Maultsby, but they couldn’t fly high enough to shoot him down.
As he finally turned back towards Alaska, two United States F-106 fighters were sent to escort him.
Like many others, these F106s had been armed with nuclear Air-to-Air missiles when the alert state was raised to DEFCON 3.
The United States Navy had devised a procedure whereby they would signal that a submarine should surface by dropping several stun grenades in the water.
They had informed Moscow of this procedure, but the Soviet Navy refused to acknowledge the message and did not pass it on to their vessels at sea.
The crew of B-59 were stressed, exhausted and living in stifling conditions.
The submariners heard the repeated thumping of practice depth charges detonating close to their hull.
The United States Navy officers who were launching these small bombs had no idea that the diesel-powered submarine was carrying one nuclear torpedo.
He agreed with his political officer that the nuclear torpedo should be prepared for action.
He felt that if his submarine was to be sunk, at least he would take an American warship down with him.
Fortunately there was another senior officer on the submarine, who held the same rank as the Savistky.
Captain Vasili Arkhipov refused to go along with his colleagues and he vetoed the order to prepare the nuclear torpedo.
Decades later, when this story first became public, Arkhipov was hailed as the man who stopped World War Three.
As this drama unfolded at sea, McNamara was leaving his office in Washington.
He turned to an aide and said that he wasn’t sure that he would live to see another Saturday night.
Four decades later McNamara had the chance to meet with key figures from Russia and Cuba who had been involved in the crisis.
He was horrified to learn that the world had come far closer to nuclear Armageddon than he, or anyone else, had realised at the time.
On Tuesday 16th October, when the Chiefs of Staff had first proposed an immediate attack, their information on the nuclear weapons in Cuba was very limited.
There were no electronic safeguards preventing the launch of the Russian nuclear weapons in Cuba, or most American nuclear weapons.
While Moscow retained authority over the long-range R-12 missiles, Khrushchev’s instructions for the tactical nuclear weapons were inconsistent.
First he delegated authority over them to Pliyev, then he said that the weapons should not be used without permission from Moscow.
Khrushchev also toyed with the idea of saying that he would hand these tactical nuclear weapons over to Cuban control if the island was invaded.
Not only did it mark a serious escalation in the crisis, but it also showed how distant leaders could lose control over a conflict.
For the Soviet officers in Cuba, who were waiting for American bombs to fall, attacking the spy plane was a reasonable operational decision.
Had the United States Air Force implemented OPLAN 312, an all-out air attack on Cuba, followed by OPLAN 316, an invasion of the islands, then there is no guarantee that the Russian officers who had practical control over individual nuclear weapons, particularly the tactical weapons, would have shown restraint as their comrades were killed by American bombs.
Khrushchev mistakenly thought that Kennedy was going to make a broadcast to the nation at 9 am, Washington time, saying that the bombing campaign had started.
Shortly before this, the Soviet leadership met outside Moscow and agreed to remove their missiles from Cuba in exchange for the withdrawal of American missiles from Turkey.
Living in the shadow of the Cold War In one way the world is closer to the nuclear apocalypse today than it was on the 27th October 1962.
Then most of the nuclear weapons were bombs which would be dropped by aircraft.
The total number of nuclear warheads from missiles that could hit targets in the USA and Soviet Union was 315.
All of these missiles had to be fuelled with liquid fuel before they could be launched.
Today the United States and Russia between them have 1,700 nuclear warheads on missiles which are on high alert.
For example, on 26 September 1983 Stanislav Petrov sat in Serpukhov-15, the Russian early warning centre, watching as one, two, then ten dots appeared on his screen.
Each represented a missile fired from the United States towards the Soviet Union.
The Standing Orders said that in this situation Petrov should immediately inform the General Staff Central Command Post at Chekhov-3.
Chekhov-3 was able to launch Russia’s entire arsenal of ICBMs by remote control, and it can still do this today.
Only then was he able to confirm that the dots were due to a computer failure.
The Soviet Union misinterpreted a NATO nuclear exercise, Able Archer, as the final preparations for a real attack.
In 1995 President Yeltsin was on the verge of authorising a nuclear strike, when a Norwegian weather rocket was mistaken for a Trident missile.
Since 1962, one way that the world’s nuclear arsenals have changed is that they now rely very heavily on complex computer software.
Cyber attacks, and false warnings of cyber attacks, are a greater danger than ever.
The attack was initially interpreted as an act of sabotage, presaging a Soviet assault.
Preparations were made to scramble as many jets as possible, so they weren’t caught on the ground.
Today the danger is from virtual bears, malevolent or misplaced bytes which could spiral the world into nuclear war by accident.
In 1962 all five of the US Navy’s new Polaris nuclear submarines were based in the Holy Loch.
The force had been deployed to the Clyde one year earlier in the face of vigorous protests from across Scotland.
On 16th October the Joint Chiefs of Staff recommended that the remaining two submarines should be sent to sea.
On 22nd October President Kennedy placed all nuclear forces on DEFCON 3.
The two submarines in Holy Loch were rushed out to sea within 24 hours.
Their support ship, USS Proteus, also sailed down the Clyde estuary and headed to the North of Scotland.
The American fleet has left the Holy Loch, but today there are British submarines, carrying American Trident missiles, based at Faslane.
There are always 40 nuclear warheads deployed on one Trident submarine at sea, 24/7.
If there was a major crisis, then one, and possibly two, other Trident submarines would be quickly sent to sea, as in 1962.
Five decades later, we have become like villagers living under a volcano, complacent about the risk of sudden catastrophic destruction.
