Quotes ... a surprise attack would erode if not destroy the moral position of the United States throughout the world.
But the greatest danger of all would be to do nothing.The path we have chosen for the present is full of hazards, as all paths are--but it is the one most consistent with our character and courage as a nation and our commitments around the world.
And one path we shall never choose, and that is the path of surrender or submission.Our goal is not the victory of might, but the vindication of right-not peace at the expense of freedom, but both peace and freedom, here in this hemisphere, and, we hope, around the world.
President John F Kennedy, President John F Kennedy on the Cubam Missile Crisis.
I repeat, we have sufficient means with which to defend ourselves; we have indeed our inevitable weapons, the weapons, which we would have preferred not to acquire, and which we do not wish to employ.
Otherwise, the Soviet Union will move on to ever more flagrant violations of the requirements for international peace and freedom, until we will be left with no other options but complete capitulation or the outbreak of a nuclear holocaust.
It is, therefore, understandable that it deeply displeases the conscience of the Brazilian people any form of intervention in an American State, inspired by the allegation of incompatibility with its political regime, to impose on it the practice of the representative system by external coercive means, which take away its democratic character and validity.
The indefinite combination of human fallibility and nuclear weapons will destroy nations.
Robert McNamara, The Fog of War Pentagon leaders urged Kennedy to attack Cuba -a possibly dangerous move that could have triggered a nuclear war with Moscow.
Assuming nuclear weapons would not be used on the island against American invading forces, war planners expected as many as 18,500 United States casualties within the first 10 days of a Cuban invasion, according to a now-declassified top secret Pentagon memo.
But the idea of a surprise United States attack on Cuba didn't sit well with some of the President's advisers, including his brother.
