The Most Despicable President In American History 4 10 2010 By Timothy D Naegele Gannett’s USA Today began publishing its daily newspapers in Washington, D.C., and I have always been proud of the publication and have praised it.
I believed it was one of the finest newspapers in the United States, if not the world; and I have been pleased with its success.
I have encouraged friends, business associates, and acquaintances to read it because of what I believed was objective reporting, or certainly very close to it.
However, I was rudely awakened by its recent series of articles about John F Kennedy and his family, which were a travesty and a lie.
Sadly, USA Today has become a participant in the deliberate distortion of history.
There was not merely one isolated article about the Kennedys, but it was an unprecedented series—which made matters far worse and even more irresponsible.
Wholesale distortions of history by a mainstream publication such as this one warrant and, in fact, demand nothing less.
When he died, his “image” was frozen in time, but the truth is grotesque.
The once-excellent and seemingly objective USA Today has reached new lows by publishing this series about Kennedy—which is the moral equivalent of running a praiseworthy series of articles about Adolf Hitler or Joseph Stalin.
USA Today failed to mention that John F Kennedy was possibly the most morally corrupt and reckless president in American history, who came tragically close to bringing about a “nuclear winter” that might have destroyed the United States and other parts of the world.
USA Today’s entire series would fall like a “house of cards” if the truth about Kennedy and his family had been told, instead of repeating the factual distortions that have been spun since he was assassinated in Dallas.
First published in 1997, Hersh’s book is a companion to Reeves’ equally fine book, which was published in the same year.
To have two truly outstanding books introduced at the same time, on the same subject, is interesting unto itself.
The Kennedy family and its sycophants have attempted to perpetrate that myth since the day Kennedy was shot—as well as myths surrounding the entire family, which is surely the most dysfunctional family ever to achieve significant political power in American history.
Indeed, after reading both books, one wonders whether there was anything decent or moral about the family, certainly the male Kennedys.
Unlike Reeves, Hersh does not mention Ted Kennedy’s culpability in the tragic death of Mary Jo Kopechne in 1969, just as she was about to celebrate her 29th birthday, and the ensuing Kennedy cover-up.
Similarly, Hersh makes scant mention of Marilyn Monroe, with whom both JFK and, after him, Bobby Kennedy had affairs, nor does Hersh discuss the possibility that she was murdered.
Instead, he discusses JFK’s long-time relationship with Judith Campbell Exner, as well as his affair with an East German “prostitute” by the name of Ellen Rometsch.
Kennedy’s reckless affairs with women were only outdone by his irresponsible and dangerous relationships with mobsters such as Chicago crime boss Sam Giancana.
These two character flaws merged when both Kennedy and Giancana had sexual liaisons with Exner, who was used as their go-between.
Indeed, it is doubtful whether Kennedy would have become the president-elect in 1960 if the Mob had not helped him in Illinois and West Virginia—and Giancana claimed credit for that.
Kennedy was the son of a bootlegger, and the apple did not fall far from the tree, with respect to all three Kennedy brothers who entered national politics.
The thread that runs through the writing of Reeves and Hersh, and through JFK’s life, is utter recklessness—which not only endangered his life, but the lives of those with whom he came into contact, and every American.
Those Americans who believed in JFK, as yours truly did—and to a lesser extent in Bobby—were deceived and disillusioned with respect to almost every issue.
The public perception bears almost no relationship to the actual facts.
Indeed, thirty-four years after his death, the American people finally learned the truth about JFK from these two books and other sources.
Even then, as Hersh describes in considerable detail, Kennedy operatives may have destroyed large amounts of historically-important documents.
Vast numbers of documents are still held by the Kennedy Library with respect to both JFK and Bobby, which have never been made available to the public.
Not the least of these are medical records about JFK’s health, which have only been reviewed by a handful of Kennedy “sycophant-like” writers.
Almost 50 years after Kennedy’s death, the full extent of his life-long medical problems is still being withheld from the American people and conservative scholars, and Reeves recounts many of those problems.
The failed “Bay of Pigs” invasion of Cuba, where Fidel Castro humiliated JFK and “the Kennedys,” led to almost 50 years of enslavement for the Cuban people, and repeated attempts by the two Kennedy brothers to have Castro assassinated.
Indeed, the three Kennedy brothers, Jack, Bobby and Ted, trashed what was sacred in their Catholic religion, such as the sanctity of marriages.
Jackie Kennedy’s travels were carefully monitored so that she would not return to find the president and women “frolicking” in the White House swimming pool or in the family quarters.
What went on in hotels and private homes, wherever JFK traveled, is described as well.
The book also discusses JFK’s venereal disease; and the risks that he and Powers took by cavorting with women who had been waived through routine Secret Service checks without prior clearances, and who might have carried weapons, listening devices, drugs or something similar.
There is no question that Kennedy launched this nation into Vietnam; and his secretary of defense, Robert McNamara, was the architect of that lost war and the enormous suffering that it produced.
Almost 60,000 brave Americans died, some of whom were my friends; and it impaled this nation’s honor on the horns of a tragedy that still haunts policy makers and citizens alike.
Instead, he chose to go to war, and to spend the blood of young Americans.
Hersh describes the constant pressure especially on CIA operatives, which was brought by JFK and Bobby, to have foreign leaders such as Castro killed.
Mob operatives were used with Bobby’s knowledge and involvement, even though as the United States Attorney General he was ostensibly prosecuting the Mob.
The family patriarch Joseph P Kennedy’s ties to the Mob are detailed, as well as his ruthlessness and penchant for women.
JFK’s first marriage to Durie Malcolm is also described, and his father’s efforts to expunge the record.
Hersh discusses how Bobby and Jackie believed that JFK was struck down by a “domestic conspiracy,” probably involving Mob boss Giancana or others.
A footnote in history, perhaps, but a very important one is that JFK hurt his back cavorting in a West Coast swimming pool.
Hence, JFK’s sexual escapades may have contributed to his tragic death.
Today, Kennedy is not someone to look up to, much less deify, as many of us thought when he was president.
That conclusion was reached reluctantly by lots of Americans, years ago, with a sense of sadness rather than anger.
Like the potentate in Hans Christian Andersen’s fairy tale, “The Emperor’s New Clothes,” the myth about Kennedy and his feet of clay have become clear for all to see with the passage of time.
Kennedy was a tragic Shakespearean figure who may be forgotten and consigned to the dustheap of history, in no small part because of the question of character that both Reeves and Hersh described brilliantly in their terrific books.
USA Today’s series of articles extolling the virtues of Kennedy and his family are shameful, and constitute the gross distortion of history.
Indeed, they seem to represent yet another attempt by America’s discredited Left to glorify its politicians, regardless of how corrupt and immoral they may be.
Few young Americans even know who John F Kennedy was—or care about him—because less than a handful of his positive accomplishments had any lasting significance.
Like former President William McKinley before him, the fact that an assassin cut short Kennedy’s life and presidency might be all that Americans recall about him 50 years from now.
He served as a Captain in the United States Army, assigned to the Defense Intelligence Agency at the Pentagon, where he received the Joint Service Commendation Medal.
Mr Naegele is an Independent politically; and he is listed in Who’s Who in America, Who’s Who in American Law, and Who’s Who in Finance and Business.
Although I was not old enough to vote for him, I was in the Los Angeles Coliseum and watched while he delivered his acceptance speech at the close of the Democrats’ convention in 1960.
Also, despite growing up in a “devoutly” Republican family, I registered to vote as a Democrat when I was able to do so, largely because of him.
After law school at Berkeley—where I had walked out of one of my classrooms to learn that he had been shot in Dallas—I spent two years at the Pentagon and had an excellent offer to return thereafter to a wonderful law firm in San Francisco, for which I had worked briefly before entering the Army.
In short, Kennedy had changed the course of my life, which is why the truth about his life—and the fraud that was “Camelot”—needs to be exposed, not covered up or papered over as USA Today has done so irresponsibly.
This person covered the Vietnam war and other wars up to and including the present day.
I admire and respect the person’s experience, opinions and judgment greatly.
Then Congress, in its infinite wisdom, cut off all further military aid to Saigon.
ARVN saw no point in continuing to fight, stabbed in the back by the United States Congress.
Giap, in his memoirs, says Hanoi was taken by surprise by what Congress did because they thought that taking Saigon would not be within their reach for two more years.
I have no reason to believe that this person’s assessment is inaccurate in any respect.
I will not disclose the person’s identity while he or she is alive, certainly without permission to do so.
You are correct Timothy, they certainly made Kennedy “King” when they made him president, and they kept the aura after he died.
Too bad it took this long for the crown to be taken off, but it’s better late than never.
I had always been told by the Cubans in Miami that he was a traitor, liar, gangster, and pretty much despicable.
I am no fan of Obama, and I have mentioned before that his announced withdrawal would be a betrayal to the Iraqi and Afghan people who support Democracy, and are willing to die for it, much like our soldiers.
Unlike John F Kennedy and Johnson before him, Obama never served in the military, and only actually served in the United States Senate for a brief period of time because he was campaigning nonstop for the presidency.
He is a former “community organizer” who has ignored the advice of America’s military leaders and fashioned his own Afghan strategy, which I have been told—by at least one true expert—is tragically doomed to failure.
Assuming that happens, he will blame the military and everyone else, or so I believe, even though he will be responsible for the deaths and injuries of countless brave Americans.
However, Reagan was guilty of treason by allowing the sale of arms to Iran, at the time, an enemy of the state.
Bottom line, if you can’t tell the whole story, you shouldn’t say anything at all.
First, as discussed in the article above and in all of the comments beneath it, the net effect is that JFK was a total fraud and despicable.
Also, if you bothered to read the article above and the comments beneath it, you would realize the full extent of JFK’s recklessness.
The problem is that most Americans never read the book, nor do they have any conception of what truly motivates him.
Moreover, after three wars there, and the loss of thousands of American lives with others maimed, and trillions of dollars wasted, the American people want out of the region and rightly so.
Also, I have written about the contrast between Reagan and JFK, so will not repeat it here.
If you read the article and all of the comments beneath it, a “picture” emerges that is not pleasant in the least.
You speak of a deliberate distortion of history concerning JFK; a common but effective way to prepare your audience to accept your own distortion.
While no Josef Goebbels, you have learned the technique of the big lie.
I would address your rant item by item, but that would be tedious, and you have supplied a surplus of tedium already.
Suffice to say, I have rarely read such an unbalanced, dis-informative, crudely crafted article.
You vilify a man many times your stature, your intelligence, and your courage.
Needless to say, you have engaged in name calling, but you did not rebut one point contained in the article, because it is impossible to do so.
Again, Kennedy is the most despicable president in American history, and is without any peers.
I recently read Hersh’s book and you accurately represent its contents and its import.
Frank Snepp’s Decent Interval also makes clear that we achieved a military victory only to have it stolen by the Democrats.
Giap apparently persuaded the politburo to allow him to attempt a cross-border operation, from which he assured them he would withdraw if Nixon reacted.
Tom, I have read countless books on the Kennedy’s and the Kennedy Presidency throughout my lifetime.
Some of the authors no doubt admired Kennedy by way of a close personal relationship and others did not.
Nonetheless, from my readings and knowledge, everything that Mr Naegele has written is true and well documented in other sources.
In fact, it’s one of the best summaries of the Kennedy Presidency that I have read.
If you read my article above and all of the comments beneath it, you may realize that JFK was a total fraud.
Indeed, his election as our President in 1960 was rigged by the Kennedys, the Democrats and Chicago crime boss Sam Giancana in Chicago and West Virginia.
One day I want you to tell me about all those Washington, DC anecdotes you have about Lyndon Johnson.
He had few if any scrupples; and like JFK, he was a notorious womanizer.
My sense is that Lady Bird Johnson was very nice, and she raised their daughters to be that way.
I spent part of a day with my wife, Lynda Bird Johnson, and another couple — who knew Lynda Bird well — at a picnic in Northern Virginia one day.
There were heightened threats against LBJ’s life because the Vietnam War; and the Secret Service protection around the five of us was significant.
I was an Army officer serving at the Pentagon; and so was the only other male in the group, who was a friend of mine and of Lynda’s and her husband Chuck Robb, who wasn’t there that day.
Lastly, JFK, LBJ, Bill Clinton, Barack Obama and Joe Biden were and are corrupt.
Indeed, they appear to represent yet another attempt by America’s discredited Left to exalt the virtues of its politicians, regardless of how corrupt and immoral they may be.
Truman sent the Military Assistance Advisory Group to assist the French.
In 1960 when Kennedy first took office, he did continue the bi-partisan, anti-communist foreign policies inherited from the administrations of Presidents Truman and Eisenhower.
But by 1962, JFK said to Walter Cronkite that the war may be unwinnable, and that it was ultimately a Vietnamese war, not an American war.
A program be established to train Vietnamese so that essential functions now performed by United States military personnel can be carried out by Vietnamese by the end of 1965.
On August 4, 1964, Johnson claimed that the USS Turner Joy had been fired upon by the North Vietnamese.
This prompted retaliatory air strikes, and prompted Congress on August 7, 1964, to pass the Tonkin Gulf Resolution.
This resolution gave LBJ authority, without a formal declaration of war by Congress, for the use of military force in Southeast Asia.
An undated NSA publication declassified in 2005 revealed that there was no attack on 4 August.
But LBJ used this non-incident to gain the power to escalate the war in Vietnam without a declaration of war.
On 8 March 1965, 3,500 United States Marines were sent to South Vietnam.
This was the beginning of the American ground war which eventually caused the death of 60,000 troops.
This was with the overwhelming support of the American people, who at the time believed in stopping the “Domino Effect” of Communism in the area.
But Kennedy realized we had no business in Vietnam, and he developed an exit plan to be completed by 1965.
I suspect the cause of your hatred is something you are unwilling to share.
I see you served as a Captain in the Army Defense Intelligence Agency at the Pentagon.
Regardless of why you hate JFK so intensely, , you cannot, in good faith blame him for the national disgrace that was the Vietnam War.
You have only to look at his successor to find the one deserving that distinction.
Hersh discusses Vietnam more than Reeves does; however, you might wish to compare your views of history with theirs.
It is pure conjecture as what Kennedy might or might not have done if he had been spared an assassin’s bullets.
However, we must never forget that his secretary of defense, Robert McNamara, was the architect of that lost war and the enormous suffering that it produced.
McNamara continued under Johnson, as you know; and together they took the war to new levels.
Like many other Americans, I felt betrayed by Kennedy, and still believe strongly that he was a fraud.
My comments about Hitler and Stalin go to the despicable nature of them as human beings, and the suffering that they produced.
Kennedy came very close to bringing about a “nuclear winter” because of his recklessness that put the lives of millions of Americans at risk—and potentially the lives of millions of other people elsewhere in the world—which might have equaled or surpassed what Hitler and Stalin did.
None of my work in intelligence has influenced my views, to the best of my knowledge.
I was a Kennedy believer who became sadly disillusioned; and this disillusionment has increased over time as more and more of the truth has come out about Kennedy.
He was hated—which is among the reasons why he did not run for reelection in 1968.
You criticized me for offering no rebuttal, yet you have not even challenged any of the above assertions, assertions which if true, prove conclusively that your claim of Kennedy ‘s responsibility for the war is unfounded.
Again, I respectfully suggest that you read the two books mentioned above, and specifically Hersh’s discussions about Vietnam.
Also, there is no point in incorporating those discussions in this blog thread, when its readers can refer to the original sources, as you can.
The two Kennedy brothers, Jack and Bobby; McNamara; Johnson; members of Congress; and others.
There was plenty of culpability to go around—which resulted in the deaths of almost 60,000 Americans, some of whom were my friends.
It is worth mentioning that both McGeorge Bundy and Robert McNamara said that if JFK was not killed the USA would not have entered the Vietnam War.
LBJ, by contrast, told the Joint Chiefs of Staff at their 1963 Christmas party that if you get me elected in 1964 I will you your war in Vietnam.
I suggest that you read Jim DiEugenio on JFK’s foreign policy which in reality was quite dovish in comparison to JFK’s previous Cold War rhetoric.
LBJ, in contrast, was the hard core war hawk who saw the political damage that “losing China” did to Harry Truman and he swore that would never happen to him.
And the loss of 55,000 American lives and countless suffering and economic losses.
JFK’s death in Dallas was perhaps the best thing that could have happened to his legacy.
One night on the ferry to Martha’s Vineyard, some fellow tried to push him overboard, which almost succeeded.
LBJ was evil too, but relatively speaking not as evil as JFK and McNamara.
I believe, however, that you are somewhat disingenuous in your posture as an unbiased presenter of fact and promoter of honest debate.
I am sure you are familiar with the concept that morality dictates theology.
You base your statements on two books, both of which support your belief that JFK, a man who made more people proud to be Americans than any President in recent history, was in fact a degenerate and a scoundrel.
I would expect to see plenty of dissent in your blog, given the high esteem in which JFK is held by so many, but all I see are a few brief and ill-reasoned agreeable comments.
Basically, you like to do all the talking and don’t want to be interrupted by questions.
In doing so, you do not demonstrate the dignity that your resume suggests.
My reasoning was not based simply on two books, which happen to support my positions.
In fact, when I worked in the United States Senate, our offices were located next to those of Teddy, whom I believed was the best of the Kennedy brothers, notwithstanding his culpability in the tragic death of Mary Jo Kopechne.
If you differ with them, I respectfully suggest that you take issue with him.
His fine book is extensively researched, and you are free to dispute his sources—some of which you may agree with ultimately.
The Kennedy “myth” has been spun for years, and it does Americans an immense disservice to have it continue.
Among other things, there are documents held by the Kennedy Library that should have been released years ago.
My guess is that John F Kennedy’s “legacy” will only get worse as the years pass, until finally he is largely discredited at least by most scholars.
I acknowledge that historical truth is often difficult to determine, and sometimes impossible.
You and I will have to agree to disagree on this subject, at least for now.
Maybe I am overly passionate about certain subjects, JFK being one of them.
I am angry, not so much that JFK was assassinated, even in such a brazen manner.
I am furious at the total lack of honest investigation into the public murder of an American President, and the farce of the Warren Commission’s findings.
It leads me to the conclusion that elements of our own government were complicit in his death.
In Kennedy’s case, so many powerful and ruthless forces were aligned against him.
He fired Allen Dulles and was dismantling the CIA, the Mob wanted him to oust Castro so they could get their casinos back, he was taking the power of fiat currency from the Federal Reserve, and LBJ wanted the Presidency almost as much as he hated Kennedy.
If you judge a man by who his enemies are, Kennedy looks like a great President.
What is perhaps most profound, as fate would have it, is that JFK might not have died except for the stiff brace that he was wearing, which held him rigid and upright.
I have been to Dallas and the site; and I was struck by how small it is.
The series represents another attempt by America’s discredited Left to exalt the virtues of its politicians, regardless of how corrupt and immoral they may be.
Here is a list of Gannett businesses and their addresses , as well as a listing of the locations of Gannett daily newspapers and TV stations that should be boycotted —certainly until both Gannett and USA Today issue formal written apologies for and retractions of their shameful series of articles, which constitute an irresponsible and gross distortion of history.
Actually, I found your site via your comments on the Air Craft Carrier providing assistance to the Carnival crippled ship.
Anyway, just a note here as I went to find the books you have referenced and found that in fact, the Reeves book was published in 1991 while the Hersh book was in 97 as you state.
While it certainly does not in any way change any conclusions one will draw from the books, the timing of those conclusions now is, if nothing else, suspect.
It is not clear whether there were any differences between the two editions; and if so, exactly what they were.
GANNETT AND USA TODAY CONTINUE TO SPEW LIES, AND MUST BE BOYCOTTED Unchastened and unrepentant, and clearly aware of the fact that their series of articles about John F Kennedy and his family distorts history beyond all recognition, Gannett and USA Today continue to tout the series on the newspaper’s homepage.
The series represents a pathetic effort to increase readership, and yet another attempt by America’s discredited Left to glorify its politicians, regardless of how corrupt and immoral they may be.
Just because they were Presidents when the U.S.S.R. fell does that mean a thing.
The Cold War was won, first and foremost, by the inability of Communism to fundamentally last in an overly Capitalistic world.
After that escalation of nuclear threat and the subsequent backing-down of the two superpowers, it was pretty obvious neither country would “destroy” the other.
So by simple logic and knowledge of what is Communism, it was obvious we’d win the war back in the ’60s, not to say we knew it then of course.
So please, don’t take a historical article about one time period and shamelessly plug in completely unrelated nonsense to propagate Republican idols.
Even though you easily are a right-wing individual, it definitely portrays yourself as less informative and more close-minded and bigoted.
But I did enjoy the rest of the article; I do not know more about JFK than the deified president that I was taught briefly in school.
It definitely makes me want to learn more about him -objectively of courseand be able to thoroughly understand your article’s main points.
I do not have time to bring up the articles on this subject for you, but a Google or Wikipedia search might prove beneficial.
Bush’s watch; and I was in Berlin shortly after the collapse took place.
Russian troops were selling their uniforms, and stealing plumbing fixtures from their barracks, which could be sold too.
They were going back to “tent cities” in the dead of winter, because there was not adequate housing for them, until the West Germans paid the Soviet Union “reparations”—which may or may not have gone to housing for them.
Second, communism as an economic and social system was decaying for years, as you point out.
The “Ten Year” and other plans were pure nonsense, and fabricated to keep the leaders in power.
I am liberal on some issues, and conservative on others, but mostly moderate—or so I believe.
The Travesties And Tragedies Of The Shameful Kennedys Continue Unabated The lies and distortions of history continue as members of the Kennedy family work behind the scenes to kill a new eight-part TV miniseries on the History Channel about John F Kennedy and Jackie Kennedy, which was set to air in the United States later this year.
Maria Shriver and Caroline Kennedy are reported to have lobbied hard for the History Channel to pull the plug on the series.
The move came after a leaked script was described as ‘vindictive’ and ‘malicious’ by former Kennedy aide Theodore Sorensen.
The series will still be broadcast in Canada on March 6 and will air in other foreign countries.
You lost all hope for convincing me here with your first sentence about how usa today is anything but a heap of populist, cotton candy trash, with or without the kennedy article.
I respectfully suggest that you read the rest of the article, as well as my comments beneath it; and I believe you will find that I agree with you—to a large extent.
Sarah Palin has shrugged off suggestions that she should tone down her rhetoric by going ahead with her planned sell-out speech at a marquee gun rights event in Reno, Nevada later this month.
The Safari Club International, a group that calls itself ‘the leader in protecting the freedom to hunt and promoting wildlife conservation worldwide’, runs the annual conference.
Fox News host Glenn Beck has already called on Mrs Palin to increase her security in light of the anger against her.
In an article of mine entitled, “Washington Is Sick And The American People Know It,” I mentioned the vitriolic climate of hate and personal destruction in Washington today, which is far beyond anything that I dealt with when I worked in the United States Senate on Capitol Hill.
There was a conscious effort to find “dirt” on the people and destroy their reputations to prevent the confirmation process from going forward.
It was unseemly when I first encountered it; and it is not the American way.
The handwriting is on the wall—and the blood is in the water—that he is likely to be a one-term president.
I believe Obama is leading America in the wrong direction, for all of the reasons that I have discussed in my articles; however, I do not wish him ill in terms of his physical safety or that of his family.
Quite to the contrary, people often become martyrs when they are struck down, which is what happened to John F Kennedy who has been “deified”—and wrongly so, in my opinion—since he was assassinated in Dallas just before Thanksgiving in 1963.
People worldwide remember the moments when John Lennon and Yitzhak Rabin were killed too.
Finally, Reagan Is Honored—Belatedly And In A Second-Class Fashion After running an entire “special” series of articles for many months now, distorting history with respect to John F Kennedy and his dysfunctional family—which is still being published online to this day—USA Today has belatedly honored Ronald Reagan as his 100th birthday approaches on February 6, 2011.
Reagan will be remembered as one of America’s greatest presidents and a man of character.
Kennedy was a tragic Shakespearean figure who may be forgotten and consigned to the dustheap of history.
Perhaps this contrast between Reagan and Kennedy—this question of character that Thomas C Reeves described in his terrific book about Kennedy—is what separates the men and underscores their differences, and ultimately will define their respective places in history.
Anyhow, I have to say that I find your writings about Kennedy to be very interesting and no doubt quite factual.
Though I’m younger than yourself , I like many others, continue to be fascinated with this period in American history.
If someone said that I had to decide, I would choose the “single-bullet” theory.
As to whether Oswald acted alone, I have never reached a definitive conclusion about that either.
It would be easy to “shoot from the hip”—no pun intended—and come down on the side of one theory or another, but again I believe we will never know for certain.,300 years after the death of Alexander the Great, there are still a variety of theories about what caused his death.
You’re correct in pointing out that so many have now passed who could have shed light on this subject … not to mention the many documents still being withheld, including autopsy reports, military briefs, etc.
This is based purely on the laws of motion and physics, as seen in the Zapruder footage.
But as you say, we will likely never know the truth, even though future generations one day might.
What happened that day happened … and nothing we do today will ever change that.
You’ve also referenced the “decency” of Ronald Reagan … a man who was then viewed as a hawk, but ultimately proved to be the greatest dove in recent memory.
Take care and please know that I’m now reading through your various articles with great interest.
You are correct about the amount of documents that were destroyed already, and those that are still withheld by the Kennedy Library, which should have its federal funding terminated.
Also, as I mentioned above, 2,300 years have passed since Alexander’s death, and we still do not know the truth.
Thus, the passage of time may not clarify the facts surrounding Kennedy’s death at all.
Thank you for the rest of your comments, with which I agree; and thanks again for your very kind remarks.
Your argument about Kennedy being responsible for the Vietnam War is bogus, since Lyndon Johnson made up the nonsense about the Gulf of Tonkin.
It is the same bogus made-up Weapons of Mass Destruction argument by the bush Administration.
It will be a cold day in hell if you can ever convince me of the responsibility of Kennedy for the Vietnam War.
This was a country just itching to get into another war–so we made up some bogus reasons just to run our war machine–just like we did in Iraq.
You can find plenty of people who might historically argue that Kennedy was responsible, but I was right there when it happened, right there when history was happening, so it will be difficult to pull the wool over my eyes.
The books are well written and researched; and the authors’ credentials are impeccable.
Second, as he states, Kennedy “had a chance in 1961 to disengage from an American involvement in South Vietnam,” but didn’t.
Robert McNamara, was the architect of that lost war and the enormous suffering that it produced.
I blamed Johnson, as you do; and I ceased to be a Democrat because of him—and the war.
If you are looking for original cause, then you have to go back to Eisenhower and Truman, both supporting the Vietnamese situation.
I think you want to put the blame on Kennedy because of your moral judgment of him.
I’ve read your comments about him, and you are going to have to take that moral judgment to the door of all the presidents who exercised infidelity.
Like you, I lost friends in that war, and I blame Johnson and McNamara more than I blame Kennedy.
He had been a leader in the House, and a “disciple” of Speaker Sam Rayburn; and he was its leader in the Senate.
He was every bit as much of a hard-line, thoroughly-partisan Democrat as Nancy Pelosi is today.
Next, the article and my comments beneath it summarize my views about Kennedy.
He was a fraud and, yes, despicable; and my views do not turn on his infidelities.
Kennedy would have NEVER left Vietnam because there were over a million fellow Catholics there.
The Kennedy Curse This is what Greek shipping heiress Christina Onassis believed John F Kennedy’s widow Jacqueline brought to the Onassis family when her father Aristotle married the widow.
Aristotle’s son, Alexander, was killed in a plane crash in 1973 when he was just 24.
When Alexander died she reportedly convinced Onassis that Jacquie had brought the curse of the Kennedys to their family after having witnessed John and Robert Kennedy’s assassinations.
Soon after the couple broke up and, two years after his son’s death, Aristotle passed away.
The suspicious death of one of President John F Kennedy’s mistresses just months after his death has sparked numerous conspiracy theories.
A new book alleges that, in her preoccupation with her lover’s assassination and ensuing personal investigation, she may have gotten so close to the ‘truth’ that the CIA found her to be a threat.
In an interview shortly before his death in 2001, said that ‘the same sons of b****es that killed John F Kennedy’ killed his ex-wife.
Fifty years ago—just months before his assassination—John F Kennedy celebrated his final Christmas with a mistress in the wings In a UK Telegraph article, Sarah Bradford—who is author of “America’s Queen: The Life of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis”—has written: At the end of the first week of December , instead of joining Jackie and the children at their rented Virginia house, Glen Ora, Kennedy went to a spectacular weekend orgy organised by his brother-in-law, the Rat Pack actor Peter Lawford, at Bing Crosby’s estate near Palm Springs.
Among the women there was Jack’s latest fling, the former White House intern, Mimi Beardsley, now a 20-year-old college sophomore, who had flown out to Palm Springs on one of the air force’s “back up” planes.
She would reveal details of her relationship with Kennedy in a sensational memoir, which was published last year.
Reverting to his presidential role—but with Mimi Beardsley once again in discreet and carefully concealed attendance—Kennedy then flew to Nassau in the Bahamas to meet Harold Macmillan, the British prime minister.
The luxurious Lyford Cay Club was the location for a vital discussion on nuclear defence, with the pre-Christmas conference resulting in the Americans offering the Polaris missile to the Royal Navy for use on specially constructed submarines.
From Nassau, Kennedy left to join Jackie and his family for a two-week break over Christmas in Palm Beach.
John F Kennedy was possibly the most morally corrupt and reckless president in American history, who came tragically close to bringing about a “nuclear winter” that might have destroyed the United States and other parts of the world.
I have read the “Dark Side of Camelot” and I consider it an excellent book.
In sum, Lyndon Johnson and his Texas oil executive inner circle used their CIA/military connections to murder John Kennedy for many reasons both personal & ideological.
Cuba policy was a major factor in the JFK assassination, much more so than Vietnam.
Btw, I happen to be somewhat of an expert on the sex lifes of JFK, LBJ & Bill Clinton.
Lyndon Johnson was a completely depraved man and a murderous psychopath with the exact same mentality and “behavior” as Adoph Hitler and Joseph Stalin.
Eventually I will give you all my files on the JFK assassination and Lyndon Johnson, but I don’t want to overload you right now.
LBJ also engineered the Israeli attack on the USS LIberty on June 8, 1967 … but that is a story for another day.
JFK Was A Smooth Criminal In a UK Daily Mail article—entitled “JFK secretly freed rapists, drug dealers and Mafia hitmen to kill Castro and curb threat of Communism, claims explosive new book”—it is noted: President John F Kennedy secretly endorsed the release of hardened criminals to assassinate Cuban leader Fidel Castro to curb the Communist threat, a new book has claimed.
At the height of tensions between America and neighbouring Communist Cuba in the early 1960s, JFK was implicit in the freeing of rapists, drug dealers, and Mafia hitmen through CIA in a bid to recruit ‘untraceable’ spies willing to risk their lives on dangerous missions rather than go back to jail, a new book sensationally claims.
Desperate to remove Castro from power, the president resorted to using dangerous criminals as operatives—rather than CIA agents—to ‘do America’s dirty work’ as they couldn’t be linked back to his administration, it is claimed.
In one failed plot, an ex con was smuggled into Cuba in 1962 to pose as a waiter in Castro’s favourite restaurant where he would drop poison tablets into the revolutionary leader’s soup.
The explosive claims come in a new book by veteran American Journalist and author William Deane, who claims specially-recruited criminals became ‘untouchable’ and were allowed to embark on ‘crime sprees’ in the United States without fear of prosecution.
They also couldn’t be officially connected with the CIA so it didn’t matter if they were captured—there was no risk of America’s shady policies being exposed.
The CIA sent him on many missions abroad, including to Cuba to assassinate Castro,’ added Deane.
It Runs In The Family: RFK, Jr., Like His Grandfather Joseph P., His Father Bobby, And His Uncles Jack And Teddy.
Serial philander’s journal includes scorecard of conquests and his Catholic guilt over cheating on wife Mary,” the UK’s Daily Mail has reported: A 2001 diary belonging to Robert F Kennedy Jr. has been unearthed that gives a stunning insight into the number of affairs he carried out during the same year that wife Mary gave birth to their fourth child.
Kennedy used a section at the back of his diary, headed ‘cash accounts,’ to list the first names of women he had cavorted with and gave each a mark out of ten.
The list contains the names of 37 women, 16 of whom have the number ten beside them—which is believed to have signified that they had full intercourse.
Alongside more prosaic details of Kennedy’s political activism and family life, there are startling admissions of his own feelings of guilt and remorse at repeatedly cheating on his wife.
Time and again he writes of how he feels tortured by his ‘lust demons’ as he describes them.
On days when he doesn’t cheat, Kennedy writes ‘victory’ to signify that he resisted sexual temptation.
The thick, red journal was found at one stage by his wife, Mary Richardson Kennedy, who, distraught over their impending divorce and her husband’s serial philandering, hanged herself in May 2012.
When a Post reporter questioned Kennedy on Friday about the diary they were first met with a stunned silence before he denied having kept a diary during that year.
At the start of the journal the 59-year-old son of the assassinated United States senator announces that his wife was pregnant with their fourth child.
He often writes as if he is the victim of the incidents and uses the word ‘mugged’ as shorthand for being seduced.
It was tempting but I prayed and God gave me the strength to say no,’ he writes on February 6.
On May 21, he wrote that after hosting dinner for Leonardo DiCaprio, he drove the actor into Manhattan and met up with someone.
He noted that he ‘got mugged on my way home,’ recording a 10 with the name of a woman next to it.
You have not the strength to resist their charms’ and to ‘be humble like a monk.
November 2001 was an especially busy month for infidelities and he lists at least one woman’s name on 22 different dates, including on 13 consecutive days.
Three dalliances even occur on the same day—one is marked a ten—when he attended a black-tie fund-raiser at the Waldorf-Astoria on Nov. for Christopher Reeve’s charity.
Bobby Kennedy’s Love Affair with Jackie Kennedy, post JFK assassination, is one big reason RFK kept publicly silent about the his beliefs on who murdered JFK Another big reason would be the death threats he kept getting after he would press the FBI and CIA for information.
Over lunch that afternoon, Smathers asked Bobby why he’d aborted his personal investigation into his brother’s assassination.
My using the CIA in conjunction with the Mafia to go after Castro may have led to Jack’s death.
Despite the FBI director’s disdain for the Kennedys, Smathers firmly believed that it was the CIA – and not the FBI – that had worked with the syndicate to assassinate Kennedy.
While there, they were introduced to crime figures Meyer Lansky and Santos Trafficante, both of whom controlled Cuba’s hotels, casinos, and nightclubs, creating an exhuberant after-hours atmosphere.
It wouldn’t have surprised me to learn that we’d been filmed through a one-way guest-room mirror.
The opportunity for blackmail, particularly after Jack became president, pointed to the foolishness of our little adventure.
His name cropped up in 1963 in connection with the so-called Profumo debacle, in which an international vice ring nearly brought down the British government.
And there was the matter of Mary Pinchot Meyer, his last mistress, who was murdered in 1964 while walking along the towpath in Georgetown.
RFK, long his brother’s bagman, almost certainly knew of the meeting in pre-Castro Cuba between Jack and Trafficante, as well as all the rest of JFK’s sordid dealings.
Ultimately, according to Smathers, Bobby’s decision to discontinue his investigation into his brother’s assassination probably had less to do with the Mafia and more to do with his and Jackie Kennedy’s madcap affair following Jack’s death.
Exposure in the media would have ruined any chance Bobby might have had of following in Jack’s presidential footsteps.
Former Federal Bureau of Narcotics agent Howard Diller on Robert Kennedy: his FBN participation, his drug use, his taking advantage of women busted for drugs for sex, his use of hookers Knocking down doors would become the least madcap of Bobby’s antics.
Other agents who hung out with Bobby, fellows named Jimmy Ceburi and Arthur Krueger, would purportedly come back with reports of him seizing bags of coke for his own use or, more probably, for distribution among his buddies Most of the people we busted were drug abusers, in places like Harlem and South Bronx.
During the raids, the men would be taken to one room of the apartment, the women to another.
It wasn’t uncommon for an agent to indulge in sex with one of the women, sometimes more than one.
In exchange for their sexual favors, the women were often let go and not carted off to jail.
I think he enjoyed the anonymous sex, because that way he really wasn’t cheating on Ethel – or at least that’s how he could it.
Bobby thought nothing of fondling these women or having intercourse with them.
Amazingly, nobody has ever mentioned or even written about RFK’s close ties to the Bureau of Narcotics.
What is truly ironic about his secret activities with the bureau is that soon thereafter he was named the attorney general of the United States, the top law-enforcement officer in the country.
Yet here’s a man who raped and pillaged and stole, a man who presumably took drugs.
He struck me as basically schizophrenic, a man capable of great good and, at the same time, incredible evil.
He screwed the women for nothing by threatening to run them in if they didn’t come across, and that’s something he did until the day he died.
He’d also pick up bums on the street and buy meals for them at that restaurant his father co-owned, La Caravelle.
Langdon Marvin, who had been an aide to JFK, and who had procured numerous women for his boss, recalled doing the same for Bobby.
I provided a gaggle of women – airline hostesses, starlets, secretaries, and others.
RFK had a penchant for nymphettes – underdeveloped women with unformed personalities.
Once, when Bobby stayed at the Carlyle, I sent him three fifteen-year-old private high school girls.
One by one, he dated almost all of the ‘boiler-room’ girls, the entourage of young women who worked for him on the campaign trail.
Yes, I have heard all of the information before; and it is consistent with what I know.
As indicated in my comments about RFK, Jr., immediately above yours, the recklessness continues.
Among other things, perhaps they have death wishes—for themselves and others.
And by the way, Lyndon Johnson was more of a demented freak than all the Kennedys put together.
He and his Vietnam War are the reasons why I ceased to be a Democrat, and have almost never voted for a Democrat since.
More About The Despicable John F Kennedy In an article entitled, “All the president’s women: Virgin interns.
In the days following John Kennedy’s assassination in Dallas, his widow Jackie’s grace and dignity defined her in the eyes of millions around the world.
At JFK’s funeral, where she held the hands of their two small children, she became an icon, burdened until the day she died with the dreams and expectations of millions of strangers.
To mark the 50th anniversary of Kennedy’s assassination, British author Sarah Bradford has updated her acclaimed biography of Jacqueline Kennedy and sheds new light on her complex relationship with the sexually voracious JFK and her sometimes waspish views of the major world figures she rubbed shoulders with… It was Jackie’s state visit to Paris in 1961 that made her an international superstar.
The fashion journal Women’s Wear Daily could have been re-christened What Jackie Wears Daily.
Indeed, the balance of power had tilted subtly towards Jackie, both in the eyes of her husband and the Kennedy entourage.
If Jack was the Sun King, Jackie was by now most definitely America’s Queen.
Jack was becoming like Jackie’s idealised father ‘Black’ Jack Bouvier—the dashing womaniser who still came home to envelop his family with love.
The birth of JFK’s children had awakened a strong paternal streak in him, But he would not, and could not, give up his sexual habits; nor did he feel the least bit guilty about them.
Jack had anticipated that the Presidency would limit his sexual adventures but, instead, high office meant that he could have virtually any woman he wanted and Jackie’s frequent absences gave him plenty of opportunity.
Secret Service logs show that Jackie spent a great deal more time away from the White House than at the White House.
She spent almost all the steamy summer months out of Washington and, even when she was there, regularly left on Friday afternoon for their rented Virginia horse farm Glen Ora, or to go to the Kennedy family seat at Hyannis Port in Cape Cod, and did not return until Monday or later.
Jackie was a rebel and a free spirit at heart, and the White House seemed claustrophobic.
Furthermore, she could close her eyes to what Jack was up to when she was not with him.
There were about four or five other friends, single girls we knew also.
One by one, each of us was told, “The President would like to speak to you”, and we were led over for about ten minutes.
The next time I saw Jackie was when they asked me to a party at the White House.
And the day after he was killed and everybody was watching the funeral I had four what you’d call ”widows” in my tiny sitting room—all married—because they couldn’t cry their eyes out in front of their husbands, all of whom thought they had been the only one.
Every time Jackie walked into a room she must have known that half the women there had slept with him.
She was snuck into the White House in the boot of a car, and she was taken down to the swimming pool and he would join her for a swim.
People thought that Jackie did not mind Jack’s infidelities because she showed no signs of doing so.
Indeed, the President’s notorious swimming-pool frolics with the two secretaries known as ‘Fiddle’ and ‘Faddle’ did not worry her, but his sleeping with her friends and women in her circle, did.
I mean, it was something that wasn’t talked about but I think this woman was put through a very great deal.
In his way he did, but his love had certain reservations and hers was total.
He shocked the eminently respectable, self-controlled British Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan, by confessing to him that if he didn’t have sex at least once a day, he had a headache.
According to the Secret Service logs, appointments with women were made through Jack’s old friend and closest personal aide, Dave Powers, whose name appeared in the official record.
She was a tall, slender and beautiful 19-year-old at Jackie’s old school, Miss Porter’s, Farmington, when she wrote to the White House requesting an interview with Jackie for her college newspaper.
A year later, Mimi was invited to join the White House staff as an intern.
Like other people who knew JFK, Mimi talked of his ‘genius at compartmentalising’ his life, placing Jackie on a pedestal to keep her apart from all the other women in his life.
Jackie, however, kept hoping he would calm down, as she confessed to her friend Adlai Stevenson.
The death of his youngest son, Patrick, in August 1963 was an unbearable blow for Jack.
He invited me upstairs and we sat outside on the balcony in the soft summer evening air.
Kennedy was possibly the most morally corrupt and reckless president in American history, who came tragically close to bringing about a “nuclear winter” that might have destroyed the United States and other parts of the world.
The thread that runs through Kennedy’s life is utter recklessness—which not only endangered his life, but the lives of those with whom he came into contact, including every American.
Kennedy’s entourage suggested to the young widow that she should change her blood-stained clothes before the flight back to Washington with the Johnson party already installed on Air Force One, Jacqueline Kennedy fiercely resisted.
It is very refreshing to read one’s own thoughts about the Kennedys echoed in such a convincing and well informed way.
I thank God that Khrushchev did the sensible thing and withdrew his missiles from Cuba, with the actions of the United States Navy being tantamount to piracy prior to this event.
The morals of the Kennedy clan were a disgrace to the United States in particular and civilisation in general.
No stable system is ever built upon the serial sexual abuse of women, willing though those women may be.
To take advantage of such women is to display a moral shallowness to the point of total transparency.
The “curse of the Kennedys” began with the old man, Joseph P Kennedy; and it has continued to the present day.
They are a “star-crossed” family, and probably the most dysfunctional family to occupy higher political office in American history.
What is most fascinating is that the Kennedy Library in Cambridge, Massachusetts still refuses to allow conservative scholars access to its records, despite the fact that many records were destroyed and never reached the library.
American media is still “lionizing” JFK on the anniversary of his assassination, which I assume will continue until the last of the true Kennedy sycophants is dead and buried.
As Long As A Democrat Sits In The White House, America Will Become A Much More Dangerous Place This is the conclusion of conservative pundit Ann Coulter: It’s pointless to pay attention to foreign policy when a Democrat is president, unless you enjoy having your stomach in a knot.
As long as a Democrat sits in the White House, America will be repeatedly humiliated, the world will become a much more dangerous place—and there’s absolutely nothing anybody can do about it.
John F Kennedy was in the White House for less than three years and, if you think he screwed a lot of hookers, just look what he did to our foreign policy.
For two days, Khrushchev batted Kennedy around, leaving the president’s own advisers white-faced and shaken.
Seeing he was dealing with a naif, Khrushchev promptly sent missiles to Cuba.
Russia would never have dared move missiles to Cuba had Khrushchev not realized that JFK was a nincompoop; and it wasn’t a victory.
In exchange for Russia’s laughably empty threats about Cuba, JFK removed our missiles from Turkey—a major retreat.
Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon Johnson, famously escalated the war in Vietnam simply to prove that the Democrats could be trusted with national security.
His most inspired strategic move was to abandon the Shah of Iran, a loyal United States ally, which gave rise to the global Islamofascist movement we’re still dealing with today.
By allowing the Shah to be overthrown by the Ayatollah Khomeini in February 1979, Carter handed Islamic crazies their first state.
The hostages were released only minutes after Ronald Reagan’s inauguration for reasons succinctly captured in a Jeff MacNelly cartoon.
It must be about one of the Americans in the Den of Spies, but I don’t recognize the name.
Bill Clinton’s masterful handling of foreign policy was such a catastrophe that he had to deploy his national security adviser, Sandy Berger, to steal classified documents from the National Archives in 2003 to avoid their discovery by the 9/11 commission.
Twice, when Clinton was president, Sudan had offered to turn over bin Laden to the United States But, unfortunately, these offers came in early 1996 when Clinton was busy ejaculating on White House intern Monica Lewinsky.
According to Michael Scheuer, who ran the bin Laden unit at the CIA for many years, Clinton was given eight to 10 chances to kill or capture bin Laden but refused to act, despite bin Laden’s having murdered hundreds of Americans in terrorist attacks around the world.
When Obama took office, al Qaida had been routed in Iraq—from Fallujah, Sadr City and Basra.
The Iraqis had a democracy, a miracle on the order of flush toilets in Afghanistan.
By Bush’s last year in office, monthly casualties in Iraq were coming in slightly below a weekend with Justin Bieber.
For purely political reasons, as soon as he became president, Obama removed every last troop from Iraq, despite there being Americans troops deployed in dozens of countries around the world.
He was busy helping to topple a strong American ally in Egypt and a slavish American minion in Libya—in order to install the Muslim Brotherhood in those countries instead.
By now, Obama has become such an object for Putin’s amusement that the fastest way to get the Russians out of Crimea would be for Obama to call on Putin to invade Ukraine.
We have been through two wars, in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the American people are “bone tired” of wars, and rightly so.
Our economic and human treasures have been spent in those wars; and we have led when no other country in the world was capable of leading.
I opposed the war in Iraq because, like so many others, I believed Saddam had WMDs that would be used against our brilliant and courageous military forces, like he had used them against Iran and the Kurds.
In Afghanistan, we should have destroyed the poppy crops from Day One, which give rise to Heroin trafficking that funds the brutal Taliban.
What the Taliban have done to women and young girls has been nothing less than savagery.
In the case of Putin, he is an “old school” Stalinist who learned his trade well as a KGB operative.
He must be viewed in this context, not as some Westernized Russian democrat, which he is not.
He only understands raw power; and the niceties of diplomacy are a sign of weakness for him.
Perhaps Putin has misjudged Obama; and finally Obama may rise to the occasion.
With Additional Sordid Disclosures, The Totally Dysfunctional Kennedy Saga Continues As if there were not enough evidence above, more disclosures have just come forth.
But beneath that icy surface was a passionate woman who needed the closeness of men every bit as much as her philandering husband Jack Kennedy needed other women, reveals a blockbuster new biography.
And while it was widely reported that Jackie had an affair with Bobby Kennedy following Jack’s assassination in 1963, now it is disclosed for the first time that Teddy was having clandestine trysts with Jackie before and after Bobby was murdered.
Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, A Life Beyond Her Wildest Dreams by Darwin Porter and Danforth Prince, authors of 20 celebrity exposes, to be published by Blood Moon Productions June 7.
And Jackie—not to be outdone by her husband—had her own movie star seductions—including Warren Beatty, Peter Lawford, Paul Newman, Gregory Peck, Frank Sinatra and a torrid affair with handsome actors William Holden and Marlon Brando.
In the first draft of Marlon Brando’s 1999 autobiography, Songs My Mother Taught Me, the movie icon wrote that after a night of heavy drinking at the Jockey Club in Washington, D.C. in 1964, the press descended on them, forcing them to escape out the back door and back to Jackie’s house for a quick dinner of omelets prepared by Brando.
Jackie danced close to Marlon ‘pressing her thighs against me’—he wrote in his memoir.
Jackie came out to society as ‘Debutante of the Year’ in Newport, Rhode Island in 1947 and the event inspired the Bouvier sisters—Jackie and her younger sister, Lee Bouvierto set out to lure beaux but only if they were rich.
Jackie was hot to follow in the footsteps of her younger sister who had already lost her virginity.
Jackie’s first car, a 1947 black Mercury convertible, spelled freedom for the new debutante.
It marked Jackie’s entrée into an international arena of dashing, sophisticated European princes, decadent millionaires, occasional politicians, writers, artists and dancers—la crème of international society.
In Paris, Jackie had her ritual daily cocktail at the bar of the Ritz Hotel where Princess Diana spent her last night.
She was absolutely mad for the celebrated novelist and art theorist, Andre Malraux whom she found terribly exciting, and dangerously exhilarating—but for fear of getting pregnant, she would not sleep with him.
In Paris, after having too many Grasshoppers, her favorite summer cocktail, part crème de menthe, crème de cacao, fresh cream and vodka, at a smoky Parisian boite named the White Elephant, she was hot to trot.
The pair wandered the Left Bank together after tossing back the creamy Grasshoppers and headed back to Marquand’s flat.
But Jackie couldn’t wait to get upstairs inside the apartment and allowed Marquand to seduce her in the creaky French elevator.
She was in Marquand’s arms, her skirt bunched above her hips, the backs of her thighs pressed against the decorative open grillwork.
When the elevator jolted to a stop, she was no longer a demi-vierge’, a partial virgin, the authors quote biographer Ed Klein.
The pair played around Europe together during her breaks from school and the affair lasted until Jackie returned to America.
In June, 1951, the Bouvier sisters, an 18-year old Lee, and 22-year old Jacqueline, took their first European trip together.
They made the rounds of society parties in Paris, Madrid, Rome and Venice before crossing back across the ocean to America where they moved into a mansion in Merrywood, Virginia, on the banks of the Potomac River, where Janet Auchincloss now lived with her second husband, Hughdie Auchincloss, a stockbroker and lawyer.
Waldrop hired Jackie as an inquiring photographer whose duties also included interviewing her subject.
Jackie dated many men before being introduced to John Kennedy, a young Senator at the time.
He put an engagement ring on her finger that she returned later by slyly dropping it in his coat pocket.
She’d taken up with this whore-mongering, red-haired Irish politician from Boston’, Husted stated.
Another beau at the time was Ormande de Kay, a young American she had walked along the banks of the Seine with in Paris and agreed to wed him on his return from the Korean War.
Jack’s courting of Jackie took place in the back seat of JFK’s car, a 1950 two-door Plymouth, according to his close friend, Lem Billing.
One night, a trooper drove up and got out of his patrol car, shining his flashlight into the back seat.
The couple married on September 12 1953, surrounded by three Kennedy brothers.
Three handsome Irish-American brothers were destined to fall in love with Jackie.
In very different ways, she would love all three of them’, write Porter and Prince.
Sparks flew with William Holden when she attended a dinner party at the Los Angeles home of producer Charlie Feldman.
The married Holden invited Jackie to go horseback riding the following day and launched a week-long affair with the future First Lady.
According to Jackie’s close friend, artist Bill Walton, the fling was ‘primarily driven by Jackie’s desire to seek revenge on Jack’ for his cheating.
At first she was very reluctant, but once she got the rhythm of it she couldn’t get enough.
Jackie would later tell her sister Lee, ‘I’ve gone to bed with men who have had a problem with hygiene.
Marilyn Monroe, Betty Grable, Sophia Loren, Jean Simmons, Lee Remick, Pamela Turnure, Mary Pinchot Meyer were all lovers—to name only a few.
He wanted a quickie and then he was back on the phone talking with some silly politician.
When he did have sex with me, he would turn over and go to sleep right away.
Her resentment built up to one night in 1957 when Jack came home late to their P Street, Georgetown house after a night of partying.
Jack went after her, brought her back inside and promptly called for an ambulance service to drive a sedated Jackie to the Valleyhead Clinic in Carlisle, Massachusetts.
She was subjected to three barbaric electroshock treatments for depression before being released within the week.
When she returned home to an empty house, she felt more depressed and contemplated suicide.
Even if Jack became president, imagine the scandal that would be uncovered about his past life, about me.
In November 1957, Jackie gave birth to a baby girl, Caroline and three years later, John.
She still needed to escape from her husband and went off on her own adventures and affairs leaving the children with their nanny, Maude Smith.
In 1962, shortly after Marilyn Monroe sang her sexy rendition of ‘happy Birthday Mr President’ to JFK, the First Lady took an extended vacation from the White House and visited Fiat Czar Gianni Agnelli on the Amalfi Coast for an affair in Southern Italy.
That same year she had a brief fling at her home in the countryside of Virginia with Andre Malraux, her ‘dream man’, the French Minister of Culture.
It made no difference to Jack who was having not-so-private affairs with movie stars.
Jack was dead from an assassin’s bullet and Bobby moved in to care for the grieving widow.
Every night they were together at Jackie’s Georgetown house at 3017 N Street while Ethel was left alone with the children at Hickory Hill.
After Bobby’s announcement of his candidacy for President, Jackie told Capote, ‘I’m in love with two men at the same time, both Bobby and Teddy’, she allegedly confessed.
She set up a meeting to urge the star to shift his political allegiance to Senator Robert Kennedy.
Newman gave Jackie a porcelain rose and listened to Jackie’s pitch to back Bobby after confessing that she thought Jack had lived, he would not have been re-elected.
According to Capote, Jackie told Newman that she had never been able to satisfy her husband sexually.
For one night, the former First Lady may have persuaded the actor to switch his political allegiance but by the morning, he was still in McCarthy’s camp.
It would become a moot point because Bobby would be assassinated in LA in June 1968.
Teddy amped up his sexual relationship with Jackie after Bobby was murdered.
Teddy and Jackie made a bond sealed not with blood, but with something even more personal … sex’, Gore Vidal claimed.
But Jackie was being courted by Greek shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis too.
On the second day of the trip, under the guise of discussing Kennedy business, Teddy and Jackie sailed to an uninhabited offshore island where they found a spot on the white sands of its most secluded cove.
The guards who were to protect them reported what they had seen back to Onassis who knew she had an affair with Bobby but this was the first time he learned about her affair with Teddy.
One night at Hickory Hill, ‘Ethel and Bobby were inside the house, Jackie and Teddy were high on daiquiris.
With the band playing, she was seen dancing close to Teddy, pressing her crotch against his’, Chuck Spalding, JFK’s investment banker friend is quoted.
Teddy was smitten when JFK first brought Jackie to Hyannis Port in the early 1950s.
In 1961, he noted in a diary his passion for Jackie and his intention to seduce her one day.
Those diaries were made public in 2010 when the FBI released previously sealed files.
In 1965, celebrating her 36th birthday at Hyannis Port, Teddy drove her down to Provincetown at the outer tip of Cape Cod.
They stopped for eight hours at Bunny Mellon’s house on the Cape in Osterville, one town over.
Gore Vidal thought this was the first time Jackie slept with Teddy and it was payback to Bobby for sleeping with another movie star.
Staff at the Hyannis Port house first spread rumours about Teddy leaving Jackie’s Cape house at early morning hours.
The couple slipped under the radar from the press in those early years but when Jackie called on him more and more, the rumors gained traction.
Jackie realized Teddy was a womanizer and she began secretly dating Aristotle Onassis while still seeing Teddy.
Jackie married the Greek shipping magnate, Aristotle Onassis in 1968 and they had an open marriage until his death in 1975.
Jackie moved with the times, doing exactly as she pleased in matters of sex’, British historian Sarah Bradford said.
Throughout the years, Jackie seduced or was seduced by Charles Addams, the American cartoonist; Dr.
She also dated American journalist, novelist Pete Hamill, who was Shirley MacLaine’s boyfriend; Lord Harlech; poet Robert Lowell, FDR Jr.—to name only a few.
She would show her horses, and compete at times, and I was along for the ride, purely as a friend.
One day I was walking alone through the crowd, and I came face to face with Jackie.
I have been around lots of celebrities and famous people, having grown up in the shadow of Hollywood, and then working in Washington.
It was as though time had frozen in place, for Jackie looked just like she had on the day of JFK’s death.
She was walking alone too, and had no guards around her; and everyone seemed to be leaving her alone, which is what I did as well.
Mr Naegele: I’m enjoying your blog immensely, but for the sake of your own credibility and the edification of your readers, please refrain from citing anything by Darwin Porter.
He is a pathological liar and his publisher, “Blood Moon,” is his boyfriend.
On December 19, 1961—well before JFK’s death—the father suffered a massive stroke; and his health deteriorated thereafter until he died.
In terms of pure evil and personal depravity goes, Lyndon Johnson was far, far more depraved than John Kennedy.
Not to mention LBJ orchestrating the Israeli attack on the USS Liberty – read the book Operation Cyanide for that.
Then there is LBJ stealing 6 million troy ounces of gold from Victorio Peak in 1969 – first thing he did in retirement.
Read the Gold House trilogy of books by John Clarence and Tom Whitten for that.
As far as sexual depravity was concerned, LBJ and Bobby Baker were enabling so much “whoring around” that they owned an abortion clinic in Puerto Rico for that – see Roger Stone’s second edition of his “LBJ Did It” book.
Unlike serial rapist and CIA drug smuggler Bill Clinton – I don’t think JFK did anything like that.
As for LBJ, his assaults on scores of secretaries were functional rapes.
So the bottom line is the author’s original post on the “most despicable president” in United States history is not even close.
It was Lyndon Johnson, with all the other criminals running a second by a country mile.
There is no myth about LBJ today, as there is about JFK and the Kennedys.
Johnson was and is hated by many for Vietnam, and the American deaths and injuries for which he was responsible.
The myth of “Camelot” still endures in some quarters, despite the true facts—which are sordid to say the least.
More About The Totally Immoral Kennedys The UK’s Daily Mail has reported: Jackie Kennedy’s marriage to JFK was headed to a divorce when his life was cut short by an assassin’s bullet in November 1963.
She was about to become the only First Lady to divorce a sitting president.
A life Beyond Her Wildest Dreams by Darwin Porter and Danforth Prince from Blue Moon Productions publisher.
Fed up with his constant womanizing, and having her own dalliances that fueled the fire of her desire for liberation, Jackie told her confidantes that she wanted out.
Her anger amped up after Marilyn Monroe’s humiliating ‘Happy Birthday Mr President’ performance And it wasn’t the first time Jackie threatened to divorce Jack.
By the late 1950s, Jackie was too demoralized by Jack’s sexual philandering to continue the public charade.
Her father-in-law, Joe Kennedy knew all too well the profound problems and stepped in to warn her.
Kennedy scion Joe Kennedy offered his daughter-in-law a check for one million dollars to stay in the union.
Jackie allegedly told him that the cost of her staying with JFK would rise to twenty million dollars ‘if he brings home any venereal disease from any of his sluts’, according to the authors.
If Jackie had divorced Jack while he was a United States Senator, the old man’s dreams of having a son in the White House would have gone unfulfilled.
And he was more concerned about those political ambitions then he was about Jackie being ostracized by the Catholic Church.
Jackie didn’t know what she was getting into when she first met the dashing senator from Massachusetts.
Single Jackie returned to Washington, DC in the early 1950s, leaving a string of lovers behind after a whirlwind trip to Europe, and she was hired as an ‘Inquiring Photographer’ for the now-defunct Washington Times-Herald.
By night, in her little apartment, she was writing a screenplay on Dolley Madison, the 4th United States President’s wife, who reportedly was a snuff tobacco addict.
No film studio showed interested in Jackie’s writing efforts, so she abandoned that to pursue finding a rich husband.
Charles Bartlett, a journalist who started the D.C newspaper bureau of the Chattanooga Times, is credited with setting up a blind date with Jack and Jackie after dating her himself.
Before hooking up with Kennedy, Jackie also dated John White, employed by the State Department and once madly in love with Kick Kennedy, Jack’s younger sister who tragically lost her life in a 1948 airplane disaster.
That dream quickly faded and Jackie confessed she now just wanted to marry a rich and powerful man, and be the power behind the throne.
If a Brit, I would want him to look like Prince Philip’, Jackie is quoted as telling White.
Bartlett knew that Jack was a skirt chaser and he also knew that Jack had to settle down if he wanted to become president.
At least, Jack was intrigued enough to walk her out to her car which was parked outside my house’, Bartlett said.
Jackie was secretly dating John Husted, Jr., a stockbroker from a banking family.
But Husted knew he wasn’t rich enough to fulfill her desires, despite being locked in each other’s arms for months.
She surreptitiously slipped the ring in his coat pocket and said good night and goodbye.
She was rumored to have had a lusty affair with Hitler’s Reichmarschall, Hermann Goring.
It was the first of a long list of Jack Kennedy’s scandalous affairs Jackie would learn about, and not an auspicious beginning for the couple who married in 1953.
On Jackie’s introduction to the Kennedy clan in Hyannis Port, she wrote in her diary, ‘Jack is no Burt Lancaster.
One evening, Kennedy friend and Cape Cod neighbor, TV comic, Morton Downey Jr., snuck up on Jack’s car thinking he’d catch Jack and Jackie necking.
Before they were even married, Jackie confessed in her diary, “Jack and I had a few romantic moments.
Jack bought the engagement ring for Jackie—a 2 carat, twinned, square cut diamond and emerald band at Van Cleef & Arpels in Manhattan.
On their wedding night, Jackie slipped into a sexy, see-through French negligee.
Jack stripped off his clothes and headed into the bathroom where he stayed for a long time.
Finally back in bed, he plopped down and complained of a terrible pain at the base of his spine so she would have to get on top.
The honeymoon in Acapulco wasn’t much better—quick passionate sex finishing early.
It was in Mexico that Jack told her about his Addison’s disease—a rare, chronic endocrine disorder causing the adrenal glands to produce insufficient steroid hormones resulting in abdominal pain and weakness.
Kennedy also suffered from prostatitis that caused chronic pelvic pain and urinary infections.
But the worst was Chlamydia, a sexually transmitted infection of the urethra that had never been cured.
And there was the slim possibility that he could transmit it to her—a daunting thought that was a turnoff in bed.
The following night when Jack told her he was meeting with business associates of the Mexican President, he was actually with the exotic and glamorous Anglo-Indian screen legend, Merle Oberon, who had starred with Laurence Olivier in Wuthering Heights.
Jack took off and drove to Palm Springs to spend the weekend with Marilyn Monroe saying he had to meet with business associates of his father.
Santa Barbara was the couple’s next stop but Jack was clearly bored and called his brother, Bobby to admit it.
During dinner, Jack read the Atlantic Monthly while Jackie picked at her food and stared into space.
Paul Fay, a buddy of Jack’s from their Navy days during World War II and later Under Secretary of the Navy, wrote in a book proposal that he predicted the couple would be talking divorce by 1954, one year later.
Back in their home in Georgetown, Jackie was not adapting well to married life.
She couldn’t cook and she hated Jack’s friends just dropping in at any time.
He had a habit of leaving her at parties, and his friend, Lem Billings had to drive her home.
One day Jackie decided to surprise her husband at his Senate office and take him to lunch.
It was Peggy Ashe, an office temp employed in the Senate Office Building who later tried to sell an expose to Confidential magazine for $500.
Orgies in Kennedy’s suite at the nearby Mayflower Hotel continued where he allegedly bedded film stars Audrey Hepburn, Betty Grable and Marlene Dietrich.
Until Jackie became pregnant in early 1956, she talked about a divorce, write the authors.
Attending the Democractic Nominating Convention in Chicago in August 1956, when Jack was campaigning for Vice President on the Democratic ticket with Adlai Stevenson, Jackie was very pregnant and expecting the next month.
He and Stevenson were defeated and an enraged Kennedy took off on a sailing expedition with Teddy.
Jackie went to stay with her mother in Newport, Rhode Island, and told her that she was still seriously considering a divorce.
In Newport, Jackie collapsed hemorrhaging and was rushed to the hospital.
Jack could not be reached because he had avoided giving Jackie the transatlantic phone number.
While in the hospital, a crazed fellow had planted four sticks of dynamite outside her window of the room that was on the ground floor.
A gardener luckily spotted him and hit the would-be assassin over the head with a shovel, knocking him out.
Jackie woke up in the hospital to see Bobby Kennedy standing by her bedside, holding her hand.
Jackie and Jack had been living at Hickory Hill, the Virginia mansion overlooking the Potomac Rver bought for them by Joe.
She told her father-in-law that she wasn’t like Ethel knocking out babies and she didn’t like football.
Here he made his famous one million dollar offer to her to stay in the marriage that was reported in Time Magazine.
He also agreed to get the couple a house in Georgetown and move Ethel and Bobby into Hickory Hill.
But the move did not change Jack’s nearby hotel seductions and on arriving home one night, Jackie ignited a fight that fell out into the street.
Jack had her committed to Valleyhead Clinic in Carlisle, Massachusetts where she underwent three barbaric electroshock treatments.
But Jack’s required use of cortisone for his Addison’s increased his libido and didn’t stop his sexual infidelities.
He was hanging with Frank Sinatra and Peter Lawford, who basically functioned as his pimps.
Film and TV actress Lee Remick, starring in Anatomy of a Murder and Days of Wine and Roses, was sleeping with Peter Lawford, before moving on to Bobby and Jack to follow.
Pamela Turnure, a Georgetown dubutante, who had dated Prince Aly Kahn once married to screen goddess Rita Hayworth, often received Kennedy late at night at her Washington apartment.
Jackie selected Turnure her as her press secretary when she became First Lady in 1960 so she could keep an eye on her, she told friends.
Lem Billings, a school friend of Jack’s from early days at the private boarding Choate School for boys in Connecticut in 1933, described Jack and Jackie as withdrawn, bitter people.
She never wanted to confront her husband about his adultery and Jack hated confrontation.
Jack’s brothers were around Jackie more than he was during critical times.
During Jack’s campaign for President, ‘Teddy confessed to Jackie that he’d always been in love with her ever since that day she’d arrived on JFK’s arm at Hyannis Port’, the authors write.
She was in the early stages of her pregnancy with John and had campaigned with Teddy in Wisconsin.
The only Kennedy who wasn’t paying her much attention was her own husband.
Feelgood, German-born physician Max Jacobson, in the summer of 1960 for his infamous injected cocktails of steroids and amphetamines that made Jack’s back pain disappear, but also sent him to the moon with soaring energy and sexual desires.
Jackie, a chainsmoker all her life, continued the habit out of the public’s eye—temporarily alleviating her own anxiety over the state of her marriage.
Initially she told the priest that she wanted to be with her husband in death.
On their last meeting, she stated she was still contemplating suicide but would give it serious thought before making such a rash decision.
In fact, the love I’m experiencing now would be called ungodly in the eyes of the Church.
I wouldn’t even dare to confess it to you’, she is quoted by Porter & Prince.
Like former President William McKinley before him, the fact that an assassin cut short Kennedy’s life and presidency might be all that Americans recall about him 50 years from now. . . . except for his depravity and utter recklessness.
The Kennedys have been and continue to be America’s most disgusting and immoral family.
Neither JFK or RFK actually gave a damn about the USA or its people except for how it served their interest. “social justice” was just cynical pandering to blacks.
I really get sick of the Kennedys portrayed as some sort of Christ-like figures.
And their deaths DID “idealize and enlarge them beyond what they were in life” to paraphrase Teddy.
The only meaning of the word “servant” they knew were the servants that worked in their homes and their sycophantic political staffs filled with young, stupid liberals.
JFK was a disaster and if RFK had become president, nothing of consequence would have changed for the better.
In fact, he would have been a weak president like his brotherwith a divided party that was crumbling.
As I have stated before, I disagree with the premise of this blog post condemning John Kennedy as the most despicable president in USA history.
LBJ had a personal hitman Malcolm Wallace and he as wiping out folks in Texas long before he became president.
LBJ orchestrated the murder of Ag official Henry Marshall in June, 1961 while LBJ was vice president.
LBJ pushed the escalation button at every step and drove and unwilling nation into Vietnam, something Kennedy was loathe to do.
Most historians have finally come around to the belief that JFK probably would not have gone into Vietnam in the way LBJ did.
LBJ also stole 2 million troy ounces of gold from Victorio Peak in spring 1969 after he left office – read John Clarence’s Gold House for that.
Roger Stone hates the Kennedys as much as you do and he will tell you Lyndon Johnson was the lowest form of human excrement ever to be in the White House.
Btw, Lee Harvey Oswald was United States intelligence, an FBI informer and he shot no one on 11/22/63.
And also, LBJ, the Kennedys and Richard Nixon all had deep mob connections.
And LBJ was every bit the deranged man-whore that JFK and Bill Clinton were.
Many people, McGeorge Bundy, Bill Moyers, Richard Goodwin, the Secret Service have all commented on Lyndon Johnson’s scary mental instabilities – he really was a functional lunatic – something John Kennedy was not.
Without offering any defense of the Kennedys, I say Lyndon Johnson beats them by a country mile in the depravity department.
Studying this info So i am satisfied to show that I have an incredibly good uncanny feeling I found out just what I needed.
JFK gave his life literally to Americathe very country which betrayed him and cut him down in such a brutal manner.
Regardless of policies you disliked or actions taken behind closed doors such as the infidelity, he died trying to make your country better.
He was a man…we all make mistakes bar you of course Naegele it would appear.
I have read numerous books both for and against the Kennedys and you can’t deny the facts.
I have zero allegiance to the kennedys being British, particularly after joe kennedys views on us but I am fascinated by history and amazed that the murder of one your best presidents remains covered up by your people/government.
JFK was a very clever, astute man who threatened all that you appear to stand for based on your attack..profit, profit and more profit.
He was making changes which would have changed America for everfor the better might I add but clearly it couldn’t be allowed.
No….you’re writing instead about a man who stopped nuclear war by making up his own mind instead of listening to the military industrial complex who wanted to make dollars….you’re slating the very man who took on the corrupt ‘morally bankrupt’, institutes of America and paid the ultimate price.
Your motivation for the utter ‘crap’, you have written is very suspect and quite telling.
Like you, I was once a JFK “true believer,” but those days are long gone.
He and his presidency were fraudulent and dishonorable; and there is no other way to describe him and it.
Please read all of them carefully, as I have done; and then see if your judgments have changed.
The myth of “Camelot” was created shortly after his death, and it persists in some quarters even to this day.
However, as more generations pass, fewer and fewer people around the world have heard his name, much less know anything about him.
How Joseph P Kennedy Killed His Daughter Rosemary The UK’s Daily Mail has an article that is worth reading, which describes what the senior Kennedy did to his daughter: Mentally disabled from birth, hidden from the public eye in a series of boarding schools and subjected to a botched lobotomy at age 23 by her Machiavellian father who was weary of her burgeoning sexuality, Rosemary Kennedy has long been an enigma.
The Hidden Kennedy Daughter – shine a spotlight on a tragic life lived in the shadows.
The latest issue of People Magazine, currently out on newsstands, contains excerpts from both books as part of the cover story about Rosemary Kennedy.
Rosemary Kennedy passed away from natural causes January 7, 2005, aged 86, at St Coletta, a Catholic institution for the disabled in Jefferson, Wisconsin, which had been her home for more than five decades.
Based on Larson’s new historical sources and on information obtained by Koehler-Pentacoff from her aunt, who was a nun at St Coletta during Rosemary’s extended stay there, the two biographies paint the most complete portrait of the ill-fated Kennedy daughter.
On September 13, 1918, Rose Kennedy went into labor at the family’s home in Brookline, Massachusetts, with only a nurse present to assist her.
An obstetrician was called to supervise the delivery, but he was running late, and so the nurse made the decision to delay the birth by forcing Mrs Kennedy to keep her legs tightly together and stop pushing.
Manually delaying labor by preventing the mother to push, and then forcibly keeping the child in the birth canal, likely deprived Rosemary of oxygen and left her with possible brain damage.
Growing up, it became clear to her parents that Rosemary was lagging in her development behind other children her age.
In her memoir published in 1974, Rose Kennedy wrote that her daughter crawled, stood, walked and uttered her first words late.
As time went by, Rosemary was having trouble performing simple tasks like writing, playing sports and steering a sled.
When Rosemary reached school age, her mother sought the advice of experts and was told her daughter was ‘retarded’ – a catch-all term erroneously used for many years to describe an array of mental disabilities.
The Kennedys tried their hardest to conceal her condition, but as she matured, it was getting increasingly difficult.
Sister Eunice Kennedy recalled years later witnessing what she believed to be seizures in Rosemary, who was also prone to temper tantrums.
At age 11, Joseph and Rose shipped Rosemary off to the first in a series of boarding schools for special-needs children, but she never went beyond the third or fourth grade in her studies.
When Rosemary was 19 years old, her father was appointed the United States ambassador to Great Britain.
The large Kennedy clan decamped to London, and Rosemary flourished at a local convent school, but she began putting on weight, which was unacceptable to her strict father.
As Rosemary reached her early 20s, she blossomed into an attractive and sexually appealing young woman whom her concerned parents now deemed unmanageable.
Rose Kennedy’s niece Ann Gargan told famed historian Doris Kearns Goodwin for her 1987 book The Fitzgeralds and The Kennedys how upon the family’s return to the states at the outbreak of World War II, Rosemary would take off from her Washington DC boarding school and wander the city at night.
By that time, Joseph Kennedy was busy laying the groundwork for his sons’ political careers and feared that his out-of-control daughter could cause significant damage to the family name by becoming pregnant.
Seeking to rein her in, Kennedy spoke to his wife about an experimental brain surgery known as a lobotomy.
But the domineering Kennedy patriarch ignored his daughter’s advice and quickly scheduled the procedure without consulting anyone in his family, including his wife.
Discovering What Matters Most, Timothy Shriver, Rosemary’s nephew and the chairman of the Special Olympics, described the ‘chilling’ procedure, which involved surgeons cutting into the brain while the patient was still conscious and only stopping when the patient could no longer communicate.
She could no longer speak, her mobility was damaged and ‘she lost her independence for the rest of her life,’ he wrote.
His wife Rose would later claim that her husband kept her in the dark about their daughter’s lobotomy for 20 years.
After Joseph Kennedy’s stroke in 1961, his wife finally traveled to Wisconsin to visit her daughter for the first time since the surgery.
At the sight of her mother, Rosemary, who was being escorted by two nuns, broke into a sprint and lunged at the elderly woman, beating her chest and screaming at her.
Some believed that seeking privacy, she had moved to the Midwest and worked as a teacher at a school for handicapped children.
Her situation markedly improved in the 1970s as relatives began invite her home for short visits.
Mr Shriver, Rosemary’s nephew, recalled that although her language skills were extremely limited, she took pleasure in taking strolls, swimming and playing cards.
Rose Kennedy kept mum about her daughter’s lobotomy until her death in 1995, even as she gave speeches about mental retardation.
I just want to re-iterate, like I always do, that no matter how scummy the Kennedys were, serial murderer and mass murderer, the psychotic Lyndon Johnson has them all lapped by a country mile, as he does the Clintons, the Bushes and Richard Nixon, who was a choir boy compared to what LBJ did.
LBJ wins “most despicable” and a baseball game that gets called after the 15 run rule in 3 innings.
Ted Kennedy’s Disabling Alcoholism The UK’s Daily Mail has a article about Patrick Kennedy’s new book that discusses his father Ted’s alcoholism: The Kennedy brothers have clashed over claims that one of America’s foremost political families have been plagued by alcoholism.
Former congressman Patrick Kennedy revealed his father’s drinking was so out of control that his family were forced to stage an intervention, in his no-holds barred book.
A Personal Journey Through the Past and Future of Mental Illness and Addiction.
But their attempts to reach out to their father only ended up driving him further away.
At a time when his infamous booze binges had make him a public laughing stock, he saw his children’s attempt to curb his intake as an act of betrayal, according to his son Patrick, who has fought his own well-publicized battle with drink over the years.
Patrick, a full-time advocate for addiction prevention, admitted his family were ‘angry’ but the former eight-term Democratic congressman from Rhode Island is no stranger to controversy.
His own battle with alcoholism has landed him in the headlines on several occasions.
On an Air Force One flight with President Bill Clinton, he famously got so drunk he spent the majority of the journey throwing up in the bathroom.
In 2006, he checked himself into the Mayo Clinic to seek help for an addiction to alcohol and Oxycontin following a late-night crash into a security barrier outside Congress.
He maintains the car accident was a result of mixing Ambien with another medication.
Patrick has talked candidly about his struggle with alcoholism and has been an advocate of addition charities for years.
In Ted Kennedy’s own memoirs, he acknowledged his many boozy benders, but insisted he was not an alcoholic.
True Compass only touches on his drinking a handful of times, but most of those involve admissions of excess.
His book discussed his battle with brain cancer and ‘self-destructive drinking,’ especially after the 1968 death of his brother Robert.
But none of the drinking ever interfered with his work in Senate or ever got as bad as the well-chronicled alcoholism of ex-wife Joan, he claimed.
Ted said he had found it difficult to return to the Senate after his brother’s death – and that even after he did, he was unable to concentrate.
The shooting of both his brothers traumatised him, and he flinched at loud noises, and hit the deck when cars backfired.
In his book, Patrick recounts what happened after a 1979 CBS interview when his father famously choked when asked why he wanted to be president.
The two went sailing, and the elder Kennedy tried to pretend everything was fine, but kept shaking his head and muttering.
That his stark problems with alcohol were affecting Ted’s political career became clear once again in 1991.
That year he went drinking in Palm Beach with his son Patrick and his nephew William K Smith.
The night took a dark turn and Mr Smith wound up being charged with rape.
Though he was later acquitted, Kennedy said the episode left him unable to protest the appointment of Clarence Thomas, a man accused of sexual harassment, to the Supreme Court later that year.
The ‘hard truth’, he wrote in True Compass, was that ‘with all the background noise about Palm Beach and my bachelor lifestyle, I would have been the wrong person’ to raise questions about the allegations.
He always denied the ‘totally false, bizarre and evil’ theories that had appeared in the media against him.
Edward Moore Kennedy began a sparkling political career taking over the United States Senate seat once held by JFK in 1962 aged just 30 – the youngest age allowed.
But tales of Kennedy’s legendary drinking began to emerge making him an easy target for his opponents.
It would be a fatal crash, where alcohol is thought to have been a factor, which would finally put an end to his presidential ambitions.
The Massachusetts senator, who had seemed primed to inherit the presidency, became embroiled in the Chappaquiddick Incident in 1969, where his pretty, young campaign assistant Mary Jo Kopechne was killed.
Kopechne was found dead in the senator’s sunken car’s seat ten hours after he accidentally drove off a bridge into the pond.
The scandal not only helped to destroy his first marriage, it effectively destroyed his political ambitions.
Patrick said his father spoke with him only once about the crash – as its one year anniversary approached.
As Ted’s drinking spiraled, one congressional aide, just 16, claimed she was propositioned by Kennedy from the back seat of his limousine in Capitol Hill.
She testified that he leaned from the window, waved a wine bottle and asked whether she or a friend she was with wanted to join him.
In Washington’s top La Brasserie restaurant, he allegedly once threw a waitress over a table in a private room and tried to have sex with her.
Others whispered round Capitol Hill that the Senator would reek of alcohol by nine and be drunk by four in the afternoon.
Patrick believes his father’s drinking was a way for him to self-medicate.
But Ted was infuriated by the intervention staged by his eldest son Teddy and daughter Kara alongside Patrick, which came shortly after the rape scandal involving his nephew Smith.
Patrick’s relationship with Ted deteriorated to such that when he decided to run for Congress in 1994, he did not bother to tell him.
But after he took office the following year, the relationship began to repair itself.
After his death, Patrick was given a letter that his father had written in 1980 in case he was assassinated during a run for president, reported Irish Central.
Sadly, his Patrick was unable to avoid the vice that gripped his father.
Even after he took a public avowal of sobriety in 2006, the congressman continued to booze heavily.
On a congressional trip to Liberia he had to be rushed home after he went into withdrawal after running out of Oxycontin.
He even made plans to move to Australia where he could drink himself to oblivion, free from the responsibilities and obligations that waited for him at home.
Patrick went onto spend years balancing his role as a politician with his addiction.
He was even called out of rehab on one occasion to vote on a health care reform bill before he was returned back to care.
After 16 years in congress, Patrick left the House in 2010 and went into the ‘roughest detox’ he had ever endured.
His cousin, Chris Lawford told Kennedy’s wife Amy that he had ‘never seen a case worse than’ Patrick’s.
Among the other cousins, three of Bobby Kennedy’s 11 children have all had public issues with drugs.
RFK Jr. was arrested for heroin possession in 1983, and more recently his estranged wife Mary killed herself amid an on-going battle with depression and addiction.
His younger brother David died of a drug overdose in 1984 while on vacation in Palm Beach.
Jean Kennedy’s son William Kennedy Smith was accused of drunkenly raping a woman after returning home from a bar.
Patrick and Christopher say that their family’s struggles with curbing addictioneven though they are wealthy enough to afford treatmentshows that the disease cannot be won or lost because of money.
The need was so profound and I come from a family that the ethic of public service is really strong,’ Chris explained to Huffington Post Live as the rationale for his new book.
His mother Joan, who later divorced Ted, has openly admitted she is an alcoholic.
Without PT 109, America Has No President John F Kennedy The UK’s Daily Mail has reported: One incident above all paved John F Kennedy’s path to the White House.
But it was only with the marketing strategy of patriarch Joseph P Kennedy, who hyped the story of PT 109, that his son won a seat in Congress that subsequently led to the Oval Office.
An American Epic of War, Survival and the Destiny of John F Kennedy, published by William Morrow.
Kennedy dined with his girlfriend du jour, fashion editor Florence Pritchett and Time-Life correspondent John Hersey, who won a Pulitzer Prize the following year for his WWII novel, A Bell for Adano, and his wife, Frances Ann Cannon, a former Kennedy girlfriend.
On hearing Kennedy’s account of his adventure in the Solomon Islands in the South Pacific, Hersey saw it as a magazine feature.
He wrote about it in a piece, ‘Survival’ and to his surprise, Life Magazine rejected the story that had gotten publicity the previous year.
Joe Kennedy, clearly dissatisfied with the limited publication that appealed to the American socially elite, wanted to find an outlet that would speak ‘to the voting masses capable of propelling a Kennedy into political office, as the elder Kennedy foresaw.
Joe Kennedy printed up thousands of copies and flooded key election neighborhoods with the account that overshadowed his son’s lack of political experience.
This was his first step in the dogged pursuit of his eighteen-year dream to have a son in the White House.
That same year, Kennedy, in his early twenties, was traveling the world, had stopped off for a vacation on the French Riviera where he slept with actress Marlene Dietrich.
He journeyed to England, Ireland, France, Moscow, Berlin, Beirut, Damascus, Athens and Turkey.
Then on to Cuba, Rio, Buenos Aires, Santiago, Peru and Ecuador – to name only a few countries and cities he visited while his father served as United States ambassador to the United Kingdom.
In London in 1939, John met the King and Queen of England and their thirteen-year old daughter, Princess Elizabeth, whom he quickly chatted up over tea.
In 1941, Kennedy decided to enlist in the military and with his father’s help behind-the-scenes, he was appointed as an ensign in the United States Naval Reserve.
John loved sailing all his life and had his own personal sloop that he often sailed out of Hyannis Port.
He was fascinated by a ‘motor torpedo boat’ or PT boat the Navy had put on display in the summer of 1941 at the dock at Edgartown, Massachusetts.
One of his heroes was Winston Churchill and he wanted to be as heroic as Churchill.
Joe Kennedy wanted to help his son so he targeted the popular American fighting man of the day, Lieutenant Commander John Bulkeley, commander of Motor Torpedo Boat Squadron 3 who had staged daring operations in the Philippines.
After a meeting at the Plaza Hotel in Joe Kennedy’s suite, Bulkeley agreed to his demands.
Joe wanted to get his son into PT boats for the publicity and to get the veteran’s vote after the war.
Bulkeley consented and in February 1943, John Kennedy was assigned to a squadron operating in the South Pacific.
Food came out of cans – Spam, Vienna sausage, powdered eggs, baked beans.
Aspirin and vitamin A pills were consumed in large doses to aid night vision.
He promised lobster dinners in Boston in exchange for a case of fresh New Zealand mutton.
The mission of the PT boats was to move in dangerously close to a Japanese destroyer in the Solomons under the cover of darkness and then attack with missiles — vintage torpedoes that rarely hit anything when fired.
The PT crew then were to race away under the cover of the smoke screen produced by a generator on the back of the boat and escape being hit by the enemy’s large destroyer guns.
Sinking Japanese troop and supply ships as well as shredding airfields, ships and planes was the mission while fighting in the Solomons.
With no radar guidance or radio communication, the massive hull of a Japanese warship was upon him.
Andrew Jackson Kirksey, who had a premonition of death and Harold William Marney, were never to be seen again.
They had no food, no water no radio, no life raft, no medical supplies and most were scattered over a wide debris field.
They clung to the overturned, unburned bow of the boat and on Kennedy’s orders, fully exposed to Japanese pilots or lookouts, made their way to Plum Pudding Island that appeared not to be inhabited by the Japanese.
Kennedy placed the strap of badly burned McMahon between his teeth and carrying him on his back, swam to the small island three and one half miles away.
Exhausted when they finally arrived at the desolate island, they crawled on their hands and knees to take cover in the trees and bushes.
There were no land animals to hunt and eat, no nutritional plant life, no fresh water.
He undertook the arduous mission but with the currents, ended up right back where he started.
It was the Coastwatchers who found those eleven lost American sailors – all starving and dehydrated, on Naru and Olasana Islands.
Kennedy was credited with holding his crew together during their post-crash ordeal as well as getting out there every night and swimming to find help.
By November 1943, Kennedy was diagnosed with malaria, colitis, had ‘chronic disc disease of the lower back’, and was severely underweight.
Now his father went to work with his sights on the White House for his second to oldest son.
Joe Jr. had been number one son for the office of President until Joe was killed in action during a patrol-bombing mission out of London.
John Kennedy grew up in the shadow of his older brother, the leader of the pack of eight children.
The Kennedy children were raised in homes devoid of familial warmth while being chauffeur-driven around in Rolls-Royces.
A family friend said the Kennedy children didn’t have their own rooms with pictures on the walls, memorabilia on the shelves.
When they came home from boarding schools, they took whatever room was available.
Joe Kennedy was a ‘ruthless businessman and investor who capitalized on his wealth to become perhaps America’s premier social climber, an Irish catholic outsider who stormed the bastions of WASP aristocracy’, wrote Jacob Heilbrunn.
He was a master manipulator of money and people and excelled in games without rules.
So when John came home, Joe went to work selling the mythology of PT 109.
Asked how he became a war hero, Kennedy told a young man, ‘It was easy.
In pursuit of his 18-year quest to have a son in the White House that began in ’42 by getting John into PT boat service, Joseph P doggedly went after buying his son that big chair in the oval office.
Bobby became campaign manager and according to Franklin D Roosevelt Jr., ‘RFK was already a full-blown tyrant.
Vice President Nixon had served honorably in the South Pacific, but his service was known for his poker-playing skill and management of a hamburger stand rather than combat heroics.
It became the basis of the 1963 Hollywood movie starring Cliff Robertson.
Joe Kennedy personally negotiated that book option contract with Warner Brothers and stayed involved in the movie’s development until a stroke incapacitated him in 1961.
Jackie wanted Warren Beatty to play her husband, but Beatty thought the project was doomed.
The film came out in June 1963, just five months before President Kennedy was assassinated.
Dear Mr Naegele I was a very young boy when Jack Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas.
There are a few things I do remember about him and his election, but especially his murder.
It caused a great impact on me and, I guess as you, started admiring him.
Yes his mother made a dysfunction family, yes his criminal father groomed him for the presidency, yes he was involved with the mafia, yes it seems his father recruited the mafia bosses in Chicago to help him win the 1960 election en Illinois and West Virginia, yes Jack Kennedy may have been to some extension corrupt, and so on.
But I do respectfully disagree with you on several political issues during the Kennedy administration.
I am not a United States national and today I do not live in the United States.
I was living in San Francisco, California at that time due to a diplomatic position my father held and so I have a different vision and perspective to a citizen of the United States.
He did have a very great standoff with the military, the CIA, JCS, NSA, etc etc. for military actions he did not permit in Vietnam, Laos, Cuba and Berlin.
I think you have forgotten that many great United States patriots were Cold Warriors and right wing radicals which tried at almost any cost, to drive the United States into a war with the Soviets, but it is through JFK and Khrushchev’s stubbornness that it was prevented.
Such a great change that maybe the great nation was not yet ready to make.
His approach to Latin America with the Alliance for Progress was something the Latin Americans had been asking for, for decades.
He was cheered and loved in every city he visited when only a few years back, Nixon had been spat on and booed, his car stoned and clubbed through the streets of Caracas.
I also agree with you that his early demise turned the man into a myth but most of all, it gives us the idea of great change taking place, so great that to avoid it, it was necessary to change the government.
Kennedy was not assassinated because he took up mistresses; he was assassinated because of the policies he pursued.
Cutting to the chase, I believe he was assassinated by Lee Harvey Oswald not for any policy reasons.
Also, I believe the thread that runs through his life is that of a totally despicable human being.
And Kennedy’s health was such that he might have died naturally before he could be reelected to a second term.
The Kennedys have destroyed documents, and denied access at the Kennedy Library to conservative scholars and others who might be very critical of JFK’s presidency and the man himself.
I have not changed my conclusion one iota that he was and is the most despicable president in America’s history.
I do not believe he is worth writing about except as I have done in the article above and my comments beneath it.
The same thing is true of the rest of the Kennedys, who constitute the most dysfunctional prominent family in American history.
It is not too farfetched to say that they have been a blight on America, which thankfully has run its course, at least until authors like you write your next tome.
Lee was actually standing in the entry to the TSBD when the motorcade passed.
He not only cannot have been “the lone gunman”, he cannot have been one o the shooters, of whom I have identified six, the shots they took and their hits.
Remarkably, Lee Harvey Oswald, the Warren Commission’s lone-assassin-designate, was not among them.
During an interview published this past Nov.th in The Santa Barbara Independent, WCR critic/researcher Dr.
He used a 30.06 to fire a Mannlicher-Carcano bullet fitted with a plastic collar known as a sabot, which hit JFK 5.5″ below the shoulder just to the right of the spinal column.
Jack Lawrence, a United States Air Force expert, who had gone to work for the automobile dealership that provided vehicles for the presidential motorcade just a few days before the assassination, fired the shot that passed through the windshield and struck JFK in the throat from the south end of the Triple Underpass.
Nestor “Tony” Izquierdo, an anti-Castro Cuban recruited by the CIA, fired the shot that hit JFK in the back of the head after the limousine was brought to a halt.
He fired three shots with two misses using a Mannlicher-Carcano, which were the only unsilenced shots fired, from the Dal-Tex Building, which housed a uranium mining corporation, Dallas Uranium and Oil, that was a CIA front.
His son subsequently discovered his diary, but gave it to the FBI and it has not been seen since.
Frank Sturgis, later complicit in the Watergate robbery, who also appears to have been connected to the CIA, is said by Fetzer to have fired from the north end of the Triple Underpass the shot that entered Kennedy’s right temple.
In his interview with the Santa Barbara “Independent,” Fetzer said “there were shooters at six different locations,” with a total of up to 10 shots fired, three of which missed.
By contrast, the Warren Commission concluded that a single bullet struck Kennedy in the back, exited through his throat and then wounded Connelly.
Fetzer explained that the “magic bullet” theory propounded by the Warren Commission is not only false but provably false and not even anatomically possible, because cervical vertebrae intervene.
Ruth Paine, who appears to have been working for the CIA, arranged for Oswald to go to work for at book depository “just weeks before the assassination, which was part of the whole project to set him up as a patsy,” Fetzer said.
Right up to the time of the assassination, Oswald was a paid FBI informant, collecting $200 a month, which explains why his W-2 forms have never been released by the government.
As for the motivation to kill JFK, Fetzer noted that he was threatening to shatter the CIA into a thousand pieces, that the Joint Chiefs believed he was soft on communism, that the Mafia was unhappy because Attorney General Robert Kennedy was cracking down on organized crime, that he was going to abolish the FED and cut the oil depletion allowance.
Fetzer said Vice President Johnson, who had forced his way onto the ticket with JFK in Los Angeles in order to succeed him when he would be taken out, “was a pivotal player” facilitating the assassination.
LBJ sent his chief administrative assistant, Cliff Carter, down to Dallas to make sure all the arrangements for the assassination were in place.
What’s more, Fetzer produced an AP photograph that appears to show Oswald standing in doorway of the book depository at the time JFK was shot.
They may be compared with Oswald’s photograph taken later that afternoon in Dallas police headquarters.
When questioned, Oswald told Dallas homicide detective Will Fritz that during the shooting he had been standing with Bill Shelley, one of his supervisors, in front of the building.
Note the missing left shoulder and the figure who is in front of and behind the man in the doorway at the same time, which are obvious indications the photo has been altered.
For more proof that the man in the doorway was Lee Oswald, visit the Oswald Innocence Campaign on-line.
While they altered features of Doorman’s face, the only other candidates for having been there were not wearing comparable clothing or did not fit the height, weight and build of the man in the doorway.
When you consider the totality of the evidence, no alternative explanation is reasonable.
The first thing that I did as a young attorney with the United States Senate Banking Committee was to staff a presidential commission.
While it was not a criminal inquiry, much less of the magnitude of the Warren Commission, it was an important undertaking.
The theories about JFK’s death are almost endless; and it is unlikely that the truth will ever be known, much less with certainty.
It is even more bizarre than the theories surrounding the Teamster Jimmy Hoffa’s death.
Thank you Tim: I guess you’re probably right about the Kennedys at the JFK Library.
If he´d been my father or relative, I would also try to keep a lid on the myth.
Never in United States history had the United States government been more admired and respected all over the world.
But if you believe Lee Harvey Oswald was the crazy, lone assassin, without a motive, you believe there was no conspiracy, you consider Jim Garrison an incompetent, you believe in the magic bullet theory and can prove it is factual, you believe the Warren Commission was a serious investigation, you disagree with members John Sherman Cooper, Richard Russel Jr. and Hale Boggs doubts, and the HSCA conclusions and as a lawyer, you believe there was more than enough evidence to condemn Oswald for murder in a courthouse.
With all due respect I must say that, it is one of the great things of living in a democracy.
With respect to the “cover-up,” among other things it goes to the state of JFK’s health before his death.
Again, it has been suggested that he would not have lived to run for reelection; and that the drugs he was taking and his STDs were major issues unto themselves.
But even then, countless documents were destroyed that might have shed light on all of the issues discussed in my article above, and the comments beneath it.
With respect to the assassination itself, we will never know for certain.
While I accept the Warren Commission’s findings, I realize too that other theories may have validity.
Regarding a “global love” for America during his presidency and now, what people from other countries often do not realize is that as a whole, the American people are very insular in their thinking.
Many have never traveled far from where they were born and raised, much less abroad.
In a very real sense, they view the United States as an island bounded by the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
This explains the “America First” doctrine that is embraced by so many, and why Donald Trump is resonating and likely to be our next president.
Americans are tired of being the “policeman of the world,” and they want to concentrate on their own towns, states, regions and country.
Two wars for nothing, in Vietnam and Iraq, drove these feelings home in spades.
Almost 60,000 Americans died in Vietnam, and thousands died in Iraq, while thousands more were maimed for life and trillions of dollars were wasted.
Because of it, Lyndon Johnson was so hated that he could not run for reelection in 1968.
The Bushes have fallen in the public’s esteem because of the Iraq War, which many feel was foisted on us by Israel and its “neocon” surrogates.
Today, the United States is the largest energy producer in the world, and essentially energy independent.
Many if not most Americans would vigorously oppose another war in the Middle East, even if Israel’s survival was at stake.
Again, Trump has tapped into the American “mood,” and his rival Bernie Sanders has too, with his anti-establishment campaign.
Both have been riding a wave of rage, which shows no sign of ebbing anytime soon.
Lee Harvey Oswald was United States intelligence and he shot NO ONE on 11/22/63.
What Insiders Know about the Assassination of JFK” by Gaeton Fonzi 3) “Spy Saga: Lee Harvey Oswald and United States Intelligence” book by Philip Melanson 4) “History Will Not Absolve Us” by Martin Schotz 5) “Me and Lee” book by Judyth Vary Baker 6) “Crossfire” by Jim Marrs “Was Oswald a Spy” – 189.
United States military/CIA COUNTER-INTELLIGENCE with a **fake public persona** of a pro-Castro Marxist.
His bosses used him like a pawn on a chessboard, frame him for JFK’s murder, then kill him in 48 hours, then LBJ-CIA-FBI posthumously frame this guy.
The Kennedys were out to destroy Johnson and the CIA/military were enraged over Cuba policy and no United States invasion at the Bay of Pigs or during the Cuban Missile crisis.
Bobby’s widow understood the Kennedys better than anyone who wasn’t born into the family and was fully aware of what she was getting herself into, a new biography claims.
She knew that infidelity was the price to pay for being married to a Kennedy man and that she had to keep her mouth shut under an unspoken contract.
The book says that Ethel loved her husband ‘more completely than she dreamed possible’ – and this meant she was able to look the other way.
The Making of A Liberal Icon’ by Larry Tye also claims that Bobby suffered what would today be called a nervous breakdown after JFK’s assassination in 1963.
In the months following, Bobby built a shrine to his dead brother in his office with photographs, books and other mementos.
He wore his brother’s bomber jacket with the Presidential seal on it and drove past Arlington cemetery twice a day to ‘visit the President’ as if he were still alive.
Bobby was seen as the most puritanical of his eight siblings and he was the one who was asked to be Attorney General by his brother when he became President.
Bobby’s tough, bare knuckle political style was just like their wealthy father Joseph P Kennedy.
And according to Tye, he also learned his wandering eye from his father as Joseph had a mistress, silent film star Gloria Swanson, and flings with numerous other women.
He married Ethel in 1950 when she was 22 and the following year the first of their 11 children was born.
But outside of his marriage Bobby’s list of conquests supposedly included stars like Kim Novak, Lee Remick and the singer Claudine Longet.
He supposedly was having an affair with Marilyn Monroe too – possibly at the same time as his brother.
Tye interviewed Ethel, who is now 88, extensively for the book and gave one of the frankest accounts so far of her late husband’s dalliances.
Richard Goodwin, a friend of Bobby’s who traveled with him extensively, was more blunt and said that it was a ‘Kennedy family tradition’ to sleep around, though Bobby was ‘much more selective and limited’ than his brother Jack.
The other woman Bobby was rumored to have had an affair with was Jackie Kennedy, his brother’s widow.
FBI files have claimed that the two were sleeping together between 1964 and 1968, and built their relationship on grief and on a long-standing affection between the two.
FBI files have revealed that Ethel was so concerned about the affair that at one point she confronted David Ormsby-Gore, British ambassador to the United States during the Kennedy administration, and asked what, if anything, he knew about the relationship.
However looking back she admitted that Jackie may not have been entirely bad for her husband and that it may have been she who finally lifted Bobby from his deep despair after Jack’s death.
Hoover had delivered the news with his characteristic monotone which made it all the more ghastly.
His hand automatically went to his face, unable to hide his anguish, which Ethel saw from the other side of the pool.
Thirty minutes later another phone call informed Bobby his brother was dead.
Another thirty minutes later he received a tone-deaf phone call from Lyndon Johnson asking if he had any objections to him being sworn in as President immediately.
Bobby made sure he was at Andrews Air Force base to meet Jackie and his brother’s body.
Bobby was the one who inspected his brother’s casket in the East Room and told them to close the coffin because it did not resemble Jack.
Bobby spiraled into what Tye calls a ‘deeper, darker stage of mourning’ in the months later when he would stare out of the window during meetings at the Department of Justice and could not focus on even reading legal documents.
As Tye writes, Jack’s assassination came after Joe Kennedy Jr died during World War II in 1944 and four years before a plane crash would claim Bobby’s older sister Kathleen.
By then their father had had a stroke and was in a wheelchair and Bobby’s sister Rosemary was in an institution in Wisconsin due to failed lobotomy.
On June 6 1968 the ‘Curse of the Kennedys’ would claim Bobby too when he was assassinated, just like his brother.
The Kennedys Were And Are Sickos The UK’s Daily Mail has reported: There were once nine Kennedy children living under the roof of parents Joseph P and Rose Kennedy, the most prominent family in American politics in the 20th century.
Jean Kennedy, now 88, is the last living sibling of president John F Kennedy and Robert F Kennedy.
And as second youngest in the family, little did Jean know her siblings would soon occupy major political offices.
We would not have been complete if they had stopped at two or four or even six.
They were the source of my amusement and the objects of my admiration,’ she says.
Summer began in June when the family headed to the ‘big white house’ facing the sea in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts.
When Joseph was at home, his morning began with a horseback ride through nearby cranberry bogs joined by Teddy, child number nine.
Rose began her day driving to St Francis Xavier Church in Hyannis for daily Mass.
Eunice, Bobby or Jean sometimes joined her, and other times they stayed burrowed in their pillows knowing whatever the day was going to bring would be exciting.
Joe, born in 1936, was baby number one and quickly became first at everything – championship trophy in football, dean’s list at Harvard, head of every activity he joined.
The boy – who went on to be the president of the United States – was sickly with the typical childhood diseases often and spent that time reading – developing a lifelong love of books.
Rosemary was the third and ‘only as I grew up did I realize that Rosemary had challenges that the rest of us did not have.
The only words the doctors had to describe her condition were ‘mental retardation”‘, Jean writes.
Kathleen was the second girl and nicknamed ‘Kick’ because she kicked off her covers in the morning.
Kick, like Rosemary, was close to their father, but she traveled in a pack with Joe, John and her girlfriends.
Eunice came in at number five, and rattled the boys with her competitive sporting abilities.
Patricia, ‘Pat’, was number six and had a great love of the dramatic arts.
Number seven was Bobby who had compassion for everyone and every rabbit, dog, pig, chipmunk, frog.
The last baby was Teddy, ‘adored by all’, with chubby cheeks, lovable, carefree, and the happiest on the sea.
When Rose had suffered enough antics from one child, she sent them to the closet.
Their Irish nanny, Kathleen ‘Kikoo’ Conboy, bellowed at the kids if she didn’t like what they were up to and reported them to Rose, who then sent them to the closet.
Kikoo aggressively tried to get Bobby to go to sleep by banging his head against the wall, Jean says.
But the kids’ other nurse, Keela Cahill, stepped in and stopped Kikoo’s head banging.
Kikoo lined up all nine every Saturday night to record their heights, marking it on the door’s molding.
It was in the closet that Jean viewed Rose’s wardrobe collected from frequent shopping trips stateside and abroad.
One time ‘I stuck my grubby toes into mother’s ivory satin shoes, the ones she had just brought home from Paris.
So teaching what was right and wrong was left up to the Catholic Church.
They were ruled by faith, prayer, the sign of the cross, and a rosary in every pocket when traveling.
Joseph’s role model was his father and at eight years old, young Joe won an oak bookcase from the Larkin Soap Company by selling the most soap and collecting the coupons inside.
He sold newspapers to workers on the docks in East Boston and peanuts and candy to the passengers on the boats.
He then went on to Harvard and became the youngest bank president when he was 25 years old.
And because the family was so large, every expense had to be justified.
Rose loved to play golf and never came home without all the balls she went out with – even if that meant endless searching in the rough for a mis-hit ball.
The kids were told there was no slouching on chores and were all forced to get a job.
Teddy mucked stables at the barn in Osterville on Cape Cod while Jean volunteered at the hospital in Hyannis making beds, changing bedpans, sweeping floors and helping the nurses.
He believed that women should be homemakers and not pursue professions traditionally held by men.
In the home, the rules were no whining, give back, and use your talents and minds.
It was on the sea and sailing where the nine children learned how to compete and found a love of winning – with Eunice being one of the fiercest competitors.
As a boy, he had no need for a pet dog or cat – One More was his faithful companion.
Rose wouldn’t admit it but the children believed she had a soft spot for Bobby, the seventh child surrounded by girls.
Jean writes that being encircled by females perhaps made him more sensitive and intuitive.
Briefly he was a paperboy but tiring of that early morning ritual, he prevailed upon his father’s chauffeur to drive him along his route.
Bobby loved all animals and doted on his large pink-and-black spotted pig, Porky, and persuaded the chauffeur to let Porky ride in the back seat with him to school.
He felt such a deep connection to Saint Francis, who loved every little creature, he asked for Francis to be his middle name.
Another love was his stamp collection and he saved the stamps from his parent’s daily incoming international mail.
Meanwhile, Joseph served as president Roosevelt’s first chairman of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission and alerted the president, a stamp collector himself, to Bobby’s interest.
Rose was always encouraging lessons in piano, golf, sailing, French, painting, ice skating, tennis – even if the activity was of no interest to that child.
To build up the little girl’s collection, she asked Joseph to send a letter to the other American diplomats around the world asking them to send two dolls dressed in their country’s native dress.
Teddy fell in love with art at an early age and when headed to Maine one summer, he stopped to visit the home of American painter, Andrew Wyeth.
A friendship evolved and he returned to visit every summer for the rest of his life.
In 1964, he broke his back in a plane crash and for six months was confined in an apparatus that held him motionless in the center of his body.
The frame was rotated every few hours and while hanging upside down he painted for hours on canvases beneath him.
She often went to Tanglewood, the summer home of the Boston Symphony in the Berkshire Mountains of Western Massachusetts – where she and Joseph went during their early courtship days.
What began as sport inspired by the times and her husband connected to the Roosevelt administration, became prophetic.
Dinnertime rituals began promptly at 6.30pm when everyone was to arrive in the parlor, bathed, in a clean outfit, with his or her hair combed.
At 7.00pm, she ceased playing and announced that dinner was served and all filed into the dining room.
Rose loved to walk but turned to the car when she went off to daily Mass.
Tiring of that early morning excursion, they decided to pool their money and buy her a small coupe for her birthday.
Later that afternoon, she announced she would drive herself to Mass but expected to be driven everywhere else.
When Joseph was appointed by president Roosevelt as United States ambassador to the Court of St James in 1938, he moved the family to London.
It was an exciting time, enrollment at Sacred Heart Convent schools, Rosemary and Kick making their social debut at the Court, an audience with Pope Pius XII – until England declared war on Germany in September 1939 and they boarded an ocean liner headed back to the United States.
Rosemary and Joseph stayed for a while, but he soon decided to send Rosemary home.
In August 1944, ‘fate determined that our family would never be whole again when the news arrived that Joe had been lost,’ Jean wrote.
A pilot in the Navy, Joe Jr had volunteered for one more flying assignment over Europe when his plane was hit.
But three years earlier in 1941, Joseph had decided that Rosemary’s learning disabilities might be helped by a new procedure, a lobotomy.
Joseph thought he had received the best medical advice and connected with the expert, Dr Watts to perform the galling procedure.
They later learned that Rose Williams, sister of playwright Tennessee Williams suffered the same fate at the hands of the butcher doctors.
Rosemary was sent off to be cared for by the sisters of St Coletta at the School for Exceptional Children in Wisconsin.
Her family visited her two to three times a year, and she came east in the summer.
Her roommate turned out to be Ethel Skakel and they became fast friends and family when Ethel married Bobby.
More tragedy struck in 1948 when Kick was killed in a plane crash in France.
We lost Dad, our giant and our leader in 1969, following a series of strokes.
Sometimes…’it is impossible to realize that they will not grace the earth and your life again’, Jean concludes.
You would think you would be able to put your German Presbyterian past behind you and move on.
Your family probably gave money to the Oswald’s through your Presbyterian Church after the JFK assassination just like the Fred Trump family.
If you did, or even read a fraction of the comments, it is inescapable that JFK was by far the most despicable president in our history, and that his brother Bobby was equally as bad.
There is not one redeeming fact about JFK except his speeches and books, which were ghost written by Ted Sorensen.
JFK was a total fraud, who was sufficiently reckless that he almost brought about a “nuclear winter,” which might have destroyed the United States and parts of the world.
Jackie Kennedy Was Cold And Detached The UK’s Daily Mail has reported: The public Jackie Kennedy was soft-spoken, elegant and had great charm and sophistication.
But behind closed doors the iconic first lady was aloof and ruthless, and left it to the nanny to deliver the news to little Caroline and John that their father, the president, had been assassinated.
The Kennedys were not what they appeared to be, a new biography reveals.
Despite her charm and popularity with the American people, Jackie Kennedy struggled with the insecurity of her early family life, which left her closed off and reluctant to share her true self with others.
At an early age, Jackie Kennedy – born Jacqueline Bouvier – struggled with her own identity after her parents divorced and she chose to identify with the lifestyle of French aristocrats and French culture.
As first lady, she imagined herself of a noble French heritage and lived accordingly, spending obscene amounts of money on haute couture French fashions reflecting what she imagined she’d wear if her husband were President of France and not president of the United States.
She wanted original designs only for her with no ‘fat little women hopping around’ in them, Jackie’s favored fashion designer, Oleg Cassini revealed.
She often wore a tiara at special events suggesting that she and the president were American royalty, the couple who could make Washington not only the political capital of the world but also the leading social and cultural capital.
Together at the White House, John and Jackie hosted raucous and often raunchy parties with friends in the family quarters or retreats where they smoked and drank for hours.
Vice President Lyndon Johnson once fell face down drunk on the floor, the book reveals.
At a party for the Indian ambassador, Oleg Cassini paraded around in a bathrobe wielding a fireplace poker as his sword.
Jackie chose to be away from the White House often and was a jet setter who preferred socializing with her cafe society friends, international dignitaries or partying with the international playboy set.
She smoked habitually and developed an amphetamine habit along with her husband according to the author.
As dedicated as Jackie was depicted to be to their children, John and Caroline, it was their English nanny, Maud Shaw who was the one to inform the children of their father’s death.
While Jackie grew up in socially prominent families with homes in Manhattan, East Hampton, McLean, Virginia and Newport, Rhode Island, and was educated at elite private schools, the backstory to that picture book life was quite different.
Jackie now spent time with her mother’s second husband, Hugh Auchincloss, a wealthy Wall Street investor.
He was a large, clumsy man who ‘spoke with a stutter, collected pornography’ and pinched every penny.
Jackie kept in touch with her father and remained distant from her mother, Janet Lee Bouvier Auchincloss, ‘an ambitious social climber and society woman who could muster good humor and great charm when necessary’, just like Jackie, Hogan writes.
Highly self-critical of her big feet and hands and her eyes set wide apart, she was self conscious about what she considered flaws and tried to disguise them.
Early on, she felt detached from her mother and stepfather and distanced herself.
But she became disillusioned when she learned in the late 1950s that her personal family history was fiction.
Her grandfather, John Vernon Bouvier, claimed he had traced both sides of his family back to illustrious French families.
But in truth, Jackie was only one-eighth French on her grandfather’s side and her mother was descended from humble Irish immigrants.
The false genealogy had inspired Jackie to envision herself as being part of something similar to the influential literary salons of Paris in the seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth century.
Always a clothes horse, Jackie spent lavishly on expensive French designer clothing which drew critical media commentary during Jack’s 1960 presidential campaign.
Her wardrobe expenditures had always disturbed Jack so Jackie decided that once they were in the White House, she would send her clothing bills to her father-in-law, Joseph P Kennedy, to hide them from the media’s attention.
She promised to limit herself to one American fashion designer and Oleg Cassini became her choice.
Cassini wasn’t an American at all but rather a Paris-born couturier who had become a United States citizen and a popular Hollywood designer.
He had many affairs with Hollywood starlets including Grace Kelly and a marriage to actress Gene Tierney.
In fact, Jackie only met him when introduced by her father-in-law who shared a mutual love of beautiful young women in Hollywood with Cassini.
Her husband was okay with his father paying for Jackie’s expensive wardrobe because it fit in with their image of this new generation taking center stage in American political life.
Jack was interested enough to choose the dress Jackie wore on that fateful day in Dallas.
Behind the facade of 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, Jack’s debilitating back pain required crutches that the public never witnessed and he needed heavy medication to ease the constant pain.
The drugs didn’t abate his sex drive or sexual addictions nor slow him down from chasing women anywhere he could — including in Jackie’s company, writes the author.
He used the White House parties as an occasion to proposition women like Mary Meyer, a socialite divorcee from the Georgetown social scene the Kennedys romped in when he was a Senator.
It was rumored that Meyer brought marijuana and LSD for the couple to consume during their torrid trysts.
Kennedy paid back the press for keeping news of his sexual proclivities out of the papers with invites to uninhibited, wild cavorting in the White House pool with babes.
All of Jack’s friends knew of the strain in the marriage and the Kennedys cut off relationships with anyone who gossiped.
Jackie was able to hide her cigarette smoking and they both slid into amphetamine consumption to keep up the pace.
Jackie escaped the White House scene often and her husband’s roving eye and hands – spending days at their home in Virginia hunt country, Middleburg, where she rode horses.
Jackie traveled to Greece in the summer of 1961 and partied with Crown Prince Constantine while Jack was bedridden with crippling back pain at the White House.
A subsequent jet-setting holiday for the First Lady took her to the famed Amalfi coast of Italy where she stayed with friends and Giovanni Agnelli, the handsome Italian auto manufacturer.
They sailed on his yacht, danced at a nightclub in Capri and tanned together on the beach.
One month before Jack’s assassination in 1963, she vacationed again in Greece with her sister, Lee Radziwell and sailed the Greek islands on Aristotle Onassis’s yacht.
Rumors of trouble in the marriage and Jack’s extra-marital conquests never ceased circulating in Washington.
Jackie was spoiled and self-indulgent just like her husband who needed to be the star of the show.
She briefly became that, beginning with the restoration of the White House.
She wanted a stage equal to any French palace for the performance of her husband’s presidency.
She gave a television tour winning an Emmy, established the White House Historical Association, and wrote a guidebook on 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue.
She restored the gardens, renovated historic townhouses on Lafayette Square across from the White House and Blair House used for the President’s guest house and then on to renovations at the Capitol — launching an aggressive marketing campaign to sell what was the Kennedy image celebrating the superiority of the United States.
Kennedy’s assassination in 1963 triggered mythical proportions of grief, shock and idealization inspiring Jackie to sweep in and take charge of every detail to assure that the great deception of Kennedy’s character continue after his death.
She had to make sure that his identity be defined less by his achievements than by what he appeared to represent – a war hero, loving husband and father, peacemaker and progressive leader.
She scripted, staged and directed his funeral and embellished his status as an American hero and created an afterlife that has lasted more than half a century generating more than 40,000 books on the Kennedys.
Jackie’s message was that her husband was a heroic peacemaker who sacrificed his life try to calm an increasingly violent political culture.
She wanted Jack’s funeral to imitate Lincoln’s as well as Lincoln’s legacy and she copied Lincoln’s stately funeral down to the famed riderless horse.
Ethel Kennedy’s wig was pulled from her head and passed around the room and Bobby Kennedy got into a tiff with Aristotle Onassis making fun of his wealth.
She tried to copyright history and asked everyone who had known her husband not to speak to historians writing books.
She tried to influence historians to overlook his plot to overthrow Fidel Castro, his early contribution to the global arms race and escalation of Eisenhower’s commitment to Vietnam, his concealed health problems, the drugs and romantic liaisons.
Revisionists argued that Kennedy had been too conservative, was incompetent with his handling of the Bay of Pigs disaster, risked nuclear war with the Soviets over Berlin and Cuba.
Others concluded that Kennedy was the most dangerous leader of the postwar era.
Historians have accused him of reading spy novels and not history; winning a Pulitzer thanks to his father – for a book he didn’t write; being a debilitated, drug-addicted womanizer without an ounce of moral fiber; associating with the mafia, and consuming drugs — marijuana, LSD and amphetamine — as well flagrantly having orgies in the White House pool.
HOW HYPOCRITICAL: A KENNEDY PROPOSES ZERO TOLERANCE IN WEINSTEIN WAKE The Hollywood Reporter has opined sanctimoniously: Kathleen Kennedy addressed the allegations of sexual misconduct surrounding Harvey Weinstein as well as suggested bold proposals to tackle the culture of fear and abuse in Hollywood on Monday night for the 24th annual Elle Women in Hollywood celebration held at the Four Seasons Hotel in Beverly Hills.
Kennedy praised the women who had come forward to accuse Weinstein and said that this act will embolden other women.
Kennedy then proposed a bold, industry-led strategy in the form of a commission.
The organizations that constitute the American film industry — the studios, the unions the guilds and the talent agencies — should immediately convene a commission charged with the task of developing new, industry-wide protections against sexual harassment and abuse,” she said.
She added the commission would be composed of labor and management specialists as well as lawyers and legal scholars, sociologists, psychologists, feminist activists and theorists as well as people who work in film and television.
The goal of this commission would be to transform our industry in regards to sexual harassment and abuse in the workplace,” she said.
Later in the evening, fellow honoree Jennifer Lawrence said she supports Kennedy’s proposition.
The prolific producer has worked on such films as Schindler’s List, Back to the Future, several films in the Star Wars universe and many others.
Kennedy also stars on one of the eight Elle November issue covers celebrating women in the entertainment industry; Jennifer Lawrence, Laura Dern, Tessa Thompson, Jessica Chastain, Cicely Tyson, Margot Robbie and Riley Keough also are among the cover ladies being honored by the Hearst-owned magazine.
The evening was hosted by Elle editor-in-chief Nina Garcia and publisher Kevin O’Malley, along with presenting sponsors L’Oréal Paris and “Real is Rare.
A night that is honoring Women in Film, a night that has increasingly gained significance with each passing day.
Along with the terrible and terrifying stories about sexual harassment and assault in the film industry that have dominated the news this past week, a demand is growing for action to prevent further civil and human rights abuses in the future.
Increased awareness of the belittlement, objectification and predation long endured by women who work in film, will certainly be one result of the exposure of what Harvey Weinstein did, and was permitted to do; women who are subject to similar criminal treatment in the future will certainly look to the brave women who’ve come forward to tell what was done to them as these shocking and also horribly familiar events have been brought to light.
The light of public scrutiny will have been strengthened, and we all hope the ability of corporations, board of directors, and colleagues to cover up and countenance sexual predators will be severely curtailed.
Predators must come to feel that they can’t count on power or wealth or fame to shield them from the consequences of their actions.
But sexual harassment of women and men, predation, rape and the misogyny that is the context for this inhumanity will continue unless there is a decisive, industry-wide, institutional response that legislates change rather than hopes for it to happen.
For the past few days, I’ve been in discussions with friends and colleagues, and I want to use my few moments of speaking tonight to offer a proposal.
The organizations that constitute the American film industry – the studios, the unions the guilds and the talent agencies – should immediately convene a commission charged with the task of developing new, industry-wide protections against sexual harassment and abuse.
The commission should be composed of specialists in labor and management practices, lawyers and legal scholars, sociologists, psychologists, feminist activists and theorists, as well as people who work in film and television.
The commission should be fully funded by our industry in order to address the task at hand in a thoroughgoing, comprehensive fashion.
The goal of this commission would be to transform our industry in regards to sexual harassment and abuse in the workplace.
We must make the film industry an exemplar in this regard, a model for self-regulation that other businesses can emulate – because of course this kind of abuse is epidemic in every sector of industry and throughout our society.
I believe that, with determination, hard work, a willingness to act and a recognition of the urgency of immediate action, it is absolutely possible to protect people from sexual terrorism in their places of employment.
It seems to me that the solution would include zero tolerance policies for abusive behavior, and a secure, reliable, unimpeachable system in which victims of abuse can report what’s happened to them with a confident expectation that action will be taken, without placing their employment, reputations and careers at risk.
The next goal would be to find a path toward universal compliance with these new standards and practices.
It’s often the case that real-world application of good ideas is more difficult than arriving at the ideas themselves, and of course any new system will have flaws – But a new system that’s 80% right can change the world for the better.
I’ve asked the Board of Governors of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Science, of which I’m a Governor, to take the first steps towards creating this commission.
I am proud to have worked in film my entire adult life and I reject the idea that misogyny is the true heart of this industry.
Misogyny is depriving human beings of their humanity, and that’s fundamentally antithetical to the empathic examination of human experience that is, or at least ought to be the core of what film at its best can be.
People in our industry know that we have our own complicity, hypocrisy and avoidance of this issue to examine and to answer for, but we cannot let that necessary work prevent us from immediately doing what needs to be done to build a better and safer industry.
She must think that the world is stupid not to realize that she knew exactly what happened in Hollywood for young women to get ahead.
For her to come forward only now, when the Weinstein saga is front and center in global news, smacks of hypocrisy.
As my article above and the extensive comments beneath it document, the Kennedys—her surname, albeit not her immediate family—have been some of the biggest abusers of women in the history of the United States.
Also, if she knew anything about how Washington works, she would realize that “commissions” are convened to bury issues from scrutiny, and buy time, not to resolve them, much less expeditiously.
There is no doubt that the Kennedys were deranged sex freaks, but I would like to point out that Lyndon Johnson would often say that he got more women by accident than JFK got with intention.
And I will say I don’t see how the Kennedys were more evil than Harvey Weinstein who has set the bar pretty high or Roman Polanski, who apparently was a serial rapist of children.
Salinger first made the revelation to Cigar Aficionado magazine in 1992.
Salinger recalled Kennedy summoning him into his office to see if he could provide “some help” in securing “a lot of cigars” by the following morning.
In hindsight, it is evident that Kennedy wanted to stockpile the Cuban products before he banned their import.
Kennedy was pleased to learn that Salinger was successful and had gotten him 1,200 Cuban cigars.
Salinger remembers, “He took out a long paper which he immediately signed.
The story of Kennedy’s cigars reemerged in 2012 as the United States rolled into its 50th year of the trade embargo with Cuba.
This year, the Obama administration moved to ease the Cuban trade embargo allowing United States businesses to open up locations in Cuba in September.
MORE TRASH ABOUT THE KENNEDYS Tom Leonard has written for the UK’s Daily Mail: The party was in full swing, her handsome house near Buckingham Palace spilling over with the cream of London’s wealthy in-crowd, yet hostess Lee Radziwill couldn’t hide from guests her dismay at events taking place across the Atlantic.
It was early 1961 and Lee’s sister, Jackie, was about to become the most celebrated First Lady in United States history.
But instead of intense family pride, Lee’s emotions were far from positive.
The Bouvier sisters, Jackie and Lee, were two of the most glamorous women of their generation.
Described by the writer Truman Capote as ‘American geishas’ — women who existed only to captivate the world’s richest and most powerful men — their conquests included John F Kennedy, Greek shipping tycoon Aristotle Onassis and various royals and aristocrats.
However, as Lee’s bitterness over Jackie’s trump card — becoming wife of a United States president — made clear, they weren’t the most loyal of siblings.
Their fierce and lifelong rivalry — over money, men, success and even their mother’s love — is revealed in a riveting new book.
In Jackie, Janet & Lee, veteran Hollywood biographer J Randy Taraborrelli, drawing on interviews with family members, reveals how their formidable and hard-nosed mother, Janet Bouvier Auchincloss, sought to mould her daughters in her own ruthlessly mercenary and social-climbing image.
He also reveals startling new details of a little-known love affair Jackie had with Jack Warnecke, the architect who designed JFK’s tomb and whom she almost married.
The new book has already upset Lee, now 84, who reportedly feels ‘betrayed’ by relatives who talked to Taraborrelli.
Janet later recalled that while Lee looked appalled by the notion of a loveless match, Jackie, three years older, was perfectly accepting of the idea.
Janet was only 21 when she married her first husband and the girls’ father, Jack Bouvier, a handsome but heavy-drinking Wall Street stockbroker and socialite, whom she divorced 12 years later over his philandering.
She struggled financially for years, but was determined her daughters should never want for money themselves.
And when Janet married a second time, it was to a much older, rather dull — but very wealthy – investment banker, Hugh Auchincloss.
Janet tried to instill in Jackie and Lee sisterly support, insisting the girls should never compete with each other.
And yet she made that all but impossible by showing undisguised favouritism towards Jackie – as did Jack Bouvier.
It engendered not only a huge insecurity complex in Lee, but also a lifelong determination to avoid her sister’s shadow – quite a challenge when Jackie became the most famous woman in the world.
Younger sister Lee was more of a rebel, more slender than Jackie and – some thought – even more beautiful.
As children, Janet had washed their lustrous brunette hair with raw egg yolk, and would drag them to museums and libraries and then quiz them remorselessly on what they had learned.
Jackie was 21 when she lost her virginity in a Paris hotel lift to John Marquand Jr, son of a celebrated writer.
When Janet discovered he was penniless, she slapped Jackie across the face.
A shameless snob, Janet instead steered her towards a British-educated stockbroker, John Husted, who was dull but socially connected and – she thought – rich.
He and Jackie became engaged but when Janet investigated his finances and learnt he earned ‘only’ £12,000 a year , she vetoed the match.
Jackie simply took her engagement ring off her finger and slipped it into Husted’s jacket pocket when she next saw him.
Janet had more trouble steering the mercurial Lee away from Michael Canfield, a young publishing executive who, it was later claimed, was the illegitimate brother of the Duke of Kent.
Lee defied her mother, insisting she would marry for love – and she was determined to beat her sister, then dating a young United States Senator, Jack Kennedy, up the aisle.
She was just 19 when they wed, but their marriage struggled from the start as Lee discovered Canfield couldn’t fund the expensive lifestyle she expected.
Janet had no objections to Jackie’s boyfriend, Jack Kennedy – not least because he was a member of a clan worth at least $500 million.
Jackie – in thrall to JFK’s huge political ambitions and his family’s glamour – brushed her mother’s reservations aside.
In London, meanwhile, Lee was rumoured to be having a fling with the handsome and charismatic playboy David Somerset, Duke of Beaufort, who owned the 52,0000acre Badminton estate.
She was also seeing the ‘dashing’ property developer Stanislaw ‘Stash’ Radziwill, a twice divorced former Polish prince, 44.
It was Janet who gave Canfield his marching orders while the couple were visiting her in the States.
Canfield later claimed Lee had boasted to him of having sex with JFK while the two couples were on holiday together.
Nini Vidal, sister of Gore Vidal and distantly related by marriage to Jackie and Lee, claimed she had made a similar admission to her and said the tryst occurred while Lee was staying with the Kennedys after Jackie had given birth to daughter, Caroline.
Lee reportedly left her bedroom door open deliberately so Canfield could hear her and JFK making love.
Taraborrelli, a seasoned Kennedy biographer, admits he doesn’t know if these stories are true.
What’s significant, he says, is that they were bandied about not by strangers or enemies, but by family members – so Jackie must have heard them, too.
Lee, by then 26, married Radziwill and remained in London, where she insisted on being addressed as ‘Princess’ Lee Radziwill, even though her husband had become plain Mr Radziwill when he took British nationality in 1951.
Soon, restless and bored once more, she embarked on an affair in 1962 with shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis, one of the richest men in the world.
Charming, adventurous but also a chauvinist and rough diamond, he was 27 years older than Lee.
Lee was, according to her friends, not only more approachable and entertaining than the rather regal Jackie, but also naturally stylish, whereas Jackie needed expert help in becoming a style icon.
Yet Lee was also the type of woman who had her maid follow her into the lavatory to drop gardenias into the bowl every time she used it.
So she had only herself to blame for inviting her elder sister – in low spirits after losing her baby son, Patrick, shortly after his birth — to join her and Onassis on a cruise in October 1963.
Once again, Lee was overshadowed as Onassis turned his attention to Jackie.
The old goat kissed Jackie lingeringly on both cheeks, alarming her Secret Service bodyguard who knew JFK would have ‘had a fit’ had he seen it.
On November 22, 1963, in the hours after JFK’s assassination, Onassis tried to ring Jackie on a private number she had given him.
He then flew to Washington and, at Jackie’s insistence, stayed at the White House.
A friend of Lee’s told Taraborrelli that, knowing Onassis’s predatory instincts, she had suspected his motives in ‘comforting’ Jackie even with JFK’s blood still on her pink Chanel suit.
He was moving in for the ‘real prize’ even as he continued his affair with Lee.
After Jack’s death, however, Jackie was rather more taken with another man.
Not her brother-in-law Bobby Kennedy, as has been widely reported, but Jack Warnecke, a tall, handsome architect.
Taraborrelli concedes there was talk she was involved with other men, including Lord Harlech, who was then the British ambassador in Washington.
However, it was Warnecke who swept her off her feet in those vulnerable months.
He wanted to marry her, but her ruinously expensive lifestyle was a problem.
Warnecke’s son told Taraborrelli how his father had once described driving Jackie back from a party.
Unable to keep their hands off each other, they had stopped the car and had sex.
However, passion came a poor second to money with Jackie, who spent vast sums on clothes, jewellery and furnishings.
Two-and-a-half years into their relationship, Warnecke admitted to Jackie that he was nearly $1 million in debt.
He’d even spent the staff bonuses at his architect’s firm to keep up with her lifestyle.
In the summer of 1967, Onassis invited Jackie to his private Greek island of Skorpios.
At dinner each night, she’d unfold her napkin and a huge jewel would fall out.
Onassis blinded her with his wealth, just as he had her sister years earlier.
But even her conniving mother drew the line at a billionaire she knew would divide her daughters.
He and Jackie married in 1968, with Janet whispering that her daughter could still back out even as they walked down the aisle together.
When Jackie returned from honeymoon, they had a vicious row about Onassis which ended with Janet once again slapping her, ‘first on her right cheek with the palm of her hand, then on the left with the back of it — just as she had done when her girls were younger’, writes Taraborrelli.
Lee was furious and utterly mortified by Jackie stealing Onassis from her – years earlier she had turned him down and stuck with Radziwill for fear of causing a scandal for her sister, then the First Lady.
It was from this point that Janet noted a ‘marked difference’ in the sisters’ relationship.
Jackie remained married to Onassis until his death in 1975, but the union had soon unravelled, and they were estranged when he died.
He had regarded Jackie as just another ‘acquisition’ and had never ended his affair with Maria Callas.
A proposed third marriage five years later to a mega-rich property heir, Newton Cope, foundered on the rocks of Bouvier greed.
Just an hour before the ceremony, he refused Jackie and Janet’s insistence that he formally agree to guarantee Lee a whopping $20,000 a month in maintenance.
Lee went on to be linked with a string of famous men, including comic Peter Cook, politician Roy Jenkins, and Mark Shand, brother of the Duchess of Cornwall.
By the Eighties, the sisters were seeing far less of each other, but in 1983 Janet was diagnosed with Alzheimer’s.
Although Jackie became her mother’s devoted carer, it was, ironically, Lee who became Janet’s avowed favourite, despite barely ringing her mother once a month.
Jackie’s resentment increased when she discovered in 1987 that Janet had given Lee $750,000 – said to be a ‘guilt’ payment for the way she had favoured Jackie when they were younger.
Lee certainly never matched Jackie when it came to raking in money from her husbands.
Janet ‘went to her grave’ in 1989 believing her daughters never recovered from their rift over Onassis, says Taraborrelli.
Jackie – by then living with the Belgian-born diamond merchant Maurice Tempelsman – was diagnosed with cancer in 1994 and declined rapidly.
I hope you know it,’ she told her sister, who was too drugged up on morphine to hear her.
The news that Jackie, a multi-millionairess, had left nothing to her sister in her will came as a huge shock – to Lee, her social circle and the millions of ‘Jackie O’ fans worldwide.
But to those who had known them both, says Taraborrelli, it was no surprise at all.
On a personal note, I used to attend “point-to-point” horse races with a female friend who competed in them, in the Virginia countryside west of Washington, D.C., which is beautiful.
One day, my friend was preparing for an event and I was walking alone in a throng of people, when all of a sudden I came face to face with Jackie Kennedy.
What struck me the most about the brief encounter, years after JFK’s assassination, was that it was like a time warp.
Her hair and look were seemingly “frozen in time,” and almost exactly how she looked on that fateful day in Dallas.
It was truly bizarre . . . but then, “Camelot” had been dead for many years.
With the fiftieth anniversary looming of the night Senator Edward Moore Kennedy drove his black Oldsmobile sedan into a pond on Chappaquiddick Island in Cape Cod, leaving his companion, Mary Jo Kopechne, in the car to drown, mystery and questions of what really happened still remain to this day.
What is known is that the fatal incident at Chappaquiddick destroyed all chances of Kennedy – who received little more than a slap on the wrist for the death of Kopechne – ever becoming president, and forever placed a dark cloud over the cursed Kennedy family.
In a statement made to police hours after the late night July 18, 1969, incident, the senator claimed he was on his way to get the ferry back to Edgartown, was unfamiliar with the road, made a wrong turn and his car went off a narrow bridge, turned over and sank in the water.
He claimed he ‘repeatedly dove down to the car in an attempt to see if the passenger was still in the car.
When Kopechne’s body was later retrieved by a diver, she was wearing a blouse, bra, slacks, but no panties.
A week after the accident, on July 25, 1969, Ted Kennedy pleaded guilty to a charge of leaving the scene of an accident and causing bodily injury.
The prosecutors agreed with Kennedy’s high-powered attorneys to suspend any jail sentence.
That evening Kennedy went on national television and offered an extensive mea culpa, claiming, among other things, that he was not under the influence of alcohol, and that there was ‘no truth whatever to the widely circulated suspicions of immoral conduct’ regarding his behavior and that of Mary Jo’s on the night of the accident.
He concluded by asking the viewers – the people of Massachusetts – whether he should resign his senate seat.
In January 1970, a secret inquest was held, the results of which were later released, and one key finding was that there was ‘probable cause’ that Kennedy had driven his car ‘negligently and that such operation appears to have contributed’ to Mary Jo’s death.
Kennedy made a payment of $90,904 to Mary Jo’s parents and they received an additional $50,000 from Kennedy’s insurance company.
He walked away a free man, although the stress of the incident caused his wife, Joan, who had a serous drinking problem, to suffer her third miscarriage.
Today, the handling of the Chappaquiddick case is still viewed as a Kennedy cover-up.
They had worked in Ted’s brother Bobby’s ill-fated presidential campaign, compiling data on how Democratic delegates intended to vote.
When Kennedy was assassinated in June 1968 – just a year before Chappaquiddick – Mary Jo, who had a close relationship with Bobby, was devastated.
After the accident on Chappaquiddick speculation was rampant that 37-year-old Ted, the popular and handsome United States Senator from Massachusetts, married with three children – but also a heavy drinker and womanizer – was headed for a sexual tryst with pretty Mary Jo, a five-foot-two blue-eyed blonde who was a week away from celebrating her twenty-ninth birthday.
Aside from the reunion, police learned, Ted had actually invited Mary Jo to accompany him to the 46th annual Edgartown Yacht Club Regatta that weekend.
Ted and his people denied there was anything romantic or sexual between him and her that fatal night, or at any other time.
But since Mary Jo was dead, it was just Ted’s word, a classic ‘he said, he said’ situation.
Because of Ted’s growing reputation as a skirt-chaser, Kennedy aides moved quickly to quash growing suspicions about Ted and Mary Jo’s activities at the party, and after.
They decided that the most virtuous person they could compare Mary Jo to was the senator’s sister-in-law, Ethel.
Wendell Pigman, who had been one of Mary Jo’s supervisors when she worked for Bobby, would later assert that Mary Jo ‘was like Ethel in that she would grimace if anyone said anything that was dirty or tasteless.
While Ted claimed he and Mary Jo were little more than acquaintances, it can now be revealed, it was Bobby who had first taken a more than casual liking to Mary Jo, who somewhat resembled Bobby’s wife Ethel, mother of their eleven children.
Like the Kennedys – and especially Ethel – Mary Jo was a staunch catholic, had attended parochial schools, and had spent a year teaching at the Mission of St.
Mary Jo had been a guest at the Kennedy compound in Hyannis Port for a cookout and sailing, and socialized with Rose and other family members.
Mary Jo hero-worshipped the Kennedys – and especially Bobby, who like Ted, their late brother, the assassinated president John Kennedy, and their father, the patriarch, Joseph P Kennedy, were legendary philanderers.
With Bobby, Mary Jo was a tireless worker and was totally devoted to him, with dreams of his winning the presidency and her coming to work for him in the White House.
During his run for the presidency, she stayed up one whole night at the Kennedy home, Hickory Hill, in McLean, Virginia, typing and editing the candidate’s major anti-Vietnam War speech.
She had not only typed his presidential announcement, but had even made suggestions regarding some of his phrasing.
Not only did Bobby think Mary Jo was invaluable as his assistant – someone who was completely trustworthy, a young woman who would keep everything between them confidential, but he also was sexually drawn to her – her fresh-faced look, her cute ways, her pert body.
He took advantage of her trust in him, and her being somewhat naïve and not really sophisticated.
It was that typical Kennedy male way with women, and Mary Jo was a convenient, cute target.
She was a good Catholic girl, and Bobby probably figured he could take advantage of her.
Bobby had often thrown caution to the wind when pursuing women, even at Hickory Hill, so it was no surprise to Kennedy insiders that he would ‘come on’ to Mary Jo Kopechne in the family home.
Back in the Sixties, Douglas Kiker had been one of the top reporters for NBC News, covering such major stories as the Vietnam War, and the civil rights movement, and he was one of the elite journalists who were part of the Bobby and Ethel’s elite circle.
Kennedy, Kiker recalled being at Hickory Hill for a cookout when Bobby, the United States Senator, openly flirted with pretty blonde twenty-something Polly Bussell, who worked on scheduling in Bobby’s Senate office, and who Kiker occasionally dated.
Both in bathing suits, Bobby and Bussell took off on her motorcycle to a nearby wooded area where they were spotted by a McLean police patrol.
Bussell said she had received a number of invitations from Bobby and Ethel to attend parties at Hickory Hill, but noted that she spent ‘much more time with Robert Kennedy than with Ethel.
A Hickory Hill insider told me that Bobby often told Ethel which women to invite to parties.
When the Chappaquiddick scandal broke, Ethel became one of her brother-in-law Ted Kennedy’s staunchest defenders.
Still, she pulled herself together, and was instructed by Burke Marshall, who had served as assistant attorney general under Bobby, when he was attorney general in his brother John’s administration, to call highly placed friends in Washington who could offer Ted advice and counsel.
Three days later, Ethel accompanied Ted and his wife, Joan, to the dreary mining town of Plymouth, Pennsylvania, where Mary Jo had been born.
Ted, who had been in seclusion at the Kennedy compound since giving what was a vague statement to police, was wearing a neck brace.
Vincent’s Church, in Plymouth, the Kennedys were treated like rock stars.
Now, nearly fifty years after the incident at Chappaquiddick, almost a decade after Ted Kennedy’s death, a film about Mary Jo’s death and the aftermath called ‘Chappaquiddick’ is opening in theaters across the country on Friday.
As The Washington Post noted, giving the film three stars, ‘Chappaquiddick provides just enough detail to allow us to draw our own conclusions, yet no viewer will think of Ted in the same way.
A surviving relative of Mary Jo, a 75-year-old aunt, however, told People ‘For 49 years, people have wanted to know what happened.
Indeed, the one thread that runs through the Kennedys is total corruption and depravity.
They set the bar, under which LBJ, Bill Clinton, Harvey Weinstein, Roman Polanski, Bill Cosby and Tiger Woods crawled.
Lessons need to be taught that will reverberate for generations to come.
And Teddy was a killer who was lionized in the corridors of Congress after Mary Jo’s tragic death.
I know, because our Senate offices were right next to his, and I saw it happen.
The Despicable Ethel Kennedy Treated Her Immigrant Servants Like Dogs Jerry Oppenheimer has written for the UK’s Daily Mail: Wearing a green jacket that read ‘I really do care,’ Ethel Kennedy celebrated at the annual Hyannis Port annual Fourth of July parade with a clear slap at the first lady.
Just a week before, it was announced that the 90-year-old would be participating in a hunger strike to protest President Trump’s immigration policies on the southern border.
But Ethel’s protestations may be somewhat hypocritical, as Robert F Kennedy’s widow ‘treated her immigrant servants like dogs,’ according to insiders who worked for her.
After RFK’s assassination in June 1968, Ethel was the sole mistress of Hickory Hillhe Kennedys’ fabled estate in McLean, Virginia became known as ‘Horror Hill’ because of Ethel’s temper tantrums and abusive treatment of the help.
She earned a reputation for slapping and berating immigrant household workers, cheating them out of money, and screaming at them like a ‘mad woman,’ causing them to flee in tears, or be fired,’ sources recalled.
Sympathetic friends blamed her behavior on the depression and anger brought on by the tragic loss of her husband, father of their 11 children, with the last born after he was killed.
Ethel Skakel Kennedy, an American Drama of Power, Privilege, and Politics.
Fell, one of a number of Ethel’s former employees interviewed for the book, asserted that Ethel ‘couldn’t stand it if didn’t speak English well, or understand it.
As part of the protest, the Kennedy widow was to make a financial donation in lieu of the food she would have eaten, according to her daughter, Kerry Kennedy, who heads the Robert F Kennedy Human Rights organization, a nonprofit advocacy group.
Kennedy in the years following her husband’s murder found ‘no joy’ in working for her, sources stated.
And even an African American woman in her employ suffered verbal racial abuse, recalled Kennedy brother-in-law, actor Peter Lawford.
Sitting in the kitchen at Hickory Hill nursing a cup of coffee, he later claimed, he witnessed Ethel voicing a racial slur at a maid who was cleaning, and inadvertently tossed an item that Ethel was saving, involving her late husband.
Returning to his home in Los Angeles, Lawford mentioned the scene to his then wife, Patricia Seaton Lawford, who recalled, ‘Peter was very upset.
To members of the Kennedy circle, Ethel’s use of a racial slur seemed incomprehensible because she and her late husband – renowned in the civil rights movement – were friends with the likes of such celebrated African Americans as Coretta King, widow of Dr.
Martin Luther King; the Olympian Rafer Johnson, and Cesar Chavez, the Mexican-American labor leader and civil rights activist.
Ethel’s son, Robert Kennedy Jr., would later claim that his mother never used such racist language.
But Ethel could also be physically abusive – especially to South American immigrants with poor language skills – as underscored by an incident witnessed by Fell.
The servant somehow misunderstood what she had been told and soon returned with sanitary napkins, rather than the requested face cream.
Furious, the Kennedy widow ‘hit her in the face, just slapped her,’ Fell told me.
The maid ‘was crying and she ran to the basement and said she was going to leave.
But, according to Fell, the maid said, ‘I’m never going to work here again.
A few weeks later she suffered a minor injury at Hickory Hill, and with guests present, Ethel made a big to-do over her, announcing she would personally drive her to a nearby hospital.
I remember her saying – and I laughed to myself when I heard it – “I have really valuable people working for me.
Future employees, including those with black or brown skin, were warned about working for the Kennedy widow at her five-acre estate, located across the Potomac River from Washington, D.C., long since sold.
One who got under her skin after RFK’s death was the senator’s favorite among the help – Ena Bernard, a black woman from Costa Rica.
She had begun working for them in the early 50s when then-congressman and future president John F Kennedy secured a green card for her, using the influence of his congressional office.
His brother, Bobby, who was attorney general in the Kennedy administration, later arranged for Ena to accompany President Kennedy on an Alliance for Progress trip to her homeland, where she was accorded a virtual hero’s welcome.
Later, Bobby Kennedy arranged to bring Ena’s daughter, Josefina, to the United States from the Bernards’ hometown of Heredia, Costa Rica.
And when RFK was murdered, Ena, who had a room on the third floor at Hickory Hill, was heartbroken.
But Ethel, so possessive of RFK, had come to loathe Ena, and wanted to fire her, apparently always jealous of her close friendship with RFK, and her control of the raucous Kennedy household.
Ted Kennedy’s personal assistant, was aware of the war between Ethel and the Costa Rican servant.
This ignited fights between Ethel and her older children, Kathleen and Joe, who had adored the heavyset woman since they were toddlers – the woman their mother had come to despise.
When asked why she took Ethel’s abuse, Ena claimed she stayed because of the Kennedy children.
But when Ethel had one of her tantrums, or did something to embarrass herself, Ena gloated, according to Noelle Fell.
She recalls Ena once confiding, ‘The thing I miss most about the senator is that he used to put Ethel in her place.
At the door of her little home in Sunrise, Florida, was a Kennedy family memento – a ceramic Dalmatian, a gift from the one Kennedy woman who wanted to fire her – Ethel Skakel Kennedy.
If one has any doubts whatsoever, please read my article above and all of the comments beneath it.
After JFK’s death in Dallas, her husband RFK began an affair with JFK’s widow Jackie; and he had affairs with Marilyn Monroe and others.
Godfather Actor Claims Marilyn Monroe Was Murdered By Robert Kennedy The UK’s Daily Mail has reported: Godfather actor Gianni Russo claims he had an affair with Hollywood icon Marilyn Monroe when he was just 16 and knows how she really died.
Russo, the Staten Islander who played Carlo Rizzo in The Godfather, says Monroe didn’t die of a barbiturate overdose as her autopsy proclaimed.
The 75-year-old says that she was killed by none other than Robert Kennedy, who orchestrated her death because he didn’t want news of his and John F Kennedy’s involvement with the star to go public.
Russo claims to have shared an on-and-off affair with Monroe for years, starting when he was 16 and the actress was 33.
He even has a picture with her just three days before her death on August 5, 1962.
In the picture he looks at the star, who dons a scarf on her head and sunglasses, at the CalNeva Lodge, a resort of the California-Nevada border.
Russo said that her death followed soon after that meeting at that lodge because the mob was after them.
He said the mob and Chicago crime boss Sam Giancana were after Monroe because they wanted to get to the president.
Mobsters flocked to the lodge when Monroe was there with the alleged plan of filming her in a threesome with JFK and Robert Kennedy.
They wanted to use the scandalous tape as blackmail to strong-arm the president into invading Cuba and returning the island’s casinos to organized criminals.
The plan never came to fruition as JFK failed to show up to the resort.
Russo says that Marilyn learned of the plot and threatened to report the mob to the media.
Robert Kennedy caught wind of her plans to go public, and plotted her death to stop her, according to the actor.
She died of an embolism, but it looked like drugs to the coroner,’ Russo said on her death.
He details Monroe’s death and his other experiences rubbing shoulders with celebrities and the mob in his new memoir Hollywood Godfather, out on March 12.
The Kennedy Curse Continues, Unabated Valerie Edwards has written in the UK’s Daily Mail: The death of Saoirse Kennedy Hill, a granddaughter of former United States attorney general Robert F Kennedy, has become the latest tragedy for a political dynasty that has been shaken by assassination and scandal.
Saoirse died from an apparent overdose at her family’s compound on Thursday afternoon.
Paramedics responding to a call of a suspected overdose just after 2.30pm on Thursday arrived at the scene and found the patient in cardiac arrest.
She was transported to Cape Cod Hospital, where she was pronounced dead.
It has been 20 years since JFK Jr was killed after his plane crashed off Martha’s Vineyard, Massachusetts.
The philanthropist Mary Kennedy was an interior designer, architect, and philanthropist.
Her official cause of death was asphyxiation due to hanging, according to an autopsy report.
Mary had an ongoing battle with drugs and alcohol and on several occasions tried to seek help.
The film and television producer Kara was born to Sen Ted Kennedy and Joan Bennett Kennedy in February 1960.
It’s believed that the heart attack may have been brought on by the aggressive cancer treatment she underwent.
At the time, she was reportedly told that her diagnosis was inoperable.
But her father helped her find a surgeon at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston who removed part of her right lung.
Following her death, her brother, former Rhode Island Rep Patrick Kennedy said the grueling treatments had left his sister physically weakened.
The lawyer and journalist JFK’s son, John F Kennedy Jr, was killed in 1999 when his plane crashed into the Atlantic Ocean.
He died alongside his wife, Carolyn and his sister-in-law Lauren just off the coast of Martha’s Vineyard.
He had almost been alone that night after Carolyn threatened to skip the nuptials.
Carolyn had a change of heart at the last second however, and the two set off with her sister Lauren.
JFK Jr had taken off from Essex County Airport in Fairfield, New Jersey, at 8.39pm that night, bound for the airfield in Martha’s Vineyard.
The air traffic controller at the island airport alerted the regional Federal Aviation Administration office in Connecticut just after 10pm when the plane had failed to arrive.
In the end, it was the conditions that evening most likely caused the tragedy.
On July 21, 1999, five days after the plane went missing, the three bodies were found and removed from the underwater wreckage.
The ashes of John, 38, his wife Carolyn, 33, and Lauren, 34, were scattered at sea on July 22 just off of Martha’s Vineyard by friends and family.
The lawyer and activist Michael Kennedy, a lawyer and activist, was in Aspen, Colorado, when he was killed in a skiing accident on December 31, 1997.
The aspiring journalist David Kennedy died from a drug overdose on April 25, 1984.
He overdosed in a hotel near a family vacation home in Palm Beach, Florida.
The second presidential Kennedy Robert F Kennedy, who was also known as RFK, was assassinated during his run for president in 1968, nearly five years after his brother JFK was shot dead in Dallas.
He was shot following his victory speech in the California primary election in front of his wife, Ethel.
Sirhan Sirhan was convicted of shooting RFK while he and a group of people were walking through the pantry at the Ambassador Hotel on the way to a news conference.
His daughter, Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, and his son, Robert F Kennedy, Jr, last year called for a new investigation into their father’s assassination because they don’t believe Sirhan is responsible for his death.
After personally reviewing evidence and visiting the convicted killer Sirhan in prison in California, Kennedy, Jr argued that the wrong man was put behind bars.
A nation mourns the 35th president JFK was assassinated on November 22, 1963, by Lee Harvey Oswald in downtown Dallas, Texas.
He was born to Joseph P Kennedy Sr and Rose Kennedy on May 29, 1917, in Brookline, an area outside of Boston in Massachusetts.
JFK, who went on to become the 35 president of the United States, was one of nine children.
The couple had three children, John F Kennedy Jr, Caroline Kennedy and Patrick Bouvier Kennedy.
That same year Kennedy had furthered United States involvement in Southeast Asia while both the Cold War and the Space Race were heating up.
He had asked Congress for millions to put a man on the moon before the 1960s ended to beat the Russians, who had their own program.
That United States accomplishment would happen when Apollo 11 landed on the moon on July 20, 1969, but one that Kennedy did not get to witness.
The day after JFK was assassinated, the newly sworn-in Lyndon B Johnson issued his first presidential proclamation.
In a statement that was broadcast on both television and radio, he declared November 25, 1963, the day of JFK’s funeral, a national day of mourning.
JFK’s youngest son Patrick was the youngest son of JFK and his wife, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, also known as Jackie O He was born prematurely on August 7, 1963, and died on August 9, 1963.
She died at the age of 28 while on a flight from Paris to the French Riviera alongside her married lover.
Kathleen was the family’s free-spirit whose life was filled with rebellion and cross-continent love.
The unpublicized story of Kathleen ‘Kick’ Kennedy is a haunting tale that ends with her funeral in which the only Kennedy to attend was her father.
She was known as a rebellious yet charming woman who defied her family for love and lost her brother and husband to war.
Because of JFK’s blossoming political career and the scandalous circumstances surrounding her death, the family kept Kathleen’s death quiet.
The gravestone identifies her as Kathleen Cavendish, Marchioness of Hartington.
The WWII pilot He was the eldest child of Joseph and Rose Kennedy and the eldest sibling of John F Kennedy.
He was 29 years old when his plane exploded mid-air on August 12, 1944.
The Chappaquiddick Incident On July 18, 1969, Edwards ‘Ted’ Kennedy drove his Oldsmobile sedan off a narrow bridge on Chappaquiddick Island and into a pond.
The island is located off the famous resort island of Martha’s Vineyard.
His passenger, 28-year-old Mary Jo Kopechne, drowned in the crash and he was unable to pull her out of the water.
But instead of alerting authorities, Kennedy returned to a party he and Kopechne had attended and sought out the late Paul Markham, who had recently resigned as United States Attorney for Massachusetts.
During his testimony at an inquest months later, Markham remembers the moment he first arrived at the scene at Dike Bridge just after midnight.
Markham later testified that the two dove into the waters numerous times in an unsuccessful attempt to locate Kopechne, who’d been a campaign worker for Kennedy’s older brother, RFK, before his assassination the previous year.
The following day, Markham went with Kennedy to provide a statement to police on Martha’s Vineyard.
Ted pleaded guilty to leaving the scene of an accident and received a suspended sentence of two months in jail.
The Massachusetts senator died on August 25, 2009, at the age of 77 following a yearlong battle with brain cancer.
He said he was afraid and ‘made terrible decisions’ and had to live with the guilt for more than four decades.
He was accused of raping Patricia Bowman in 1991 in Palm Beach, Florida, after a night of drinking with his uncle, Ted Kennedy.
William’s mother Jean Kennedy Smith is a former United States Ambassador to Ireland.
A Florida jury acquitted William of sexual assault and battery on Bowman following a ten-day trial.
Another sexual assault claim levied against William was dismissed in 2004 while an additional claim was settled out of court the following year.
In 1973, Joseph P Kennedy II was found guilty of driving to endanger after a car accident in Nantucket left Pamela Burkley partially paralyzed.
Burkley became paralyzed from the chest down when the vehicle driven by Joseph overturned on a country road.
Others were also injured, including his brother, David Kennedy, and Burkley’s younger sister.
Burkley decided not to sue Kennedy after getting $668,000 from an insurance settlement.
The lobotomy Rosemary Kennedy was the third child and first daughter of Rose and Joseph P Kennedy.
She attended the Edward Devotion public school in Brookline, Massachusetts, for the first two years of kindergarten and was found to be deficient in basic cognitive skills.
Rosemary didn’t interact well with fellow students although at home, she adored her brothers, Jack and Joe, and they lavished attention on her.
With her issues, at age seven she couldn’t return to Edward Devotion School.
In 1941, her father gave his consent for a pre-frontal lobotomy on his 23-year-old daughter.
Rosemary’s reading, writing, spelling and counting skills never got above a fourth-grade level even though she studied hard and was able to add three triple digit numbers.
She returned to Brookline to be tutored again by specialists as well her mother who even tried to help develop her physical coordination by playing tennis and catch with her.
Glowingly happy back at home, Rosie wanted to go out on her own just like her brothers and younger sisters.
He feared his daughter’s condition could impact his political ambitions for him and his sons.
He read about this new procedure, a pre-frontal lobotomy that promised to be the definitive treatment.
In November 1941, unbeknownst to his family, Joe took Rosemary to be examined by Dr.
James Watts, a neurosurgeon and the two practiced on brains in cadavers.
The unseemly pair raided sanitariums and mental institutions for candidates and if the surgery was botched, there was no complaint.
With what looked like a butter knife, he moved it up and down slicing through brain tissue.
When Rosemary stopped singing ‘God Bless America’ and became incoherent, they ceased their butchery.
He lied to Rose and said Rosie had become worse and doctors suggested institutionalization with no visitors – but he never said where she was.
Now lethargic, incontinent, she couldn’t talk and relied on grunting, screaming and shrieking.
The barbaric treatment did not erase her temper tantrums but she became worse and was assigned two guards in her living quarters.
In 1949, on learning that Rosie was being sexually abused at Craig House, Joe had her moved to Saint Coletta, a home for the mentally retarded in southeastern Jefferson, Wisconsin.
The listing in the Daily Mail article above is merely a partial description of the “Kennedy Curse,” which has afflicted what is surely the most dysfunctional family ever to achieve significant political power in American history.
The Kennedys Are Evil Wackos Chris Spargo has reported for the UK’s Daily Mail: Robert F Kennedy Jr is once again making waves after accusing former Lockheed Aircraft employee Thane Eugene Cesar of murdering his father.
He had landed the job about one week earlier,’ wrote RFK Jr in a social media post on Thursday.
He made this accusation just hours after Cesar passed away in the Philippines, and 41 years after the fatal shooting.
RFK Jr also claimed that it was Cesar, unloading his gun from behind as Kennedy fell to the floor after being struck with a bullet from Sirhan’s gun, who fired the fatal shot that night.
RFK Jr is not the first to accuse Cesar of having been involved in the assassination, with some even believing it was his bullet and not Sirhan’s which killed the presidential hopeful.
He had been called in to work at the hotel at the last second that night, with the plumber at Lockheed also working security detail part time with a local agency.
Many have pointed out in the past that Thane had extreme right-wing views and held a deep-seeded hatred for the Kennedy clan.
His gun was drawn as well at the time, and powder burns were found on his face.
And his clip-on tie was found by Kennedy’s side, as if he had ripped it off while being shot Cesar was married at the time There has long been support for the theory that there was a second gunman however after the autopsy report found that Kennedy died after being fatally struck from behind.
RFK Jr notes that in his post, which comes just a few months after he made waves with his sudden and staunch stance against mandatory vaccinations.
From under the dog pile, Sirhan emptied his 8 chamber revolver firing 6 more shots in the opposite direction 5 of them striking bystander and one going wild,’ wrote RFK Jr.
RFK Jr then gets into what Cesar did with the murder weapon and his motive for the murder.
Cesar lied to police claiming that he’d disposed of the gun months before the assassination,’ claimed RFK Jr.
He then revealed that he had even planned to meet Cesar last June in the Philippines, but said that the planned sit-down was cancelled at the last second.
RFK Jr said that it was Cesar’s agent, Dan Moldea, who cancelled the meeting.
The investigative journalist and author laid out all the evidence in support of the second gunman theory, but then declared Cesar was not guilty of any crime in the book’s final pages.
Moldea also eulogized Cesar on Thursday, but in a far different tone than RFK Jr.
This is not the first time RFK Jr has flouted this theory, and he is not the only member of his family who believes Cesar is responsible for his father’s death.
His sister Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, who served as lieutenant governor of Maryland from 1995 to 2003, has also said in the past that police should reopen the investigation into her father’s murder.
Roselli was the mobster who ran the assassination program for the CIA against Castro.
Sirhan has claimed this as well multiple times in the past, despite his conviction by a jury one year after the shooting.
No other gunman was ever apprehended or charged with playing a role in the assassination.
The investigation was ultimately closed out one year after the shooting in 1969, when Sirhan was convicted of he crime.
He was first sentenced to death, but that was commuted to a life sentence just a few years later in 1972.
He is now 75 and incarcerated at the Richard J Donovan Correctional Facility in San Diego.
Prosecutors were able to present evidence suggesting Sirhan was seen at the hotel two nights before the attack.
He was also holding the same gun from which the bullets that killed Kennedy came from, and had eight additional bullets in his hand.
On the opposite side of the debate are RFK Jr’s siblings Joseph and Kerry, the latter of whom recently took her brother to task earlier this year following some of his comments about vaccinations.
This is not because the two do not believe the theory, but rather how they want their father to be remembered by the public.
Kennedy had just won the California primary and his pregnant wife Ethel was by his side when he was shot.
Kennedy was hit with three bullets – one in the head and two in the back – while fourth passed through his jacket.
Sirhan Sirhan is the only person who was charged and tried in the wake of of Robert F Kennedy’s assassination, but there is some evidence that does support the theory of a second gunman.
One bullet entered through his armpit, one entered through his back and one through the back of his head behind his right ear.
The bullet which had entered through Kennedy’s head and was determined to have caused his death one day after the shooting was fired at point black range. –SHOTS FIRED: In video of the incident, there are what sounds like 11 shots being fired in total, but Sirhan would have been able to fire no more than eight. –SIRHAN’S CAPTOR: The individual who tackled Sirhan to the ground first and multiple eyewitnesses have said that the convicted murderer only got off two shoots before he was tackled to the ground.
One eyewitness said that paper could be seen in the air after Sirhan fired his bullets, suggesting he was using blanks.
THANE EUGENE CESAR KILLED ROBERT KENNEDY SAYS RFK JR VERSION OF EVENTS ‘Thane Eugene Cesar died today in the Philippines.
On June 5, 1968, Cesar, an employee in a classified section of Lockheed’s Burbank facility, was moonlighting as a security guard at the Ambassador Hotel.
Cesar waited in the pantry as my father spoke in the ballroom, then grabbed my father by the elbow and guided him toward Sirhan.
With 77 people in the pantry, every eyewitness said Sirhan was always in front on my father at a 3-6 feet distance.
From under the dog pile, Sirhan emptied his 8 chamber revolver firing 6 more shots in the opposite direction 5 of them striking bystander and one going wild.
By his own account, Cesar was directly behind my dad holding his right elbow with his own gun drawn when my dad fell backwards on top of him.
Cesar repeatedly changed his story about exactly when he drew his weapon.
Thomas Noguchi, all 4 shots that struck my father were “contact” shots fired from behind my dad with the barrel touching or nearly touching his body.
Cesar sold his .22 to a co-worker weeks after the assassination warning him that it had been used in a crime.
Cesar was a bigot who hated the Kennedys for their advocacy of Civil Rights for blacks.
Ironically, Moldea penned a meticulous and compelling indictment of Cesar in a 1995 book and then suddenly exculpated him by fiat in a bizarre and nonsensical final chapter.
INVESTIGATION ‘The LAPD unit that investigated my dad’s assassination was run by active CIA operatives.
Sirhans appointed lawyer was Johnny Rosselli’s personal lawyer, Grant Cooper.
At Best, John F Kennedy Was Trailer Trash Tom Leonard has written for the UK’s Daily Mail: John F Kennedy wasn’t really picky about the women who made up his ‘conga line’ of paramours.
From Hollywood stars to White House secretaries — including a pair known as Fiddle and Faddle — interns, Mafia molls, strippers and call girls, for the libidinous President it was all about the sex.
However, he was not only a prolific womaniser but a prodigious scribbler, and now newly uncovered notes from the 1960 election campaign trail reveal just how his voracious sexual appetites weighed on his mind.
In the scrawled messages to aides — he developed laryngitis and was ordered not to speak — the soon-to-be President fretted that they might cost him the election.
According to JFK, his father, a former United States ambassador to Britain, had instructed his sons to ‘get laid as often as possible’ and he certainly tried to follow that advice.
The Kennedy White House was far removed from the image of perfect-young-family bliss that he and Jackie tried to project.
In what one chronicler of his love life called a ‘bimbo eruption’, JFK — 43 when he became President — exploited his wife’s frequent absences from Washington and his own busy travel schedule to cheat on her at every opportunity.
His defenders note that no woman ever accused him of rape or sexual assault — but then, nor did many of Harvey Weinstein’s accusers until recently.
Certainly, Kennedy’s charisma, film-star looks and power, together with the very different sexual dynamics of those days, allowed him to get away with behaviour that would cause outrage today.
He invited her to join him in Palm Springs, California, the following month — adding that his wife wouldn’t be there.
They spent a weekend at Bing Crosby’s house and that, according to some sources, was as far as the affair went, although Monroe was besotted.
She reportedly wrote to Jackie telling her that she intended to become First Lady.
In September 1963, Kennedy seduced the iconic German actress Marlene Dietrich, a former mistress of his domineering father Joe, who was also a serial philanderer.
According to biographer Christopher Andersen, JFK worked his way through a sizeable chunk of Hollywood’s leading ladies.
Even Audrey Hepburn was reportedly a notch on the Kennedy bedpost during regular visits to the White House.
Other actresses to fall for the Kennedy charm included 22-year-old Lee Remick and voluptuous Swede Anita Ekberg.
While the British-born film star Jean Simmons was filming in Boston, she said, JFK ‘practically broke down’ her hotel room door to demand sex with her.
As for Sophia Loren, then 24, Florida senator George Smathers said he initially approached the sultry actress on his friend’s behalf.
With most women it was simply sex, but Kennedy apparently fell in love with one of his mistresses.
Swedish socialite Gunilla von Post was 21 and JFK was 36 when they met on the French Riviera.
They spent the evening flirting, only for him to reveal that he was marrying Jackie in three weeks.
JFK was smitten and rang his father to say he wanted to get a divorce and marry Gunilla.
Joe told him he’d destroy his career if he did, and the affair ended there and then.
Married socialite Mary Pinchot Meyer, who had first met him at a school dance, visited the White House for trysts.
When she died in a mystery execution-style shooting on a Washington street in 1964, some claimed that officials had ordered her death to stop her influencing the President with her support for pacifism and mind-bending drugs.
She was introduced to JFK by Frank Sinatra, with whom she was also sleeping.
Exner, who went on to be mistress of the Sicilian-American mobster Sam Giancana, says she first met Kennedy in 1960 in Las Vegas.
She also claimed she became the ‘bagwoman’ ferrying money from Kennedy to Giancana to secure election votes.
This has been widely discredited, although her insistence that they had a two-year affair while he was in the White House is supported by phone records and official documents.
Exner also said she had an abortion, which seems likely given Kennedy kept the details of a doctor who performed terminations — then illegal — in his Rolodex.
It was Exner who revealed that JFK had prostitutes brought to the White House for naked pool parties.
His brother Bobby, the attorney general, later had her deported, fearing she could harm JFK’s re-election campaign.
But nobody could stop Blaze Starr, a buxom red-headed stripper dubbed ‘The Hottest Blaze in Burlesque’, blabbing, although she waited until 1989 before revealing that JFK had been ‘very quick and very wild’ in the sack.
Starr said she had met JFK in 1954 when he started visiting her Maryland strip club, but didn’t get a White House invitation until 1962.
Prostitutes weren’t the only way Kennedy could have access to women without leaving the White House.
Fiddle and Faddle were the cheeky Secret Service codenames for White House secretaries Priscilla Wear and Jill Cowen.
Both did little office work — they couldn’t type — but managed a fair amount of skinny-dipping in the pool with the President.
If she had known the same was true of Pamela Turnure, JFK’s secretary when he was a senator, Jackie would surely not have agreed to his request to make Turnure her own press secretary in the White House.
During a relationship stretching between 1961 and 1963, Turnure — a 21-year-old — would reportedly sleep with the President when her boss was away.
Kennedy liked women who resembled his wife but were, in the words of Parisian brothel-keeper Madame Claude, sexier than Jackie.
Claude said she provided him with such a prostitute during the 1961 tour when Jackie wowed Paris and won over President de Gaulle.
Mimi Alford, an innocent 19-year-old press office intern, said that, having got her tipsy on cocktails, Kennedy took her virginity in the First Lady’s bedroom.
They had an 18-month affair during which she always called him ‘Mr President’, and even had sex on Air Force One.
Yet JFK’s worse betrayal of his wife allegedly involved her sister, Lee.
According to two people in their inner circle, the two slept with each other one night while their families were holidaying together, soon after Jackie had given birth to their daughter Caroline.
Marilyn made frequent phone calls throughout July to the Justice building in Washington, and when Bobby was out of the office, his secretary, Angie Novello, talked with her.
Marilyn spent some of her time that disastrous month posing for photographs.
She did some nude sessions with Bert Stern, which, following Marilyn’s death, brought him fame on an international scale.
She was also photographed by Allen Grant, who took some candids of her in her home to accompany a long, prophetic, and brilliant interview for Life magazine that would come out in the last week of her life.
She met with Springer and a Life staffer named Dick Meryman at the Savoy Plaza Hotel.
Meryman had an assistant along who, after a few gin and tonics, came on too strong for Marilyn and who was quickly banished.
We went upstairs with her and knocked on a door and a man wearing only a towel wrapped around his lower parts opened the door.
The man nodded in great confusion, not quite believing his eyes in a perfect double-take.
Marilyn got the giggles over the man’s reaction; it struck her as very funny.
The man opened his door a crack and sneaked another look as we went down the hall.
It turned out that Lawford was out of the hotel attending a party that evening.
The piece was especially successful in mirroring her philosophy—her attitude toward fame and success as well as failure.
Only the previous month, she had been equally open with another interviewer, Alan Levy, writing for Redbook magazine.
I’m looking forward to eventually becoming a marvelous—excuse the word marvelous—character actress.
To put it bluntly, I seem to have a whole superstructure with no foundation.
At least once she kept him waiting for over an hour, but he was unusually patient.
One of the Jacobs office publicists said that on July 20, Marilyn was admitted to Cedars of Lebanon Hospital under an alias.
If Marilyn was really pregnant, her state of mind can only be imagined.
She was three months away from her last bedroom encounter with the President and only a few weeks away from her last date with his brother.
It would be easy to assume that the aborted child was a Kennedy, but she was seeing other men as well that spring and summer.
The cover story given out at the time by the Jacobs office was that she had gone that weekend with the Lawfords to Lake Tahoe.
By the end of July, Marilyn was taking tentative steps toward replacing Mrs.
She had gone to the home of her former black housekeeper, Florence Thomas, and asked her to come back to work for her.
If she had indeed terminated a pregnancy, we have no way of knowing whether or not she told him.
What we do know is that she seems to have plunged into a profound depression.
Mickey Rudin, Marilyn’s attorney in California , had worked out details for her return to the Fox lot and the completion of Something’s Got to Give.
Dean Martin had begun a nightclub tour since the production shut down and would not be free until October.
She called designer Jean Louis about a dress and asked his fitter to come the next day but then remembered that it was a Saturday and said that Monday would be fine.
That evening she went out to her favorite restaurant, La Scala, with Pat Newcomb, Peter Lawford, and, according to at least one source, Bobby Kennedy, who was then in California with his family.
Bobby had taken over her emotional life within a brief two and a half months, but he may well have brought Ethel and his family West to help ease him out of this mistake.
Marilyn had drifted into an unrealistic view of the situation—believing that Bobby was somehow available to her.
If she felt that the possibility of a really serious relationship with Bobby was being dismissed—that would certainly help explain her ill temper Friday evening.
The document, which is termed in the text as “miscellaneous information,” says that Bobby Kennedy and his family spent the weekend on the Gilroy ranch, then went to the apartment of Paul Fay, Jr., in the city of San Francisco Sunday night and that he held a press conference Monday morning in San Francisco.
It says nothing about the tragedy unfolding in Los Angeles that weekend.
But the document served to make it officially clear that Kennedy was far away by the time the word of the tragedy was out.
Good Versus Pure Evil—Bloody Images From Ukraine RSS Posts RSS Comments NaegeleBlog Subscription Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email.
