Kennedy chose to blockade Cuba, deciding to bomb the missile sites only if further action proved necessary.
The options that President John F Kennedy have for responding to the Soviet missile deployment was to attack Cuba using air strikes to destroy the missile sites to get rid of Castro once and for all.
The second option was to call a Navy blockade to keep Soviet ships from sending any more missiles.
Kennedy opted for a naval blockade that would stem flow of missiles entering Cuba.
Kennedy responded by placing a naval blockade, which he referred to as a “quarantine,” around Cuba.
He also demanded the removal of the missiles and the destruction of the sites.
From the outset of the crisis, Kennedy and ExComm determined that the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba was unacceptable.
Kennedy announced a naval blockade to prevent the arrival of more missiles and demanded that the Soviets dismantle and remove the weapons already in Cuba.
President Kennedy demanded that the Soviets remove the missiles, and a United States naval blockade around Cuba was created to stop Soviet ships from entering.
Kennedy’s economic development programs, supported by the Peace Corps, were intended to reduce poverty in developing nations so their citizens would be less attracted to Communism.
The basis for President Kennedy’s demand that the missiles be removed from Cuba was basically out of fear.
The United States announced that it would not permit offensive weapons to be delivered to Cuba and demanded that the Soviets would dismantle the missile bases that were under construction.
Khrushchev wanted to support the new communist country in ‘Uncle Sam’s backyard’, and ensure that the Americans would not attempt another incident like the Bay of Pigs and attempt to overthrow Castro.
Kennedy accepted the Soviet offer to withdraw the missiles from Cuba in return for an end to the quarantine and a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
The same day Attorney General Robert Kennedy told Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin that if the Soviet Union did not remove the missiles the United States would do so.
The most important foreign policy event of the Kennedy administration was the signing of a treaty that banned testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere.
It was the most important event because it ended the Cuban missile crisis and stopped both countries from beginning a nuclear war.
The Berlin Wall was built by the German Democratic Republic during the Cold War to prevent its population from escaping Soviet-controlled East Berlin to West Berlin, which was controlled by the major Western Allies.
Kennedy had a neutralized and flexible response to the Cold War; Truman supported containment, and Eisenhower supported massive retaliation and brickmanship.
Kennedy’s establishment of the Peace Corps was aimed towards communist containment by providing aid to the Third World.
Flexible Response gave the president the ability to select from nonmilitary options, as well as military options, when responding to a crisis and allowed the United States to meet each hostile action with a proportional reaction.
In terms of the missile crisis, John and Robert Kennedy did provide generally adroit leadership – but not, however, as flawless as that portrayed in Thirteen Days.
Soviet missiles out of Cuba and United States nuclear missiles out of Italy and Turkey.
In 1963, a year after the crisis, the U.S., Great Britain, and the Soviet Union signed the treaty. … n September of 1962 the United States would discover that the Soviets were building nuclear missile sites in Cuba, apparently to protest Castro from another American invasion.
When the United States discovered Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba, President John F Kennedy demanded their removal and announced a naval blockade of the island; the Soviet leader Khrushchev acceded to the United States demands a week later.
