If you’re interested in nuclear things you no doubt already know this, given that every organization with a plausible connection to it seems to have done something to commemorate it.
It’s kind of amazing, but even after all this time, there are new things to learn — and things we still don’t know.
United States photo analysts first spotted these tactical nuclear-capable missiles on October 25, but only in 1992 did United States policymakers learn that nuclear warheads for the Lunas were already in Cuba in October 1962.
Yesterday I was fortunate enough to be in the audience at a talk by Stan Norris and David Rosenberg at the Wilson Center.
Stan is, you will recall, the author of the great biography of General Groves, and a frequent contributor to the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists’ “Nuclear Notebook” series where he and Hans Kristensen give us the definitive estimates for how many nuclear weapons there are in the world at any given time.
David, for his part, talked about the nuclear war planning that was going on at the time.
I mean, everybody knows that nuclear war in 1962 would have been, to put it mildly, bad.
But thinking through how bad in very concrete terms makes it even more disturbing — it takes it from the realm of “generic existential threat” to images of destroyed American cities.
Both were excellent and said far more than I can summarize justly in such a short space, and the audience questions were great.
The audience had a good dollop of DC nukerati in it — among those who asked questions were Bill Burr of the National Security Archive; Svetlana Savranskaya, who just wrote a book about the Soviet side of the Crisis; Irving Lerch of the American Physical Society, who had been involved with some of the on-the-ground planning for invading Cuba back in the day; Chris Pocock, an historian of the U-2 spy plane; and Thomas Cochran of the Natural Resources Defense Council.
At the time of the Crisis, the United States could out-nuke the Soviets by a fairly considerable margin.
Depending on how you hash out megatonnage vs. delivery vs. success likelihood and whatnot, the United States arguably had an advantage of 17-to-1 over the Soviets, though by my reckoning it was probably more like a 10-to-1 advantage in terms of strategic weapons.
In one small but important example of this disparity, in 1962 the Soviet Union had only 42 long-range ICBMs ready to launch.
Plus the United States also had several thousands of other nukes stashed around the globe ready to go, as well.
But the Soviets still could have easily killed tens of millions in the United States and in Europe if it had come to it.
ICBMs is still a pretty big number — especially when 6 of them are wearing 3 megaton warheads, and the other 36 are ranging from 3 to 6 megatons.
Even if the Soviets were being very conservative about those and launching three per target, that’s still 14 American cities you can scratch off the list, ignoring the fallout.
In the face of this fact, our 1o-to-1 “superiority” looks pretty pointless.
This is discussed a bit in Errol Morris’ Fog of War and I’ve always been a little surprised this hasn’t been more talked about.
Well, according to Stan, the total number of Soviet nuclear warheads on Cuba was… wait for it… 158.
But six to eight SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles were also there, and also at “operational” status.
Those SS-4s could have reached as far north as Washington, D.C., with explosive yields of a little over a megaton each.
And that’s just the “regional” problem — there’s still those other ICBMs that Soviets had.
Moscow vigorously asserted its authority in terms of actual nuclear use in the region, but if it had come down to it, there would have been little they could have done to stop a local commander from using one.
What’s shocking about this is that apparently the Americans had no clue.
They knew there might be some tactical nukes in Cuba, but chose to ignore the fact.
Khrushchev was too afraid of nuclear war, and the Cuba missile base was really only a fraction of what it was meant to be at that point.
The period of danger stretched out well into November 1962, and those MRBMs weren’t removed until December 1962.
Furthermore, Kennedy and Khrushchev both realized that they only had limited control when it came to preventing all-out nuclear war.
The military engines were spinning up, and getting them back to a not-hair-trigger state was a non-trivial thing.
Wiping out a SAC base within minutes of the start of hostilities might have been more important than hitting a population center, especially with the limited capabilities of the time.
October 25, 2012 at 10:24 am It’s a great question — the fact that we really don’t know is one of the things that came up a few times at the talk.
In the United States case, for example, the main nuclear strategy was based around pre-emption — taking out their nukes first.
It could be dialed up to “destroy their urban/industrial areas” but that was the last of many possibilities.
Exactly what they would have aimed at, and how close they were to doing any of those things is still unclear.
My recollection is that David said that Soviet nuclear doctrine at the time favored first a pre-emptive strike against the United States — a big salvo — then a strike against Europe and an invasion of Europe.
But that doesn’t really tell us too much about where those SS-4s would have been targeted, other than the obvious, like Washington.
I suppose the Russian government hasn’t released any of those old Soviet records so as not to give anything away about their possible current nuclear doctrine.
October 25, 2012 at 10:29 am Nice…I’ll cross reference this in my first blog post which mentions the crisis.
My understanding is that it’s not so much that they were “too old” but that they were planning to be phased out anyway.
So in a way, indeed, the United States got a really great deal out of it — no missiles in Cuba, in exchange for removing missiles they were already going to remove.
October 30, 2012 at 11:44 am On the Jupiters, they were seen as obsolete and dangerous and there was a lot of talk about removing them, but JFK had not yet approved any plans,mainly for alliance reasons,g. the governments of Turkey and Italy had to be persuaded to accept removal.
Phil Nash’s book “the Other Missiles of October” is a terrific book on the Jupiter problem.
Of course, once Kennedy had authorized the secret deal involving the Jupiters persuasion became a secondary concern.
November 2, 2012 at 8:39 am Crisis was still on-going through early December 1962.
December 28, 2012 at 11:44 am a discussion of Norris and Kristensen’s accounting of those nukes in Cuba and elsewhere, see my post here.
Alex Wellerstein is a historian of science and nuclear weapons and a professor at the Stevens Institute of Technology.
Email Address Subscribe TwitterMy Tweets All text copyright 2011-2022 by Alex Wellerstein, unless otherwise specified.
