The United States Manhatten Project, initiated during WWII, led to the creation of the first atomic bombs which were used to bomb the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 1945.
Stalin was determined to follow suit and make the USSR a nuclear power.
In August 1949, the USSR tested an atomic device, ending the United States nuclear monopoly. 1 of 16 Development of Nuclear Weapons Hydrogen Bombs Following the Soviet test, Truman comissioned the development of the hydrogen bomb.
This second generation of nuclear weapons were based on nuclear fission and therefore known as thermo-nuclear devices.
The US' Mike Tests in 1952 resulted in a megaton explosion 1000x the explosion at Hiroshima, producing a mushroom cloud which rose 41000m in 3 minutes.
Again, the USSR was determined to keep up with United States technology and produced its own H-Bomb within the year.
The test of Sakharov's Third Idea in 1955 demonstrated that the USSR had developed a bomb as powerful as the United States H-Bombs 2 of 16 Development of Nuclear Weapons 1950 to 1960 Thoughout the 1950s, both Superpowers regarded the development of firepower as vital to their security.
The number of United States warheads increased from 1000 to 18000 The first battlefield tactical nuclea weapons were stationed in West Germany in 1953 Eisenhower developed the strategy of massive retaliation.
He believed that a huge nuclear arsenal capable of annihilating the USSR would deter a nuclear attack.
In 1961, in an aggressive speech designed to pressure JFK, Khrushchev announced the successful testing of a 50-megaton bomb.
However, it was not a practical military option as it could not be loaded onto any ICBM and could only be used by aircraft in test conditions. 3 of 16 Development of Nuclear Weapons Impact Nuclear weapons became central to the development of the military strategy of both superpowers.
The Arms Race increased tension between the Superpowers as they competed for a decisive lead.
A balance of terror existed between the Superpowers, detering direct military conflict which could potentially escalate into nuclear war.
With the exception of West Berlin, which was Western territory situated within Stalin's sphere of influence, the threat of war forced the Superpowers to respect each other's sphere of influence.
The vast cost of developing weapons and the delivery systems put huge strain on the economies of the Superpowers.
Neither the United States nor the USSR was able to develop enough delivery systems powerful enough to attack each other directly.
Consequently, prior to 1960, nuclear tensions focused on Central Europe, the only area in range of both Superpowers. 4 of 16 Delivery Systems Developments During the 1950s, both Superpowers had created ever more powerful warheads.
However, neither side had a convicing delivery system capable of targetting the other side directly.
Short-range nuclear missiles stationed outside the territory of the Superpowers.
Ballistic missiles fired from submarines. 5 of 16 Delivery Systems The Soviets In 1956, the USSR deployed the TU20 Bear, a long-range bomber which could reach United States territory from Soviet airbases.
However, the bombers were slow and could be intercepted by United States fighter planes.
The problems inherent in bomber technology led to the development of ICBMs, the first Soviet ICBM test occured in 1957.
Later in the year, the launch of Sputnik demonstrated to the world that Soviet missiles were powerful enough to reach space.
This caused shock and panic in the United States as it showed that the USSR had the potential to target the United States directly.
However, ICBMs were expensive to produce and thus Khrushchev attempted to find cheaper alternatives. 6 of 16 Delivery Systems The US US ICBM technology lagged behind that of the USSR in the mid-1950s and therefore te United States focused on deploying IRBMs.
IRBMs had a smaller range than ICBMs but could target Soviet territory as they were stationed in Europe and the Middle East.
However, by the early 1960s, the United States had developed ICBMs that were superior to the Soviet equilalents and therefore had a decisive lead in the Arms Race.
The Cuban Revolution of 1959 gave Khrushchev the opportunity to achieve nuclear parity.
Stationing missiles on Cuba, less than 160km from the US, would allow the USSR to target the United States without having to use expensive long-range ICBMs.
Therefore, Khrushchev planned to send 40 tactical nuclear missiles and 50000 Soviet soldiers to Cuba.
The United States had attempted to overthrow Castro twice via a CIA-backed invasion of the Bay of Pigs and through Operation Mongoose.
Khrushchev believed that sending nuclear weapons to Cuba would deter United States interference.
Kennedy responded to the Soviet build-up with a TV address in which he referd to 'unmistakable evidence of nuclear strike capacity' on Cuba.
He made it clear that a full retaliatory response would follow if the Soviets didn't abandon their military presence.
Rather than ordering immediate military action, Kennedy decided to establish a naval blockade.
Aware that Soviet ships were en route to Cuba, he stated that any ships crossing the line would have to submit to United States inspection.
Khrushchev was relieved that Kennedy did not announce immediate military action.
The first potential flashpoint occured on 24 October, Soviet ships reached the United States quarantine line.
Stevenson appealed to the 'courtroom of world opinion', producing a photograph of developing Soviet sites.
On Friday 26th October, the White House recieved a long and rambling telegram from Khrushchev which proposed a way out of the crisis that would involve a United States guarantee not to invade Cuba.
Before the United States could decided on a response, a second message was broadcast on Radio Moscow with a very different tone.
The talks led to a compromise, Soviet military withdrawal from Cuba in return for United States withdrawal from Turkey.
The United States also agreed to respect Cuban independence and the Soviets agreed there would be no public announcement about United States withdrawal from Turkey.
During the Crisis, both leaders had been seeking to avoid war without losing face, Khrushchev's actions had not been designed to cause war.
He had assumed that the United States would only discover Soviet missiles on Cuba once they were fully operational.
His actions were designed to contain the situation without provoking a military response from Khrushchev.
Kennedy knew that Khrushchev would only back down if he could do so with dignity.
In this sense, Kennedy was attempting to reduce Khrushchev's humiliation and minimise tension between the Superpowers. 11 of 16 Consequence of Crisis Test Ban Treaty The Nuclear Test Ban Treaty was designed as a first step towards controlling nuclear arsenals.
The Treaty banned the testing of nuclear weapons as a first step towards arms control.
Stockpiling of warheads and future production was allowed and it was made clear that none of the agreements should prevent states taking action in defence of their own security.
Nonetheless, both sides committed themselves to continued negotiations with a view to nuclear disarmament. 12 of 16 Consequence of Crisis Hot Line Both sides agreed to the establishment of a hot line between the United States President and the Soviet Leader.
This was intended to improve communication and create an effective means for resolving problems. 13 of 16 Consequence of Crisis USSR Military Policy The Crisis contributed to a change in Soviet military policy.
Soviet leaders believed that Khrushchev's diplomacy had resulted in a humiliating climb-down.
Specifically, they believed that Khrushchev's policies in Cuba had led to a confrontation that the USSR could not win; United States nuclear superiority meant that the Soviet Union had to accept United States terms.
These years of maximum nuclear daner were caused by the relative weakness of the Soviet nuclear arsenal.
US generals advised aggressive policies as they assumed that in the event of war the United States would be victorious.
Khrushchev adopted aggressive policies in order to cover up the Soviet nuclear inferiority.
In this sense, Khrushchev's strident policies were a bluff, designed to make Western leades believe that the Soviet Union was in a stronger position than it really was.
Consquently, the achievement of nuclear parity in the mid-1960s removed the causes of instability.
Equally, nuclear parity led to the prospect of a war in which both superpowers were utterly annihilated.
Thus, the achivevement of nuclear parity ended the era of nuclear crisis and in the period of 1964 to 1979 there were no further nuclear crisis. 15 of 16 Consequence of Crisis The Two Leaders The Crisis also changed the fortunes of the two leaders.
Kennedy was praised for securing peaceful resolution of the crisis without backing down.
By contrast, leading figures in the Soviet government criticised Khrushchev for leading the Soviet Union into an unwinnable confrontation and therefore, damaging its prestige and credibility.
Superpower Relations 1944-90 discussion thread » Edexcel GCSE History A, International Relations » Anyone have a list of History edexcel medicine/germany/cold war/elizabethan questions » AQA GCSE History Statistics and Dates for Cold war, Germany and Empire » A2 History 3rd June 2013 » Similar History resources: Arms Rce 1945-63 0.
