This includes the causes, The development of the cold war and the cuban missile crisis.
I have only used the information to put into note form so its easier to read, but the information is from bbcbitesize.
Wanted to wreck Germany, take huge reparations for the damage done during the war, and set up a buffer of friendly states around Russia to prevent another invasion in the future. 1 of 20 Causes:Soviet takeover CountryDateMethod Albania 1945 The Communists immediately took power.
Bulgaria 1945 In the 1945 elections, a Communist-led coalition was elected, but the Communists executed the non-Communists.
In 1949, they set up a Communist-controlled state called the German Democratic Republic.
Romania 1947 In the 1945 elections, a Communist-led coalition was elected to power.
The Communists gradually took over and in 1947 they abolished the monarchy.
Poland 1947 Stalin had promised to set up a joint Communist/non-Communist government at Yalta, but then he invited 16 non-Communist leaders to Moscow and arrested them.
Thousands of non-Communists were arrested, and the Communists won the 1947 election.
Hungary 1947 The non-communists won the 1945 elections with Zoltan Tildy as president.
However, the Communists' leader, Rakosi, took control of the secret police , and executed and arrested his opponents.
Tildy was forced to resign and Cardinal Mindzenty, head of the Catholic Church, was imprisoned.
Germany was not yet defeated, so, although there were tensions about Poland, the big three Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill managed to agree to split Germany into four zones of occupation, and to allow free elections in Eastern European countries.
Russia was invited to join the United Nations, and Russia promised to join the war against Japan when Germany was defeated.
Germany had been defeated, Roosevelt had died and Churchill had lost the 1945 election so there were open disagreements.
Truman came away angry about the size of reparations and the fact that a communist government was being set up in Poland.
Truman did not tell Stalin that he had the atomic bomb. 3 of 20 Causes:Yalta and Potsdam Conferences Yalta Potsdam Churchill, Roosevelt and Stalin Attlee, Truman and Stalin Germany to be split into four zones.
It was agreed that Russia could take whatever it wanted from the Soviet zone, and 10 per cent of the industrial equipment of the western zones, but Britain and the United States thought this was too much.
A government of 'national unity' to be set up in Poland, comprising both communists and non-communists.
Truman was angry because Stalin had arrested the non-communist leaders of Poland.
This part of the agreement was called the Declaration of Liberated Europe.
America and Britain were alarmed because communists were coming to power in the countries of Eastern Europe.
Truman dropped the atomic bomb so that Japan would surrender before Russian troops could go into Japan.
America had the bomb in July 1945, but Truman did not tell Stalin about it.
Truman Doctrine and Marshall plan By 1947, Greece was one of the few countries in Eastern Europe that hadn't turned communist.
The Communist rebels in Greece were prevented from taking over by the British Army.
America was becoming increasingly alarmed by the growth of Soviet power.
So, when the British told Truman they could no longer afford to keep their soldiers in Greece, Truman stepped in to take over.
In March 1947, he told the American Congress it was America's job to stop communism growing any stronger.
It is often said that Truman advocated containment , but Truman did not use this word and many Americans spoke of ""rolling back"" communism.
In June 1947, General George Marshall made a visit to Europe to see what was needed.
He came away thinking Europe was so poor that the whole of Europe was about to turn Communist.
Marshall and Truman asked Congress for $17 billion to fund the European Recovery Programme nicknamed the Marshall Plan to get the economy of Europe going again.
Congress at first hesitated, but agreed in March 1948 when Czechoslovakia turned Communist.
The Revisionists · In 1959 the historian William Appleman Williams was the first to suggest that America was to blame.
Revisionists said that Truman's use of the atomic bomb without telling Stalin was the start of the Cold War.
The Post-Revisionists · John Lewis Gaddis first published this idea in 1972.
The post-revisionists argued that neither Russia or America was to blame, but that the Cold War was the result of misunderstandings on both sides, and the failure to appreciate each other's fears.
Berlin Crisis In 1945, the Allies decided to split Germany into four zones of occupation.
The USSR took huge reparations from its zone in eastern Germany, but Britain, France and America tried to improve conditions in their zones.
In June 1948, Britain, France and America united their zones into a new country, West Germany.
On 23 June 1948, they introduced a new currency, which they said would help trade.
The next day, Stalin cut off all rail and road links to west Berlin the Berlin Blockade.
The west saw this as an attempt to starve Berlin into surrender, so they decided to supply west Berlin by air.
During this time, 275,000 planes transported 1. million tons of supplies and a plane landed every three minutes at Berlin's Templehof airport.
January 1948 Russia starts to stop western literature being sold in the Soviet zone.
April 1948 Russia imposes a partial blockade of west Berlin Allied transport into the city has to apply for a permit and is inspected.
June 1948 America, Britain and France announce they wanted to create a new country of West Germany.
Koren war In 1945, Korea was split along the 38th parallel between a communist north led by Kim IL Sung, and a non-communist south led by Syngman Rhee.
The United States developed the 'domino theory' the idea that, if one country fell to communism, others would follow like a row of dominoes.
Korean war In 1950, after getting the support of Russia and China, Kim IL Sung invaded South Korea.
The USA went to the United Nations and got them to send troops to defend South Korea.
The Russians couldn't veto the idea because they were boycotting the UN at the time.
In September, UN troops, led by the United States General MacArthur, landed in Korea and drove the NKPA back.
In November 1950, Chinese People's Volunteers attacked and drove the Americans back.
The Americans landed more troops and drove the Chinese back to the 38th parallel, where Truman ordered General MacArthur to stop and sacked him when he disagreed.
Why would pe Khrushchev's statement that he wanted to ""de-Stalinise"" Eastern Europe led to anti-Soviet rebellions in 1956 in Poland and Hungary, and Khrushchev sent in Russian troops to re-establish Soviet control.
Russia and America competed in every way possible eg in sport, and in the space race.
Russia launched the first satellite Sputnik in 1957, and sent the first man into orbit Yuri Gagarin in 1961.
Alan Shepard became the first American to fly in space in 1961, and President Kennedy promised to put a man on the moon by 1969.
This was not just a propaganda war, it was a clash of ideologies as both sides tried to prove that their way was best.
Senator McCarthy led a series of public trials of suspected Communists the so-called witch-hunts.
U2 and Paris conference By the end of the 1950s, there was massive tension in the Cold War: The arms race both sides accepted the need for some kind of Nuclear Test Ban treaty.
Berlin the Russians were furious that many East Germans were fleeing to the west through West Berlin.
Cuba the Americans were worried because Fidel Castro, a Communist, had seized power there in 1959.
On 1st May 1960 thirteen days before the summit an American U2 spy plane was shot down over Russia and the pilot, Gary Powers, was captured.
At first, the Americans tried to say that it was a weather plane, but they were forced to admit that it was a spy plane when the Russians revealed that much of his plane had survived, and that they had captured Gary Powers alive.
When the summit met on 14 May, the first thing Khrushchev did was to demand that the United States president, Eisenhower, apologise.
During October 1956, students, workers and soldiers in Hungary attacked the AVH and Russian soldiers, and smashed a statue of Stalin.
On 24 October 1956 Imre Nagy a moderate and a westerniser took over as prime minister.
Khrushchev agreed and on 28 October 1956, the Russian army pulled out of Budapest.
The new Hungarian government introduced democracy, freedom of speech, and freedom of religion.
Then, on 3 November 1956, Nagy announced that Hungary was going to leave the Warsaw Pact.
He claimed he had received a letter from Hungarian Communist leaders asking for his help.
Hungarian people even children fought the Russian troops with machine guns.
Berlin wall By the 1960s Berlin was still divided the USSR controlled the East and the USA guaranteed freedom in the West.
The nature of the war Historians have looked at the Cold War in many different ways over the years.
Over the following years, it became a symbol of division the division of Germany, the division of Europe, the division of communist East and democratic West.
In September 1961, Castro asked for and Russia publicly promised weapons to defend Cuba against America.
These sites brought every town in the United States within range of Soviet nuclear missiles.
Events DayEvents Monday 22 October Kennedy announces a naval blockade of Cuba.
B52 nuclear bombers are deployed, so that one-eighth of them are airborne all the time.
Saturday 27 October However, at 11am Khrushchev sends a second letter, demanding that Kennedy also dismantles American missile bases in Turkey.
The Origins of The Cold War 1945-55 5. / 5 based on 1 rating Teacher recommended Evil empire key words 5. / 5 based on 1 rating Who was to blame for the Cold War? Different Viewpoints Mindmap 0.
Get Revising is one of the trading names of The Student Room Group Ltd.
