This crisis is widely believed to be the closest the world has come to nuclear war.
By 1962, the United States of America and the Soviet Union were deep into the Cold War.
This was not a traditional type of war, instead, the conflict played out in other countries.
The goal in this war was to spread one's ideology while preventing the spread of the enemy's ideology.
The United States was attempting to prevent the spread of Communist ideology by fighting or funding wars that Communist forces were fighting in.
While both countries had Intercontinental missiles, medium-range missiles were more common so being close to the target was imperative to national interest Another major aspect of the Cold War was the desire to have nuclear weapons ready for use at any given moment.
The United States had nuclear weapons placed in Turkey and had Intercontinental missiles that could be launched from the United States.
In contrast, the Soviet Union did not have any nuclear weapons placed close to the United States and the country only had a few missiles capable of launching from the Soviet Union and striking inside the United States While tensions were already high between the two countries, the leader of the Soviet Union, Nikita Khrushchev, decided to move nuclear missiles into Cuba.
From the Russian perspective, this act was simply matching the United States presence in Turkey.
However, the major difference between the United States nuclear weapons in Turkey and the placement of nuclear weapons in Cuba is that Khrushchev decided to keep the missiles a secret.
Nikita Khrushchev was the first leader of the Soviet Union after Stalin Regardless of when Khrushchev planned to tell the United States, an American high-altitude spy plane captured images of nuclear installations in Cuba during mid-October which instantly began the crisis.
The United States was surprised by this action and because the act was secret, American officials worried about Khrushchev's motives.
Between October 15th and October 28th of 1962, the United States government, led by President John F Kennedy, worked to identify the most appropriate response to this Soviet act.
It was clear that the United States and the Soviet Union were the two most powerful countries, and this led each to produce as many nuclear weapons as they could.
The United States had over 18,000 of these weapons by 1960 and the Soviet Union had about 2,000.
While the United States may have had significantly more, each country had enough to destroy the world singlehandedly.
For this reason, each country practiced the policy of M.A.D. as a deterrence strategy.
Mutually Assured Destruction refers to how either country would launch their entire nuclear arsenal if even a single nuclear bomb was launched by the enemy.
The United States was spreading principles of Capitalism and Democracy around the world, while the Soviet Union was spreading Communism.
In 1959, the revolutionary Fidel Castro managed to overthrow the Cuban government and established a Communist government just 90 miles from Florida.
The United States had held influence over the island for 50 years and American businesses were heavily invested by the time this overthrow occurred.
Castro nationalized industries, took control of the factories and pushed the Americans off the island.
Castro overthrew a government that was heavily aligned with United States interests During the Cold War, the United States did not want a Communist government so close and once John F Kennedy became president, he created a plan to invade Cuba.
The C.I.A. recruited and trained Cuban refugees who fled during Castro's takeover; these would be the people invading.
This was called the Bay of Pigs invasion because the Cuban fighters were going to land in this southern bay and move north towards Havana.
However, the United States military support was so disorganized during the invasion that the attempt to overthrow Castro was a complete failure and weakened America's perception abroad.
I am a student I am a teacher Try Study.com, risk-free As a member, you'll also get unlimited access to over 84,000 lessons in math, English, science, history, and more.
Plus, get practice tests, quizzes, and personalized coaching to help you succeed.
Try it risk-free It only takes a few minutes to setup and you can cancel any time.
Log in here for access Back Resources created by teachers for teachers Over 30,000 video lessons & teaching resources&dash;all in one place.
Video lessons Quizzes & Worksheets Classroom Integration Lesson Plans I would definitely recommend Study.com to my colleagues.
If the United States was not seen as the more powerful and stable of the two superpowers, countries were not going to remain under the American sphere of influence.
Because of this, when John F Kennedy was notified about nuclear weapons in Cuba on October 15th, 1962, he had to act.
Kennedy did not want to humiliate himself again after the Bay of Pigs Invasion After consulting with his advisors, Kennedy decided to quarantine Cuba.
This meant that the United States would place ships outside Cuban waters and prevent more shipments of nuclear weapons from arriving in Cuba.
At the same time, Kennedy contacted Khrushchev and tried to figure out how this conflict could come to a peaceful end.
Kennedy lost the Bay of Pigs invasion and permitting nuclear bombs in Cuba would surely eliminate his chance of re-election.
Khrushchev had to make sure the Soviet Union was not humiliated in this crisis because members of the Communist party would likely remove him from office if he withdrew the missiles.
A week after Khrushchev saw the images, Kennedy's quarantine began to encounter Soviet Ships.
Over a dozen Soviet ships began to approach the quarantine line and construction on Cuba showed no signs of slowing down.
However, on October 25, 1962, Soviet ships turned around and headed back towards Russia.
By the next day, it was clear no more nuclear weapons would be delivered to Cuba.
This solved much of the crisis for Kennedy, however, weapons remained in Cuba.
The two leaders began to write letters to each other frequently as tension increased Ultimately, Khrushchev agreed to take the last few missiles out of Cuba, and in exchange, he was privately assured that the missiles in Turkey would be removed in the succeeding months.
However, this agreement only would be honored if Khrushchev kept it secret.
To the outside world, the Soviet Union was completely humiliated because not only did they have to stops shipments of weapons, but they had to pull the nuclear missiles out because the United States forced them to.
The only public concession the Soviet Union received was a United States declaration that it would never again invade Cuba.
A U-2 spy plane takes photos of nuclear missile installations in Cuba October 15: President Kennedy is notified October 16: Kennedy and his cabinet decide to proceed with a naval quarantine October 22: The President gives an address to the American people explaining what was found in Cuba and further United States plans.
Khrushchev asserts the missiles are defensive, comparing them to missiles in Turkey October 25: A soviet ship passes the quarantine line but is allowed since it has no nuclear weapons October 26: Fidel Castro urges Khrushchev to launch a nuclear attack on the United States October 27: An American U-2 spy plane is shot down over Cuba October 28: Khrushchev agrees to remove the missiles November 21: All Soviet military forces had left Cuba and the crisis was officially over Over this fast-paced crisis, both leaders had to confront the possibility of nuclear war.
They saw themselves slowly losing control of the situation and attempted to find a peaceful compromise before other diplomats or leaders seized control of the situation.
Nikita Khrushchev knowingly compromised his position by accepting the deal with Kennedy and was eventually removed from power in 1964.
The United States removed the nuclear missiles in Turkey during April of 1963.
Castro viewed Khrushchev's actions as a betrayal and relations did not recover for years.
Khrushchev sought a non-aggression pact with the United States after seeing how close the world came to nuclear war.
American officials saw how effective the United States military could be when preventing the spread of Soviet power.
The United States had tried to invade Cuba a year earlier and President Kennedy would have been humiliated again if the missiles were not removed.
Nikita Khrushchev created this crisis by secretly sending nuclear weapons to Cuba, however, from his perspective, these missiles were matching the capability of the missiles in Turkey.
Because the United States discovered this from a U-2 spy plane as opposed to being publicly notified, American officials felt threatened by this act.
As a response, Kennedy ordered a naval quarantine to prevent Soviet ships from delivering more nuclear warheads.
After a week of mounting tension, Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles and the only public concession he received was a United States declaration promising never to invade Cuba.
During the 13 days of the crisis, Kennedy and Khrushchev both attempted to further their nation's interest.
However, each leader understood that the safety of the world comes before ambitions.
This encouraged Khrushchev and Kennedy to negotiate when others were calling for war.
It did not end until October 28, 1962, when Nikita Khrushchev agreed to pull the missiles out and stop all further shipments.
Nikita Khrushchev took this a step too far when he secretly placed nuclear weapons in Cuba.
This likely would not have been a crisis if the United States had been notified.
This almost led to war and did not end until the Soviet Union removed all nuclear weapons from Cuba.
I am a student I am a teacher Unlock Your Education See for yourself why 30 million people use Study.com Become a Study.com member and start learning now.
Log In Back Resources created by teachers for teachers Over 30,000 video lessons & teaching resources&dash;all in one place.
Help and Review Enrolling in a course lets you earn progress by passing quizzes and exams.
Download the app Plans Student Solutions Teacher Solutions Study.com for Schools Working Scholars® Solutions Tutoring plan About Us Blog Careers Teach For Us Press Center Ambassador Scholarships Support FAQ Site Feedback Expert Help Download the app Working Scholars® Bringing Tuition-Free College to the Community © copyright 2003-2022 Study.com.
All other trademarks and copyrights are the property of their respective owners.
