Gregory we are celebrating Mission days, a new way of organizing our out-of-class days.
For character, the first of these, we have a broad-based learning program, including a storytelling session in which we are sharing those inspirational tales oft-told in our families about ancestors or relatives who inspire us in the realm of character.
I was delighted to be invited, and delighted to share this story of my grandfather, Ambassador Edwin M “Ed” Martin. — Students, let me open by saying how happy I am that you are here to learn more about character by participating in storytelling and story-listening.
It has been said that the two most powerful words in the English language are “for example;” in other words, the two most important words in effective communication are “for example,” because there is no better way to understand something being explained– to better retain it, internalize it, apply it– than to hear about the action in practice, particularly when that action is performed by characters we care about.
The characters we care about the most are often, of course, our own family members, which is why family stories can be so powerful.
Many of us revere our grandfathers and grandmothers; many of us think of them as our heroes.
For instance, I remember vividly being 6 years old, when my next door neighbor friend told me full of sincerity and certainty that his grandfather killed Hitler.
I believed it at first, but then over time I slowly realized he was exaggerating, but it speaks to how much he viewed his grandfather as a hero in his life.
I’m going to tell you now about the time when my grandfather saved the world—or at least saved the United States & Russia from a major nuclear war— and I will understand that you may be skeptical about this claim, as I should have been skeptical about my friend’s claim about his grandfather.
As you will see, my grandfather saved our nation, and Russia, from a devastating nuclear war.
Nearly all historians of the era agree that this was the moment in the decades from 1945 to the present when nuclear war between the United States and the USSR came closest to occurring, and many Americans living in that time thought it was the most frightening moment they have lived through.
In the background of the crisis was very high tension between the two superpowers.
The crisis began when spy planes flew over Cuba, taking photos of things happening there, and you need to remember that Cuba under Fidel Castro had just recently become an ally of the Soviet Union.
Back to the lab they took the photos, and examined them with magnifying glasses, finding, shockingly, in early October that the Soviets were installing nuclear launch pads in Cuba.
You have to understand how close Cuba is the US, and the threat posed by a surprise missile launch from this proximity.
One among them was the Assistant Secretary of State for Latin America, Edwin Martin.
Together they met in what was called the Executive Committee, or Excom, for the famous 13 days of the crisis, huddling and managing it together very closely.
I am going to argue to you today that the crisis had two critical junctures, two key forks in the road, two moments when especially major decisions had to be made and where a different decision could or would have led to a very different outcome.
The first key moment occurred right away, in the very first days of the crisis.
At the start, a highly influential and assertive group of the ExCom members argued for a prompt airstrike against the installations; it seemed that this was the majority viewpoint and had all the momentum behind it.
After several days of discussion, remarkably, the quarantine option rose from a distant second to the chosen path, and an immediate airstrike was ruled out.
We should recognize that the historical records emphasizes that Bobby Kennedy, the President’s brother, Attorney General, and a key player in the ExCom, prevailed in this, pushing hard for the blockade/quarantine alternative, but it was important that he had had, from the beginning, my grandfather’s support in these intense meetings, and to overcome the opposition of the initial pro-airstrike majority, every bit of support for quarantine made a big difference.
Thus we can say that because the quarantine alternative prevailed, we avoided what very probably would have been nuclear war.
A few things about my grandfather’s character, and remember this story is intended for Character Day, are illuminated here.
First, he knew to take time in his decision-making, to not immediately follow his gut, to seriously, thoughtfully, and thoroughly consider the implications and possibly unexpected outcomes of his choices.
When the pressure was on, in those first hours after discovery of the launch pads, many or most urged we strike right away, but he instead pushed to slow down the decision-making and make a better decision.
Students, I know when I have a tough decision to make, Second, he had the independence of thought and courage of his convictions to go against the majority opinion and hold his own, ultimately to prevail for his point of view.
It was no easy thing to oppose the majority, and many are cowed into changing their opinion to suit the majority or into keeping silent.
Third, one of his main reasons for opposing the airstrike was his deep concern about how such an action would be viewed among American allies in Latin America, the Presidents of Mexico, Argentine, Brazil, etc.
As Assistant Secretary of State for Latin America, these were his constituents, in a sense; they were whom he was responsible for maintaining good relations, and he took the time to empathize with their point of view, to see it from their perspective, to feel what they would feel, and he knew they would be deeply offended by an American attack, and he brought this perspective to the ExCom.
It was in part by his having this empathy, and making this argument, that he was able to help the group toward an alternative choice– for quarantine, not airstrike.
Students, try yourself to take the perspective of others, to walk in their shoes or see through their eyes, before making decisions or taking actions.
Onto the second critical juncture, which occurred toward the end of the 13 day crisis.
The blockade, or quarantine, was working to stop Soviet ships, but not to remove the nuclear launchpads.
It had been a terrifying moment, as they had had no idea at first what would happen when the first Russian ship approached the first United States Navy ship and was told to turn back, but turn back it did.
But ships did not return all the way back to Russia, just back out to the Atlantic.
The nuclear launchpads were still being built in Cuba, and the threat still rising.
The Soviets at first issued strong denunciations; the American public was increasingly frightened and obsessed with the crisis, and the anxiety was unbearable.
Then, in the midst of this terrible tensio, a letter came to the White House from the Soviet leader, Khrushchev.
Many in the Kennedy administration took the second letter as a heightening of tensions, and some very influential figures at first saw it as all the more reason to prepare for war.
The Excom met again, trying to figure out how to resolve the confusion and crisis of the two contrary letters, and what to do next which would not mean a complete defeat for the United States nor would lead to nuclear war.
Instead of obsessing over the the challenge, demands, threats, and crisis created by the second letter, as everyone else was doing, my grandfather Ed Martin’s suggestion was to ignore the second letter, and respond to the first letter publicly, sharing it with the world and saying to Khrushchev yes, let’s do it, let’s make peace on your proposed terms.
But gradually, my grandfather’s crazy idea gained ground, , and, after a few more hours of highly stressful discussion, it was the option President Kennedy took.
But he had the kind of mind that could see an option others couldn’t easily recognize.
Second, he displayed a temperament and a judiciousness to decide not only what must be addressed and responded to, but also what could be set aside.
We say sometimes that discretion is the better part of a valor; we should remember that critical thinking and evaluation is often about determining what information should be dismissed, ignored, or dropped so we can keep our focus on the important things.
The second letter was a great, terrible, threat and challenge, and most of the ExCom were so upset or offended by the threat that they saw only red, only danger, only competition.
Khrushchev did want peace, he did want a settlement, and let’s grab the good and work on the positive opportunity, not obsess over the bad news.
Students, sometimes when you hear or see a friend, peer, or classmate say or something really nice or great, and then do or say something really mean or nasty, you have a choice too.
You understand better now, students, I hope, why I believe my grandfather saved the world.
If your grandfather is still alive, please give him a hug and a handshake for me.
I watched a documentary about the Cuban missile crisis, and was always amazed by how clear-headed your grandfather appeared to be, and how willing he seemed to be to stand against the militaristic tide.
September 16, 2011 at 6:12 pm Truly inspiring, Jonathan, in numerous ways.
I loved learning that Adm Edwin Martin was your beloved grandfather, loved your testimonial to your students, and loved how you used an exercise like this to teach so much.
September 17, 2011 at 9:22 am What an interesting and pointed story that does, in fact, show true strength of character and what it can mean.
While I agree that the immediate result of the approach in the specific example was successful in the short term, I think the long term effects have been disastrous.
It is an easy, but illogical assumption that a surprise, surgical attack of the nuclear sites would not have totally neutralized them.
We discovered only the building of launch pads through sophisticated aerial photo reconnaissance technology which would, logically, have shown in place armed sites.
We have only the “word” of the Russians that the sites were active…and we all know how truthful they were then …and knowing the Russian philosophy of warfare, I doubt that they would have given any commander on the ground authority to initiate a nuclear strike that in turn, would have destroyed not only the US, but also annihilated Cuba and turned the USSR into glass.
The quarantine did give the USSR time to equip and activate those sites and therein was the true nuclear danger.
The after effects left Castro and the Russians free, for decades, to spread Communism throughout Latin and Central America, and we now see the results of that in our disastrous relations with the presidents of Mexico, Venezuela, Columbia, Nicaragua, etc…and Cuba still remains a fully Communist country ruled by non-benevolent dictators 50 years later.
I am in no way demeaning the character of standing against the tide…but as one who has served in combat, rarely does the slow decision making process save lives or accomplish goal…look, for example, at the WWI Armistice, Neville Chamberlain’s negotiations and concessions to Hitler, the 60 year ongoing “cease-fire” in Korea and the disastrous results of trusting Ho Chi Minh at the Paris Peace Accords which we let the N Vietnamese openly violate without repercussion.
Having had both a Top Secret and NATO COSMIC security clearance, including cryptographic, let me say that there was a much wider agreement with Khrushchev than indicated…he accomplished what he wanted.
September 23, 2011 at 3:02 pm What a fascinating post and response from Ken.
I was in my final year of high school and can clearly remember walking through an almost empty high school wondering if the world was going to end in the next day or two.
It is fascinating to learn about the interesting role he played in the Crisis.
September 16, 2011 at 3:02 pm Category : Uncategorized Do More : You can leave a response, or trackback from your own site.
