The Sixties: A Decade of Protest & Change “My fellow Americans, ask not what your country can do for you, ask what you can do for your country.” -President John F Kennedy Chapter Objective, Essential Questions, & TEKS • Objective: ▫ Explain the significance of the turning points in the 1960s, such as the assassinations of John F Kennedy and Martin Luther King, Jr., the Vietnam War, the United States responses to Soviet aggression, the Civil Rights Movement, and the Space Race.
Kirby • Great Society • White Regester • Barry Goldwater • Vietnam War • Anti-War Movement • Domino Theory • Feminist Movement • Gulf of Tonkin Resolution • Betty Friedan • Vietnamization • Title IX • Roy Benavidez • Black Power Movement • Tet Offensive • Black Panthers • Credibility Gap • Chicano Movement • Silent Majority • Hector Garcia • Fall of Saigon • Cesar Chavez • Beat Generation • Dolores Huerta Important Ideas • John F Kennedy brought a new spirit of youthful vigor to the White House.
He supported civil rights, the space program, and freedom around the world.
Cuban exiles with United States support landed at the Bay of Pigs but were defeated.
United States spy planes saw the missile silos and Kennedy ordered a blockade around Cuba.
Under a compromise. the United States would not invade Cuba and the missiles were withdrawn.
In 1963, Kennedy reassured West Berliners when he told them ""lch bin ein Berline1:"" • Kennedy was assassinated in 1963.
Lyndon B Johnson, the new President, steered civil rights legislation and his Great Society programs through Congress.
His program gave aid to cities. fought poverty, and established Medicare.
Barry Goldwater, who revived conservatism, lost to Johnson in the election of 1964.
Betty Friedan focused on the plight of middle-class suburban housewives.
During the Women's Liberation Movement. women sought greater socioeconomic opp0rtunities.
Affirmative action programs and Title IX led to gender equality in education.
The Equal Pay Act required equal pay for men and women doing the same job.
The Black Power Movement believed African Americans should rely more on themselves.
Malcolm X believed that violence might be necessary to achieve equal rights.
The Black Panthers demanded equal opportunities and reparations for past oppression.
African-American frustration led to rioting in cities after the assassination of Dr.
Organizers like Cesar Chavez and Dolores Huerta fought for the rights of migrant farm workers, most of whom were Mexican Americans.
The right to vote to all citizens over 18 years old was given by the Twenty-sixth Amendment.
North Vietnam came under Communist control, while South Vietnam had the support of the West.
When South Vietnamese leaders decided to oppose elections to re-unify the country, the Vietcong launched a guerilla war to win control of the country.
He bombed the North and began a policy of Vietnamization to give the South Vietnamese a larger stake in the war.
The United States signed an agreement with North Vietnam, withdrawing its forces from Vietnam.
Fighting continued until the fall of Saigon in 1975, when Vietnam was re-united under Communist rule.
The Beat poets and writers, like Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac, were forerunners of this new counter-culture.
Advances in civil rights spread from African Americans to other minority groups and women.
President Johnson dreamt of ending poverty in America. but his hopes were derailed when the United States became involved in the Vietnam War.
By the late 1960~. a new generation of young Americans began to question the confom1ity of the 1950s.
John F Kennedy narrowly defeated Richard Nixon and became the youngest man ever elected to the Presidency.
Kennedy’s Domestic Policy • Kennedy's New Frontier symbolized the vigor of youth.
The President and his wife, Jackie, brought an elegant style to the White House.
Kennedy sought to use the powers of the federal government to solve the nation's problems.
He proposed a tax cut to stimulate the economy, the creation of Medicare, civil rights legislation, and increased aid to education.
Kennedy did create the Peace Corps, a program in which American volunteers went to developing countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America to share their skills.
Few Americans at that time realized that they were just setting off on a road of exploration and discovery that would greatly improve their lives on Earth.
Later Presidents continued the space program, and by 1969, the United States became the first country to land two men, Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin, on the surface of the moon.
For example, as a result of space exploration we now have satellites with improved television and radio signals.
These satellites help us communicate faster, predict the weather and forecast impending tsunamis, cyclones, hurricanes and tornadoes.
One of the greatest challenges Kennedy faced was in Cuba, only 90 miles from Florida.
In 1959, while Eisenhower was President, Fidel Castro led an uprising to overthrow the brutal Cuban dictator General Batista.
At first, Americans looked at Castro's revolution as an attempt to introduce democracy into Cuba.
However, shortly after taking power, Castro made new agreements with the Soviet Union.
President Eisenhower reduced the amount of sugar Cuba could sell to the United States, and Castro nationalized American businesses in Cuba.
Then he announced his plans to make Cuba a pro-Soviet Communist nation.
This included secretly training a group of Cuban exiles in the United States and Guatemala to invade the island.
When Kennedy became President, he let the plan continue, but he refused to provide air power, which would openly tie the invasion to the United States.
The exiles landed in Cuba three months after Kennedy took office, but were quickly defeated by the Cuban military.
Only a few weeks after that, Soviet officials actually began construction of the Berlin Wall, cutting off access to the West for East Berliners.
Castro and Khrushchev became aware that the United States had been behind the invasion, and took steps to protect Cuba.
In 1962, United States spy planes flying over Cuba discovered that Cuba was secretly preparing silos for missiles with nuclear warheads.
At this time, Soviet missiles still could not reach the United States easily from Europe or Asia.
He encouraged them to consider every option to find a way out of the crisis.
In good decisionmaking, one examines all of the alternatives and weighs the pros and cons (advantages and disadvantages) of each option.
After a week of intense debate, Kennedy decided to announce a naval blockade around Cuba to prevent the arrival of any additional Soviet weapons.
Kennedy also threatened to invade Cuba if the offensive missiles were not withdrawn.
Kennedy put United States armed forces at their highest state of alert, while Soviet commanders in Cuba prepared to defend the island.
After several days of extreme tension, Khrushchev agreed to withdraw the missiles for a pledge that the United States would not invade Cuba.
After the Cuban crisis, United States and Soviet leaders set up a special ""hot line"" telephone.
They also agreed to a treaty banning further nuclear testing except for underground.
He told its citizens ""Ich bin ein Berliner"" , reassuring West Germans of the U.S. commitment to their safety and freedom.
The Johnson Presidency • The nation was shocked when Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on November 22, 1963.
The post-war McCarren-Walter Act had kept immigration quotas at 1920 levels, favoring Western Europe.
Each country was given an identical quota for its number of legal immigrants.
Preference was given to those with relatives already in the United States or with valuable skills.
The act also restricted immigration from Latin America for the first time.
The Great Society • Soon after becoming President, Johnson proposed the most far-ranging program of social legislation since the New Deal.
Johnson proposed federal legislation designed to transform American society.
Johnson's goal was to turn the nation into a Great Society by opening up opportunities and improving the quality of life for all Americans.
His Great Society programs included equality of opportunity, enrichment of urban life, restoration of natural beauty, expansion of education, ending poverty, health care for the elderly, and greater racial equality.
Goldwater helped revive conservatism at a time when it seemed out of fashion.
He called for a tough stance in dealing with the Soviets, opposing arms-control talks.
He also attacked Johnson's Great Society programs for extending the reach of the government too far into our lives.
His slogan ""that extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice,"" actually hurt Goldwater in the election.
Many Americans feared that Goldwater was an ""extremist"" who might lead the nation into a nuclear war against the Soviet Union.
The cost of the Vietnam War eventually forced Johnson to withdraw much of the funding from these domestic programs.
Because of the growing divisions in the nation over this war, Johnson did not seek another term as President in 1968.
The Women’s Liberation Movement • One of the most important events of the 1960s was the Women's Liberation Movement.
In the 1950s and early 1960s, most American women had occupied traditional roles as wives and mothers.
Working class women worked outside the home, but middle class women were often restricted to the household.
Married women who did not conform to the ideal housewife were even regarded as outcasts.
Although they could now vote, women still had not achieved full equality either at work or in the home The Women’s Liberation Movement • Unlike the earlier Suffrage Movement, which focused on securing the vote, the Women's Liberation Movement was directed at achieving greater economic and social equality.
It challenged the belief that educated suburban housewives were happy doing nothing more than keeping their homes clean and preparing dinner for their families.
Friedan wrote that women were as capable as men and should be permitted to compete for the same jobs.
In 1966, Friedan helped form the National Organization of Women , which became the chief voice of the Women's Movement.
Achievements of the Women’s Liberation Movement • Feminist goals were far-reaching.
In fact, they had to hire more women faculty quickly because most professors were males.
Greater gender equality was also achieved in admissions to military academies, law schools, and medical schools.
In 1963, Congress passed the Equal Pay Act, requiring companies to pay women the same wages as men for the same work.
They opposed sexist language , the use of women as sex objects in advertising, or the idea that men cannot do housework.
Women's leaders opposed sexual discrimination in textbooks that ignored women's contributions.
They lobbied for more funds to research women's diseases, like breast cancer.
Feminists believed that a woman should have the right to decide for herself whether to end her pregnancy.
In Roe Wade, the United States Supreme Court held that a woman had a constitutional right to privacy.
This gave her the right to end her pregnancy in the first three months if she chose to do so.
The decision overturned all those state laws prohibiting an abortion in the first three months.
Title IX promoted gender equity by guaranteeing girls in school the same opportunities as boys.
By linking enforcement of the act to federal funding, lawmakers created a powerful financial incentive for schools to provide gender equality to keep from losing federal aid.
For example, before Title IX, only one in 27 girls played varsity high school sports.
Title IX helped women to pursue higher degrees, compete in sports, and enter jobs and educational fields that had previously been dominated by men.
Before Title IX, the number of women attending colleges was significantly lower than men.
Expanding Struggle for Equal Rights • The 1960s and early 1970s were a watershed in American history.
Many groups women, African Americans, Mexican Americans, Native American, and the young became more vocal in their demands for a more equal and diverse American society.
The Civil Rights Movement had ended public segregation and discrimination in voting.
But it did not end private bias or provide equal opportunities for members of those groups that had suffered from previous oppression.
King's methods of non-violence were not powerful enough to overcome such obstacles.
They had their own newspaper and claimed the right to carry weapons to protect black neighborhoods from the police.
Their ten-point program demanded greater opp011unities and benefits for African Americans, including full-employment, decent housing, education, and the freedom to determine their destiny.
Black Power • The new militants believed in Black Power that African Americans should use their votes to win concessions from government and that they should control their own communities and patronize their own businesses to free themselves from the economic, cultural, and political domination of whites.
The Ghettos Erupt, 1968 • In the North, African Americans often faced segregation based on residential living patterns rather than on state laws.
Homeowners in middle class white communities often refused to sell their homes to African Americans.
Many African Americans were confined to ethnic communities, known as ghettos, in decaying inner cities.
Landlords often failed to maintain their buildings and city officials cut back on inspections.
African American frustration erupted in a series of riots that shook Northern cities three summers in a row.
Martin Luther King was assassinated by a white supremacist in Memphis, Tennessee.
King's assassination led to an outpouring of anger among young African Americans, as well as a period of national mourning.
King's death sparked race riots across the nation that cost dozens of lives, destroyed property, and led to hundreds of millions of dollars in damage.
The riots showed that there was still work to be done to eliminate racism and introduce equality of opportunity in America.
The Chicano Movement • Like African Americans, Mexican Americans, also known as Chicanos, had often faced discrimination, racism and exploitation in the United States.
Garda noticed that Mexican Americans in his Texas community were barred from restaurants, swimming pools and hospitals.
They also faced restrictions in voting, office holding, and employment.
Garcia arranged for a highly publicized burial at Arlington National Cemetery for the soldier.
Garcia became the first Mexican American to serve on the United States Commission on Civil Rights.
The Chicano Movement • Another leader of the Chicano Movement was Cesar Chavez, an organizer of farm workers in California.
Migrant farm workers normally perform seasonal farm work, such as planting or harvesting grapes and strawberries.
Chavez emphasized reliance on nonviolent means – using strikes, pilgrimages, and fasts to achieve his goal.
Chavez organized nation-wide consumer boycotts of farm products, asking Americans to support migrant farm workers by refusing to buy certain crops such as grapes.
He also took part in hunger strikes, refusing to eat until violence against strikers ended and state legislators passed laws to improve the lives of farm workers.
In the 1960s, she met Chavez and helped him to form the National Farm Workers Association, which later became the United Farm Workers.
She spent her life using strikes, marches, boycotts, and hunger strikes in her campaign for legislation to extend aid to the families of farm workers.
In the 1980s, Huerta expanded her efforts to include women's rights, environmental protection, and immigration policy.
In 2012, Huerta was awarded the Medal of Freedom, the nation's highest civilian honor, by President Obama.
The Chicano Mural Movement • Mexican Americans also expressed themselves through a greater appreciation of their culture.
Copying great Mexican muralists of the 1930s like Diego Rivera, Mexican-American artists began painting murals in barrios throughout the Southwest in the 1960s.
Wall murals provided a visual presence to people who often lacked representation in public life, with few voices on city councils or school boards.
In El Paso alone, more than a hundred Chicano wall murals were completed.
American Indian Movement • American Indians also grew restless in the 1960s.
Back in 1953, the federal government had transferred its responsibility for those American Indians still living on reservations to state governments.
Lacking sufficient funds, many states were unable to provide the same level of services previously provided by the federal government.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibited discrimination against Native Americans.
In 1970, President Nixon announced the federal government would honor its treaty obligations.
Nevertheless, many American Indians still felt they were being mistreated.
Under the slogan ""Red Power,"" they formed the American Indian Movement to mobilize public opinion in their favor.
They introduced the term ""Native American“ and protested against textbooks, television shows and movies that showed anti-American Indian bias.
They dramatized the plight of American Indians by temporarily occupying government monuments on Alcatraz Island and at Wounded Knee, South Dakota.
Mendez Westminster School District • In 1945, some places in California sent Mexican-American children to separate public schools.
Several Mexican-American parents challenged this practice in U.S. district court.
The district court ruled that this practice violated the Fourteenth Amendment, which guarantees citizens the right to the ""equal protection'' of the laws.
Westminster School District appealed to the United States Court of Appeals.
The latter concluded that the case did not involve a constitutional question.
The court held that separation within a race was not permitted if not required by a specific state law.
Delgado and others sued Bastrop ISD, claiming that the separation of Mexican-American children from other children of the same race without a specific state law was a violation.
The United States District Court agreed, and ordered the school district to stop the segregation of Mexican-American children.
No Mexican American had served on a jury in the county where Hernandez was tried for more than 25 years.
Hernandez appealed to the United States Supreme Court, claiming his right to ""equal protection of the law'' under the Fourteenth Amendment had been violated.
Texas argued that Mexican Americans were white and not entitled to any special protection.
Supreme Court ruled that Mexican Americans, formed a separate class that was entitled to protection.
The way the new plan worked out, Mexican Americans and African Americans in these two districts would have no real chance of being elected.
The United States Supreme Court upheld a district court ruling that the legislature had to make these into smaller, one-member districts, giving MexicanAmerican barrios the chance to elect their own candidates.
Civil rights activists then filed lawsuits in various state courts, based on the provisions of state constitutions.
A Mexican-American legal group filed a suit against Kirby, the Texas Education Commissioner, on behalf of Edgewood ISD, a poor district with a large Mexican-American population.
The school district claimed that the state method for funding public schools resulted in major differences between the funds available for students in rich and poor districts.
This violated the Texas Constitution, which promised a ""fair and efficient"" public school system.
The Beatles, a rock band from England, introduced new fashions and long hair for males, which became symbols of the new culture.
They adopted new fashions that set them apart from more traditional styles.
Some ""hippies“ even left mainstream society altogether and went to live on self-sufficient communes.
During the Vietnam War, 18-year olds were considered old enough to be drafted into military service to fight and die for their country. but were told they were not old enough to vote.
The Vietnam War, 1954 – 1973 • The ""decade of change"" saw Americans deeply divided over the Vietnam War.
In 1954, Vietnamese nationalists, led by Ho Chi Minh, defeated their French rulers.
At the Geneva Conference that followed, Laos and Cambodia were made into independent states.
Ho Chi Minh and the Vietnamese Communists controlled the north, while a pro-Western state was established in the south.
After 1954, Ho Chi Minh introduced land reform, ""reeducation,"" and other policies in the North similar to those of Mao in China.
South Vietnam refused to hold elections for the re-unification of Vietnam, since they feared elections in the North would not be free.
Soon afterwards, South Vietnamese Communists with North Vietnamese support began a guerrilla war against the government of South Vietnam.
They assassinated South Vietnamese officials and seized control of South Vietnamese villages.
War Under President Kennedy • President Eisenhower had suggested that the fall of French Indochina might create a ""domino"" effect.
According to this Domino Theory, if South Vietnam fell to Communism, neighboring Southeast Asian countries would also fall to Communism like a row of dominos.
After taking Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos, Communists would threaten Thailand to the west and the Strait of Malacca to the south.
Responding to requests from the South Vietnamese government for help, Kennedy sent aid and United States military advisers to assist South Vietnam in fighting the Vietcong.
Kennedy also felt that a successful democracy in South Vietnam might serve as a model for other developing countries in Asia, Africa and Latin America.
War Under President Johnson • Under President Johnson, the United States became even more deeply involved in Vietnam.
Congress voted to give Johnson full military powers to stop North Vietnam's aggression.
Years later, it was revealed that the United States ships had actually been in North Vietnamese waters in cooperation with South Vietnamese warships that were bombing North Vietnam.
By 1968, half a million United States soldiers were stationed in South Vietnam.
New weapons like napalm, a sticky gasoline-based jelly that bums, inflicted great damage on the Vietnamese, while herbicides like Agent Orange destroyed the jungle cover used by the Vietcong to hide.
The Tet Offensive • In 1968, the Vietcong launched a massive offensive throughout South Vietnam, seizing many major cities, including the capital city of Saigon.
Once in control, the Vietcong committed brutal acts of terror against South Vietnamese officials.
Although American forces finally drove the Vietcong from these strongholds, the offensive marked a turning point in the war.
In addition, it disproved the rhetoric of the American government that the Vietcong were weak, under-supplied, disorganized, and low in morale.
Benavidez was critically wounded, but he refused to stop gathering survivors, saving the lives of eight men.
At first, he was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for his heroism.
When the full story of his daring became known, Benavidez was awarded the Congressional Medal of Honor by President Ronald Reagan in 1981.
They felt they were fighting for their independence and were willing to suffer large losses to re-unify their country.
On the other hand, the disruptions of the war weakened the government of South Vietnam.
Successive South Vietnamese governments failed to gain popular support.
American forces were unable to tell who was friendly and who was the enemy.
The jungles of Vietnam provided an ideal cover for guerilla warfare and secret enemy movements.
Vietnam's location made it easy for Communists to send a steady flow of supplies through neighboring countries.
The Anti-War Movement • The media had a great influence in shaping public opinion.
It was the first time American audiences could watch the destructiveness of the war on their television sets while sitting at home.
President Johnson told Americans they were winning the war, but journalists reported otherwise.
Mass anti-war movements occurred throughout the country from 1965 onwards.
Young people burned their draft cards, marched on the Pentagon, held rallies, and staged demonstrations.
American ""doves“ wanted the United States to withdraw, since they saw the contest as a civil war between the North and South Vietnamese.
They believed American leaders were acting immorally by bombing civilians and burning villages.
The ""hawks"" supported the war, which they saw as an attempt to defend free Vietnamese from Communist repression.
War Under President Nixon • Division among Democrats over the war, the assassination of Robert F Kennedy (younger brother of President Kennedy), and violence at the Democratic National Convention in Chicago in 1968 led to the election of Republican Richard Nixon as President.
During the campaign, Nixon, a staunch anti-Communist, promised Americans ""peace with honor"" in Vietnam.
The War Under President Nixon • The anti-war movement increased in intensity during the Nixon Presidency.
Anti-war protesters were shocked by his escalation of the war with the bombing of Cambodia.
In 1969, national guardsmen shot at and killed four student demonstrators at Kent State, Ohio.
College campuses across the nation closed down due to student demonstrations and sit-ins.
Students engaged in mass marches in Washington, D.C. and other major cities.
Sometimes exchanges between anti-war protesters and supporters became violent.
The government had tried to stop the publication of these documents, but lost its case in the United States Supreme Court.
These documents showed that several Presidents before Nixon had lied to the American people about Vietnam; although these Presidents felt they could not win in Vietnam, none of them wanted the disgrace of defeat associated with their Presidency.
The Fall of Saigon • After President Nixon introduced Vietnamization, American forces were gradually reduced.
In 1973, U.S. negotiators in Paris, led by Henry Kissinger, worked out a cease-fire agreement with the North Vietnamese.
Nixon agreed to pull out all remaining United States troops from Vietnam, and North Vietnam agreed to release American prisoners of war.
The fall of Saigon (today called Ho Chi Minh City) marked the end of the Vietnam War.
South Vietnamese government officials, military officers, and soldiers who had supported the American presence in Vietnam were sent to Communist ''re-education camps,"" where they faced torture, disease and malnutrition.
Over a million Vietnamese were killed, while many more were left homeless.
The war demonstrated that government actions can be greatly affected by public opinion.
Next to the Civil War, the Vietnam War was the most divisive war in United States history.
As a result, Americans became more aware of the limits of United States power and cautious about where they should act abroad.
In 1973, Congress attempted to re-claim its constitutional powers by passing over Nixon's veto, the War Powers Resolution.
This set limits on Presidential power in a conflict without a formal declaration of war by Congress.
The act requires the President to inform Congress within 48 hours of sending troops to fight overseas.
If within 60 days the Congress does not approve of the use of these overseas forces, the President must withdraw them.
Post-War Literature, Art, & Music • American literature has been marked by movements of varying styles and directions.
Some of the best writing just after World War II dealt with the war experience itself, including such works as Norman Mailer's The Naked and the Dead , describing the capture of an island from the Japanese, and James Jones' From Here to Eternity , showing army life in Hawaii up to the Pearl Harbor attack.
They showed a care-free, often reckless and fresh approach to literature.
Post-War Literature, Art, & Music • Two of the founders of the movement, Allen Ginsberg and Jack Kerouac, began giving public readings of their works in the mid-1950s.
They became even more well-known after Ginsberg's best known poem, Howl , was seized for obscenity.
The Beats opposed the conventions of the 1950s and saw the solution to the lifeless materialism of the fifties in the heightened sense of freedom and spirituality in their own works.
Kerouac's novel, On the Road, tells the story of the narrator's adventures crossing the country in a car several times with a character named Dean Moriarty.
From the name ""beat,"" a newspaper columnist coined the term ""beatnik,"" which became associated with artistic lifestyles in the 1950s, in which young men wore beards, berets, and sandals, while young women dressed in leotards.
The beatniks represented an early form of what would later become known as the counter-culture.
Post-War Literature, Art, & Music • By the 1960s, the counter-culture was in full swing.
Two late World War II novels, Joseph Heller's Catch 22 and Kurt Vonnegut's Slaughterhouse-Five , challenged mainstream thinking by exposing the absurdity of armed conflict.
In a much later work, American Pastoral , Roth dealt with coming to terms with the middle class radicalism of the 1960s.
During World War II, Big Band music had been popular, but in the 1950s, African-American gospel music, jazz, blues, and country music were brought together and adopted by artists like Chuck Berry, Little Richard and Elvis Presley to create rock and roll music.
Rock and roll music depended on the invention of the electric guitar, amplifier and microphone, as well as the use of smaller records and radio stations to play them to audiences across the country.
Post-War Literature, Art, & Music • In the early 1960s, the Motown Sound from Detroit, with African-American artists like the Temptations, the Four Tops, and the Supremes, swept the nation.
Artist and song writer Bob Dylan brought the influence of folk music to rock and roll.
In 1964, the Beatles launched the ""British invasion,"" followed by such groups as the Rolling Stones and the Who.
By the late 1960s, artists like Jimi Hendrix, Country Joe and the Fish, and Crosby, Stills, Nash and Young became icons of the counter-culture and the anti-war movement.
Many of their songs protested the war in Vietnam or celebrated the psychedelic experience.
Andy Warhol was one of the creators of a new kind of art -Pop Art, or popular art.
Warhol used symbols from our mass-produced, massmarketed consumer culture, like a Campbell's soup can or a portrait of Marilyn Monroe, which he repeated multiple times.
Warhol was also post-modem in producing his own music groups and films.
Jasper Johns and Roy Lichtenstein were two other prominent pop artists.
