David Courtney Michael Kerry Chris Max Douglas RoryParent Joseph P Kennedy Sr.
He served as his brother's closest advisor until the latter's 1963 assassination.His tenure is known for advocating for the civil rights movement, the fight against organized crime and the Mafia, and involvement in United States foreign policy related to Cuba.
As attorney general, he authorized the Federal Bureau of Investigation to wiretap Martin Luther King Jr. and the Southern Christian Leadership Conference on a limited basis.
After his brother's assassination, he remained in office during the Presidency of Lyndon B Johnson for several months.
He was an advocate for issues related to human rights and social justice by traveling abroad to eastern Europe, Latin America, and South Africa, and formed working relationships with Martin Luther King Jr., Cesar Chavez, and Walter Reuther.
In 1968, Kennedy became a leading candidate for the Democratic nomination for the presidency by appealing to poor, African American, Hispanic, Catholic, and young voters.
Shortly after winning the California primary around midnight on June 5, 1968, Kennedy was mortally wounded when shot with a pistol by Sirhan Sirhan, a 24-year-old Palestinian, allegedly in retaliation for his support of Israel following the 1967 Six-Day War.
Sirhan was arrested, tried, and convicted, though Kennedy's assassination, like his brother's, continues to be the subject of widespread analysis and numerous conspiracy theories.
Relationship with parents 2 Naval service 3 Further study, journalism, and marriage 4 Senate committee counsel and political campaigns 4.
Assassination of John F Kennedy 6 Vice presidential candidate 7 United States Senate 7. 1964 election 7.
Bibliography 17 External links Early life and education Robert Francis Kennedy was born outside Boston in Brookline, Massachusetts, on November 20, 1925.
After he stepped down as ambassador to the United Kingdom in 1940, Joe Sr. focused his attention on his oldest son, Joseph Jr., expecting that he would enter politics and be elected president.
He also urged the younger children to examine and discuss current events in order to propel them to public service.
After Joseph Jr. was killed during World War II, the senior Kennedy's hopes fell on his second son, John, to become president.
Joseph Sr. had the money and connections to play a central role in the family's political ambitions.
The Kennedy family in Hyannis Port, Massachusetts, with Robert on the bottom left in a jacket, 1931 Kennedy's older brother John was often bedridden by illness and, as a result, became a voracious reader.
Although he made little effort to get to know his younger brother during his childhood, John took him on walks and regaled him with the stories of heroes and adventures he had read.
One of their favorite authors was John Buchan, who wrote The Thirty-Nine Steps, which influenced both Robert and John.
John sometimes called Robert ""Black Robert"" due to his prudishness and disposition.Unlike his older brothers, Kennedy took to heart their mother Rose's agenda for everything to have ""a purpose,"" which included visiting historic sites during family outings, visits to the church during morning walks, and games used to expand vocabulary and math skills.
Kennedy later said that during childhood he was ""going to different schools, always having to make new friends, and that I was very awkward ... nd I was pretty quiet most of the time.
A teacher at Bronxville public school reflected that he was ""a regular boy"", adding, ""It seemed hard for him to finish his work sometimes.
He developed an interest in American history, decorating his bedroom with pictures of United States presidents and filling his bookshelves with volumes on the American Civil War.
He became an avid stamp collector and once received a handwritten letter from Franklin Roosevelt, also a philatelist.In March 1938, Kennedy sailed to London with his mother and four youngest siblings to join his father, who had begun serving as Ambassador to the United Kingdom.
In April 1939, he gave his first public speech at the placing of a cornerstone for a youth club in England.
According to embassy and newspaper reports, his statements were penciled in his own hand and delivered in a ""calm and confident"" manner.
Bobby returned to the United States just before the outbreak of World War II in Europe.
Paul's and Portsmouth Priory In September 1939, Kennedy began eighth grade at St.
Paul's School, an elite Protestant private preparatory school for boys in Concord, New Hampshire, that his father favored.
Rose Kennedy was unhappy with the school's use of the Protestant Bible.
After two months, she took advantage of her ambassador husband's absence from Boston and withdrew Kennedy from St.
She enrolled him in Portsmouth Priory School, a Benedictine Catholic boarding school for boys in Portsmouth, Rhode Island, which held daily morning and evening prayers and Mass three times a week, with a High Mass on Sundays.
Kennedy attended Portsmouth for eighth through tenth grade.At Portsmouth Priory School, Kennedy was known as ""Mrs.
Kennedy's little boy Bobby"" after he introduced his mother to classmates, who made fun of them.
He was defensive of his mother, and on one occasion chased a student out of the dormitory after the boy had commented on her appearance.
In letters to her son, Rose urged him to read more and to strengthen his vocabulary.
Rose also expressed disappointment and wrote that she did not expect him to let her down.
Monks at Portsmouth Priory School regarded him as a moody and indifferent student.
Milton Academy In September 1942, Kennedy transferred to his third boarding school, Milton Academy, in Milton, Massachusetts, for 11th and 12th grades.
His father wanted him to transfer to Milton, believing it would better prepare him for Harvard.
Hackett started accompanying him, and was impressed when Kennedy took it upon himself to fill in for a missing altar boy one Sunday.
Hackett admired Kennedy's determination to bypass his shortcomings, and remembered him redoubling his efforts whenever something did not come easy to him, which included athletics, studies, success with girls, and popularity.
Hackett remembered the two of them as ""misfits"", a commonality that drew him to Kennedy, along with an unwillingness to conform to how others acted even if doing so meant not being accepted.
Kennedy's grades improved.One of his first relationships was with a girl named Piedy Bailey.
The pair was photographed together when he walked her home after chapel on a Sunday night.
Soon after he transferred to Milton, he pressed his father to allow him to enlist, as he wanted to catch up to his brothers who were both serving in the military.
Kennedy had arrived at Milton unfamiliar with his peers and made little attempt to know the names of his classmates; he called most of the other boys ""fella"" instead.
Most of the school's students had come in eighth or ninth grade and cliques had already been formed.
Despite this, his schoolmates would later say the school had no prejudice.
He had an early sense of virtue; he disliked dirty jokes and bullying, once stepping in when an upperclassman tried bothering a younger student.
Relationship with parents In Kennedy's younger years, his father dubbed him the ""runt"" of the family and wrote him off.
Billings commented that the only similarity between Robert and Joe Sr. was their eye color.
As Kennedy grew, his father worried that he was soft on others, conflicting with his ideology.
In response, Kennedy developed a tough persona that masked his gentle personality, attempting to appease his father.
Biographer Judie Mills wrote that Joe Sr.'s lack of interest in Robert was evident by the length of time it took for him to decide to transfer him to Milton Academy.
Both Joe Jr. and John attended the exclusive Protestant prep school Choate from their first year, while Robert was already a junior by the time he was enrolled at Milton.
Despite his father's disdain, Kennedy continued to seek his approval, requesting that Joe Sr. write him a letter about his opinions on different political events and World War II.As a child, Kennedy also strove to meet his mother's expectations to become the most dutiful, religious, affectionate, and obedient of the Kennedy children, but the father and son grew distant.
She influenced him heavily and, like her, he became a devout Catholic, throughout his lifetime practicing his religion more seriously than the other boys in the family.
He impressed his parents as a child by taking on a newspaper route, seeking their approval and wishing to distinguish himself.
However, he had the family chauffeur driving him in a Rolls-Royce so that he could make his deliveries.
His mother discovered this and the deliveries ceased.Joe Sr. was satisfied with Kennedy as an adult, believing him to have become ""hard as nails"", more like him than any of the other children, while his mother believed he exemplified all she had wanted in a child.
Mills wrote, ""His parents' conflicting views would be echoed in the opinions of millions of people throughout Bobby's life.
Robert Kennedy was a ruthless opportunist who would stop at nothing to attain his ambitions.
Naval service Kennedy during his time at Bates College, in front of a snow replica of a Navy boat.
Six weeks before his 18th birthday in 1943, Kennedy enlisted in the United States Naval Reserve as a seaman apprentice.
He was released from active duty in March 1944, when he left Milton Academy early to report to the V-12 Navy College Training Program at Harvard College in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
He returned to Harvard once again in June 1945 completing his post-training requirements in January 1946.
At Bates he received a specialized V-12-degree along with 15 others, and during its Winter Carnival built a snow replica of a Navy boat.
While in Maine, he wrote a letter to David Hackett in which he expressed feelings of inadequacy and frustration at being isolated from the action.
In addition to Hackett, who was serving as a paratrooper, more of his Parker Hall dorm mates went overseas and left him behind.
He was also frustrated with the apparent desire to shirk military responsibility by some of the other V-12 students.Kennedy's brother Joseph P Kennedy Jr. died in August 1944, when his bomber exploded during a volunteer mission known as Operation Aphrodite.
Robert was most affected by his father's reaction to his eldest son's passing.
He appeared completely heartbroken and his peer Fred Garfield commented that Kennedy developed depression and questioned his faith for a short time.
After his brother's death, Robert gained more attention, moving higher up the family patriarchy.
On December 15, 1945, the United States Navy commissioned the destroyer USS Joseph P Kennedy Jr., and shortly thereafter granted Kennedy's request to be released from naval-officer training to serve aboard Kennedy starting on February 1, 1946, as a seaman apprentice on the ship's shakedown cruise in the Caribbean.
For his service in the Navy, Kennedy was eligible for the American Campaign Medal and the World War II Victory Medal.
Further study, journalism, and marriage In September 1946, Kennedy entered Harvard as a junior, having received credit for his time in the V-12 program.
He worked hard to make the varsity football team as an end; he was a starter and scored a touchdown in the first game of his senior year before breaking his leg in practice.
He earned his varsity letter when his coach sent him in wearing a cast during the last minutes of a game against Yale.
His father spoke positively of him when he served as a blocking back and sometime receiver for the faster Dave Hackett.
Joseph Sr. attended some of Kennedy's practices and saw his son catch a touchdown pass in an early-season rout of Western Maryland.
Wally Flynn, another player, looked up in the huddle after one play to see him crying after he broke his leg.
Kennedy earned two varsity letters over the course of the 1946 and 1947 seasons.
Kennedy holding a football in Cape Cod with sisters Eunice and Jean, November 1948 Throughout 1946, Kennedy became active in his brother John's campaign for the United States Representative seat that was vacated by James Curley; he joined the campaign full-time after his naval discharge.
Biographer Schlesinger wrote that the election served as an entry into politics for both Robert and John.
Robert graduated from Harvard in 1948 with a bachelor's degree in political science.Upon graduating, he sailed immediately on the RMS Queen Mary with a college friend for a six-month tour of Europe and the Middle East, accredited as a correspondent for the Boston Post, filing six stories.
Four of these stories, submitted from Palestine shortly before the end of the British Mandate, provided a first-hand view of the tensions in the land.
Kennedy adapted to this new environment, being elected president of the Student Legal Forum, where he successfully produced outside speakers including James M Landis, William O Douglas, Arthur Krock, and Joseph McCarthy and his family members Joe Sr. and John F Kennedy.
Kennedy's paper on Yalta, written during his senior year, is deposited in the Law Library's Treasure Trove.On June 17, 1950, Kennedy married Ethel Skakel at St.
He graduated from law school in June 1951 and flew with Ethel to Greenwich to stay in his father-in-law's guest house.
The brothers rarely interacted until Kenny O'Donnell contacted Robert to repair the relationship between John and their father during John's Senate campaign.
As a result of this, Joe Sr. came to view Robert favorably as reliable and ""willing to sacrifice himself"" for the family.In September 1951, he went to San Francisco as a correspondent for the Boston Post to cover the convention that concluded the Treaty of Peace with Japan.
In October 1951, he embarked on a seven-week Asian trip with his brother John and their sister Patricia to Israel, India, Pakistan, Vietnam, and Japan.
Because of their age gap, the two brothers had previously seen little of each other—this 25,000-mile trip came at their father's behest and was the first extended time they had spent together, serving to deepen their relationship.
On this trip, the brothers met Liaquat Ali Khan just before his assassination, and India's prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru.
Senate committee counsel and political campaigns JFK Senate campaign and Joseph McCarthy In November 1951, Kennedy moved with his wife and daughter to a townhouse in the Georgetown, Washington, D.C., and started work as a lawyer in the Internal Security Section of the Criminal Division of the United States Department of Justice.
On June 6, 1952, he resigned to manage his brother John's United States Senate campaign in Massachusetts.
JFK's victory was of great importance to the Kennedys, elevating him to national prominence and turning him into a serious potential presidential candidate.
John's victory was also equally important to Robert, who felt he had succeeded in eliminating his father's negative perceptions of him.In December 1952, at his father's behest, Kennedy was appointed by family friend Republican Senator Joseph McCarthy as assistant counsel of the United States Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations.
Kennedy disapproved of McCarthy's aggressive methods of garnering intelligence on suspected communists.
The period of July 1953 to January 1954 saw him at ""a professional and personal nadir"", feeling that he was adrift while trying to prove himself to his family.Kenneth O'Donnell and Larry O'Brien urged Kennedy to consider running for Massachusetts Attorney General in 1954, but he declined.After a period as an assistant to his father on the Hoover Commission, Kennedy rejoined the Senate committee staff as chief counsel for the Democratic minority in February 1954.
When Democrats gained a Senate majority in January 1955, Kennedy became chief counsel and was a background figure in the televised Army–McCarthy hearings of 1954 into McCarthy's conduct.
The Moss incident turned Cohn into an enemy, which led to Kennedy assisting Democratic senators in ridiculing Cohn during the hearings.
The animosity grew to the point where Cohn had to be restrained after asking RFK if he wanted to fight him.
For his work on the McCarthy committee, Kennedy was included in a list of Ten Outstanding Young Men of 1954, created by the United States Junior Chamber of Commerce.
In 1955 Kennedy was admitted to practice before the United States Supreme Court.
Stevenson aide and focus on organized labor In 1956, Kennedy moved his growing family outside Washington to a house called Hickory Hill, which he purchased from his brother John.
This enormous 13-bedroom, 13-bath home was situated on 6 acres in McLean, Virginia.
Kennedy went on to work as an aide to Adlai Stevenson during the 1956 presidential election which helped him learn how national campaigns worked, in preparation for a future run by his brother, Jack.
Unimpressed with Stevenson, he reportedly voted for incumbent Dwight D Eisenhower.
Kennedy was also a delegate at the 1956 Democratic National Convention, having replaced Tip O'Neil at the request of his brother John, joining in what was ultimately an unsuccessful effort to help JFK get the vice-presidential nomination.
Shortly after this, following instructions by his father, Kennedy tried making amends with J Edgar Hoover.
There seemed to be some improvement in their interactions, which came to be seen as ""elemental political necessity"" by Kennedy.
In a famous scene, Kennedy squared off with Teamsters Union President Jimmy Hoffa during the antagonistic argument that marked Hoffa's testimony.
Kennedy, who was instructed to collect information, discovered several financial irregularities, such as that Hoffa had misappropriated $9. million in union funds and made corrupt deals with employers.
During the hearings, Kennedy received criticism from liberal critics and other commentators both for his outburst of impassioned anger and doubts about the innocence of those who invoked the Fifth Amendment.
Senators Barry Goldwater and Karl Mundt wrote to each other and complained about ""the Kennedy boys"" having hijacked the McClellan Committee by their focus on Hoffa and the Teamsters.
They believed Kennedy covered for Walter Reuther and the United Automobile Workers, a union which typically would back Democratic office seekers.
Amidst the allegations, Kennedy wrote in his journal that the two senators had ""no guts"" as they never addressed him directly, only through the press.
He left the committee in late 1959 in order to run his brother's presidential campaign.
JFK presidential campaign In 1960 Kennedy published The Enemy Within, a book which described the corrupt practices within the Teamsters and other unions that he had helped investigate.
Kennedy went to work on the presidential campaign of his brother, John.
In contrast to his role in his brother's previous campaign eight years prior, Kennedy gave stump speeches throughout the primary season, gaining confidence as time went on.
After securing the nomination, John Kennedy nonetheless decided to offer Lyndon Johnson the vice presidency.
This did not sit well with some Kennedy supporters, and Robert tried unsuccessfully to convince Johnson to turn down the offer, leading him to view Robert with contempt afterward.
RFK had already disliked Johnson prior to the presidential campaign, seeing him as a threat to his brother's ambitions.
Despite Kennedy's attempts, Johnson became his brother's running mate.Kennedy worked toward downplaying his brother's Catholic faith during the primary but took a more aggressive and supportive stance during the general election.
These concerns were mostly calmed after JFK delivered a speech in September in Houston where he said that he was in favor of the separation of church and state.
The following month, Kennedy was involved in securing the release of civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. from a jail in Atlanta.
Kennedy spoke with Georgia governor Ernest Vandiver and later Judge Oscar Mitchell, after the judge had sentenced King for violating his probation when he protested at a whites-only snack bar.
Attorney General of the United States Kennedy testifies before the Senate Committee on Government Operations' Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations about organized crime, September 1963 After winning the 1960 presidential election, President-elect John F Kennedy appointed his younger brother attorney general.
But Kennedy was hardly a novice as a lawyer, having gained significant experience conducting investigations and questioning witnesses as a Justice Department attorney and Senate committee counsel and staff director.According to Bobby Baker, the Senate majority secretary and a protégé of Lyndon Johnson, President-elect Kennedy did not want to name his brother attorney general, but their father overruled him.
At the behest of Vice President-elect Johnson, Baker persuaded the influential Southern senator Richard Russell to allow a voice vote to confirm the president's brother in January 1961, as Kennedy ""would have been lucky to get 40 votes"" on a roll-call vote.The deputy and assistant attorneys general Kennedy chose included Byron White and Nicholas Katzenbach.
Kennedy also played a major role in helping his brother form his cabinet.
John Kennedy wanted to name Senator J William Fulbright, whom he knew and liked, as his secretary of state.
Fulbright was generally regarded as the Senate's resident foreign policy expert, but he also supported segregation and white supremacy in the South.
Robert Kennedy persuaded his brother that having Fulbright as secretary of state would cost the Democrats Afro-American votes, leading to Dean Rusk being nominated instead after John Kennedy decided that his next choice, McGeorge Bundy, was too young.
Kennedy was also present at the job interview when the CEO of the Ford Motor Company, Robert McNamara, was interviewed by John Kennedy about becoming defense secretary.
McNamara's self-confidence and belief that he could ""scientifically"" solve any problem via his ""Systems Analysis"" style of management impressed the Kennedy brothers, though John was rattled for a moment when McNamara asked if his bestselling book Profiles in Courage was written by a ghost writer.
Author James W Hilty concludes that Kennedy ""played an unusual combination of roles—campaign director, attorney general, executive overseer, controller of patronage, chief adviser, and brother protector"" and that nobody before him had had such power.
His tenure as attorney general was easily the period of greatest power for the office—no previous United States attorney general had enjoyed such clear influence on all areas of policy during an administration.
To a great extent, President Kennedy sought the advice and counsel of his younger brother, with Robert being the president's closest political adviser.
He was relied upon as both the president's primary source of administrative information and as a general counsel with whom trust was implicit.
The president once remarked about his brother, ""If I want something done and done immediately I rely on the Attorney General.
Berlin As one of the president's closest White House advisers, Kennedy played a crucial role in the events surrounding the Berlin Crisis of 1961.
Kennedy's visit with his wife to West Berlin in February 1962 demonstrated United States support for the city and helped repair the strained relationship between the administration and its special envoy in Berlin, Lucius D Clay.
Organized crime and the Teamsters John F Kennedy, J Edgar Hoover, and Kennedy in 1961 As attorney general, Kennedy pursued a relentless crusade against organized crime and the Mafia, sometimes disagreeing on strategy with FBI Director J Edgar Hoover.
Kennedy worked to shift Hoover's focus away from communism, which Hoover saw as a more serious threat, to organized crime.
According to James Neff, Kennedy's success in this endeavor was due to his brother's position, giving the attorney general leverage over Hoover.
Biographer Richard Hack concluded that Hoover's dislike for Kennedy came from his being unable to control him.He was relentless in his pursuit of Teamsters Union president Jimmy Hoffa, due to Hoffa's known corruption in financial and electoral matters, both personally and organizationally, creating a so-called ""Get Hoffa"" squad of prosecutors and investigators.
The enmity between the two men was intense, with accusations of a personal vendetta—what Hoffa called a ""blood feud""—exchanged between them.
On July 7, 1961, after Hoffa was reelected to the Teamsters presidency, RFK told reporters the government's case against Hoffa had not been changed by what he called ""a small group of teamsters"" supporting him.
The following year, it was leaked that Hoffa had claimed to a Teamster local that Kennedy had been ""bodily"" removed from his office, the statement being confirmed by a Teamster press agent and Hoffa saying Kennedy had only been ejected.
On March 4, 1964, Hoffa was convicted in Chattanooga, Tennessee, of attempted bribery of a grand juror during his 1962 conspiracy trial in Nashville, Tennessee, and sentenced to eight years in prison and a $10,000 fine.
After learning of Hoffa's conviction by telephone, Kennedy issued congratulatory messages to the three prosecutors.
While on bail during his appeal, Hoffa was convicted in a second trial held in Chicago, on July 26, 1964, on one count of conspiracy and three counts of mail and wire fraud for improper use of the Teamsters' pension fund, and sentenced to five years in prison.
Hoffa spent the next three years unsuccessfully appealing his 1964 convictions, and began serving his aggregate prison sentence of 13 years on March 7, 1967, at the Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary in Pennsylvania.
In this case, in all cases, I say to you today that if the orders of the court are circumvented, the Department of Justice will act.
In February 1962 Hoover presented Kennedy with allegations that some of King's close confidants and advisers were communists.
Concerned about the allegations, the FBI deployed agents to monitor King in the following months.
In response, King agreed to ask suspected Communist Jack O'Dell to resign from the SCLC, but refused to heed to the request to ask Stanley Levison, whom he regarded as a trusted advisor, to resign.
In October 1963, Kennedy issued a written directive authorizing the FBI to wiretap King and other leaders of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, King's civil rights organization.
Although Kennedy only gave written approval for limited wiretapping of King's phones ""on a trial basis, for a month or so"", Hoover extended the clearance so that his men were ""unshackled"" to look for evidence in any areas of King's life they deemed worthy.
The wiretapping continued through June 1966 and was revealed in 1968, days before Kennedy's death.Kennedy remained committed to civil rights enforcement to such a degree that he commented in 1962 that it seemed to envelop almost every area of his public and private life, from prosecuting corrupt Southern electoral officials to answering late night calls from Coretta Scott King concerning the imprisonment of her husband for demonstrations in Alabama.
During his tenure as attorney general, he undertook the most energetic and persistent desegregation of the administration that Capitol Hill had ever experienced.
He demanded that every area of government begin recruiting realistic levels of black and other ethnic workers, going so far as to criticize Vice President Johnson for his failure to desegregate his own office staff.
Kennedy and Vice President Johnson meeting with civil rights leaders at the White House on June 22, 1963 Although it has become commonplace to assert the phrase ""The Kennedy Administration"" or even ""President Kennedy"" when discussing the legislative and executive support of the civil rights movement, between 1960 and 1963 a great many of the initiatives were the result of the passion and determination of an emboldened Robert Kennedy, who, through his rapid education in the realities of Southern racism, underwent a thorough conversion of purpose as attorney general.
The president came to share his brother's sense of urgency on the matters at hand to such an extent that it was at the attorney general's insistence that he made his famous June 1963 address to the nation on civil rights.Kennedy played a large role in the response to the Freedom Riders protests.
He acted after the Anniston bus bombings to protect the Riders in continuing their journey, sending John Seigenthaler, his administrative assistant, to Alabama to attempt to secure the Riders' safety there.
King later publicly thanked him for dispatching the forces to break up the attack that might otherwise have ended his life.
Kennedy then negotiated the safe passage of the Freedom Riders from the First Baptist Church to Jackson, Mississippi, where they were arrested.
He offered to bail the Freedom Riders out of jail, but they refused, which upset him.
Kennedy's attempts to end the Freedom Rides early were tied to an upcoming summit with Nikita Khrushchev and Charles de Gaulle.
He believed the continued international publicity of race riots would tarnish the president heading into international negotiations.
This attempt to curtail the Freedom Rides alienated many of the civil rights leaders who, at the time, perceived him as intolerant and narrow-minded.
The attorney general had hoped that legal means, along with the escort of federal officers, would be enough to force Governor Ross Barnett to allow Meredith's admission.
He also was very concerned there might be a ""mini-civil war"" between federal troops and armed protesters.
The Office of Civil Rights also hired its first African-American lawyer and began to work cautiously with leaders of the Civil Rights Movement.
Kennedy saw voting as the key to racial justice and collaborated with presidents Kennedy and Johnson to create the landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964, which helped bring an end to Jim Crow laws.
Between December 1961 and December 1963, Kennedy also expanded the United States Department of Justice Civil Rights Division by 60 percent.
Yale law professor Charles Reich wrote in The New Republic that the Justice Department had violated civil liberties by calling a federal grand jury to indict United States Steel so quickly, then disbanding it after the price increase did not occur.
Death penalty issues During the Kennedy administration, the federal government carried out its last pre-Furman federal execution , and Kennedy, as attorney general, represented the government in this case.In 1967 Kennedy expressed his strong willingness to support a bill then under consideration for the abolition of the death penalty.
Cuba As his brother's confidant, Kennedy oversaw the CIA's anti-Castro activities after the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion.
He had initially been among the more hawkish members of the administration on matters concerning Cuban insurrectionist aid.
His initial strong support for covert actions in Cuba soon changed to a position of removal from further involvement once he became aware of the CIA's tendency to draw out initiatives, and provide itself with almost unchecked authority in matters of foreign covert operations.
President Kennedy with his brother Robert, 1963 Allegations that the Kennedys knew of plans by the CIA to kill Fidel Castro, or approved of such plans, have been debated by historians over the years.
But there is ample evidence to the contrary, such as that Kennedy was informed of an earlier plot involving the CIA's use of Mafia bosses Santo Trafficante Jr. and John Roselli only during a briefing on May 7, 1962, and in fact directed the CIA to halt any existing efforts directed at Castro's assassination.
Concurrently, Kennedy served as the president's personal representative in Operation Mongoose, the post-Bay of Pigs covert operations program the president established in November 1961.
His clandestine meetings with members of the Soviet government continued to provide a key link to Khrushchev during even the darkest moments of the crisis, when the threat of nuclear strikes was considered very real.
Japan At a summit meeting with Japanese prime minister Hayato Ikeda in Washington D.C. in 1961, President Kennedy promised to make a reciprocal visit to Japan in 1962, but the decision to resume atmospheric nuclear testing forced him to postpone such a visit, and he sent Bobby in his stead.
Kennedy and his wife Ethel arrived in Tokyo in February 1962 at a very sensitive time in U.S.-Japan relations, shortly after the massive Anpo protests against the U.S.-Japan Security Treaty had highlighted anti-American grievances.
Kennedy won over a highly skeptical Japanese public and press with his cheerful, open demeanor, sincerity, and youthful energy.
When radical Marxist student activists from Zengakuren attempted to shout him down, he calmly invited one of them on stage and engaged the student in an impromptu debate.
Kennedy's calmness under fire and willingness to take the student's questions seriously won many admirers in Japan and praise from the Japanese media, both for himself and on his brother's behalf.
Assassination of John F Kennedy Robert Kennedy at the funeral of his brother, President John F Kennedy, November 25, 1963 At the time that President Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on November 22, 1963, RFK was at home with aides from the Justice Department.
Kennedy then received a call from Tazewell Shepard, a naval aide to the president, who told him that his brother was dead.
Shortly after the call from Hoover, Kennedy phoned McGeorge Bundy at the White House, instructing him to change the locks on the president's files.
He ordered the Secret Service to dismantle the Oval Office and cabinet room's secret taping systems.
He scheduled a meeting with CIA director John McCone and asked if the CIA had any involvement in his brother's death.
An hour after the president was shot, Bobby Kennedy received a phone call from Vice President Johnson before Johnson boarded Air Force One.
RFK remembered their conversation starting with Johnson demonstrating sympathy before the vice president stated his belief that he should be sworn in immediately; RFK opposed the idea since he felt ""it would be nice"" for President Kennedy's body to return to Washington with the deceased president still being the incumbent.
Eventually, the two concluded that the best course of action would be for Johnson to take the oath of office before returning to Washington.
In his 1971 book We Band of Brothers, aide Edwin O Guthman recounted Kennedy admitting to him an hour after receiving word of his brother's death that he thought he would be the one ""they would get"" as opposed to his brother.
In the days following the assassination, he wrote letters to his two eldest children, Kathleen and Joseph, saying that as the oldest Kennedy family members of their generation, they had a special responsibility to remember what their uncle had started and to love and serve their country.
When he was introduced, the crowd, including party bosses, elected officials, and delegates, applauded thunderously and tearfully for a full 22 minutes before they would let him speak.
When shall die Take him and cut him out in little stars, And he will make the face of heaven so fine That all the world will be in love with night And pay no worship to the garish sun.
The ten-month investigation by the Warren Commission of 1963–1964 concluded that the president had been assassinated by Lee Harvey Oswald and that Oswald had acted alone.
But I have been briefed on it and I am completely satisfied that the Commission investigated every lead and examined every piece of evidence.
Beran assesses the assassination as having moved Kennedy away from reliance on the political system and to become more questioning.
Vice presidential candidate Kennedy with David Dubinsky in an undated photo.
In the wake of the assassination of his brother and Lyndon Johnson's ascension to the presidency, with the office of vice president now vacant, Kennedy was viewed favorably as a potential candidate for the position in the 1964 presidential election.
Several Kennedy partisans called for him to be drafted in tribute to his brother; national polling showed that three of four Democrats were in favor of him as Johnson's running mate.
Democratic organizers supported him as a write-in candidate in the New Hampshire primary and 25,000 Democrats wrote in Kennedy's name in March 1964, only 3,700 fewer than the number of Democrats who wrote in Johnson's name as their pick for president.Kennedy discussed the vice presidency with Arthur Schlesinger.
In his first interview after the assassination Kennedy said he was not considering the vice presidency.
The two disliked one another intensely, with feelings often described as ""mutual contempt"" that went back to their first meeting in 1953, and had only intensified during JFK's presidency.
To block Kennedy, Johnson considered nominating his brother-in-law Sargent Shriver for vice president, but the Kennedy family vetoed that.
Kenny O'Donnell, a Kennedy aide who stayed on to serve Johnson, told the president that if he wanted a Catholic vice president, the only candidate available was Kennedy.
Johnson instead chose Senator Hubert Humphrey.During a post-presidency interview with historian Doris Kearns Goodwin, Johnson claimed that Kennedy ""acted like he was the custodian of the Kennedy dream"" despite Johnson being seen as this after JFK was assassinated, arguing that he had ""waited"" his turn and Kennedy should have done the same.
Johnson wanted Kennedy to tell the media that he decided to withdraw his name, but he refused, saying the president could do that himself.
Johnson wanted a way to announce that he had refused Kennedy serving as his running mate without appearing to be motivated by malice towards a man he disliked and distrusted.
The Democratic power broker Clark Clifford suggested to Johnson a way to block Kennedy.
In response to this statement, angry letters poured in directed towards both Johnson and his wife, Lady Bird, expressing disappointment at Kennedy being dropped from the field of potential running mates.
Johnson, worried that delegates at the convention would draft Kennedy onto the ticket, ordered the FBI to monitor Kennedy's contacts and actions, and to make sure that he could not speak until after Hubert Humphrey was confirmed as his running mate.
After making his announcement, Johnson at an ""off-the-record"" meeting in the Oval Office with three journalists boasted about how he had gotten ""that damned albatross off his neck"" as he proceeded to mock what he called Kennedy's ""funny"" voice and mannerisms.
Though not published in the newspapers, Kennedy quickly learned of Johnson's performance and demanded an apology, only to have the president deny the story.
In a meeting with Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Johnson talked about Kennedy.
Senator Henry Jackson advised Kennedy, ""Let them get it out of their system"" as he stood on the stage raising his hand to signal he wanted the crowd to stop cheering.
Johnson knew instantly that the reference to the ""garish sun"" was to him.
He had considered the possibility of running for the seat since early spring, but also giving consideration for governor of Massachusetts or, as he put it, ""go away"", leaving politics altogether after the plane crash and injury of his brother Ted in June, two months earlier.
Kennedy was lauded during trips to Germany and Poland, the denizens of the latter country's greetings to Kennedy being interpreted by Leaming as evaporating the agony he had sustained since his brother's passing.
Despite their notoriously difficult relationship, Johnson gave considerable support to Kennedy's campaign.
The main reason Kennedy chose not to run for the United States Senate from his native Massachusetts was that his younger brother Ted was running for reelection.
RFK charged Keating with having ""not done much of anything constructive"" despite his presence in Congress during a September 8 press conference.
Tenure Kennedy drew attention in Congress early on as the brother of President Kennedy, which set him apart from other senators.
He drew more than 50 senators as spectators when he delivered a speech in the Senate on nuclear proliferation in June 1965.
But he also saw a decline in his power, going from the president's most trusted advisor to one of a hundred senators, and his impatience with collaborative lawmaking showed.
Robert saw his brother as a guide on managing within the Senate, and the arrangement worked to deepen their relationship.
Harris noted that Kennedy was intense about matters and issues that concerned him.
President Lyndon B Johnson signs the Immigration Act of 1965 as Ted and Robert Kennedy and others look on While serving in the Senate, Kennedy advocated gun control.
In May 1965 he co-sponsored S.1592, proposed by President Johnson and sponsored by Senator Thomas J Dodd, that would put federal restrictions on mail-order gun sales.
Speaking in support of the bill, Kennedy said, ""For too long we dealt with these deadly weapons as if they were harmless toys.
Yet their very presence, the ease of their acquisition and the familiarity of their appearance have led to thousands of deaths each year.
With the passage of this bill we will begin to meet our responsibilities.
The bill forbade ""mail order sale of guns to the very young, those with criminal records and the insane,"" according to The Oregonian's report.
S.1592 and subsequent bills, and the assassinations of Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert F Kennedy, paved the way for the eventual passage of the Gun Control Act of 1968.
Kennedy and his staff had employed a cautionary ""amendments–only"" strategy for his first year in the senate.
In 1966 and 1967 they took more direct legislative action, but were met with increasing resistance from the Johnson administration.
Despite perceptions that the two were hostile in their respective offices to each other, United States News reported Kennedy's support of the Johnson administration's ""Great Society"" program through his voting record.
Kennedy supported both major and minor parts of the program, and each year over 60% of his roll call votes were consistently in favor of Johnson's policies.On February 8, 1966, Kennedy urged the United States to pledge that it would not be the first country to use nuclear weapons against countries that did not have them noting that China had made the pledge and the Soviet Union indicated it was also willing to do so.In June 1966, he visited apartheid-era South Africa accompanied by his wife, Ethel, and a few aides.
The tour was greeted with international praise at a time when few politicians dared to entangle themselves in the politics of South Africa.
He spoke out against the oppression of the native population, and was welcomed by the black population as though he were a visiting head of state.
A questioner declared that few churches allow black Africans to pray with the white because the Bible says that is the way it should be, because God created Negroes to serve.
On January 28, 1967, Kennedy began a ten-day stay in Europe, meeting Harold Wilson in London who advised him to tell President Johnson about his belief that the ongoing Vietnam conflict was wrong.
Upon returning to the United States in early February, he was confronted by the press who asked him if his conversations abroad had negatively impacted American foreign relations.
Kennedy speaks with children while touring Bedford–Stuyvesant in Brooklyn, February 1966 During his years as a senator, he helped to start a successful redevelopment project in poverty-stricken Bedford–Stuyvesant, Brooklyn.
Schlesinger wrote that Kennedy had hoped Bedford-Stuyvesant would become an example of self-imposed growth for other impoverished neighborhoods.
Kennedy had difficulty securing support from President Johnson, whose administration was charged by Kennedy as having opposed a ""special impact"" program meant to bring about the federal progress that he had supported.
Kennedy confided to journalist Jack Newfield that while he tried collaborating with the administration through courting its members and compromising with the bill, ""They didn't even try to work something out together.
Pelé and Kennedy shaking hands after a game at Maracanã Stadium, Rio de Janeiro He also visited the Mississippi Delta as a member of the Senate committee reviewing the effectiveness of ""War on Poverty"" programs, particularly that of the Economic Opportunity Act of 1964.
Edelman noted further that the senator requested she call on Martin Luther King Jr. to bring the impoverished to Washington, D.C., to make them more visible, leading to the creation of the Poor People's Campaign.
At the request of labor leader Walter Reuther, who had previously marched with and provided money to Chavez, Kennedy flew out to Delano, California, to investigate the situation.
Although little attention was paid to the first two committee hearings in March 1966 for legislation to include farm workers by an amendment of the National Labor Relations Act, Kennedy's attendance at the third hearing brought media coverage.
Biographer Thomas wrote that Kennedy was moved after seeing the conditions of the workers, who he deemed were being taken advantage of.
Chavez stressed to Kennedy that migrant workers needed to be recognized as human beings.
As a senator, he was popular among African Americans and other minorities including Native Americans and immigrant groups.
He spoke forcefully in favor of what he called the ""disaffected"", the impoverished, and ""the excluded"", thereby aligning himself with leaders of the civil rights struggle and social justice campaigners, leading the Democratic party in pursuit of a more aggressive agenda to eliminate perceived discrimination on all levels.
He supported desegregation busing, integration of all public facilities, the Voting Rights Act of 1965, and anti-poverty social programs to increase education, offer opportunities for employment, and provide health care for African Americans.
Consistent with President Kennedy's Alliance for Progress, he also placed increasing emphasis on human rights as a central focus of United States foreign policy.
Vietnam The JFK administration had backed United States involvement in Southeast Asia and other parts of the world in the frame of the Cold War, but Kennedy was not known to be involved in discussions on the Vietnam War when he was his brother's attorney general.
According to historian Doris Kearns Goodwin, before choosing to run for the Senate, Kennedy had sought an ambassadorship to South Vietnam.
Entering the Senate, Kennedy initially kept private his disagreements with President Johnson on the war.
While Kennedy vigorously supported his brother's earlier efforts, he never publicly advocated commitment of ground troops.
Though bothered by the beginning of the bombing of North Vietnam in February 1965, Kennedy did not wish to appear antipathetic to the president's agenda.
But by April, Kennedy was advocating a halt to the bombing to Johnson, who acknowledged that Kennedy played a part in influencing his choice to temporarily cease bombing the following month.
Kennedy cautioned Johnson against sending combat troops as early as 1965, but Johnson chose instead to follow the recommendation of the rest of his predecessor's still intact staff of advisers.
In July, after Johnson made a large commitment of American ground forces to Vietnam, Kennedy made multiple calls for a settlement through negotiation.
The next month, John Paul Vann, a lieutenant colonel in the United States Army, wrote that Kennedy ""indicat comprehension of the problems we face"", in a letter to the senator.
In December 1965, Kennedy advised his friend, the Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, that he should counsel Johnson to declare a ceasefire in Vietnam, a bombing pause over North Vietnam, and to take up an offer by Algeria to serve as a ""honest broker"" in peace talks.
In February 1966, Kennedy released a peace plan that called for preserving South Vietnam while at the same time allowing the National Liberation Front, better known as the Viet Cong, to join a coalition government in Saigon.
Senator Robert F Kennedy and President Lyndon B Johnson in the Oval Office, 1966 In April 1966, Kennedy had a private meeting with Philip Heymann of the State Department's Bureau of Security and Consular Affairs to discuss efforts to secure the release of American prisoners of war in Vietnam.
Kennedy wanted to press the Johnson administration to do more, but Heymann insisted that the administration believed the ""consequences of sitting down with the Viet Cong"" mattered more than the prisoners they were holding captive.
On June 29 of that year, Kennedy released a statement disavowing President Johnson's choice to bomb Haiphong, but he avoided criticizing either the war or the president's overall foreign policy, believing that it might harm Democratic candidates in the 1966 midterm elections.
In August, the International Herald Tribune described Kennedy's popularity as outpacing President Johnson's, crediting Kennedy's attempts to end the Vietnam conflict which the public increasingly desired.In the early part of 1967, Kennedy traveled to Europe, where he had discussions about Vietnam with leaders and diplomats.
A story leaked to the State Department that Kennedy was talking about seeking peace while President Johnson was pursuing the war.
He voiced this during a meeting with Kennedy, who reiterated the interest of the European leaders to pause the bombing while going forward with negotiations; Johnson declined to do so.
On March 2, Kennedy outlined a three-point plan to end the war which included suspending the United States bombing of North Vietnam, and the eventual withdrawal of American and North Vietnamese soldiers from South Vietnam; this plan was rejected by Secretary of State Dean Rusk, who believed North Vietnam would never agree to it.
On May 15, Kennedy debated Governor of California Ronald Reagan about the war.
On November 26, 1967, during an appearance on Face the Nation, Kennedy asserted that the Johnson administration had deviated from his brother's policies in Vietnam, his first time contrasting the two administrations' policies on the war.
On February 8, 1968, Kennedy delivered an address in Chicago, where he critiqued Saigon ""government corruption"" and expressed his disagreement with the Johnson administration's stance that the war would determine the future of Asia.
On March 14, Kennedy met with defense secretary Clark Clifford at the Pentagon regarding the war.
Clifford's notes indicate that Kennedy was offering not to enter the ongoing Democratic presidential primary if President Johnson would admit publicly to having been wrong in his war policy and appoint ""a group of persons to conduct a study in depth of the issues and come up with a recommended course of action""; Johnson rejected the proposal.
On April 1, after President Johnson halted bombing of North Vietnam, RFK said the decision was a ""step toward peace"" and, though offering to collaborate with Johnson for national unity, opted to continue his presidential bid.
Later that month, Kennedy called the war ""the gravest kind of error"" in a speech in Corvallis, Oregon.
In January, faced with what was widely considered an unrealistic race against an incumbent president, Kennedy stated that he would not seek the presidency.
Kennedy traveled to Delano, California, to meet with civil rights activist César Chávez, who was on a 25-day hunger strike showing his commitment to nonviolence.
It was on this visit to California that Kennedy decided he would challenge Johnson for the presidency, telling his former Justice Department aides, Edwin Guthman and Peter Edelman, that his first step was to get lesser-known Senator Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota to drop out of the presidential race.The weekend before the New Hampshire primary, Kennedy announced to several aides that he would attempt to persuade McCarthy to withdraw from the race to avoid splitting the antiwar vote, but Senator George McGovern urged Kennedy to wait until after that primary to announce his candidacy.
Johnson won a narrow victory in the New Hampshire primary on March 12, 1968, against McCarthy, but this close second-place result dramatically boosted McCarthy's standing in the race.After much speculation, and reports leaking out about his plans, and seeing in McCarthy's success that Johnson's hold on the job was not as strong as originally thought, Kennedy declared his candidacy on March 16, 1968, in the Caucus Room of the old Senate office building, the same room where his brother had declared his own candidacy eight years earlier.
He stated, ""I do not run for the presidency merely to oppose any man, but to propose new policies.
They believed that McCarthy had taken the most courageous stand by opposing the sitting president of his own party and that his surprising result in New Hampshire had earned him the mantle of being the anti-war candidate.
On March 31, 1968, Johnson stunned the nation by dropping out of the race.
Vice President Hubert Humphrey, a champion of the labor unions and a long supporter of civil rights, entered the race with the financial backing and critical endorsement of the party ""establishment"", including most members of Congress, mayors, governors, ""the south"", and several major labor unions.
With state registration deadlines long past, Humphrey joined the race too late to enter any primaries but had the support of the president.
Kennedy, like his brother before him, planned to win the nomination through popular support in the primaries.
Kennedy campaigning in Los Angeles Kennedy ran on a platform of racial and economic justice, non-aggression in foreign policy, decentralization of power, and social change.
A crucial element of his campaign was an engagement with the young, whom he identified as being the future of a reinvigorated American society based on partnership and equality.
His policy objectives did not sit well with the business community, where he was viewed as something of a fiscal liability, opposed as they were to the tax increases necessary to fund social programs.
It was this intense and frank mode of dialogue with which he was to continue to engage those whom he viewed as not being traditional allies of Democratic ideals or initiatives.
Kennedy's presidential campaign brought out both ""great enthusiasm"" and anger in people.
His bid for the presidency saw not only a continuation of the programs he and his brother had undertaken during the president's term in office, but also an extension of Johnson's Great Society.Kennedy visited numerous small towns and made himself available to the masses by participating in long motorcades and street-corner stump speeches, often in troubled inner cities.
He made urban poverty a chief concern of his campaign, which in part led to enormous crowds that would attend his events in poor urban areas or rural parts of Appalachia.
On April 4, 1968, Kennedy learned of the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr. and gave a heartfelt impromptu speech in Indianapolis's inner city, calling for a reconciliation between the races.
The address was the first time Kennedy spoke publicly about his brother's killing.Riots broke out in 60 cities in the wake of King's death, but not in Indianapolis, a fact many attribute to the effect of this speech.
Kennedy addressed the City Club of Cleveland the next day, on April 5, 1968, delivering the famous On the Mindless Menace of Violence speech.
Despite Kennedy's high profile and name recognition, McCarthy won most of the early primaries, including Kennedy's native state of Massachusetts.
Kennedy won the Indiana Democratic primary on May 7 with 42 percent of the vote, and the Nebraska primary on May 14 with 52 percent of the vote.
On May 28, Kennedy lost the Oregon primary, marking the first time a Kennedy lost an election, and it was assumed that McCarthy was the preferred choice among the young voters.
If he could defeat McCarthy in the California primary, the leadership of the campaign thought, he would knock McCarthy out of the race and set up a one-on-one against Vice President Humphrey at the Chicago national convention in August.
Assassination of Robert F Kennedy Kennedy delivers remarks to a crowd in the Ambassador Hotel moments before the assassination, June 5, 1968 Kennedy scored major victories when he won both the California and South Dakota primaries on June 4.
He addressed his supporters shortly after midnight on June 5, 1968, in a ballroom at The Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles.
Leaving the ballroom, he went through the hotel kitchen after being told it was a shortcut to a press room.
He did this despite being advised by his bodyguard—former FBI agent Bill Barry—to avoid the kitchen.
In a crowded kitchen passageway, Kennedy turned to his left and shook hands with hotel busboy Juan Romero just as Sirhan Sirhan, a 24-year-old Palestinian, opened fire with a .22-caliber revolver.
Kennedy was hit three times, and five other people were wounded.George Plimpton, former decathlete Rafer Johnson, and former professional football player Rosey Grier are credited with wrestling Sirhan to the ground after he shot the senator.
As Kennedy lay mortally wounded, Romero cradled his head and placed a rosary in his hand.
After several minutes, medical attendants arrived and lifted the senator onto a stretcher, prompting him to whisper, ""Don't lift me"", which were his last words.
He was rushed first to Los Angeles' Central Receiving Hospital, less than 2 miles east of the Ambassador Hotel, and then to the adjoining Good Samaritan Hospital.
Despite extensive neurosurgery to remove the bullet and bone fragments from his brain, Kennedy was pronounced dead at 1:44 a.m. on June 6, nearly 26 hours after the shooting.
Robert Kennedy's death, like the 1963 assassination of his brother, President John F Kennedy, has been the subject of conspiracy theories.
Funeral Kennedy's body was returned to Manhattan, where it lay in repose at Saint Patrick's Cathedral from approximately 10:00 p.m. until 10:00 a.m. on June 8.
My brother need not be idealized, or enlarged in death beyond what he was in life; to be remembered simply as a good and decent man, who saw wrong and tried to right it, saw suffering and tried to heal it, saw war and tried to stop it.
Those of us who loved him and who take him to his rest today, pray that what he was to us and what he wished for others will some day come to pass for all the world.
Robert F Kennedy's grave in Arlington National Cemetery The requiem Mass concluded with the hymn ""The Battle Hymn of the Republic"", sung by Andy Williams.
Kennedy's funeral train was pulled by two Penn Central GG1 electric locomotives.
Thousands of mourners lined the tracks and stations along the route, paying their respects as the train passed.
When it arrived in Elizabeth, New Jersey, an eastbound train on a parallel track to the funeral train hit and killed two spectators and seriously injured four, after they were unable to get off the track in time, even though the eastbound train's engineer had slowed to 30 mph for the normally 55 mph curve, blown his horn continuously, and rung his bell through the curve.
The train was scheduled to arrive at about 4:30 pm, but sticking brakes on the casket-bearing car contributed to delays, and the train finally arrived at 9:10 p.m. on June 8.
Although he had always maintained that he wished to be buried in Massachusetts, his family believed Robert should be interred in Arlington next to his brother.
The procession left Union Station and passed the New Senate Office Building, where he had his offices, and then proceeded to the Lincoln Memorial, where it paused.
As the vehicles entered the cemetery, people lining the roadway spontaneously lit candles to guide the motorcade to the burial site.The 15-minute ceremony began at 10:30 p.m.
Cardinal Patrick O'Boyle, Roman Catholic Archbishop of Washington, officiated at the graveside service in lieu of Cardinal Richard Cushing of Boston, who fell ill during the trip.
On behalf of the United States, John Glenn presented the folded flag to Senator Ted Kennedy, who passed it to Robert's eldest son, Joe, who passed it to Ethel Kennedy.
The Navy Band played The Navy Hymn.Officials at Arlington National Cemetery said that Kennedy's burial was the only night burial to have taken place at the cemetery.
After the president was interred in Arlington Cemetery, the two infants were buried next to him on December 5, 1963, in a private ceremony without publicity.
His brother, Senator Edward M Kennedy, was also buried at night, in 2009.
On June 9, President Lyndon B Johnson assigned security staff to all United States presidential candidates and declared an official national day of mourning.
After the assassination, the mandate of the United States Secret Service was altered by Congress to include the protection of United States presidential candidates.
John, Robert, and Ted, July 1960 in Cape Cod, Massachusetts On June 17, 1950, Kennedy married socialite Ethel Skakel, the third daughter of businessman George and Ann Skakel , at St.
His widow, Ethel, and their children continued to live at Hickory Hill after his death.
Attitudes and approach Kennedy was said to be the gentlest and shyest of the family, as well as the least articulate verbally.
Luella Hennessey, who became the nurse for the Kennedy children when Kennedy was 12, called him ""the most thoughtful and considerate"" of his siblings.Kennedy was teased by his siblings, as in their family it was a norm for humor to be displayed in that fashion.
Despite his gentle demeanor, he could be outspoken, and once engaged a priest in a public argument that horrified his mother, who later conceded that he had been correct all along.
Although Joe Kennedy's most ambitious dreams centered around Bobby's older brothers, Bobby maintained the code of personal loyalty that seemed to infuse the life of his family.
His competitiveness was admired by his father and elder brothers, while his loyalty bound them more affectionately close.
A rather timid child, he was often the target of his father's dominating temperament.
Working on the campaigns of older brother John, he was more involved, passionate, and tenacious than the candidate himself, obsessed with detail, fighting out every battle, and taking workers to task.
He had always been closer to John than the other members of the family.Kennedy's opponents on Capitol Hill maintained that his collegiate magnanimity was sometimes hindered by a tenacious and somewhat impatient manner.
Schlesinger comments that Kennedy could be both the most ruthlessly diligent and yet generously adaptable of politicians, at once both temperamental and forgiving.
In this he was very much his father's son, lacking truly lasting emotional independence, and yet possessing a great desire to contribute.
I think we all feel that when a witness comes before the United States Senate, he has an obligation to speak frankly and tell the truth.
He was blunt to a fault, and his favorite campaign activity was arguing with college students.
In his earlier life, Kennedy had developed a reputation as the family's attack dog.
Yet Bobby Kennedy somehow became a liberal icon, an antiwar visionary who tried to outflank Lyndon Johnson's Great Society from the left.
On Kennedy's ideological development, his brother John once remarked, ""He might once have been intolerant of liberals as such because his early experience was with that high-minded, high-speaking kind who never got anything done.
Religious faith and Greek philosophy Kennedy's Catholicism was central to his politics and personal attitude to life and its purpose; he inherited his faith from his family.
His was not an unresponsive and staid faith, but the faith of a Catholic Radical, perhaps the first successful Catholic Radical in American political history.In the last years of his life, he also found great solace in the playwrights and poets of ancient Greece, especially the writings of Aeschylus, suggested to him by Jacqueline after JFK's death.
Edwin O Guthman and C Richard Allen, 1993 Kennedy was the first sibling of a president of the United States to serve as United States Attorney General.
Walter Isaacson commented that Kennedy ""turned out arguably to be the best attorney general in history"", praising him for his championing of civil rights and other initiatives of the administration.
Some of his successor attorneys general have been unfavorably compared to him, for not displaying the same level of poise in the profession.
Kennedy has also been praised for his oratorical abilities and his skill at creating unity.
Dolores Huerta and Philip W Johnston expressed the view that Kennedy, both in his speeches and actions, was unique in his willingness to take political risks.
That blunt sincerity was said by associates to be authentic; Frank N Magill wrote that Kennedy's oratorical skills lent their support to minorities and other disenfranchised groups who began seeing him as an ally.
Kennedy in a 1963 photograph taken for Look Kennedy's assassination was a blow to the optimism for a brighter future that his campaign had brought for many Americans who lived through the turbulent 1960s.
K Rowling,Jim McGreevey,Gavin Newsom, and Ray Mabus have acknowledged Kennedy's influence on them.
Honors President George W Bush dedicates The Justice Department building in honor of Robert Kennedy as Ethel Kennedy looks on.
In the months and years after Robert F Kennedy's death, numerous roads, public schools, and other facilities across the United States have been named in his memory.
The Robert F Kennedy Center for Justice and Human Rights was founded in 1968, with an international award program to recognize human rights activists.The sports stadium in Washington, D.C., was renamed Robert F Kennedy Memorial Stadium in 1969.
The Bureau of Engraving and Printing distributed 159,297,600 of the perforated, blue-and-white stamps—an unusually-large printing.
The stamp design was taken from a family photo suggested by his wife, Ethel.In 1998 the United States Mint released the Robert F Kennedy silver dollar, a special dollar coin that featured Kennedy's image on the obverse and the emblems of the United States Department of Justice and the United States Senate on the reverse.
On November 20, 2001, United States President George W Bush and Attorney General John Ashcroft dedicated the Department of Justice headquarters building in Washington, D.C., as the Robert F Kennedy Department of Justice Building, honoring Kennedy on what would have been his 76th birthday.
They both spoke during the ceremony, as did Kennedy's eldest son, Joseph.
Robert F Kennedy silver dollar Obverse Reverse Proof Robert F Kennedy silver dollar In a further effort to remember Kennedy and continue his work helping the disadvantaged, a small group of private citizens launched the Robert F Kennedy Children's Action Corps in 1969.
On September 20, 2016, the United States Navy announced the renaming of a refueling ship in honor of Kennedy during a ceremony attended by members of his family.Personal items and documents from his office in the Justice Department Building are displayed in a permanent exhibit dedicated to him at the John F Kennedy Library and Museum.
Several public institutions jointly honor Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr.
In 1969, the former Woodrow Wilson Junior College, a two-year institution and a constituent campus of the City Colleges of Chicago, was renamed Kennedy–King College.
In 1994 the City of Indianapolis erected the Landmark for Peace Memorial in Robert Kennedy's honor near the space made famous by his speech from the back of a pickup truck the night King died.
Memorial Park depicts a sculpture of RFK reaching out from a large metal slab to a sculpture of King, who is part of a similar slab.
This is meant to symbolize their attempts in life to bridge the gaps between the races—an attempt that united them even in death.
A nephew of King and Indiana United States Congresswoman Julia Carson presided over the event; both made speeches from the back of a pickup truck in similar fashion to RFK's speech.In 2019, Kennedy's ""Speech on the Death of Dr.
The film Bobby is the story of multiple people's lives leading up to RFK's assassination.
The film employs stock footage from his presidential campaign, and he is briefly portrayed by Dave Fraunces.Barry Pepper won an Emmy for his portrayal of Kennedy in The Kennedys , an 8-part miniseries.
It is unclear where the rumor began about McCarthy being godfather to Bobby's firstborn, Kathleen.
Authors and journalists echoed it enough that they stopped footnoting it, but they continued citing it as the clearest sign of how close Kennedy was to McCarthy.
Even Kathleen's mother, Ethel, asked recently whether it was true, said, 'He was.
Kathleen, who would enter politics herself and knew firsthand the stigma of being associated with Joe McCarthy, has 'no idea' where the rumor came from but double-checked her christening certificate to confirm that it was false.
Rationality – Case Histories in International Politics, 5th Edition"". westvalley.edu.
In return, Hoffa had a 45 percent interest in the project, and he and several others received kickbacks in the form of ""finder's fees"" from developers for securing the money.
ISBN 0-262-19309-4 ^ ""NIXON COMMUTES HOFFA SENTENCE,CURBS UNION ROLE"". nytimes.com.
Archived from the original on August 22, 2016. ^ a b c ""Martin Luther King, Jr. and the Global Struggle for Power – Federal Bureau of Investigation"". stanford.edu.
Retrieved December 3, 2019. ^ a b c ""Kennedy, Robert Francis "". kingencyclopedia.stanford.edu.
A History of the United States: Since 1865, Vol., Cengage Learning, 853.
July 15, 2011. ^ ""9 actors who have played John F Kennedy"". theweek.com.
The Historic Face-Off Between the Kennedys and J Edgar Hoover That Transformed America.
Argues the policies of RFK's Justice Department show the conservatism of justice, the limits of charisma, the inherent tendency in a legal system to support the status quo, and the counterproductive results of many of Kennedy's endeavors in the field of civil rights and crime control.
The Kennedys, the Freedom Rides, and the Electoral Consequences of a Moral Compromise.
External links This article's use of external links may not follow Wikipedia's policies or guidelines.
The Vault – Robert F Kennedy at fbi.gov Biography at United States Department of Justice United States Congress.
RFK, PBS Text, Audio, and Video of Robert Kennedy's Remarks on the Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.
J Kennedy .mw-parser-output .nobold{font-weight:normal} Joseph P Kennedy Sr.
John F Kennedy Jacqueline Bouvier Rosemary Kennedy Kathleen Kennedy William Cavendish, Marquess of Hartington Eunice Kennedy Sargent Shriver Patricia Kennedy Peter Lawford Robert F Kennedy Ethel Skakel Jean Kennedy Stephen Edward Smith Edward M ""Ted"" Kennedy Joan Bennett; Victoria ReggieIII.John F Kennedy Caroline Kennedy Edwin Schlossberg John F Kennedy Jr.
Carolyn Bessette Patrick Bouvier KennedyEunice Kennedy Shriver Bobby Shriver Maria Shriver Arnold Schwarzenegger Timothy Shriver Mark Shriver Anthony ShriverPatricia Kennedy Lawford Christopher LawfordRobert F Kennedy Kathleen Kennedy Townsend Joseph P Kennedy II Robert F Kennedy Jr.
Mary Richardson, Cheryl Hines David A Kennedy Michael LeMoyne Kennedy Kerry Kennedy Andrew Cuomo Christopher G Kennedy Max Kennedy Douglas Harriman Kennedy Rory Kennedy Mark BaileyJean Kennedy Smith William Kennedy SmithTed Kennedy Kara Kennedy Edward M Kennedy Jr.
True Compass Speeches The Dream Shall Never DieFamily,family tree Joan Bennett Kennedy Victoria Reggie Kennedy Kara Kennedy Edward M Kennedy Jr.
Lyndon B Johnson campaign Daisy Incumbent VP nominee: Hubert HumphreyOther candidates: Daniel Brewster Pat Brown Robert F Kennedy Albert S Porter Jennings Randolph John W Reynolds Jr.
Barry Goldwater campaign VP nominee: William E MillerOther candidates: Hiram Fong Walter Judd Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.
