A Creative Commons license is only valid when it is applied by the person or entity that holds rights to the licensed work.
Works may contain components to which the rightsholder in the work cannot apply the license.
It is ultimately your responsibility to independently evaluate the copyright status of any work or component part of a work you use, in light of your intended use.
With the generous support of the Andrew W Mellon Foundation, the Pilot uses cutting-edge publishing technology to produce open access digital editions of high-quality, peer-reviewed monographs from leading university presses.
Please consult www.creativecommons.org if you have questions about your rights to reuse the material in this book.
United States Air Force personnel and residents of Rio Salud, Colon, Panama, 1952 38 3.1.
Senator Warren G Magnuson and United States military officials discussing nuclear excavation of a second Central American canal, March 12,1964 60 4.1.
Equipment delivered via United States Navy tank landing ship for the nuclear Route 17 field studies, Soskatupu, Darien, Panama, ca.66 81 4.2.
United States Army Corps of Engineers colonel Alexander Sutton compensating Guna chiefYabiliquina, Soskatupu, Darien, Panama, September 20,1966 83 4.3.
Reina Torres de Arauz with Guna, Panamanian, and United States representatives, Soskatupu, Darien, Panama, September 20,1966 84 5.1.
United States president Lyndon B Johnson and Smithsonian Institution secretary S Dillon Ripley, June 13,1967 93 7.1.
Map of proposed Central American interoceanic canal routes, 1902 18 1.2.
Map of the routes studied by the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Studies Commission, 1970 19 1.3.
Thanks also to the organizers, panelists, and audience members of conference sessions at the American Association of Geographers, American Historical Association, American Society for Environmental History, Columbia History of Science Group, History of Science Society, North American Society for Oceanic History, Rochester United States Historians, Society for the History of American Foreign Relations, and Society for the History of Technology.
Many thanks to Ira Rubinoff, Alan Covich, Wayne Clough, William Newman, and other historical participants for sharing their insights with me.
For their generous hospitality in Panama, muchas gracias to Noris Herrera, Susan Brewer-Osorio, Ariel Espino, Dan Norman, Stanley Heckadon-Moreno, Egbert Leigh, Rachel Collin, Hector Guzman, Harilaos Lessios, and Mark Torchin.
Many archivists, librarians, and interlibrary loan officers provided crucial sources, for which I am most appreciative.
Thank you also to the program officers and support staff of the Smithsonian Institution Archives Postdoctoral Fellowship Program, National Endowment for the Humanities Summer Stipend Program, Lyndon B Johnson Foundation Moody Research Grant Program, and Eisenhower Foundation Abilene Travel Grants Program for providing critical funds and for believing in my project.
I am also very grateful to the Rochester Institute of Technology College of Liberal Arts Miller Fellowship, Faculty Research Fellowship, and Publication Cost Grant Programs, and to the RIT Departments of STS and History.
Deep thanks to my fantastic high school teachers and college professors for setting high standards of mentorship to which I have always aspired, especially Zeleana Morris, Rod Wallace, Kenneth Zachmann, Esther Iglich, Christianna Nichols Leahy, and Carole McCann.
Sonia, Matt, AJ, Greg, Dana, Ethan, Andrew, Samuel, Gabriel, Gary, Helen; my aunts, uncles, cousins, and late grandparents; and my wonderful mom, Vera.
And the greatest thanks of all to my dear and loving husband, Darren Lacey.
This book is dedicated in memory of Jim Keiner, taken too soon from us all by pancreatic cancer.
Introduction The Central American Sea-Level Canal and the Environmental History of Unbuilt Megaprojects T he atlantic-pacific Central American sea-level canal was a spectacular failure.
The famed French engineer of the Suez Canal, Ferdinand de Lesseps, destroyed his career and the lives of twenty-five thousand workers by insisting he could excavate across the mountainous Panamanian isthmus in the 1880s.
Learning from his mistakes, the Americans succeeded in the early 1900s by taming the tropical insect-borne diseases and building an ingenious “bridge of water” with a dam and locks that lift ships eighty-five feet above sea level.
However, the world-changing Panama Canal appeared more and more obsolescent and vulnerable as ship size and military airpower increased, leading its postwar operators to dust off old plans for a means of connecting the seas without any impediments.
Nuclear weapons designers thought they had discovered the key to unlocking the canal in the form of peaceful nuclear explosives , and to that end the United States government spent hundreds of millions of dollars and thirteen years considering the question of atomic excavation.
That in a nutshell is the conventional story of the Atlantic-Pacific sea-level canal, a megaproject that failed to make the transition from idea to reality and thereby enter the pantheon of monumental civil engineering works.
Devoting historiographical attention to such a nonevent might seem counterproductive.
Scholarly studies of the nuclear canal have enriched our understanding of Cold War-era mentalities and geopolitical relations by addressing it in 1 z INTRODUCTION the context of Project Plowshare, the 1957-77 United States initiative to apply nuclear energy to earthmoving and other nonmilitary pursuits.
Although the sea-level ship canal did not come to pass, as a proposal it served important political and scientific purposes during different eras.
During the 1950s and 1960s, it enabled three United States presidents to address the increasingly problematic Panama Canal Zone, the colonialistic enclave surrounding the original waterway, and during the 1970s and 1980s, it offered new visions for dealing with the oil crisis.
Throughout the most serious period of governmental attention, from 1965-70, the plan provided opportunities for producing new knowledge to resolve the burning question of whether detonating buried thermonuclear bombs to excavate the “very deep cuts required by an interoceanic canal” was technically feasible.
The United States government’s then lack of legal requirements for assessing environmental impacts, and its narrow definition of the kinds of information, expertise, and authoritative capacity deemed most relevant to this task, in turn generated high-profile debates within the scientific community over the project’s nonradioecological, nonanthropocentric risks.
After officials ruled out nuclear construction methods—an outcome that was never inevitable—ecological concerns about how the sea-level canal and other maritime transportation complexes might affect the biological integrity of the oceans continued to circulate in the policy realm in ways that still resonate today.
In other words, as science and technology studies scholars would say, the sea-level canal proposal performed different kinds of work for different historical actors, and vice versa.
Dismissing it as a failed scheme unworthy of historiographical attention prevents us from considering the political, cultural, and epistemological processes that went into constructing the seaway as an innovative diplomatic solution, an exciting research opportunity, a superior hydrocarbon highway, or a serious ecological threat.
These processes highlight themes of broader relevance to environmental history and the history of science and technology.
The controversies over the nuclear and nonnuclear phases of the The Central American Sea-Level Canal 3 sea-level canal signify the disintegration of a powerful technocratic worldview that permeated United States environmental management from the construction of the original Panama Canal until the rise of the modern environmental movement.
Deep Cut uses the Central American seaway proposal to address specific elements and consequences of this revolutionary shift, especially the changing roles of environmental expertise and state-sponsored preliminary environmental impact assessment, and the historical contingencies of infrastructural decision-making.
More broadly, this book contributes to an emerging literature addressing the environmental, scientific, and political histories and legacies of unbuilt megaprojects.
One of the first studies of “unbuiltism” appeared over forty years ago.
An art historian coined this odd word in the introductory essay of Unbuilt America , a book featuring dozens of salvaged drawings and descriptions uncovered by two artists from architectural firms, libraries, and private collections in the 1970s.
According to the authors, only one other such work dealing “exclusively with the unbuilt as a phenomenon” had ever appeared, and that was in 1925/ Unbuilt America focuses on buildings and monuments, but the reasons proffered for their lack of execution apply as well to larger-scale architectural, engineering, and landscape projects.
Visions of the built environment fail to take form for many reasons, including lack of funding, bureaucratic inertia, technical infeasibility, and community resistance.
The book did not unleash a groundswell of academic or popular interest in unbuiltism, but its time has come.
The curators of the Never Built series hail from the world of architecture, but more deeply contextualized case studies of unrealized large-scale projects have emerged from across the environmental humanities.
Cultural historian Kathryn Oberdeck coined the phrase “unbuilt environment” in a 1005 essay about the value of archives as conservatories of unrealized urban visions.
Analysis of the private and public evidence of grandiose ventures that never came about can also shed light on imperialist and modernist attitudes that continued to influence development thinking long afterward.
These are important points of Heffernan’s pioneering studies of late nineteenth-century French colonial plans to transform the Sahara Desert into a vast inland sea and railway network that would fuel the development of northern Africa.
Another never-built Eurocentric macroengineering project with rich insights for the history of science, technology, and human-environment relations was Atlantropa.
From 1917 until his death in 1952, German architect Herman Sorgel sought to overcome European fears of energy shortages and cultural decline by damming the Mediterranean to generate hydroelectricity and lower the sea enough to create a new continent connecting Europe and Africa.
In his vision, climate engineering would stave off desertification, thereby ensuring healthful conditions for Atlantropa’s imperialist European communities and industries.
The megaproject’s scale, complexity, and cost undermined its feasibility, but its failure was not preordained.
Scott’s influential analysis uses cases such as the Soviet collectivization of agriculture and the Brazilian construction of a new capital city in the Amazon rainforest to demonstrate how high modernists mobilized science and technology to advance progress, yet wound up causing great ecological and social harm by privileging centralized technocratic expertise and rigid centralized directives above local knowledge and needs.
The most notorious high-modernist projects have taken place in authoritarian societies capable of crushing dissent, but democratic governments have also promoted problematic large-scale agricultural, industrial, and urban development projects despite fierce local resistance.
Lawrence Seaway, the U.S.-Canadian transportation and hydroelectricity complex that submerged several villages and displaced 6,500 citizens.
Historian Daniel Macfarlane uses the concept of “negotiated high modernism” to show how United States and Canadian officials strategically used the public planning process to The Central American Sea-Level Canal 5 overcome opposition from stakeholders who did not stand to benefit.
Starting in 1957, Plowshare officials convinced Congress that investing in PNE feasibility studies would reap huge dividends in the form of cost-effective transportation infrastructure , energy sources (especially the extraction of oil and gas from shale and tar sands), medical breakthroughs , and weather modification.
Because a PNE consisted of a thermonuclear device with a fission trigger, the smaller the amount of harmful radionuclides released via the fission process and the deeper the device was buried, the less the radiation hazard.
However, placing a PNE too far underground would reduce its effectiveness for earthmoving purposes.
Figuring out the optimal combinations of such variables as burial depth, percentage of vented radiation, and the number of explosives needed for a given goal required extensive testing.
The Atomic Energy Commission conducted twenty-seven experimental explosions for Plowshare, primarily at the Nevada Test Site, from 1961 to 1973.
Each one required presidential permission and intensive calculating of political risks, especially after the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963 banned countries conducting atomic experiments from releasing radioactive debris across national borders.
Federal officials were not required to take what we would now call environmental costs into consideration, which helps explain why for them nuclear excavation appeared much less expensive than conventional methods.
As Teller and his allies argued, atomic excavation would not only save money but also reduce the number of worker injuries and deaths caused by massive construction projects.
Like many midcentury Americans, Plowshare’s powerful sponsors in Congress and the executive branch held great faith in the power of science and technology to solve social and political problems.
At the same time, United States decision makers operated in the context of checks and balances.
However imperfectly, unevenly, and inconsistently, democratic governing systems provide opportunities for challenge and change.
Examining how proponents of Plowshare dealt with outsiders asking tough environmental and public health questions shines light on the evolving political role of scientific expertise and dissent vis-a-vis environmental impact assessment in the mid-to-late twentieth century.
Plowshare’s first proposed venture, Project Chariot, aimed to excavate a harbor in northwestern Alaska.
Deep historical detective work has exposed the secretive, hubristic ways in which Livermore’s scientist-administrators tried to exploit the Alaskan tundra for their own purposes, especially to sell the Central American sea-level canal and thereby keep the laboratory running while the United States observed a voluntary moratorium on nuclear weapons testing from 1958-61.
In response to unexpected pushback from Indigenous people, local biologists, and citizen conservationists regarding radiation hazards, Teller and his Livermore associates sought to co-opt the opposition by sponsoring extensive bioenvironmental studies.
Barry Commoner, the biologist-activist and originator of the famous quote, “The first law of ecology is that everything is related to everything else,” traced his ecological The Central American Sea-Level Canal 7 awakening to the insight that Arctic lichen would absorb radioactive fallout from the atmosphere and contaminate the caribou grazing on them, in turn harming the human carnivores atop the tundra food chain.
Moreover, the final official bioenvironmental report, which came out in 1966, four years after the AEC responded to the public uproar by canceling Chariot, has been hailed as a model for the first modern environmental impact statement.
By requiring federal infrastructure designers to conduct preliminary environmental impact studies, articulate less damaging alternatives, and solicit comments from the public, NEPA changed public works planning in the last three decades of the twentieth century in the United States, as well as in other democratic nations.
By the 1970s, as knowledge of complex ecological consequences expanded and gained political legitimacy in democratic societies via laws like NEPA, civil engineers and hydro-engineers could no longer presume to exert the same levels of control as had their predecessors.
Accordingly, addressing how statist environmental management policies and practices shifted over the middle decades of the twentieth century from conquering nature to implementing less damaging forms of development provides another rationale for paying attention to unrealized macroengineering projects and the debates they generated.
Toward this end, environmental historians have delineated several important controversial proposals beyond the realm of nuclear power that withered in the face of intense, sustained resistance.
Recent studies of large-scale energy production and transportation plans that did not materialize during the 1960s and 1970s emphasize the skillful mobilization of scientific knowledge and new legal tactics by grassroots groups.
Local environmentalist opposition and high costs also contributed to the early-i970S demise of Scripps Island, a planned underwater research facility on which the prestigious Scripps Institution of Oceanography spent almost a decade.
Its downfall tells us much not only about how rapidly citizens in California and elsewhere redefined the appropriate use of marine and coastal resources, but also about changing scientific attitudes toward the practice and goals of oceanography.
Other recent publications provide a rich foundation for rethinking unbuilt projects.
Drawing upon decades’ worth of unsuccessful plans to industrialize the Stikine region of northwestern Canada, Peyton shows how such failures reinforced rather than weakened perceptions of the Stikine as a resource-rich landscape destined for development.
Previous unsuccessful attempts to mobilize the area’s resources on a grand scale continue to exert influence on contemporary controversies regarding “the politics and possibilities of development” because they created things—paperwork, knowledge claims, memories, and physical landscape imprints such as geographical surveys—with which current stakeholders must reckon if they are to triumph in the latest round of debate.
Collectively, the disparate phases of the failed seaway endeavor demonstrate how convergences of unforeseen IO INTRODUCTION political, economic, military, technological, scientific, and environmental forces sometimes stymied high-modernist plans, while also setting the stage for later iterations of the envisioned infrastructure.
The first chapter of part I sets the scene by providing an alternative “shadow history” of the Panama Canal creation story that foregrounds the role of the sea-level design in the long quest to link the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
Indeed, the most famous scientist of the century, Alexander von Humboldt, who spent decades advocating for an artificial waterway, explicitly endorsed an interoceanic canal without obstructive locks in the 1850s.
Moreover, for two years after the United States government resumed digging in 1904, arguments continued over whether to adopt the lock design that won out in the end.
Despite the triumphant opening of the lock canal in 1914, problems predicted by the sea-level advocates soon began to materialize.
Chapters 2 and 3 address the growing technological obsolescence of the Panama Canal during the interwar years, the Atomic Age rationales and techniques for excavating a new waterway, the increasing Panamanian resistance against United States control of the Panama Canal and its colony-like enclave, and finally, the 1964 diplomatic crisis that led President Lyndon Johnson to announce that the United States would “plan in earnest” to replace the existing canal and renegotiate the inequitable 1903 treaty with Panama.
For Johnson and his two predecessors, the sea-level canal offered a means of driving new discussions over decolonizing the Canal Zone while maintaining United States hegemony in the Western Hemisphere.
In intriguing ways, the seaway proposal functioned as an instrument of both technological imperialism and the far rarer phenomenon of technological <t»A-imperialism.
Focusing on the civilian presidential appointees of the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission, rather than Teller and the Livermore physicists, opens new interpretive pathways on the Panatomic Canal endeavor.
The commissioners, whose backgrounds included law, engineering, administration, and the military, were enthusiastic about PNEs, but not blindly so.
However, their declassified meeting transcripts reveal the flexibility with which the commissioners strove to complete their complicated mission, especially in the face of severe budgetary, meteorological, and time constraints and pressure from the scientific community that challenged their high-modernist tendencies.
Toward this end, chapter 4 examines how the Canal Study Commission navigated a difficult course set by Congress and the president to determine the proposed waterway’s nuclear feasibility and optimal location.
The commission’s workload included overseeing the collection of reams of economic, military, and engineering data and analyses of the seaway’s feasibility.
At the same time, the chairman endeavored to persuade reluctant United States officials to allow the needed PNE experiments to take place at the Nevada Test Site, in spite of the risk of violating the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty provision against cross-border radioactive debris.
The commission chairman also led the 1964-67 initiative to renegotiate the 1903 treaty with Panama, a process in which the seaway proposal played a large part.
Multiple diplomatic contingencies affected the scientific and engineering field studies, and vice versa.
Chapters 5 and 6 address how the commissioners dealt with scientific and political developments that destabilized the United States government’s high hopes for the proposed nuclear seaway.
The engineering feasibility studies, which took place in the remote Darien portions of eastern Panama and northwestern Colombia, entailed numerous diplomatic and technical difficulties.
The research teams struggled to complete their work in the contexts of the tropical climate, which limited operations to the four-month dry season, and the Vietnam War, which diverted needed funds, equipment, and personnel.
The high-modernist dream of plowsharing the Darien collapsed in a literal and political quagmire.
A second set of challenges unfolded in a much more public way, as biologists associated with the Smithsonian Institution and several universities called for a share of the engineering feasibility funds to address the nonanthropocentric, nonterrestrial matter of marine species exchange.
The issue led to heated debates between biologists and engineers about the oceans’ biological II INTRODUCTION integrity, and among scientists about whether the megaproject represented a research opportunity or environmental threat.
Biologists cannot take credit for stopping the nuclear canal, but they did contribute to new understandings of the areas of expertise considered relevant for assessing the environmental risks of maritime infrastructure.
An Alaskan senator convinced the president that a sea-level channel would facilitate the flow of North Slope oil to East Coast, Caribbean, and Gulf Coast refineries and thereby preclude the construction of expensive, disruptive new networks of terrestrial pipelines.
As discussed in chapter 7, Carter confounded his environmentalist and diplomatic allies by insisting that the 1977 Panama Canal Treaty include a provision allowing a United States option for a new sea-level waterway.
The last-minute addition created new kinds of work for the federal agencies required by NEPA to assess the sea-level canal’s likely environmental impacts.
The treaty clause also rallied environmental advocacy groups, whose influence had grown significantly during the so-called environmental decade inaugurated by President Richard Nixon’s signing of the National Environmental Policy Act on January 1,1970.
In this post-NEPA era, as addressed in chapter 8, the sea snake studies of the 1960s acquired a new political significance.
Both conservative opponents of the Panama Canal Treaties and professionalized environmentalist organizations mobilized marine invasion ecology to discredit the seaway proposal.
This phase of the sea-level canal controversy signified the dissolution of the technocratic worldview that had underpinned the Panatomic proposal in favor of more democratic and precautionary modes of environmental governance.
The book concludes with a brief discussion of how Japanese interests revived the seaway idea in the 1980s for importing hydrocarbons and how more recent events link back to the feasibility studies of the late 1960s.
By abrogating the 1903 accord, the 1977 canal treaties set the stage for a new diplomatic relationship in which Panama transitioned over the course of two decades toward assuming full responsibility for managing the waterway.
The nation’s decision to modernize The Central American Sea-Level Canal 13 it by building a wider lane of locks from 2007 to 2016 drew in some ways on the ecological insights of the sea-level canal debates of the late 1960s and 1970s.
Although environmentalists criticized Panama for not conducting a thorough, democratically informed environmental impact assessment, the canal now features a water-saving mechanism that has so far precluded the need to pump in seawater, which, as biologists warned over four decades ago, would eliminate a crucial freshwater barrier to marine species exchange.
In 2014, the Nicaraguan government announced that construction had already begun, a year and a half after awarding the $40 billion concession to a Chinese business magnate eager to develop an alternative lock-based ship channel.
Although the Nicaraguan government responded to protests by green-lighting an environmental and social impact assessment, a panel of international experts found it lacking.
The country’s highest court dismissed the last environmentalist challenges in 2017, yet the project remains in limbo, a likely consequence of the Chinese concessionaire’s economic downfall as well as improved China-Panama relations.
Like the Panama Canal expansion, the Nicaragua plan sheds light on how twenty-first-century Latin American nations weigh development priorities with post-NEPA concepts of statist environmental governance and public input procedures, especially in the context of the growing power of Asian energy and maritime shipping interests.
Tracing such developments, along with challenging entrenched assumptions about the inexorability of historical outcomes and notions of progress, is one of the most important jobs of the historian.
For those now seeking to mitigate the threats to human rights and ecological quality posed by development plans, the sea-level canal '4 INTRODUCTION story offers a hopeful precedent for challenging narratives of inevitability— but also an ominous reminder that environmental management, like nature itself, evolves along multiple, nonlinear paths and not necessarily toward progressive ends.
Hundreds of books and articles have honored its visionary engineers, the enormous amounts of dirt removed, the acres of wetlands drained to control tropical diseases, and other superlatives that speak to the monumental transformation of the isthmus.
But other important parts of the canal story have emerged in recent decades.
Influenced by labor history, anthropology, environmental history, and science and technology studies, the newer literature centers the working-class people who built the structure amid intense racial injustices, the communities swept aside to create the canal landscape, the maintenance issues that undermined the conquest-of-nature narrative, the scientific knowledge generated in the context of the altered isthmian environment, and other stories that enable us to see the artificial waterway as something much more than an amazing technological testament.
This chapter explores another aspect of the Panama Canal’s history that ebbed from public consciousness as the massive structure took shape—the prolonged controversies over where to site it and how to design it.
The routes he identified in 1811 as most suitable drew attention not only during his long life.
Over the course of almost five decades, Humboldt experienced frustration in his quest to mobilize resources for comprehensive isthmian surveys, and he changed his mind about where and how the “water communication” should be built.
His canal advocacy illustrates the contingent nature of megaproject planning.
A 190Z map of the Central American isthmus demonstrating nineteen possible routes for an interoceanic canal, several of which Humboldt addressed during the first half of the nineteenth century.
The chapter then examines the post-Humboldtian alignment of political, economic, military, and technological forces in favor of the Panama route and against the sea-level design.
This approach helps us appreciate the central Panamanian lock canal as the product of a specific coalition of stakeholders who seized the right opportunities at the right times, rather than as the expected outcome of strategic geography and United States technopolitical superiority.
Humboldt and the Changing Canal Calculus Ever since the Panamanian isthmus became a global route for conveying Peruvian gold and silver to Atlantic ships during the sixteenth century, those searching for a natural maritime passage had pondered the possibility of creating an artificial one.
Eventually, the Spanish government developed a road-and Canalizing and Colonizing the Isthmus 19 map 1.1.
The routes investigated by the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Studies Commission.
Humboldt achieved worldwide fame through popular accounts of his travels and studies of geography, geology, astronomy, meteorology, and ecology, among other fields.
A large inheritance enabled the thirty-year-old mining inspector to finance his own scientific expedition to the Americas from 1799-1804, for which he convinced the king of Spain to issue him and his partner rare passports.
Although he did not visit any parts of the isthmus south of modern-day Mexico, Humboldt’s access to maps, letters, and engineering reports in the archives of the Mexican viceroyalty and other Spanish territories provided crucial information about potential routes for a large artificial waterway.
In the Political Essay, Humboldt described nine routes or, as his translator put it, “points” for cutting a canal.
In particular, although the fifty-mile route from the Caribbean to the Bay of Panama had “occupied every mind” since Vasco Nunez de Balboa’s crossing in 1513, fundamental questions remained about the elevation of the cordilleras and whether the oceans on either side were of different levels.
By that time, most of the Spanish Canalizing and Colonizing the Isthmus 11 colonies in the Americas had gained emancipation, and the governments of the newly independent nations spanning the isthmus were beginning to explore the prospects of canal construction.
An isthmian waterway would revolutionize world trade by precluding the long voyages around Cape Horn and the Cape of Good Hope.
Nevertheless, framing the Central American waterway as an agent of globalization and Asia-Pacific transformation was prescient.
The only concern Humboldt conveyed in public regarding the canal was the potential for military conflict.
Humboldt returned yet again to the interoceanic transit issue in 1849’s Views of Nature.
The discovery of gold in California had caused westward traffic to explode around Cape Horn and across Central America, especially in Panama.
Canalizing and Colonizing the Isthmus 2-3 The difficulty of crossing the Panamanian landmass, though only fifty miles long, by canoe and mule reignited interest in more efficient forms of transportation infrastructure.
In the last decade of his life, Humboldt’s hope for a Darien survey seemed on the verge of fulfillment.
In 1854, fearing competition from British and French interests, the United States Navy launched the first Darien Exploring Expedition.
Popular accounts of the ninety-seven-day ordeal reified perceptions of the Darien as a dangerous wilderness inhabited only by remnants of Indigenous Guna who had survived Spain’s genocidal wars.
Tropical diseases and famine had also doomed an infamous 1698 colonization effort that bankrupted Scotland.
Seven expeditions received funds from a Wall Street financier, sea-level canal enthusiast, and Darien canal concession holder named Frederick Kelley.
Kelley credited the writings of “the illustrious Humboldt” and Admiral Robert FitzRoy, who had captained the famed Beagle voyage of Humboldt’s disciple Charles Darwin, with sparking his interest in the Darien routes.
Not until the 1870s did surveyors return to the southeastern Darien sites that had so interested the illustrious naturalist in his final years.
The Contingent World Wonder In 1869, a decade after Humboldt’s death and the year that citizens of both North and South America celebrated the centennial of his birth, the French diplomat and entrepreneur Ferdinand de Lesseps oversaw the completion of a technological sensation.
The 12.0-mile-long Suez Canal joined the Mediterranean and Red Seas, cutting 4,300 miles off the voyage between the North Atlantic and northern Indian Ocean.
Funded by the sale of shares in the Suez Canal Company, the project took ten years and the lives of thousands of workers, many of them enslaved.
Yet the transformation of the desert isthmus into a moneymaking maritime highway cemented France’s reputation for cutting-edge civil engineering, and intensified interest in creating a similar bypass between the Pacific and Atlantic.
Ulysses S Grant made the isthmian waterway the subject of his first address to Congress after assuming the United States presidency in March 1869, and during his tenure, seven state-sponsored expeditions conducted surveys that built on and refined Humboldt’s routes.
For example, as one surveyor, Lieutenant Frederick Collins, tactfully noted, Humboldt was “somewhat misled” as to the actual height of the mountain range near Cupica Bay, the Pacific terminus of one of the Darien sites.
On the other hand, the lake’s high elevation would require locks to lift and lower ships by as much as no feet.
Although the mountains there were only a third as high as Humboldt had thought, the heavy rains he had warned of magnified the tendency of the clay-streaked soil to collapse on itself.
Even worse than the downpours and landslides were the horrific outbreaks of malaria and yellow fever, which killed twenty-five thousand workers.
Carving a channel through rainforests and wetlands did not compare to digging in the Egyptian desert, and by 1889, de Lesseps’s project and career imploded.
Even as another French company tried to salvage the project by resuming work on a smaller scale from 1894 to 1904, United States canal fever remained strong.
The 1890 publication of a book by a Naval War College history professor provided a justification for an Atlantic-Pacific link that transcended Humboldt’s focus on commercial exchange.
Alfred Thayer Mahan’s tome The Influence of Sea Power upon History, 1660-1783 inspired politicians chastened by the nation’s economic downturn and by perceptions of the frontier’s closure.
Rather than accepting that the era of Manifest Destiny was over now that white settlers had filled the lands west of the Mississippi, Mahan argued that Americans must extend their military dominion over the oceans to protect and expand their commercial fortunes, just as Great Britain had become a world power via naval supremacy, maritime trade, and a far-flung colonial network.
Mahan called for developing naval bases outside United States boundaries.
The benefits of investing in battleships as instruments of economic and foreign policy paid off enormously for the United States in the Spanish-Cuban-American War of 1898, after which Spain ceded Cuba, Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines.
Oregon , which took sixty-six days to rush from San Francisco to the Cuban battlefront by way of Cape Horn; as many observers noted, an isthmian shortcut would have shaved off eight thousand miles.
Several political, economic, and technological forces converged in the half decade from 1898 to 1903 to make the U.S.-controlled Panama Canal a reality.
As assistant secretary of the navy during the war, he had helped implement Mahanian goals, and after becoming president in 1901, he lobbied hard for a canal in Panama.
Although the House of Representatives had voted for a bill specifying a Nicaraguan route, he and a few key stakeholders seeking to build on the French project convinced the Senate otherwise.
Congress passed a law authorizing the president to purchase the French syndicate’s assets and rights and to build an isthmian canal, contingent on the negotiation of a treaty with Nicaragua or Colombia, of which Panama had long been a province.
When the Colombian Senate objected to the ensuing U.S.-Colombia treaty on financial grounds, well-connected insiders encouraged dissatisfied Panamanian elites to revolt in 1903.
Roosevelt deployed battleships to the Caribbean Canalizing and Colonizing the Isthmus 2-7 and Pacific coasts to prevent Colombian troops from suppressing the revolution.
No Panamanians took part in the ensuing treaty negotiation, which was led by a French canal agent who benefited from the sale of his company’s assets for $40 million.
A sea-level waterway would shorten transit times, but Roosevelt did not consider it worth adding too many years and safety risks to the construction process.
By sneaking in dynamite via the surrounding forest or blowing up a transiting ship, saboteurs could disable the canal for months.
Moreover, while recognizing that a seaway would cost more and take longer to build, the majority stressed that it would “endure for all time” no matter how large ships might become, and that the construction expenditures must be balanced against those of maintaining and defending a vulnerable locked waterway.
De Lesseps’s crews had managed to lower the summit from no feet to 193. feet above sea level.
Excavating all the way down, even using the latest technology, would take closer to fifteen years—six years longer than a lock waterway with a summit elevation of 85 feet, or as they called it, a summit-level canal.
Even a sea-level canal, they argued, would be vulnerable to attack at its tidal-regulating structure, a device needed to account for the different maximum tidal ranges on either side of the isthmus.
As surveyors had quantified several decades previously, the Pacific tides rise and fall twenty feet each day, whereas the Caribbean tides move only two feet.
In a sea-level channel, depending on the time of day, the resulting current flows might compromise navigational safety.
A tidal-regulating structure at the Pacific terminus would enable engineers to adjust the currents at a given moment to the desired velocity—but of course not if saboteurs took them out.
Though Roosevelt’s question about the mechanics of conversion remained unanswered, he could not have agreed more with the board’s minority members.
To control the insect-borne diseases that had killed so many of de Lesseps’s workers, sanitarians drained wide swaths of wetlands, installed drinking-water systems in the port cities of Colon and Panama, and sprayed hundreds of thousands of gallons of oil and larvicide.
Closer to the Atlantic side, the 1.5-milelong Gatun Dam channeled the Chagres River into the world’s largest reservoir, Gatun Lake, to serve as the canal’s water and electricity source.
To move so much soil, crews from Barbados, Jamaica, and many other nations mobilized massive steam shovels and hydraulic rock crushers shipped from the booming factories of the Ohio River Valley and Great Lakes.
They also installed three pairs of Pittsburgh-forged locks—each measuring no feet wide by 1,000 feet long—to lift ships 85 feet above sea level.
The ingenious “bridge of water” used fifty-two million gallons of fresh water from the Chagres for every transit.
The radical reshaping of central Panama’s human-dominated landscape was not an unavoidable byproduct of canal construction.
Rather, it resulted from specific decisions that benefited the United States—choices that were easy to forget as second-growth forests took root in cleared fields, and as the waters of Gatun Lake submerged what had been for over three centuries an intensively cultivated valley.
Creating the massive bridge of water and its buffer zone required technological, scientific, and organizational expertise, which countless magazine spreads, postcards, popular books, and world’s fair exhibits commemorated with jingoistic flair.
The image of him operating a steam shovel in a white linen suit became a powerful icon of the conquest of nature and other nations.
Grade school United States history textbooks replicated such heroic representations throughout the twentieth century, reinforcing belief in the project’s inexorableness and righteousness among generations of United States citizens.
Publicity regarding the Panama Canal played up its international commercial benefits and the munificent United States policy of keeping tolls low rather than trying to recoup the $400 million cost.
Of course, as later analyses revealed, low tolls functioned as a subsidy for United States shippers moving goods from coast to coast.
The elderly Mahan, not surprisingly, stressed the incalculable national security benefit of moving the United States naval battalion between oceans as needed.
He had expressed explicit concern about nations fighting to control such a conduit, and more broadly, he rejected scientific racism and its allied institution, slavery.
Despite being the world’s most famous scientist—one who succeeded in getting other projects off the ground (such as networks of magnetic and meteorological observatories)—he failed for forty years to convince officials to conduct comprehensive surveys of all the routes he had identified.
Conducting the scientific reconnaissance work, let alone the large-scale engineering of the actual structure, required favorable political, economic, and technoscientific forces to coalesce at the right moments.
As a United States senator wrote in 1837 of the southern Atrato River valley, “Nature seems to have designed this for the passage.
In fact, the agency responsible for operating and maintaining the waterway, the Panama Canal Company , initiated an ambitious expansion in 1939.
But the project stalled in the midst of World War II, and by the time the fighting ended, larger locks no longer appeared a worthwhile investment.
For officials seeking to bomb-proof the canal at the start of the Atomic Age, dusting off old blueprints for a low-tech seaway made more sense than enlarging vulnerable locks.
Decision makers balked when presented with the exorbitant quotes for converting the Panama Canal to sea level or excavating a new channel along one of the routes studied in the previous century.
Rather than weaponizing atomic energy, PNE designers worked to harness it to reshape the environment for the use and convenience of humankind.
Peaceful nuclear excavation boded well for resolving two kinds of obsolescence facing the postwar Panama Canal, the technological and the geopolitical.
Although previous anti-Yankee protests had led to a few concessions, violent demonstrations in 1947,1958,1959, and, most significantly, 1964 attested to the unsustainability of the status quo.
By negotiating new agreements that separated the issues of military bases and the canal, and by prioritizing the development of a simplified waterway that would require few people to operate and defend—a sea-level canal.
Pitching a cheap nuclear-excavated seaway to another interested client, such as Colombia or Nicaragua, would provide a potent means of checking Panamanian resistance.
This chapter brings the first twentieth-century phase of the sea-level canal proposal out of the historiographic shadows by examining the technological and diplomatic problems the first two generations of Panama Canal officials faced.
The postwar modernization studies highlight the roles that the nuclear seaway played for Presidents Dwight D Eisenhower and John F Kennedy as they sought to blunt the sharp edges of United States imperialism while maintaining control of a strategic region.
Obsolescing Shibboleths Even as popular writers extolled the almost-completed Panama Canal as a wonder of the modern world, serious challenges remained to be solved.
Despite the immensity of the canal’s water source, the 163.5-square-mile Gatun Lake, it could not store enough water during droughts for the increasing traffic.
Nor could the Gatun Dam control all upstream deluges, forcing occasional canal closures.
United States officials responded by invoking the clause of the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty that allowed them to expropriate land from Panama for canal maintenance and protection, and built the Madden Dam on the mountainous upper Chagres from 1931 to Confronting the Canal’s Obsolescence 35 FIGURE 2.i.
Sea-level canal advocates argued that their design would preclude dangerous blockages caused by landslides, ship collisions, or acts of sabotage.
The resulting 22-square-mile Alajuela lake provided an additional freshwater supply for operating the locks and generating hydroelectricity.
It also flooded out more forests and people and expanded the dominion of Canal Zone officials.
In 1929, Congress authorized feasibility studies to determine the cost of expanding the existing waterway and of building a second one in Nicaragua, with which the United States had signed a canal treaty in 1914.
As a PCC publication announced in June 1941, shortly after excavation began on the New Gatun Locks, “The original builders were aware that the Canal’s capacity would eventually require enlargement,” but not so soon.
Construction stopped in 1942, however, and officials focused instead on preparing for a Pearl Harbor-style attack by stocking extra lock gates and building new defensive infrastructure within and outside the Zone.
After the war, the atom bomb cast doubt on the viability of lock canals.
PCC personnel worked closely with the Army Corps of Engineers, the venerable federal agency that had played a key role in building the Panama Canal, to complete the report, titled Isthmian Canal Studies — 1947.
The investigation included a meta-analysis of historical surveys of thirty possible routes spanning Central America, eight of which now appeared suited to sea-level excavation.
The report also drew on new geological mapping and exploratory drilling work, and even featured the construction of a half-mile-long hydraulic model that engineers used to measure the effects of currents and tidal-regulating structures.
Finally, the authors consulted with experts in soil mechanics, dynamics, and seismology to determine the effects of nuclear bombing on canal structures.
In place of the triumphant portrait that had prevailed since the start of the century, the 1947 engineering report painted a grim picture of the Panama Canal.
Once Confronting the Canal’s Obsolescence 37 breached, the Gatun Dam would empty into the Caribbean, rendering the waterway unusable for one to two years and leaving operators at the mercy of the rains for refilling.
If hit with a nuclear weapon, another two years at least would be needed for the radioactivity to dissipate.
Granted, it would require special devices to regulate the tidal currents caused by the differences between the tides in the Pacific and Atlantic.
Flood-control dams and spillways would also be needed to control river inflows.
Nevertheless, the loss of such auxiliary structures would not close the canal for too long.
Even an atomic attack would shut it down for a matter of weeks rather than years.
Converting the existing canal to sea level would take ten years and the removal of one billion cubic yards of soil and rock using conventional construction equipment.
President Harry Truman submitted the report without comment to Congress, and the ensuing hearings privileged the testimony of atomic warfare specialists that no canal could be rendered bombproof.
The development of air power and a two-ocean fleet had undermined the Mahanian rationale for an Atlantic-Pacific link, and the navy had begun building aircraft carriers that exceeded the dimensions of the locks and the narrow Culebra Cut.
Jet planes, the interstate highway, and dieselized railroads could now transport goods and people across the continental United States more quickly than ever.
And the voracious industrial expansion of California precluded the need to continue exporting its petroleum and other natural resources eastward.
United States Air Force personnel interacting with Panamanians in Rio Salud, Colon, Panama, 1952.
The presence of thousands of United States civilians and soldiers in the Canal Zone benefited some sectors of the Panamanian economy but also sparked violent antiUnited States protests in 1947,1958,1959, and 1964.
That was how two Stanford political scientists titled a provocative article in a 1959 issue of Foreign Affairs magazine that called for internationalizing the waterway under the United Nations.
Not only were military and civilian transportation alternatives undermining United States interests in the canal, but so was the increasing “toll in terms of Latin American resentment” exacted by the Canal Zone.
The Zone’s fans celebrated it as a beautifully landscaped enclave of tropical suburbs, whose United States residents enjoyed subsidized housing, health care, and other perks provided by Uncle Sam.
United States officials made some concessions via supplemental treaties in 1936 and 1955.
The latter Eisenhower-Remon Treaty increased the annuity to Panama to $1.93 million, transferred some zone lands, provided for a high bridge to be built across the canal, and guaranteed equal pay for Panamanian and United States employees in the Zone.
Congress delayed implementing the changes, however, and the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty provisions granting United States control over the Zone remained in place.
A momentous event in July 1956 drew unexpected attention to the Zone’s quasi-colonial status.
The Egyptian seizure and nationalization of the Suez Canal intensified United States concerns about maintaining control in Panama, leading the Eisenhower administration to revisit the seaway proposal as a technopolitical lever.
Engineers had long since deemed locks necessary for the route through the high-level Lake Nicaragua.
Even so, during the late 1950s, the PCC, the House of Representatives Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries , and other interested parties continued to investigate the question of canal modernization.
Despite its decline as a strategic asset, the waterway remained a useful conduit.
On May 1, university students surprised United States officials by planting several dozen Panamanian flags in civilian spaces of the Canal Zone.
White Zonians dismissed the demonstration as a joke, but later in the month, riots broke out, marking the second year in a row of lethal antiUnited States protests in Panama.
As gestures of goodwill, the outgoing Eisenhower administration issued an economic aid package and an executive order that the Panamanian flag be raised beside the Stars and Stripes at a conspicuous site in the Zone bordering Panama City.
Concessions served only to encourage more acts of “irresponsible political extortion” by Panamanian radicals and Communist agitators.
PNEs would provide not only an economic boon to the construction industry and a diplomatic option for decision makers facing transportation crises like the Suez closure but also job security to nuclear scientists and engineers if the superpowers succeeded in negotiating treaties mandating disarmament, an important geopolitical development of the late 1950s.
Indeed, Project Plowshare provided a rationale for the Livermore facility to continue operating while the United States observed a voluntary moratorium on nuclear testing from November 1958 to September 1961.
Canals, harbors, reservoirs, mountainous roads, and other such products of “geographical engineering” could be quarried at a fraction of the cost and risk of conventional explosives.
The explosion is used not only to shatter the material, but also to eject it from the cut.
As discussed by several scholars, Chariot involved a great deal of hubris and miscalculation on the part of the AEC from the project’s start in 1958 until its demise four years later.
Ecological and anthropological insights would help determine the optimal time of year to detonate the explosives so as to limit exposure to radiation.
Ideally, the lucrative grants would also provide authoritative endorsements for the nuclear harbor by local scientists.
For John Wolfe, the founding director of the AEC’s new Environmental Sciences Division, the Alaskan research program represented a priceless opportunity to conduct a predetonation biological survey.
At Plowshare’s second symposium in 1959, the former professor of botany emphasized the uniqueness of the Arctic ecosystem, a time when most outsiders considered it a wasteland.
Wolfe even argued for applying Leopold’s ethical framework to the sea, long before most biologists expressed concern about oceanic health.
Wolfe concluded his Plowshare symposium presentation on an unexpected historical note.
The idea of preliminary biological surveys was nothing new, he argued; it underpinned the famous Lewis and Clark Expedition of the early 1800s.
After acquiring a vast landscape extending westward from the Mississippi River, President Thomas Jefferson had instructed Captain Meriwether Lewis to collect data on the natural history and Indigenous peoples of the Missouri and Columbia River basins.
While conceding that the expedition achieved few of Jefferson’s scientific objectives, Wolfe deemed the inspiring intellectual quest applicable to the Alaska project.
Although none of the report’s economic analyses included estimates for acquiring land or securing treaty rights, the construction costs of nuclear excavation appeared very favorable.
The cheapest conventional option, of converting the existing canal to a six-hundred-foot-wide seaway, was $2.-3 billion—three times as much as the least expensive nuclear sea-level canal, a thousand-foot-wide channel to be blasted out along the Sasardi-Morti route in the Panamanian portion of the Darien, no miles east of the existing waterway.
While requiring precise meteorological conditions and the temporary evacuation of thousands of residents, the $770 million project appeared feasible and safe.
The i960 report, authored by a group of engineers that included General Leslie Groves, the former director of the Manhattan Project, investigated many aspects of the Panama Canal’s long-term viability.
The engineering consultants called for more research into isthmian sea-level canal routes and new conventional and nuclear methods of canal construction.
Until safe, cheap PNEs could be developed, they recommended making interim improvements to the existing, aging canal as soon as possible.
Only the last recommendation satisfied Representative Flood, who considered the seaway idea an artifact of postwar hysteria over atomic attacks.
Now that the even more powerful hydrogen bomb had exposed “the underlying fallacies in the ‘security’ thesis for planning navigational projects,” as he asserted in numerous speeches, he argued that policy makers should resume the World War II-era expansion project.
John F Kennedy’s administration tried to dissuade President Roberto Chiari of Panama from broaching the subject of treaty reform, but Chiari insisted the time had come for abrogating the 1903 pact.
The resulting report recommended deferring any decision on a sea-level canal for five years, while conducting feasibility studies and delaying formal treaty negotiations affecting the existing waterway during that period.
As for containing Panamanian pressure, the working group advised redirecting attention to the sea-level canal studies, reinterpreting the 1903 treaty “to satisfy Panamanian aspirations which are reasonable and consistent with the basic interests of the United States,” and providing more economic aid to reduce dependence on canal revenues.
In conveying the report to Kennedy, the State Department’s second-highest official, George Ball, issued two warnings.
The timing was critical because Panama’s academic year commenced in May, and Chiari’s government feared that the new school year would reignite leftist student activism.
Nineteen sixty-two did not constitute the turning point Panamanian treaty reformers had hoped for, but it did result in major changes for Project Plowshare.
The AEC had acquired the scientific data it sought, but not the concomitant political support.
And yet during the same year, the United States lifted the ban against testing nuclear weapons.
Plowshare administrators wasted no time in conducting thermonuclear cratering experiments at the Nevada Test Site.
Within two hours of the shot, the AEC announced that 95 percent of the radioactivity had been contained.
Yet elevated levels of iodine-131 soon appeared in milk supplies in Salt Lake City, Utah.
AEC officials assured worried public health officials that everything would be okay once dairy farmers shifted their cows from fallout-contaminated pasture to dry feed.
Over the next year, high-profile publicity reiterated the agency’s confidence in its ability to develop so-called clean explosives for nuclear excavation.
By contrast, Representative Flood demanded an investigative commission independent of the PCC and Army Corps of Engineers, and advocated for an adapted version of the suspended third-locks expansion of 1939-42 so as to maintain United States territorial rights in the Canal Zone.
A key potential user, the shipping industry, sought to keep tolls as low as possible and distrusted claims that a new sea-level waterway would remain as cheap to transit as the Panama Canal, an issue that would be explored in much more detail by the succeeding administration.
Furthermore, the Livermore laboratory and AEC had a strong stake in finding new projects as public support increased for nuclear arms control.
By that time, United States and Soviet physicists had long since developed bombs that dwarfed the explosive power of the ones deployed against Japan.
The experiment unleashed radioactive fallout over a much wider swath of the Pacific Ocean than expected and sickened the members of a Japanese fishing boat, generating worldwide outrage.
No matter how remote test sites appeared to be, the dozens of experimental detonations conducted each year by the three nuclear powers—the United States, United Kingdom, and Soviet Union—released radioactive isotopes that made their way into human bodies.
Campaigns to expose the public health effects of radioactive fallout helped drive the diplomatic efforts to decelerate the nuclear arms race during the late 1950s and early 1960s.
Confronting the Canal’s Obsolescence 47 While allowing underground tests to continue, the proposed test ban treaty posed an existential threat to PNE projects in smaller nations by banning cross-border releases of radionuclides.
Nevertheless, he asserted, excavation technology experiments could proceed under the proposed treaty, and future nuclear construction projects could take place as long as the parties to the treaty agreed to amend it.
In October 1963, the United States Senate ratified the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, a milestone for international arms control, Cold War diplomacy, and environmental health protection.
But it upset advocates of geoengineering because the final document, unlike earlier versions, included no exceptions for PNEs, not even on an experimental basis.
Cautious optimism prevailed nevertheless that agreements could be worked out with the Soviets, who were pursuing their own PNE projects, to allow cratering shots to continue.
The technical, economic, and military rationales for the sea-level canal appeared ripe for reanalysis.
Conclusion Midcentury technological and economic innovations reduced United States reliance on the Panama Canal as a commercial and military conduit, but by then the Panama Canal Zone had become a critical locale for Latin American-focused surveillance, security, and defense infrastructure.
Accordingly, except for a few modifications, postwar United States officials resisted making fundamental changes to the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty.
Yet maintaining hemispheric security interests while managing the more obvious issues of canal ownership and operation was becoming more and more difficult.
The proposal for a sea-level canal, especially one constructed with the new technology of PNEs, appeared to address the technopolitical outdatedness of the Panama Canal and its zone.
For Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy, the seaway idea, in concert with symbolic concessions, offered a background kind of diplomatic leverage to placate Panamanian dissent indefinitely.
Because it was such a technically complex undertaking, the proposal bought time for Plowshare scientists and engineers to develop safer explosives and build greater public trust, and for United States officials to improve diplomatic relations with Panama without provoking the many Americans who considered the Canal Zone their own.
In hindsight, each of these endeavors was as riddled with unsustainable, contradictory premises as the Canal Zone system itself.
Nevertheless, they reinforced the exciting conditions of possibility embodied by the nuclear seaway of the future, a project designed to imbue the Panamanian landscape with multiple forms of modernity.
What was to have been a year of celebration opened instead with four days of antiUnited States violence across Panama, worldwide coverage ofwhich featured United States soldiers firing on citizens of their host country.
Panama’s president, fed up with the delays over treaty reform and eyeing an uphill election campaign for his conservative party, broke diplomatic ties and refused to resume them without an agreement to abrogate the 1903 accord that granted the northern colossus perpetual control over the waterway and its surrounding zone.
While the new United States president was not about to bullied, he knew the status quo could not endure.
Lyndon B Johnson had assumed office following the tragic assassination of Kennedy on November 21, 1963.
That morning, Plowshare and State Department officials had met to discuss how the nuclear sea-level canal proposal could remain viable in the context of the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, signed by Kennedy a month earlier.
The January Flag Riots, as they became known, led Johnson to resume secret discussions over the political benefits of building a nuclear canal on the cheap in either Panama or another nation.
He sought to defuse Panamanian demands for treaty reform until after the November 1964 United States presidential election.
Johnson had to tread a fine line between managing dissent among frustrated Panamanians and the demands of anticommunist United States interests to take a hard line against the small yet strategic nation.
The sea-level canal provided the ideal venue for doing so, and Johnson masterfully used the proposal to contain both foreign and domestic opposition during the pivotal year following the Flag Riots.
Permeating these two developments was an intriguing degree of what could be called technological anti-imperialism.
Johnson harnessed the disparate economic, military, and political forces favoring a modern new waterway to nudge forward the cause of Panamanian sovereignty over the Panama Canal Zone.
Johnson’s two predecessors, Eisenhower and Kennedy, had also viewed the sea-level canal proposal as a means of dismantling the problematic Canal Zone, but Johnson worked to get the feasibility studies going in a much timelier manner.
That is not to say that Johnson did not employ delay tactics, nor that his vision of a colony-free canal lacked bias.
The idea that a simplified seaway would enable its owners to dispense with highly skilled personnel recapitulated the patronizing presumption that few if any Panamanians could be trusted or trained to operate complex infrastructure, one of the many points of contention between the two nations.
Moreover, the administration sought to reduce Panamanian leverage over the treaty negotiations by calling for the investigation of sea-level canal routes in other countries besides Panama.
Despite its important anticolonialist components, the seaway proposal undermined principles of equity and sovereignty in other ways.
Accordingly, the Johnson treaty negotiators sought separate pacts governing the proposed new seaway and the existing military bases.
Finally, the progressive goal of recognizing Panama’s full sovereignty over its lands via a new sea-level canal treaty must be considered in the context of contemporaneous foreign policy initiatives that exuded technological arrogance.
Johnson officials funded a secret experimental program to control the weather in India and Pakistan for food production and drought mitigation.
Much more famously and disastrously, the administration escalated the anticommunist war in Vietnam despite intelligence assessments that superior firepower could not overcome the enemy’s resolve.
Johnson also expanded his predecessor’s program of chemical herbicidal warfare.
These cases demonstrate how Johnson embraced science and technology as diplomatic instruments to control and reengineer the physical environment and less technologically advanced nations.
It is no mere coincidence that the major architects of the Vietnam War—Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, and his successor Walt Rostow—also championed the nuclear Central American canal.
A Tale of Two Treaties Throughout 1963, while the United States Congress debated the terms of the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, anti-Yankee tensions intensified in Panama.
Facing anger from young Panamanians, the oligarchic Chiari renewed his public demands for a new treaty, but the United States government would commit only to constructing new flagpoles in the Zone to fly the Panamanian standard alongside the United States one.
The Soviets had deployed ballistic missiles to Cuba following the failed 1961 United States plan to overthrow Fidel Castro, the leader of the communist Cuban Revolution.
Because Balboa High School, which was located in a part of the Zone near Panama City, had only one flagpole, its leaders took down the banner to avoid violating the order.
Encouraged by their parents, several Zonian teenagers raised a makeshift replacement on the night ofjanuary 7-8,1964.
Word spread, and outraged Panamanian students marched into the Zone on the ninth to raise their own flag, a bloodstained relic of a 1947 riot.
Radio broadcasts of the incident sparked uprisings in Panama City and Colon.
In the violence that consumed the country on the ninth, tenth, eleventh, and twelfth, when the Guardia Nacional finally resumed control, twenty-one Panamanians and four United States soldiers died.
As an editorial in the glossy Life magazine stated, “As owner and operator of the Canal Company, the United States government has blindly allowed the Canal Zone to turn into a pretty fair imitation of a colony, complete with a colonial mentality.
However, while Johnson officials worked to contain the damage, 56 percent of Americans demanded that their government make no concessions to Panama.
The day after the riots ended, Johnson met with several high-level officials including Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, and Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Thomas C Mann to discuss solutions to the diplomatic impasse.
Mann, a controversial diplomat whom Johnson had appointed the month before, argued for using the threat of building a sea-level canal in Colombia or Nicaragua as a means of leverage with Panama so as to develop a new treaty acceptable to the United States Senate.
Johnson and officials from the State and Defense Departments and Atomic Energy Commission agreed, but the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty of 1963 posed a daunting obstacle.
By prohibiting cross-border releases of radioactive debris, the treaty diluted the threat to Panama of building a nuclear canal in another country.
To contain the damage, he suggested advance surveying work could begin while negotiators obtained a test ban treaty exemption for peaceful nuclear excavation in smaller countries.
Otherwise, if further delays ensued, “the political opposition may well push for the site surveys themselves.
The Flag Riots stimulated bipartisan congressional support for nuclear canal excavation, and thus the AEC pressed the White House for permission to resume relevant work at the Nevada Test Site.
It had been nineteen months since the first and last excavation experiment, Project Sedan, although other Plowshare detonations oriented toward device development had taken place there in the meantime.
In contrast to the hundred-kiloton Sedan device that left an enormous crater on the desert floor, the next proposed excavation test, Project Sulky, involved a blast of only ninety-two tons.
But concerns that the explosion might still vent enough radionuclides to be detected in Canada or Mexico sparked an internal debate about the risks of violating the test ban treaty.
The administration decided in February 1964 to postpone the project until the following winter.
The intervening months would provide more time to continue developing less-contaminating explosives and thereby improve the prospects of nondetection, time to ensure the most advantageous wind and weather conditions, and time to address the potential for amending the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
By then, the grazing season and presidential election would have also passed, thereby reducing the test’s literal and figurative fallout.
The long-delayed congressional bills for sea-level canal feasibility studies got a new round of hearings in March 1964.
Cabinet officials framed the nuclear seaway as the solution to long-standing problems encompassing the technological, economic, and political realms.
Vance reiterated the postwar history of calls for canal modernization, and explained “the current difficulties” between the two nations as a function of the lock waterway’s complexity and concomitant need of a large United States labor force.
The Panamanian officials with whom Johnson administration officials had conferred did not want a career diplomat heading the team, and Anderson attributed his acceptability to the goodwill he had established among Panama’s ruling elite by leading the 1959 effort to organize the Inter-American Development Bank.
Looking back in the late 1970s, Anderson noted Johnson’s dedication to restoring diplomatic relations with Panama but also his unrealistic assumption that the treaty negotiations could be completed within two to three months—a far cry from the two-and-a-half years over which they stretched.
Anderson also recalled that in their initial discussion, Johnson expressed concern about how the Panama Canal related to one of his signature initiatives, the space program, for which some of the enormous rocket parts had to be transported via barge from California to the Florida launch site.
Anderson agreed to serve as the special representative for U.S.-Panama relations in exchange for access to the president and permission to remain based in Manhattan, and Johnson established two new entities to formulate and execute United States policy in Panama, one in Washington and the other in Panama.
The jurists concluded that Canal Zone police and United States Army personnel used disturbingly excessive force at some points, but that the use of force per se was justified to quell the riots.
One antiquated perk that attracted attention was the 25 percent tropical hardship differential paid to United States citizen employees in the Canal Zone.
The salary boost had been deemed necessary to attract northern whites in the early 1900s, when malaria and yellow fever posed dangerous threats to foreigners lacking immunity.
But sanitary engineering, chemical pesticides, air conditioning, and other technological advances had long since reduced the hazards of tropical living.
In addition, the fiftieth anniversary of the opening of the waterway transpired with “quiet and restrained ceremonies which were not offensive to Panama,” as the secretary of defense assured the president.
On the other hand, the Zone leadership overlooked other requested changes, such as having ships transiting the canal fly the Panamanian flag (in addition to the United States one and the flag of registry), making Spanish an official language, and using the host country’s postage stamps.
Echoing the rationales made by Vance, Mann, Ailes, and others, he explained that an agreement for a new seaway in Panama “would put to rest many of the emotional issues which now plague our relations.
A new treaty for a simplified waterway requiring far fewer United States employees—who would be required to leave by a fixed date, even if it were far in the future—held the key for improving relations with Panama over both the short and long terms.
Toward that end, a new feasibility study authorization bill that had emerged from the March hearings had passed the Senate and was scheduled for an upcoming House vote.
But the administration’s efforts to buy time prior to the November presidential election had another payoff in the form of a new technical assessment of the nuclear-excavated canal, the first since i960.
While the average yield per detonation would be approximately 10 megatons, cutting through the i,ioo-foot-high Continental Divide would require an explosion of some 35 megatons.
By comparison, the most powerful nuclear device ever tested by the United States, the 1954 Castle Bravo blast that released radioactive fallout over a hundred-mile swath of the Pacific Ocean, yielded 15 megatons.
The other proposed nuclear path between the seas crossed Colombia’s portion of the Darien isthmus via the Atrato and Truando Rivers.
Designated Route 25, it closely paralleled the route that had intrigued the elderly Humboldt in the 1850s.
As for the cost, emplacement drilling, explosive charges, and other direct expenses of nuclear excavation would require approximately $307 million for the Panama route and $315 million for the Colombia one.
To improve the economic and safety estimates, the army engineers and Plowshare scientists called for the accumulation and analysis of much more data pertaining to the topography, geology, meteorology, hydrology, coastal hydrography, seismology, ecology, demography, and economic resources of the two regions.
The congressional bill authorizing the group that would be responsible for overseeing the formidable research program, the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission, passed both houses in September 1964.
Rather, the Flag Riots had expedited long-standing calls for action regarding the obsolescing canal.
His home state of Washington was the site of the Hanford facility that produced the plutonium for the nation’s nuclear weapons.
They have been talking about this for a long time, hoping that new nuclear technology can be put to some good uses.
Representative Flood did succeed in ensuring that neither cabinet members nor civil servants would oversee the feasibility studies.
However, the final bill authorized the president to appoint five private citizens without congressional consent.
Wilson Jr., Lieutenant Colonel Robert W McBride, and Senator Warren G Magnuson discussing the use of nuclear charges to excavate a second Central American canal, March iz, 1964.
Accordingly, Johnson’s Panama-based policy review committee met days later to develop guidelines for the treaty renegotiations.
Indeed by December 1, Mann, working with State and Defense Department personnel, had developed the broad framework for three new treaties.
The sea-level canal accord would give the United States the right to conduct the needed surveys and to construct the new waterway, but not to operate and maintain it; that would be the job of an international commission, and sovereignty over the seaway would be held by the country through which it passed.
Abrogating the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty in such a way, explained Bundy, would secure United States canal rights for the time being while undercutting antiAmericanism on the isthmus.
Bundy urged the president to make a strong statement later in December regarding the sea-level canal treaty negotiations.
To hammer out the language, the cabinet would meet the next day at the White House.
That was how journalists described it, but it was no surprise to former presidents Harry Truman and Dwight Eisenhower and other VIPs whose approval Johnson had secured in advance.
Johnson outlined the technological, economic, military, and political reasons for changing course, arguing, “Such a canal will be more modern, more economical, and will be far easier to defend.
Thanks to the $17 million Congress had authorized to study four possible routes—two in Panama, one in Colombia, and one through Nicaragua that might also include part of Costa Rica—the United States would be well-equipped to modernize maritime transportation.
It is an age of friendly partnership among the nations concerned with the traffic between the oceans.
Mobilizing for Panama Canal II 63 Conclusion The Flag Riots helped transform the nuclear seaway idea from a United States presidential delaying tactic into a serious diplomatic instrument for resolving the persistent tensions caused by the 1903 treaty between the United States and Panama.
The sea-level canal’s economic, defense, and political rationales each proved insufficient to justify the project.
But the unprecedented scale of antiUnited States violence in January 1964 accentuated the value for United States decision makers of merging the three factors.
Contemporaneous technical advances in PNEs further strengthened the case for committing significant scientific and diplomatic attention to the several possible routes the megaproject might take.
An immense amount of scientific, engineering, and diplomatic groundwork remained before the problems produced by the 1903 treaty could ever go away.
It is true that, like his predecessors, President Johnson used the nuclear sealevel canal idea to his advantage.
However, framing the proposal as a cynical ploy or high-modernist boondoggle limits our understanding of how it functioned as a complex, qualified instrument of technological anti-imperialism.
While it did serve to buy time and distract angry stakeholders, that does not mean the proposal was fictitious.
Whether or not he believed it would ever come to fruition, Johnson’s advocacy of the nuclear canal set in motion a process that would have important, unpredictable side effects pertaining to politics, science, technology, and the environment.
In fact, the nuclear seaway resembled other Johnson administration initiatives to mobilize science and technology for diplomatic ends in the so-called Third World, from weather modification in India and Pakistan to herbicidal warfare in Vietnam.
Moreover, the Panatomic Canal embodied the broader Cold War ethos of faith in science and technology that “encouraged bold environmental interventions” to reshape and optimize the landscape for human use.
Ever since the commission released its final report in 1970 recommending conventional rather than nuclear construction of a new channel to the west of the original one, it has been criticized for wasting millions of dollars, minimizing ecological risks, and rubberstamping a foregone conclusion.
In the capitalist West, democratic institutions vitiated the ability of planners to impose their absolute visions of order upon the land and people.
But North American megaprojects such as hydroelectric dams and urban renewal did feature top-down planning and other high-modernist hallmarks.
The CSC operated in the context of a presidential administration that also privileged technological solutions to political problems and disdained criticism thereof, as exemplified by the near-simultaneous escalation of chemical herbicidal warfare in Vietnam.
Indeed, the major architects of the war in Vietnam were the greatest proponents of the nuclear sea-level canal, or at least of renegotiating relations with Panama in relation to it.
After the Flag Riots, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy promoted the announcement of the historic foreign policy change regarding the U.S.-Panama treaty in 1964.
The sea-level canal held the key to modernizing the technological and political Panama Canal complex.
Under such circumstances, it was not at all inevitable that the commission would advise against nuclear construction of a new canal.
Congress passed NEPA in December 1969, after several high-profile cases of pollution focused public attention on the negative environmental consequences of modern industrial society.
NEPA sought to instill environmental values into federal megaproject decision-making by requiring federal agencies to conduct preliminary environmental impact studies.
The law also provided opportunities for public input and empowered citizens to challenge technocratic projects via the courts.
Such developments traced in part to the revolutionary argument of Rachel Carson’s best-selling 1962 book Silent Spring —that “the authoritarian temporarily entrusted with power” had no right to make unilateral decisions regarding the use of technologies affecting society.
Navigating High Modernism 69 The commissioners and their executive director showed no awareness of Carson’s book, and they derided environmentalism as a passing fad.
However, pressure from marine scientists forced them to consider how broadly they should define the scope of the environmental data needed to determine the sea-level canal’s engineering feasibility.
The latter question dogged the commission throughout its existence but especially during the second half of its tenure, from early 1968 to December 1970.
This chapter examines how the CSC (also known as the Anderson Commission, after its chair, Robert B Anderson) and its consultants engaged in multiple sets of negotiations in the service of the nuclear sea-level canal endeavor during its first two-and-a-half years, from the spring of 1965 to late 1967.
By divulging the twists and turns of their deliberations, the commission’s scrapbooks and declassified meeting transcripts shine light on an evolving approach to environmental impact assessment in the pre-NEPA era.
The concept of “negotiated high modernism,” which refers to the consultations and compromises that democratic governments must engage in to bring unpopular megaprojects to fruition, helps us understand how the CSC coped with the challenges of rendering a responsible decision.
The commission navigated those rough waters with a degree of flexibility that was remarkable for large-scale technocratic planners of the era.
To take but three contemporary examples, the architects and implementers of the Aswan Dam, midcentury Manhattan, and the chemical war in Vietnam demonstrated little if any consideration of the ecological and social toll.
The members of President Johnson’s canal study group deserve more attention for how they reconciled their faith in the promise of nuclear excavation with external demands to address its nonfinancial costs.
Engineering the Commission At the behest of the Johnson administration, Congress established the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission near the end of the 1964 session, eight months after the Flag Riots exposed the political unsustainability of the U.S.-run Panama Canal Zone.
The law authorized the commander-inchief to appoint “five men from private life” to conduct an investigation of enormous scope to determine where and how to build an isthmian sea-level canal.
The Democratic Pennsylvania congressman had been defending the sovereignty of the United States over the Canal Zone since the 1958 riots and had worked to ensure that the CSC members would not be the government officials desired by Johnson.
However, the president’s delay in making the appointments, and press coverage that the cabinet officials Stephen Ailes and Thomas Mann had visited Nicaragua, Costa Rica, Colombia, and Panama in January 1965 to discuss canal options, led Flood to allege a cover-up.
Convinced the commission would approve the Panama Canal Company’s 1947 recommendation to convert the present waterway to sea level, and that the nuclear routes were propagandistic distractions, Flood reminded his colleagues of why his hero Theodore Roosevelt had rejected the sea-level arguments back in 1906.
At one pivotal point, Representative Leonor Sullivan confided that she would not be able to slip a requested change through by simply listing it on the committee calendar.
To keep the treaty negotiations and seaway feasibility studies interlinked, Johnson selected Robert B Anderson, the special representative for U.S.-Panama relations, as CSC chair.
Raymond A Hill was a renowned water resources development expert and lead author of a 1938 compact that addressed long-standing water rights disputes over the Rio Grande.
Having worked in Panama since 1961 as the military assistant for canal affairs to the secretary of the army, he was well versed in isthmian politics.
Earlier in his career, he had also completed a three-year program in nuclear energy and weapons.
Sheffey, then in his midforties, retired from the military to take on what he considered a prestigious assignment as the study commission’s executive director.
The postwar mandate of the Army Corps of Engineers emphasized flood control, navigation works, and other aspects of water resources development, but the agency retained strong links to the atomic energy establishment.
The corps had played a key role in organizing the Manhattan Project, and in 1962. established the Nuclear Cratering Group at the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory.
Like the Livermore Plowshare physicists—and civil engineers more generally—corps personnel sought to reshape the landscape for utilitarian purposes.
Due to their shared values, and the corps’s influence in Congress (a function of its pork barrel water projects), the Plowshare-Corps partnership was mutually beneficial.
Accordingly, the CSC designated an Army Corps officer as its official engineering agent.
The canal study commissioners had much of their work cut out for them because the Livermore physicists and Nuclear Cratering Group engineers had been working on the sea-level canal project for years.
Yet good maps, let alone subsurface geophysical data, remained elusive.
To do it in less than a minute with a single explosion staggers the imagination.
Because the atomic seaway would take ten to thirteen years to complete, Seaborg, Johnson, and Kelly testified before Congress in January 1965 that the field surveys and nuclear cratering tests should start as soon as possible.
Yet the Anderson Commission did not begin meeting until the late spring, by which time it was already behind schedule.
Due to the original three-year congressional limit and the short tropical dry season, which lasted from December/January to April, Corps of Engineers representatives had outlined an ambitious schedule of data collection and site surveys.
The final year of 1967-68 would be reserved for evaluating all the data to determine the most feasible, cost-effective channel designs, as well as the projected schedule of nuclear detonations and area evacuations.
Meanwhile, if all went according to plan, Plowshare scientists and technicians would be conducting six experiments at the Nevada Test Site to see how various configurations of PNEs operated in nature rather than in theory.
Uncharted Territory Not only was time not on their side but also, from the start, the commission members harbored deep concerns about the costs posed by the field studies.
The infrastructural costs alone—constructing the camps and data collection stations, clearing center line trails across the isthmus, and providing communications and medical support along the two routes—would consume $2 million of the $17. million budget.
Ideally, the equipment would be set up prior to the dry season of January 1, 1966, but Congress resisted releasing funds before the survey agreements with Panama and Colombia had been inked, making for yet more delays and logistical headaches.
Another worrisome constraint over which the commission had no control was the test ban treaty restriction against depositing radioactive debris in adjacent nations.
Despite the commissioners’ enthusiasm for PNEs, they knew there would be no point in conducting any sea-level canal studies if the administration had no intention of spending political capital to amend the protocol to allow peaceful nuclear experiments.
At the second meeting as well as later ones, Kelly maintained that the Russian language text of the treaty provided for a more liberal interpretation of the ban on radiation outside national borders and that every test shot would release some radiation— which would not pose a serious health risk anyway.
Other federal agencies, especially the State Department and Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, viewed Plowshare as a threat to nuclear weapons nonproliferation initiatives.
The third CSC meeting, in July 1965, featured a heated discussion among representatives of the AEC and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency about the potential of Plowshare experiments to cause an international incident by venting radiation across the border.
From the start, the CSC and its AEC partners recognized the importance of researching isthmian food chains and ecosystems to determine how their human users would be affected by the radiation released by PNEs.
Even as the AEC assured the public that radioactive fallout carried minimal health risks, the agency provided a major source of support for ecosystem ecologists during the Cold War.
That query came from an unexpected source, Chairman Anderson’s deputy treaty negotiator.
John N Irwin II, a fellow Republican and Manhattan-based lawyer, attended the CSC meetings when his boss’s busy schedule kept him away.
Irwin’s job was to brief the commission on the latest developments in the U.S.-Panama treaty talks, but he also bugged them about an interest that occupied his leisure time.
The essay addressed the “interesting biological problems” regarding the marine consequences of building a sea-level canal.
Unlike the existing lock canal, which contained a large freshwater reservoir that prevented most marine species from transiting, a sea-level channel would join the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans for the first time since the rise of the isthmian land bridge during the late Pliocene.
After all, the private research organization that had won the AEC’s bioenvironmental contract, the Battelle Memorial Institute, planned to collect terrestrial baseline data as well as information on oceanographic currents, temperature gradients, and marine life on either side of the isthmus.
When the Chariot project began, he explained, an agreement between the State Department and AEC had precluded the latter from taking a proactive stance, “and we got into trouble because that is all we could do, answer questions.
Other members of the atomic energy establishment echoed Kelly’s attitude about the proper way to mold public opinion.
As the former AEC commissioner and Nobel prizewinning physical chemist Willard Libby told a journalist in 1966, both of Alaska’s senators had supported Project Chariot and thus the plan should have proceeded.
Our cautiousness gave the lie to our reassurances about fallout, and ruined the project.
Despite Flood’s allegation that the commission would recommend converting the existing canal to sea level, as the Panama Canal Company had advised in 1947, the CSC invested little in that option.
At their seventh meeting, in November 1965, they grilled National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy about the administration’s commitment to the atomic seaway.
Commissioner Hill, who possessed the most experience in the contentious realm of water resources management, pressed Bundy about whether the sea-level canal decision would ultimately come down to economics or politics.
Bundy hedged that a new waterway appeared to be on the horizon due to its technological and diplomatic superiority over the outdated existing channel, but stated that it was by no means a fait accompli.
The chair ordered the ensuing discussion off the record, a sign of the topic’s immense sensitivity.
Later, Bundy addressed one last question on the record, about how the commission should interpret the word feasibility as used in the authorizing legislation.
Nonetheless, Seaborg insisted at the January 1966 CSC meeting that by consolidating the remaining nuclear excavation experiments, Plowshare personnel could answer the feasibility question by the June 30, 1968 deadline.
Navigating High Modernism 79 Not only were budgets being cut left and right, political and meteorological impediments loomed large.
The AEC had planned to conduct six shots starting with the Cabriolet experiment at the Nevada Test Site that spring.
The timing of each test was essential to avoid potential releases of radioactive fallout during the grazing season.
But Johnson postponed the Cabriolet shot during the critical 1966 window for fear of violating the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty and disrupting the current SovietUnited States nonproliferation discussions.
Thousands of miles south of the Nevada desert, the Darien fieldwork also failed to start as planned.
Gaining permission from the governments of Panama and Colombia proved more difficult than expected because legislators in both nations perceived the field studies as diversionary tactics.
The late start cost a great deal of time and money, as did the unexpected allocation to Southeast Asia of military helicopters and other equipment needed by the Darien surveyors.
But Johnson had little to celebrate, as the treaty negotiations dragged on.
Moreover, geopolitical, economic, and meteorological constraints were converging so as to subvert the technocratic “air of inevitability” and the assumption underlying the AtlanticPacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission—that an engineering solution to the multifaceted problems posed by the lock canal could be achieved by mobilizing science and technology to reshape the political and hydrological geography of the isthmus.
By the time the engineering feasibility field studies finally took place from 1966 through 1969, the commissioners found themselves having to adapt to obstacles that decelerated the institutional momentum underlying Plowshare.
Eastern Panama’s population of approximately fifty thousand consisted of Indigenous tribes, African descendants, and mestizo settlers.
The Kuna, or Guna, famed for their independence and mola artwork, numbered twenty-one thousand and practiced subsistence fishing and slash-and-burn farming in the upper Chucunaque River valley and on the San Bias coast, near the Caribbean end of the proposed canal route.
The fifteen hundred Indigenous Choco occupied villages along rivers draining into the Gulf of Miguel, the Pacific terminus of Route 17.
Colonel Alexander G Sutton Jr. had taken charge of the office the previous summer, having spent four years directing the corps’s Waterways Experiment Station in Vicksburg, Mississippi.
The facility’s large-scale models of the Mississippi and other rivers helped engineers predict the effects of flood-control structures and otherwise bridge the realms of hydraulic science and engineering.
Taking the measure of the formidable Darien would entail very different kinds of considerations and actions than operating a control panel of knobs and switches.
The Johnson administration’s month-long delay in announcing the site survey agreement led to misunderstandings, as did a lack of transparency on the ground.
The Panama American , a newspaper that primarily served United States residents of the Canal Zone, reported in mid-March that eyewitnesses had viewed a few dozen men setting up tidal and weather stations, as well as a coast-to-coast surveying track, across the eastern Darien.
Yet when reached for comment, the United States embassy and other offices denied that the Route 17 work had begun.
The author considered such secrecy pointless, given that land Navigating High Modernism FIGURE 4.1.
Equipment delivered via United States Navy tank landing ship to construct a meteorological station on Soskatupu Island near the Atlantic terminus of the proposed Panamanian nuclear route , ca. early 1966.
Eleta had provoked anger among his fellow citizens by not submitting the site survey agreement for advance approval to the National Assembly and by waiting until April to confirm that the field studies had actually begun.
He might have been concealing a conflict of interest; according to a confidential document in the Anderson Commission’s files, Eleta supported the Route 17 proposal to stimulate development of the area, where he owned property.
The business leader, who held an undergraduate degree in structural engineering from MIT, also asked that an upcomingHtojw in Action exhibition scheduled for Panama focus more on the promise of nuclear excavation.
As the Office of Interoceanic Canal Studies liaison officer boasted to the commissioners back in Washington, the article’s flattering approach made it more of a press release than a journalistic expose.
The corps even sent extra copies as a morale-building effort to the three dozen men in the field, who were experiencing grueling heat and the predations of biting mosquitoes and vampire bats.
The upbeat news story got picked up by international media, which facilitated the commission’s task of controlling the narrative that the field studies were at last underway and under control.
Another hard lesson entailed paying more respect to residents of the survey areas, especially the semiautonomous Guna, a people with a long history of resisting Spanish, Panamanian, and United States domination.
Torres helped the corps broker an agreement by which the United States would provide medical assistance and compensation for damaged Guna trees and gardens.
Yet the trees were not useless to the Guna, who negotiated reimbursements of $2 to $5 for palms and $7 for avocado trees cleared Navigating High Modernism 83 FIGURE 4.
United States Army Corps of Engineers colonel Alexander Sutton paying a stack of United States bills to Guna chief Yabiliquina to compensate for trees and vegetation removed during the construction of a weather-recording station in the Darien, Soskatupu, Comaro de San Bias, September zo, 1966.
Her results later informed the United States Department of Transportation environmental impact statement requirements for the proposed completion of the Pan-American Highway through the Darien Gap.
Along Route 17, all sixteen hydrology stations, including tidal gauge, rain gauge, and river gauge stations, were up and running.
Coverage by local journalists emphasized the benefits to Panama, which included both jobs and valuable data about potential mineral, hydroelectric, agricultural, and fishery resources.
The field studies to the southeast in the Atrato River valley of Colombia had also at long last begun.
Reina Torres de Arauz with Guna, Panamanian, and United States representatives preparing to meet to execute payment for trees and vegetation removed during the construction of a weather-recording station in conjunction with the canal studies in the Darien, Soskatupu, Comaro de San Bias, September zo, 1966.
Despite carefully staged ceremonies, protests against both Yankee imperialism and the oligarchic Robles government erupted on the third anniversary of the Flag Riots, January 9,1967.
At a subsequent congressional hearing, the corps representative Woodbury testified that “agitators” were sowing discontent among the Indigenous people working for the Route 17 survey by telling them that they were not being paid enough.
Navigating High Modernism 85 More canal study calamities were unfolding stateside.
For the second year in a row, President Johnson acceded to pressure from the State Department and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency to call off the Cabriolet test.
After canceling it in early 1966, Johnson agreed to another delay in February 1967 to avoid disrupting negotiations in Mexico City among twenty-one countries to outlaw nuclear weapons in Latin America via the Treaty of Tlatelolco.
Underground explosions at the Nevada Test Site from 1963 to 1966 had emitted fallout eight times.
Even though none of the incidents involved cross-border releases, the State Department had just sent a representative to the Tlatelolco treaty conference to protest a provision that allowed participating nations to use nuclear devices for peaceful purposes.
To placate his pro-PNE critics, Johnson asked Congress to increase the Plowshare appropriation from $15. million to $19. million for the fiscal year beginning on July 1, 1967.
In June 1967, Presidents Johnson and Robles announced that the two nations had agreed to replace the HayBunau-Varilla pact with three new treaties governing the existing canal, the Zone defense bases, and the proposed sea-level canal.
But before the accords could be signed, the Chicago Tribune published the unofficial texts.
Anderson and other administration members held out hope that the diplomatic process could continue.
After chemical weapons wreaked havoc in World War I, for instance, most of the world’s nations outlawed them via the Geneva Protocol of 1925.
In all these cases, governmental decision makers—often working with elite economic stakeholders—played powerful roles in determining which new technologies and associated infrastructural systems gained dominance.
For those still hoping in the late 1960s that PNEs would become a routine tool for harbor and canal construction, support came from an unexpected source.
The cautionary Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, the periodical that since 1947 had featured the famous Doomsday Clock to represent the changing threat to humanity by nuclear technology, published a special report in its December 1967 issue.
Managing public relations and governmental expectations, and reconciling their faith in the potential of nuclear Navigating High Modernism 87 excavation with unexpected diplomatic and economic issues, required much more than the three years originally allocated by Congress.
Key allies enabled the commission to gain one last extension, until December 1,1970.
Except for Flood and a few others, even some of the stalwart congressional defenders of the canal status quo, especially Representative Leonor Sullivan of the pivotal House Merchant Marine and Fisheries Committee, worked to ensure the completion of the sea-level canal studies.
In the process of plotting out their final two years, the members of the Anderson Commission began shifting focus to another route that ruled out PNEs.
Yet even as they became more realistic about the political infeasibility of nuclear methods, other important issues in the air blindsided them.
The geological and marine biological dimensions of the sea-level canal endeavor prompted significant epistemological and diplomatic challenges and opportunities, and they show how the isthmian environment itself—both the land and surrounding seas—helped shape political perceptions of the new waterway’s feasibility.
The commission sponsored several data-collecting expeditions along the two proposed nuclear routes.
Because scientists knew so little about the Darien rainforests and marshlands, much of the work entailed basic environmental research—quantitative studies that Humboldt would have approved.
Corps of Engineers personnel also conducted experiments pertaining to ground and air blast activity.
The subcontracted studies generated numerous peer-reviewed journal articles and volumes of gray literature.
Near the end of the surveys in Panama, workers confirmed that the saturated clay shale soils along a twenty-mile stretch of the otherwise-ideal Route 17 would not hold up to underground thermonuclear blasts.
While not wholly unexpected, the finding had revolutionary implications both for the proponents of nuclear construction and for the United States treaty negotiators.
How the commissioners dealt with the clay shales “bad actor” sheds light on the secretive, technocratic aspects of their approach to environmental impact assessment.
The CSC had always accepted the need for biological data to predict the effects of nuclear excavation on the human societies of the isthmus.
But they drew a sharp line between essential and desirable bioenvironmental information when the zoologically oriented canal treaty negotiator, John Irwin, suggested looking into the broader effects of a sea-level waterway on oceanic organisms.
How they handled the pressure highlights one of the most intriguing side effects of the sea-level canal story, the emergence of an international forum for debating the effects of maritime transportation on marine biological diversity.
The Ivory Soap Bomb and the Isthmus After two years of waiting for the canal cratering experimental program to begin, the Anderson Commission received the wonderful news in January 1968 that President Johnson had finally permitted the 2.3-kiloton Cabriolet shot to proceed at the Nevada Test Site.
Because radioactive fallout might escape into the atmosphere and contaminate the local milk supply or cross the border to cause an international incident, the timing had to be precise—after the State of the Union address, but before the Nevada grazing season.
An unnamed AEC source attributed the smaller amount of radiation to the “really tiny fission device” used to trigger the thermonuclear explosive.
Such rhetoric discounted the continuing opposition by Latin Americans to the use of nuclear explosives on their lands.
The United States Navy’s largest ships needed to be able to cross the isthmus as quickly as possible, but that was not the case for an emerging class of commercial vessels.
In 1966, massive new tankers, some capable of carrying 2. million barrels of crude oil from the Middle East to Europe, had already begun bypassing the Suez Canal to save on tolls; voyaging around the Cape of Good Hope took longer, but the size of their cargoes made up for the loss of time.
As the Anderson Commission’s economic advisors tried to predict future shipping trends, the Route 17 geological consultants delivered unwelcome news.
Nuclear explosives would likely not form stable slopes in such an unstable medium, meaning that achieving the shallow slopes needed to prevent the crater from collapsing over time would require conventional excavation techniques.
Clay shale happened to be the same type of sedimentary rock that had caused destructive landslides during the construction of the original Panama Canal, and thus the problem was not a surprise to engineers familiar with the physics of the isthmus.
While engineers consulted with leading soil mechanics specialists to determine whether the geological discovery really did rule out PNEs, the Livermore physicists conducted chemical explosive experiments to try to model the effects of burying thermonuclear devices in wet clay shale.
If nuclear excavation of Route 17 was no longer possible, then that had major implications for future U.S.-Panama treaty negotiations.
The 1967 draft treaties had established the United States commitment to building the sea-level canal in Panama and had granted Panama the right to veto nuclear methods.
The deadline for the fourth annual report, covering the period from July 1, 1967 to June 30, 1968, was approaching, and it would be the last one prepared for President Johnson, who had decided not to run for reelection.
In conveying the ensuing report to Congress, President Johnson omitted the clay shales matter from his public statement, and sent mixed messages by emphasizing both the benefits of the conventional Route 10 and the favorable results of the two 1968 Nevada Test Site shots.
Marine and Evolutionary Biologists Barge In The secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, Leonard Carmichael, had posed a version of this question to AEC director Glenn Seaborg back in the spring of 1963, when U.S.-Panama tensions, the resumption of nuclear testing, and the negotiations over the test ban treaty generated widespread publicity for the Panatomic Canal idea.
Carmichael had likely been prompted by an employee of the Museum of Natural History, oceanographer I Eugene Wallen, who had spent years studying the faunal effects of nuclear testing in the South Pacific.
United States president Lyndon B Johnson presenting a plaque to Smithsonian Institution secretary S Dillon Ripley, June 13,1967.
Ripley and other Smithsonian officials tried but failed to secure federal funds from Johnson’s canal study commission for a ten-year baseline inventory of marine life on either side of the proposed seaway.
However, the AEC chose the Battelle Memorial Institute, a private organization that in turn subcontracted with university-based teams.
Deeply disappointed, Wallen and Ripley regrouped to consider their options.
Decades earlier, in 1937, he had visited Barro Colorado Island in Panama’s Canal Zone while voyaging from Philadelphia to New Guinea for a zoological expedition.
BCI was an artifact of the construction of the canal, as the reservoir created by Gatun Dam left only the highest hilltops of the Chagres River valley unsubmerged.
The island was also a testament to the Smithsonian’s embrace of the isthmus as a model study site, beginning with the prescient 1910-12 biological survey of the Panama Canal Zone, which generated several studies documenting the area’s marine and terrestrial biota.
The survey led the governor of the Canal Zone to designate BCI a reserve in 1923, and over the next two decades, the research station drew more scientific visitors than any other tropical research facility.
BCI and the associated Canal Zone Biological Area became a Smithsonian bureau after the war and by the late 1950s had provided the setting for hundreds of articles on tropical forest biota and dynamics.
However, the CZBA lacked facilities for long-term terrestrial and marine research.
Expanding the institutional base of tropical biology gained urgency as tropical nations decolonized and sought to accelerate deforestation for development.
Another influential source of encouragement for expanding the CZBA was Ernst Mayr, an old friend of Ripley and fellow ornithologist, the head of Harvard’s Museum of Comparative Zoology, and the mentor of BCI director Martin Moynihan.
Mayr had gained fame in the 1940s as a proponent of the Modern Synthesis of evolutionary biology and the concept of allopatric speciation, a topic for which the Panamanian isthmus provided an ideal research setting.
Knowing the approximate period of the geological emergence of the Central American land bridge made it possible to date the origin of evolutionary differences between marine species on either side of the isthmus.
The 1910-12 Smithsonian survey had built upon a few pioneering studies to expand knowledge of the marine fishes of the Atlantic and Pacific coasts and associated evolutionary effects of geographic isolation.
Naturalists subsequently documented some other taxonomic groups west and east of the isthmus that appeared similar but were not identical, as Mayr substantiated for shallow-water sea urchins in a foundational paper that called for more research on modes of speciation in marine organisms.
Assessing Mankind’s Most Gigantic Biological Experiment 95 Mayr’s recognition of the evolutionary importance of the Central American isthmus shaped his mixed reaction to President Johnson’s December 1964 announcement.
I have been worrying for some time about the contemplated sea-level canal across the Isthmus of Panama.
There is little doubt that such a salt water connection between the two great oceans will have many and drastic effects on the marine faunas and floras.
There are closely related species living on either side of the Isthmus and no one can predict with certainty what will happen if such species come in contact with each other.
In this regard, he noted, “I might add parenthetically that organismic biology is, on the whole, poorly represented on high level boards in Washington.
Mayr had an important informant who helped shape his thoughts about the sea-level canal—his recent graduate student Ira Rubinoff.
Conducting such research in the Canal Zone entailed unusual occupational hazards, from having to pass checkpoints manned by surly sentries to missing optimal tides due to the lack of gas stations that serviced military vehicles on weekends.
Ripley announced the name change to Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute the following year.
As STRI’s marine director, Rubinoff provided an energetic on-the-ground complement to the D.C .-based Smithsonian campaign of Ripley, Wallen, and Assistant Secretary for Science Sidney Galler, a former Office of Naval Research biologist.
In July 1965, Rubinoff published the first article on the sea-level canal’s potential nonradiological effects, the Natural History essay that likely caught Irwin’s attention.
Several outcomes seemed possible, including large-scale extinctions, as suggested by principles of ecology and genetics, morphological comparisons of Caribbean and Pacific shore fishes, and historical human-facilitated introductions of organisms to new areas.
Dutch elm disease and the Australian rabbit invasion were infamous in the annals of pest outbreaks; other cases like the canal-facilitated migration of voracious Atlantic sea lampreys into the United States Great Lakes were less well known but equally devastating to local ecosystems and fishing-based communities.
At the 1965 International Conference on Tropical Oceanography in Miami, Rubinoff and oceanographers from other distinguished institutions discussed the importance of expanding the preproject studies beyond radioactivity in the food chain, and marveled at Assessing Mankind’s Most Gigantic Biological Experiment 97 what they considered the myopia of attendees from the Battelle Memorial Institute and other AEC subcontractors.
However, in the spring of 1966, Battelle Memorial Institute officials invited Galler to their Ohio headquarters to discuss the “myriad problems” that had become apparent as they realized the limitations they faced in fulfilling their AEC obligations.
Galler convinced the Battelle managers to invite the Smithsonian to cosponsor an international symposium aimed at developing a long-term ecological survey for the Canal Study Commission.
However, sharp differences emerged regarding questions of framing and language.
Moreover, because some of the transisthmian species liable to go extinct might be “those we would want to exterminate,” attention should also be devoted to the beneficial environmental changes that the canal might effect.
When a Smithsonian employee explained that only by accentuating the negative would Congress respond with the needed funds, Woodbury stated that using words like “catastrophe” and “profound disturbance” would upset his bosses, who had been tasked with determining where—not whether—to build the sea-level canal.
The Smithsonian team also recognized the importance of “not antagonizing the Panamanians,” and thus they invited both United States and Panamanian representatives to the symposium slated for November 1966.
A Allocating internal resources to stage the Panama conference and relevant pilot projects at STRI became an important part of the Ripley team’s evolving strategy to create, in Galler’s words, “a receptive constituency” among the scientific and governmental communities to fund the Smithsonian’s long-term program.
Smithsonian research awards enabled the husband-and-wife team of Ira and Roberta Rubinoff to focus on interoceanic colonization and isolating mechanisms in Atlantic and Pacific fish populations.
Such grants also made it possible for visiting marine biologists to conduct research at STRI’s new facilities on the Caribbean and Panama Bay coasts, resulting in publications that would drive much of the sea-level canal debate.
The Smithsonian’s self-funded canal studies also benefited marine scientists on the other side of the globe.
The hundred-mile-long Suez Canal, completed in 1869, had a high-salinity interior that blocked most, but not all, species’ migration between the Red Sea and Mediterranean.
Israeli marine biologists made major contributions in the ensuing decade to the study of Red-Med species exchange, cleverly dubbed “Lessepsian migration” after Ferdinand de Lesseps, the architect of Suez and the failed i88os-era Panama Canal.
The Smithsonian’s target constituency for canal ecology fundraising did not include the public, but mainstream attention to the nonnuclear dimensions of the sea-level canal was increasing at the time Galler made his confident prediction.
For the Smithsonian scientists, however, his focus on radioactivity and his erroneous claim that the Pacific Ocean stood higher than the Atlantic by an average of six feet, evinced the importance of advancing a more informed debate.
To test the possible consequences of interbreeding between formerly isolated populations, Rubinoff and his collaborators, including his spouse Roberta Rubinoff, conducted mating experiments between Atlantic and Pacific marine gobies.
The range of results regarding the viability of the offspring, and the broader question of which species might dominate, hybridize, or go extinct, demonstrated the need for extensive knowledge of the morphological and behavioral characteristics of the organisms in question, as well as their degree of genetic divergence over time.
Two weeks after signing the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, Kennedy used the academy event to announce his intention to minimize government secrecy and thereby foster greater discussion by the international scientific community about proposed large-scale development projects.
In important ways, he echoed the drafters of what would become the United States National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, the groundbreaking law requiring preliminary environmental impact assessments of federally funded projects.
Throughout the twentieth century, the institutional status of naturalist-based disciplines such as taxonomy, biogeography, and evolutionary and ecological science lagged further and further behind the more reductionist, experimental life sciences, as epitomized by molecular biology.
Not until the 1990s and early 2000s did funding agencies begin devoting serious attention to ocean Assessing Mankind’s Most Gigantic Biological Experiment IOI conservation science.
A terrestrial bias also permeated the agenda of the emerging environmentalist movement.
Fears of marine species migration and mixing did not fit the agenda of potential allies who focused on the terrestrial threats posed by synthetic chemicals, rapid population growth, overconsumption, and other toxic byproducts of technological modernity.
And even though oil spills and overhunting presented obvious dangers to fish and marine mammals, competition from nonnative introduced species was much harder to comprehend, for both mainstream scientists and environmental advocates.
Indeed, the late 1960s was still an era of intentional aquatic species introductions.
For over a century, governments and acclimatization societies in search of cheap protein or recreational opportunities had shipped live fish and shellfish for transplanting in rivers and bays around the world.
Pests often moved with the desired species, resulting in occasional warnings, most famously from Elton, who described oysters as the “sessile sheep” of the sea.
Nevertheless, government officials stocked Lake Michigan with Pacific salmon in 1966 and replaced France’s adopted oyster, the Portuguese Crassostrea angulata, with the Japanese C gigas from 1971 to 1975.
Another difficult thing to explain pertained to the existing Panama Canal’s failure to facilitate disruptive marine species exchange.
Of course, identifying invasive species required consistent monitoring as well as thorough knowledge of the native organisms of each coast.
Biotic exchange must thus already be occurring on a large scale, without any ill effects.
The concept of “a risky mix” applied not only to the environmental threats of intermixing the fauna and planktonic flora of two oceans.
It also involved the professional hazards facing scientists who stepped too far outside their idealized realm of social isolation.
Rubinoff’s 1968 article opened the floodgates of critique from fellow biologists.
The major intellectual disputes encompassed conflicting interpretations of the limited empirical research on transisthmian evolution, biological diversity, and biotic mixing, and of the validity of the Suez and Panama Canals as models for predicting how the sea-level waterway might affect ecological and evolutionary processes.
Some participants also questioned Rubinoff’s more explicitly political assumptions and framing choices.
At a time when the negative environmental consequences of modern technoscience were gaining more and more attention, but when marine biodiversity and bioinvasions barely registered as issues of concern, the debates reveal how biologists of different disciplinary backgrounds and levels of conservationist concern struggled to communicate the political relevance and fund-worthiness of a topic for which they lacked a common vocabulary and conceptual understanding.
While appreciating the redirection of scientific attention away from radiation damage, Briggs took issue with RubinofFs sense of opportunism and inevitability.
He argued that the Suez offered disturbing empirical evidence of how organisms from a richer marine ecosystem might outcompete the natives of a less stable one, as shown by the aggressive migration of Red Sea fishes, crustaceans, mollusks, and tunicates into the empty niches of the nutrient-poor eastern Mediterranean.
Briggs calculated that 6,710 Caribbean species would migrate westward through a Central America sea-level canal and 4,480 less robust Pacific species would move eastward, resulting in massive extinctions among the latter.
While suggesting that a sea-level waterway could be designed to kill migrating animals with chemicals or hot water, Briggs deemed such methods “risky and distasteful” and instead called for improving the existing canal to meet the needs of world shipping.
Briggs’s analysis provoked strong reactions from fellow members of the scientific community.
Rubinoff and other scientists questioned his statistical methods and assumptions.
The two isthmuses differed in terms of not only salinity levels but also geological histories.
The more recently separated coastal Caribbean and Pacific biotas contained many closely related pairs of species, whereas the Mediterranean and Red Sea biotas contained almost no such sister species, differences which presented “extremely urgent, and at the same time very promising” opportunities for systematic, ecological, and evolutionary studies.
It was no surprise, he argued, that Red Sea ichthyofauna had occupied the vacant niches of the impoverished Mediterranean.
By contrast, because most of the ecological niches on either side of the Central American isthmus were already filled, species introgression through a sea-level canal would likely not cause widespread extinction.
After towing cheesecloth-wrapped marine animals through the canal, Robert Menzies concluded that genetic exchange was probably already occurring on a large scale due to the ability of fouling organisms attached to the bottoms of ships to survive the full fifty-mile transit.
Another visiting biologist studying marine plankton transport, Richard Chesher, confirmed via interviews with Panama Canal Company officials that tankers and freighters had been required since 1956 to ballast down prior to the transit to ensure maneuverability.
He also questioned the scanty empirical evidence for ballastmediated carriage, arguing that Menzies used intertidal organisms preadapted to survival in fresh water and that Chesher overlooked the toxic anticorrosion coatings lining ballast tanks.
He did concede that modern tankers with stainless steel tanks—most of which were too large to use the existing canal—might enable plankton to survive passage from ocean to ocean.
The commission scrounged up enough funds to elicit the National Academy of Sciences to lend its authority to the quest for external federal support of a comprehensive tropical marine biological inventory.
Conclusion The CSC conveyed its fifth annual report to the new president, Richard M Nixon, in the summer of 1969.
The report acknowledged the Route 17 clay shale problem, as well as the expanded efforts to address marine biotic exchange.
The fifth annual report also glossed over Panama’s revolutionary events of October 1968—the military coup staged by Omar Torrijos and other officers of the Guardia Nacional.
While hinting at the recent political changes, the international relations section of the CSC document praised the U.S., Panamanian, and Colombian officials whose cooperation made the field surveys possible.
So did the insistence of biologists that the canal engineering feasibility studies address issues that had nothing to do with radioactivity, just so they could resuscitate the old-fashioned study of natural history.
Today, fifty years on, it is clear that those demanding realistic, comprehensive assessments of the megaproject’s environmental effects were as forward-thinking as the other sea-level canal stakeholders.
The Plowshare physicists and allied engineers sought to advance the unproven field of nuclear excavation, and United States officials aimed to update the isthmian transportation system and relations with Panama.
Likewise, the marine evolutionary and ichthyological scientists sought to revitalize relevant naturalist disciplines to analyze the enormous ecological changes a wide channel at the level of the seas would induce.
The sea-level canal proposal served as a modernization strategy for a wide range of stakeholders, and it facilitated many kinds of work with far-reaching political and intellectual effects.
The collapse of the treaty reform process, the delayed nuclear test shots, Panamanian and Colombian opposition to the field surveys, the diversion of surveying equipment to Vietnam, the discovery of unstable clay shales along the preferred nuclear route, and the annoying calls by marine scientists for deeper bioenvironmental studies had all undermined the optimistic assumption of the 1964 enabling legislation, that a decision could be rendered within three years.
And yet not once but twice, the commission convinced Congress to extend its deadline and funding, a sign of the nuclear seaway’s powerful allure as a technological solution—or, at the very least, of most legislators’ faith in the commission’s ability to adjudicate on such a momentous project.
The group’s leaders were by no means paragons of objectivity and transparency; they embarked on their mission with preconceived notions about the value of employing PNEs for canal construction, and they sat on geological intelligence of significance to future treaty negotiators, an issue that extended beyond their mandate.
But at the same time, the commission was much more flexible than the federal agencies with which it worked to demonstrate the feasibility of peaceful nuclear excavation, the Atomic Energy Commission and the Army Corps of Engineers.
The five commissioners and their executive director ultimately accepted that they could not overlook the technical nor public relations problems of peaceful nuclear excavation, despite the enormous cost savings it appeared to offer.
The second matter, about the biological, nonhuman consequences of joining the oceans without a freshwater barrier, absorbed an increasing amount of their time during the second half of their tenure, though they had received a heads-up early on from a perceptive diplomatic consultant.
The pressure the commissioners encountered from 1968 to 1970 to fund preliminary studies of nonradiological ecological effects happened to coincide with the rise of the modern environmental movement.
Marine biologist Ira Rubinoff originally sought not necessarily to stop the project but rather to tap into the CSC’s pool of funds, though other members of the scientific community disagreed.
The CSC leadership conflated them with the students and activists in the news raising their voices against the environmental costs of modern society.
Nineteen sixty-nine became a particularly important year for the rise of modern environmental advocacy.
Onjanuary 28, an oil-drilling platform off the coast of Santa Barbara exploded, coating dozens of miles of the Southern California coastline with oil.
Later that summer, hazardous waste in Ohio’s Cuyahoga River caught on fire.
Grassroots groups built on the momentum of earlier citizen and scientific protests against radioactive fallout to call for stronger regulations against industrial pollution and rampant development.
Congress responded, as did President Nixon; he approved the National Environmental Policy Act as his first official act of the decade of the seventies.
Like Nixon, the leaders of the CSC cared little for environmental causes, but they recognized the public relations value of supporting them in at least limited ways.
Despite the constraints they faced during their final two years, the CSC did expand the bioenvironmental studies to go beyond the public health effects of radiation in the isthmian environment, and it commissioned the National Academy of Sciences to produce a comprehensive ecological research agenda to precede the seaway’s construction.
The commissioners’ final assessment regarding the risk of adverse ecological consequences—that it appeared acceptable—elicited intense criticism from scientists, environmentalists, and antienvironmentalists seeking to preserve the Canal Zone status quo.
Not only did it overlook important extenuating factors regarding the state of marine invasion ecology in the late 1960s, it also obscured the remarkable transformation the commission members experienced on the topic of peaceful nuclear excavation.
Rumors that the NAS might appoint an investigative committee circulated at oceanographic and zoological conferences following the publication of RubinofPs pivotal 1968 Science article.
The academy was established in the 1860s to provide the government with expert advice, which during its first century pertained mostly to the physical sciences.
As the i96os-era environmental movement unfolded, the academy faced pressure to admit more ecologists, especially in the wake of its advice reinforcing the status quo on chemical pesticides.
LaMont Cole was the most outspoken about urging the organization to think ecologically.
Because the CSC lacked the time and funds for nonradiological research, it recommended that the Smithsonian develop and execute a coordinated program of ecological studies, in concert with the advice of academy-designated experts.
No, answered Anderson, “but we would be able to tell the conservationists and other people who are concerned with this sort of thing what the probabilities were and whether there were steps such as fish nets that might or might not be employed” to prevent harmful biological effects.
Commissioner Hill, the hard-nosed water resources management expert, did not conceal his contempt for those asking about marine effects.
Hill conflated the scientific sea-level canal authors with political environmentalists, even though the scientists argued among themselves about whether the megaproject posed a threat to be opposed or a research opportunity to be seized.
The commissioners also approved the $50,000 contract with the National Academy.
As Sheffey explained, “To distinguish the two, the Battelle program is an action program for a product and an answer at the end of it.
Sheffey had started drafting the final feasibility report by emphasizing that much more research and development were needed to determine whether nuclear excavation could be used to dig a new canal.
However, his “degree of negativism” appalled John Kelly and other AEC officials.
Hill had recently visited Livermore to discuss the issue of the Route 17 clay shales with Plowshare scientists, who had conducted follow-up chemical experiments regarding the soil mechanics in question.
Although the negotiations had been suspended since the 1967 leak of the draft treaties, Anderson met in his capacity as lead treaty negotiator with Panama’s dictator, General Omar Torrijos, in September 1969.
As in the case of Cabriolet and the other canal-oriented Plowshare tests conducted at the Nevada Test Site, strong arguments existed for not risking a violation of the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, especially after the 1968 Schooner debacle.
Now even more was at stake for the United States with respect to its bargaining position with Panama.
Fields’s colleagues did not share his eagerness to pursue the Sturtevant test.
By the time the commission held its next meeting, on January 22, 1970, another portentous political event had occurred.
On the first day of the new decade, President Nixon signed the National Environmental Policy Act , a six-page statute requiring federal agencies to consider environmental consequences and open up environmental project decision-making to greater public involvement.
As evidence, Thompson referenced congressional hearings held by the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy in 1959 on the biological and environmental effects of nuclear war, as well as the Project Chariot Alaskan ecological study.
For Thompson, furthermore, environmentalists’ rejection of American ideals of progress and technological change constituted a possibly greater danger than threats to the environment per se.
As would soon become evident, such attitudes echoed those of the CSC members.
Thompson concluded his speech by praising Plowshare’s great potential “to improve the quality of our environment, enrich our understanding of the ecology and natural resources and enhance our efforts to achieve a productive harmony between man and nature”—in other words, to meet the broad goals of the NEPA statute.
The closing remarks that a Plowshare official, Livermore physicist Glenn Werth, made at the 1970 Las Vegas conference reiterated the failure of the atomic bureaucracy to reckon with the values embodied by NEPA and the modern environmental movement.
He repeated the old arguments about the economic savings of nuclear canal construction while also proposing to use nuclear energy to clear smog, tap non-fossil fuel energy sources, and preserve scenic landscapes by storing wastes underground.
In 1971 “an upstart environmental organization,” the Chesapeake Bay Foundation, used NEPA to contest the AEC’s process for licensing a new nuclear power plant in Calvert Cliffs, Maryland.
The court case produced a landmark decision that transformed the commercial nuclear industry and warned all federal agencies to comply with NEPA’s procedural requirements.
The Calvert Cliffs verdict forced the AEC to suspend reactor construction for seventeen months as it filed the appropriate impact statements, leading a legal scholar to ask in late 1971 whether NEPA constituted an “environmentalist Magna Carta” or a “coup de grace” to the atomic energy establishment.
Yet Plowshare proponents continued to try to convince the canal study commissioners that Route 17 s clay shale soils could be safely excavated with nuclear devices.
Having conferred with Soviet nuclear scientists during recent trips to Moscow and Vienna, Kelly reported good news at the commission’s March 1970 meeting.
Four months later, his patience fully eroded, Hill delivered a stern rebuke to his fellow commissioners for having “played along with” Kelly’s optimistic expectations about PNEs for far too long.
By the spring of 1970, the commission was equally fed up with the scientists seeking CSC funds to explicate the seaway’s potential consequences for marine life on either side of the isthmus.
Hill mentioned an article he had read about activists in Death Valley, California, who were trying to stop a development project based on the discovery of “some diminutive fish ... that roots in the mud in one creek out there,” a probable reference to pupfish conservation efforts initiated decades earlier by the ichthyologist Carl Hubbs.
One month before the highly anticipated Earth Day teach-in events of April 1970, the commission members agreed that the final report should include a statement that the faunal-exchange problem should not be allowed to block a decision in favor of a sea-level canal.
Added one of the engineering consultants, “The one thing you can do to get them off your back is going to come from the National Academy study, which is a program of investigations that you should pursue in the years to come to answer all these questions.
The Committee on Ecological Research for the Interoceanic Canal In the meantime, the Science expose that had portrayed Sheffey as antipathetic to ecological questions generated more press.
Lederberg urged the CSC not to allow diplomatic, engineering, military, political, and financial issues to bury the scientific ones.
That was precisely the point of the contract with the National Academy establishing CERIC, the Committee on Ecological Research for the Interoceanic Canal.
In the spring of 1969, Mayr, who had agreed to chair the committee, met with several advisors, including Wallen and Galler of the Smithsonian, John Wolfe of the AEC, and marine and hydrological scientists associated with the National Science Foundation, United States Geological Survey, and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, to discuss the committee’s scope and membership.
They identified dozens of research questions pertaining to marine biota, the biology of species dispersal, and the physical parameters governing water movement through the canal as well as the conditions on either side of the isthmus.
The ten members seem to have been chosen, primarily by organizational affiliation, by NAS executives, with input from Mayr.
While he did not succeed in having Rubinoff appointed as the Smithsonian representative (a position filled by David Challinor, who succeeded Galler as the assistant secretary for science in 1971), Mayr did gain representation for two Caribbean university marine biology programs.
The school employed Gilbert Voss, Frederick Bayer, and C Richard Robins, one of the teams subcontracted by Battelle, the private organization that had won out over the Smithsonian in the 1965 competition for AEC funds.
Mayr wanted an eminent ecologist to serve on the committee and convinced his younger colleague Edward O Wilson to do so.
As codeveloper of the innovative theory of island biogeography, the insect systematist aimed to revolutionize ecology by linking it with genetics and biogeography.
Wilson had also participated in a foundational 1964 symposium at the Asilomar Conference Grounds in California on the genetics of colonizing species, presenting on the invasive— or as it was then called, imported—South American fire ant.
At CERIC’s first workshop, held in August 1969 in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, Mayr explained the committee would proceed on the assumption that the sea-level canal would actually be built.
Wilson’s presentation, for instance, noted the repeated failure of intentional species introductions, and the need for field and laboratory experiments to determine the qualities of successful colonizers.
To assess the current state of knowledge on selected Central American marine biota and how human effects might change them, Bakus contacted nearly two hundred specialists with exhaustive requests for information.
One informant complained he would need six months and “at least $10,000 plus perquisites” to do the job.
John Briggs, the most conservation-oriented of the sea-level canal authors, organized a symposium at the annual meeting of the American Association for the Advancement of Science in Boston that featured presentations by Sheffey, Voss, Topp, and other sea-level canal authors.
Bakus concluded that many speakers overlooked evolutionary mechanisms of species dispersal, and attributed some of the disagreements about the likely patterns of migration, colonization, and competition to diverse disciplinary outlooks.
The A A AS scientific speakers did acknowledge one specific danger, the crownof-thorns starfish.
In his presentation, Voss stated that a little-known eastern Pacific species, Acanthaster ellisi, appeared almost identical to A planci ; a Central American sea-level canal might thus enable A ellisi to prey on Caribbean corals.
To quantify the invasion potential of a specific organism, Rubinoff had shifted his attention from gobies to the physiology and ecology of Pelamisplaturus, a venomous organism that periodically appeared in large numbers along Panama’s Pacific shores.
By offering the snake to potential Atlantic predators, Rubinoff and his collaborators sought to predict how fast it might colonize the Caribbean Sea and adjacent Atlantic Ocean.
Their experiments indicated that Atlantic predators were much more likely to attack the serpents and die than Pacific carnivores, and thus following the construction of an unobstructed channel, natural selection would favor predatory fishes disinclined to attack sea snakes.
Due to its ability to drift and feed at the surface, Pelamis might not only invade the Caribbean and Atlantic but also ride the Gulf Stream all the way to the English Channel.
The preliminary research program would require at least ten years, an initial capital outlay of $4 million, and annual budgets of about $2 million, to be paid for by “a new system” of environmental cost accounting borne by the waterway’s users.
Representative Dan Flood used Mayr’s words to denounce the wastefulness of the CSC and to reiterate his long-standing argument for expanding the existing canal.
Some Observations Prior to a Sea-Level Canal,” which grew out of a March 1970 conference organized by invertebrate zoology curator Meredith Jones of the Smithsonian Museum of Natural History.
Such distinctions were lost on the CSC members and engineering consultants.
Meeting in July 1970, they scorned CERIC’s argument for a thermal species barrier, an expensive method of preventing species exchange via hot water.
Nor did the commission appreciate CERIC’s insistence on making value judgments regarding the risks at hand.
Rather than simply recommending studies to be conducted, the academy group argued that the dangers of marine species exchange justified the installation of biotic barriers.
To reconcile the two groups’ different views in the final report, Sheffey asked the commissioners for policy guidance, which revealed their inability to grasp the rising political influence of the modern environmental movement.
Sheffey also asked for advice about whether to include “the ecology discussion” in a separate chapter or as part of the longer chapter on technical and financial considerations.
Eisenhower’s recommendation that he need not worry about the shortness of the ecological chapter would soon come back to haunt the group.
While the commission members favorably interpreted the lack of data on the potential disastrous effects of seaway-induced biological invasions, they did not do so for PNEs.
In fact, they spent one of their last meetings grappling with their own rapid evolution on the issue.
This gets overlooked,” stated Chairman Anderson at the twenty-eighth meeting in July 1970.
Route 17 had appeared optimal to the Livermore physicists, the developers of the nuclear cratering technology.
It was the engineering studies that exposed the clay shale permeating much of the preferred Panamanian route.
The commissioners had rejected the idea of adding a third, wider lane of locks to the existing waterway because it would buy only twenty years before ships exceeded the new locks once again and would require pumping in massive quantities of seawater.
Furthermore, even if the original canal were operated free of tolls, economies of scale would likely lead the shipping industry to divert the bulk of traffic to much larger ships by the turn of the twenty-first century.
Although the commissioners considered the Route 10 location disadvantageous due to the need to acquire new lands, it was the shortest of the five routes considered and the only Panamanian one that would not interfere with the existing canal.
Moreover, in accordance with NEPA, the appendices included brief environmental impact statements for the proposed routes.
Yet in their accompanying classified letter to the president, the commissioners made no mention of environmental issues.
Rather, they addressed the sea-level canal in the context of future treaty negotiations with Panama and the unquantifiable benefits of ensuring U.S control of a modernized isthmian canal system for several decades thereafter.
The existing canal had contributed to United States national security and enabled the United States to influence the economic development of several Latin American countries, the transportation costs of many United States exports and imports, and the trade patterns of all nations using the canal.
Though the astronomical costs of building a new sea-level waterway with conventional methods could not be recompensed quickly by tolls, the commissioners concluded, the “risk of financial loss” would be offset by maintaining United States control of the Panamanian transportation corridor.
Although officials expressed concern about the additional lands that would have to be obtained, and the possibility of creating another artificial river with no bridges over it, the report’s focus on the value of building the new waterway in Panama generated positive press.
Representative Flood asserted that “there was never any doubt that when the commission finished that would be their conclusion” and that the group “wasted bags of money” surveying remote routes in eastern Panama and Colombia that it knew could not be used for the new canal.
The CSC report’s skimpy analysis of environmental issues angered the CERIC and Smithsonian scientists who had lobbied on behalf of preliminary ecological research for so long.
Subtitled “How the Academy’s Voice Was Muted,” it emphasized the CSC’s privileging of the Battelle-Miami’s upbeat analysis, and featured an academy-leadership-defying interview with Mayr that included the quote, “We said that great danger would result from building a sea-level canal, though we can’t prove it.
Boffey later published an important book about the National Academy of Sciences that blew the whistle on the close ties among many of its expert panels and special interests, but in this case he himself might have been too beholden to his informant.
Erroneous interpretations of an earlier author eventually become myths, accepted without question and carried forward from generation to generation.
Yet by preserving his private correspondence for future scholars, Mayr the historian left the door open for deeper interpretations to emerge.
Conclusion It is a great irony that the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission is now so closely associated with the “environmental considerations” of the proposed sea-level canal, or rather the lack thereof.
The commission’s work wound up highlighting the increasing importance of environmental criteria in public works planning.
Throughout 1971, congressional opponents of renegotiating the U.S.-Panama treaty publicized the scientific questions about the dangers posed by otherwise-obscure marine organisms.
Granted, the memo also asserted that defense and foreign policy goals no longer justified construction.
The biologists’ concerns did not shut the project down, but they did constitute another important rationale against it, especially in the context of a new era of statist environmental management.
The Canal Study commissioners navigated a difficult course during the five years of their tenure.
Scientific discussions of the environmental risks posed by the sea-level canal did influence federal officials and policy makers in unexpected ways, and the CSC took a more nuanced approach to the question of environmental considerations than one of complete dismissal.
Despite tensions and biases, its engineering agents and executive director worked for years with the Smithsonian and National Academy to increase the congressional appropriation for marine ecological research.
The CSC members did indeed fail to appreciate the problem of marine invasive species, and they failed to differentiate between scientists seeking financial support to study the potential effects of a proposed megaproject and activists seeking to shut the project down due to the presumed ecological risks.
Nevertheless, the commission’s blind spots about marine bioinvasions—a topic that would not gain widespread scientific and popular attention until later in the twentieth century—should not diminish how its leaders overcame their own technocratic embrace of Project Plowshare.
The CSC wound up caught between two eras, the high-modernist period of extreme faith in science and technology, and the new environmentalist age of increasing public suspicion of large-scale technological solutions.
The United States National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 required federal decision makers to quantify the environmental costs of development, and thus imposed an enormous cultural change on entrenched bureaucratic agencies that had hitherto been incentivized to ignore such costs.
Unlike the Army Corps of Engineers and the Atomic Energy Commission, the CSC was an ad hoc organization with no public constituency, whose authority diminished after Johnson’s presidency.
But it still had friends in Congress and commanded front-page newspaper coverage in 1970.
Its ultimate refusal to make a recommendation for nuclear excavation technology, despite its enthusiasm just five years earlier, speaks to the rapid shift in values and expectations regarding environmental planning and policy-making.
Its adaptively technocratic approach to determining the feasibility of the sea-level canal, and the proper role of nonanthropocentric ecological science therein, provides a clearer, more accurate view of the failure of an iconic high-modernist project to take root in the postwar era.
Although the 1976 Republican United States presidential primaries had reiterated the extreme unpopularity of relinquishing control of the waterway and zone, Democratic president Jimmy Carter entered office on January 20,1977, determined to complete the efforts of his predecessors to develop a more equitable relationship with Panama.
Seeking a quick resolution to the venerable problem, he set his negotiators a tight deadline of six months.
The rancorous debate over the 1977 Torrijos-Carter Treaties featured the issues of sovereignty, national security, and economics, yet other concerns played subtle, intriguing roles over the course of the arduous negotiation and ratification processes—environmental ones.
The pacts did, after all, come to fruition in the midst of the “environmental decade” and the energy crisis, and at the helm of a president with high standing among environmentalists, with a naval engineering background, and with a focus on reforming federal water project policy-making.
Viewing this diplomatic and domestic watershed through an environmental lens reveals the rising yet uneven political influence of the environmentalist movement during the 1970s on megaproject infrastructural planning.
Late in the treaty negotiations, during the summer of 1977, Carter compelled his negotiators to include an option for a future Panamanian sea-level canal, irritating many in both Panama and the United States.
The sea-level canal provision of the Panama Canal Treaty (the second of the two accords that negated the old one) has been described as a mere distraction and ploy to win an Alaskan ratification vote or two.
It is true that in contrast to the dominant role the ideaplayed in the 1967 U.S.-Panama negotiations—when it was the subject of its own treaty—the seaway had become almost a nonissue for the i970S-era mediators.
Its last-minute revival deserves to be taken more seriously for several reasons.
The postatomic rebirth of the sea-level waterway proposal challenges the idea that it died along with Project Plowshare in the early 1970s.
Moreover, it helps elucidate changes in United States statist environmental management during the pivotal environmental decade.
The proposed megaproject shines light on the new opportunities and constraints of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, and on shifting attitudes about what constituted acceptable costs of implementing new forms of United States energy-security infrastructure following the 1973 oil shock.
The i970S-era invocation of the interoceanic sea-level canal also provides a deeper look at Carter’s enigmatic environmental record.
He not only faced the challenge of balancing environmental goals with efforts to end the oil crisis and stimulate the economy but also sought to make the federal system of water project policy-making less wasteful and destructive.
Early in his term, Carter tried to cancel plans for nineteen large-scale dams and reclamation projects that had already been authorized, an endeavor that alienated many members of Congress.
While environmentalists commended the water projects “hit list,” they detested the resurrection of the Panamanian sea-level canal.
Building on the ecological and evolutionary insights of the marine biologists of the late 1960s, several prominent environmental organizations mobilized against the proposal, rather than welcoming it as an alternative to new terrestrial pipelines.
The plan also contradicted Carter’s own pioneering executive order recognizing the ecological risks of invasive species, and thus the 1970s phase of the seaway proposal illuminates changing public attitudes toward nonnative species, especially in terrestrial versus marine contexts.
Carter’s advocacy of the nonnuclear sea-level canal speaks to the extraordinary challenges he faced as an environmentally oriented president steering the ship of state through the energy crisis.
At the same time, Carter’s insistence that the Panama Canal Treaty provide for the eventual construction of a sea-level waterway—like his determination to overturn the 1903 treaty itself—supports the idea that he adopted a trusteeship model ofleadership that deemphasized the political costs to himself of pursuing unpopular courses of action.
Carter acted as a trustee of the public welfare by applying an engineering approach to solving certain problems as quickly and efficiently as possible, without consulting potential legislative allies, as in the cases of the canceled water projects and federal bureaucratic reorganization.
In other instances, his antipolitical trusteeship style featured a strong sense of morality.
The sea-level canal proposal, and the 1977 Panama Canal Treaty of which it was a part, exemplified Carter’s technocratic and moralistic impulses to do what he considered right for the country, no matter the costs he incurred.
Once Carter became aware of it, the sea-level canal option seemed to hold one of the keys to breaking down a few blocks in the wall of domestic resistance.
Alaskan oil boosters, antipipeline environmental activists, and undecided senators seeking to ensure future cooperation with Panama on an exciting energy-security megaproject.
Ship of Joules Newspaper editors do not often get the chance to use sixty-point font.
After years of exploratory drilling, and months of rumors, the Atlantic Richfield and Humble Oil companies confirmed they had discovered North America’s largest field of subaqueous oil in Prudhoe Bay on the North Slope.
A pipeline could be built through Canada to the northern tier of the midwestern United States, but that would require bilateral control and cooperation.
More dauntingly, a harbor could be excavated in Prudhoe Bay for East Coast-bound icebreaking supertankers to carve out the fabled Northwest Passage.
Manhattan from Chester, Pennsylvania, to Point Barrow and back during the summer and fall of 19 6 9.
TAPS would preclude the need for international pipeline right-of-way agreements and offer a variety of transit options.
Tankers could travel from Valdez to refineries of the continental West Coast or energy-starved Japan, which received more than 80 percent of its oil from the Middle East.
Or tankers could offload their hydrocarboniferous cargo at a proposed pipeline terminal in Central America for reshipping to Gulf Coast and Caribbean refineries.
Finally, because the Panama Canal could not accommodate ships larger than 65,000 deadweight tonnage , supertankers of 70,000 to 189,000 dwt could convey North Slope oil eastward by traveling around Cape Horn or transferring their cargo to smaller ships transiting the Panama waterway, a process known as lightering.
Assuming the TAPS plan was a foregone conclusion, the oil companies began ordering pipe from Japanese steelmakers without the required federal permits.
They got a rude awakening when environmental groups sued to halt construction, citing their authority to do so under the National Environmental Policy Act.
Congress had passed the law in December 1969, and many of its supporters probably deemed it a mere feel-good nod to the rising environment movement.
Barely three months after President Nixon signed NEPA on January 1,1970, the Washington-based Center for Law and Social Policy filed a lawsuit on behalf of three organizations—the Wilderness Society, Friends of the Earth, and the Environmental Defense Fund—to force the Interior Department to conduct a more detailed study of TAPS’s environmental repercussions as well as an assessment of alternate routes.
The original TAPS report, issued on March 5, 1970, had sparked the litigation because it concluded, based on only eight pages of evidence, that the pipeline would have no major effects.
In what became the first major NEPA-inspired lawsuit, TAPS opponents focused on the threats that the hot-oil pipeline posed to Native American land rights, permafrost, and caribou, as well as the danger of oil spills occurring along the sea route from Valdez and the pros and cons of alternative Canadian routes to the Midwest.
EIS in January 1971, which many citizens outside the scientific and academic communities denounced at public hearings in Washington and Anchorage for failing to take the wide range of potential environmental consequences seriously.
Some environmentally inclined stakeholders invoked other possible unintended consequences.
In particular, Minnesota’s Democratic senator Walter Mondale, who later became Carter’s vice president, led the fight for a Trans-Canadian Pipeline on environmental and economic grounds.
Mondale predicted that if TAPS supporters prevailed, a large surplus of oil would flood the West Coast’s refineries.
He also alleged that the Alaskan oil consortium sought to use the planned Valdez TAPS terminal not to benefit United States consumers but rather to export up to a quarter of the precious resource to Japan.
The Interior Department’s Final Environmental Impact Statement, released in March 1972, covered six volumes.
It predicted that the pipeline infrastructural system, including the haul road, oil field, and tanker ballast treatment facility, would have a variety of unavoidable effects during construction, operation, and maintenance.
Congress initiated new hearings based on a court decision that the report did not meet the requirements of another relevant law, the Mineral Leasing Act.
Alaska Senator Mike Gravel introduced an amendment that exempted the project from further environmental review, culminating in a dramatic tie-breaking vote by Vice President Spiro Agnew in July.
The path was cleared for the pipeline, and Congress had checked its own initiative to subject megaproject planning on federal lands to greater public oversight.
Despite their deep disappointment, some took solace in having forced the designers to implement important changes, such as building parts of the forty-eight-inch-wide pipeline above tundra areas vulnerable to melting and around caribou points of passage.
Equipment sat exposed to the intense Arctic elements for three winters, and government officials received bad press.
OPEC retaliated against the United States for supporting Israel during the 1973 Arab-Israeli War by cutting off the flow of oil, sparking a crippling recession.
Environmentalist action turned to conservation and the development of renewable energy sources and more efficient cars and mass transit.
In the meantime, TAPS construction proceeded with little attention paid to ensuring that the transportation network that would be needed to distribute North Slope petroleum would meet the same high environmental standards as the pipeline itself.
Reduced United States consumption of fossil fuels following the embargo had its own unintended consequences.
By the time the monumental eight-hundred-mile pipeline was completed, and the first barrels started flowing in the summer of 1977, federal officials faced an embarrassing dilemma.
The predicted West Coast glut had come to fruition, mainly because most of the area’s refineries could not handle the North Slope’s high-sulfur crude.
Following the Santa Barbara oil rig blowout of 1969, California and Washington had enacted stringent water and air pollution laws that stymied initiatives to build new transcontinental pipelines.
Of the four oil infrastructure projects on the table in 1977, the most publicized environmental conflict involved the Standard Oil Company of Ohio , controller of 50 percent of the North Slope reserves.
Seeking to end the costly work of lightering through the Panama Canal, Sohio proposed to build a new terminal at Long Beach, California, to access an existing natural gas pipeline to transport five hundred thousand barrels of crude oil per day to Midland, Texas, the western terminus of a crude pipeline network stretching to the Northeast.
Yet despite the support of the Carter administration, the California Air Resources Board and California Energy Commission objected that the terminal would increase air pollution in the smoggy Los Angeles basin and that repurposing the Midland pipeline for oil would jeopardize the state’s natural gas supplies.
The embargo had another shocking effect—for the first time since World War II, the number of ships transiting the Panama Canal fell, from 15,500 in 1970 to 13,500 in 1976.
Shippers of petroleum and petroleum products had been a major source of traffic and income for the canal, so much so that the Anderson Commission had surveyed the twenty major United States oil companies regarding the nuclear sea-level canal idea in 19 6 8.
The OPEC ban reduced the number of oil-carrying ships through the Panama Canal, as did the closure of the Suez Canal following the 1967 Six-Day War.
The eight-year-long shutdown accelerated the trend toward larger tankers, which could compensate for the longer trips around the Cape of Good Hope by carrying heavier cargoes.
Likewise, these superships made it more economical to bypass the Panama Canal in favor of the lengthy South American Cape Horn route.
Although such a trip took thirty-eight days, it was cheaper than sending a fully loaded 50,000-ton ship for the twenty-fiveday voyage to the Far East via Panama.
Due to the rapid expansion of supertankers, by 1976 over 1,300 of the world’s 21,500 merchant vessels were too wide for the Panama Canal’s locks, and another 1,700 ships exceeded the draft limits when loaded to capacity.
The Seaway’s Post-PNE Resurrection The negotiators of the 1964-67 program to replace the Hay-Bunau-Varilla Treaty had devoted one of the three draft treaties to a future sea-level canal.
But by the time the two nations resumed serious talks in 1973-75, the futuristic waterway had been all but forgotten.
The Anderson Commission’s 1970 recommendation against nuclear excavation, the 1971 United States National Security Council memo addressing the sea-level canal’s ecological issues and lack of military and foreign policy benefits, and the shipping industry’s disinterest in any solution requiring high tolls had sapped United States enthusiasm for what had once appeared an ideal technopolitical solution.
Moreover, a strong sense on both sides that any new canal—however unlikely—would have to be sited in Panama dissipated the United States leverage that had prevailed in the previous treaty talks.
Even so, the diplomats retained language allowing for eventual cooperation on a sea-level waterway.
Subsequently, in 1975 President Ford directed his negotiators to seek the longest possible period for a United States option to increase canal capacity, either by adding a third lane of locks or building a sea-level canal.
It was not that Ford sought to build a new waterway anytime soon, but rather that he wanted to prevent any other nation—particularly Japan, the canal’s secondlargest user—from doing so, since technological and economic changes might eventually render such a project viable and useful for the United States.
However, Democrat Jimmy Carter won the election, with strong support from environmentalists.
He immediately made the Panama Canal Treaties a centerpiece of his foreign policy agenda, retaining Ford’s negotiator Ellsworth Bunker and appointing Linowitz (a former ambassador to the Organization of American States) as co-negotiator, for a six-month term to end on August 10,1977.
Treaty reform, Flood warned in a private letter, “could well be your ‘Bay of Pigs’ and prevent your renomination or re-election,” an ominous reference to President Kennedy’s disastrous failure to overthrow Fidel Castro’s government in Cuba in 1961.
During the 1976 campaign, Carter’s team had cultivated the environmental vote by hailing his record as governor of Georgia.
After being persuaded by environmental and conservation groups to reverse his support for an imminent Army Corps of Engineers dam on the Flint River, Carter incurred the wrath of many Georgians by vetoing the project.
But it raised his national profile, and solidified his resoluteness as chief executive to eliminate wasteful pork barrel water projects—a goal that combined his interests in environmental quality and fiscal conservatism.
Flood, a conservative Democrat, had little interest in environmental issues— except for when it came to his passion project of preserving the Panama Canal Zone.
He and other opponents of treaty reform had been mobilizing the ecological arguments against the sea-level canal proposal for years.
Friends of the Earth played a prominent role, beginning in 1973 when the sea-level canal idea attracted renewed attention at congressional hearings on the efforts of Flood, Thurmond, and others to allocate $850 million for a third lane of locks for the original waterway.
FOE was a young organization, having been founded in 1969 by the former executive director of the Sierra Club David Brower.
Taking strong stands against TAPS, chemical warfare in Vietnam, nuclear energy, and other technologies of the postwar era, the group’s membership grew to twenty-seven thousand within four years.
Its legislative director, George Alderson, had become such a congressional fixture that a member of the House Interior committee joked about calling him by his first name.
Alderson had also helped organize the successful environmentalist coalition against the federal supersonic transport program, and later authored a guide to citizen lobbying.
During both the Ford and Carter administrations, as a leading employee of FOE and then of the Wilderness Society, Alderson endeavored to mobilize the insights of the i96os-era marine biologists.
While shipping industry representatives objected that such a waterway would lead to increased tolls, Alderson sought to elevate ecological matters to the level of economic ones.
In letters to the House Panama Canal subcommittee chairs requesting the opportunity to testify at future hearings, Alderson asserted that expanding the original waterway would serve commercial maritime needs “without allowing disruption of the marine ecosystems in the adjacent waters,” and noted that no environmental impact statements for modernizing the Panama Canal had yet been filed.
Alderson tried to get the White House’s attention by writing to the Domestic Policy Staff’s environmental expert, Katherine Fletcher.
She had participated in Earth Day 1970 and, after completing her undergraduate biology degree, worked in Washington lobbying for environmental legislation and in Colorado opposing oil-shale development there.
In March 1977, she was consumed with the congressional fallout of the water projects hit list, among other issues.
Fletcher responded two weeks later, in April 1977, that she was forwarding his letter to CEQ and Office of Management and Budget and would like to learn more about this “very interesting situation,” but otherwise remained noncommittal.
The following month, Carter received a persuasive letter from a pro-sea-level canal senator, Mike Gravel.
He “picked up the cause,” having become convinced that it offered the best solution to the problem of distributing Alaskan oil to the energy-hungry East and Gulf Coasts.
In particular, the Army Corps of Engineers should update the Anderson Commission’s 1970 report.
Other recommended actions echoed those of previous administrations, such as transferring some lands and responsibilities for operating the canal to Panama.
A civil liberties framework infused Gravel’s ensuing forty-six-page report to the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, which outlined the political and technological outmodedness of the existing waterway.
He focused on the need to rectify the historical injustice perpetuated by the United States against Panama and argued that the United States did not own the Canal Zone, a “colonial-socialistic enclave” incommensurate with American values.
Gravel rejected the argument that Panamanian control would lead to the waterway’s ruin.
He also presented data he had commissioned demonstrating the canal’s diminishing value due to its inability to accommodate the new class of postPanamax supertankers.
Having outlined the case against retaining United States control of the existing canal, Gravel presented five reasons for developing a new interoceanic waterway at sea level, any one of which in his view justified the project.
First, the need to transport the oil and natural gas resources of his own state eastward would enhance the economic viability of a wide sea-level canal.
Such a waterway, which he proposed to be fully owned by Panama, would resolve the thirteen-year-old stalemate in treaty negotiations, reduce United States dependence on foreign energy sources, preclude massive United States investments in new east-west oil pipeline systems, and strengthen United States defense capacities by allowing the navy’s thirteen post-Panamax aircraft carriers to transit in the event of a national security crisis.
Although he addressed the report to the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, and despite President Carter’s well-known environmental concerns, Gravel made no mention of the furor over the biological questions raised by the i96os-era sea-level canal debate.
Nor did he ground his concerns about energy security and infrastructure needs in the language of environmental issues.
Gravel’s lobbying paid off when he scored a twenty-minute meeting with the president in the Oval Office on July 13,1977.
The briefing paper’s final point reminded Carter to tell Gravel that the new treaty would provide an option for the U S. to build a sea-level canal, but otherwise the document’s background section included no information about the proposal’s checkered history.
That seemed to be the end of it, but eight days later, on July 21,1977, Carter brought up the sea-level canal idea in an unexpected venue.
At a town hall in Yazoo City, Mississippi, a citizen implied that he opposed granting Panama control of the canal and relinquishing the Canal Zone because the area would provide vital military assistance in the event of a third world war.
While President Lyndon Johnson’s administration had studied the multibilliondollar project, Carter explained, the need to transport Alaskan oil and gas in huge tankers to the Gulf and East Coasts had since then intensified the need for a wider waterway.
The $8 billion spent by private industry on TAPS, and the $11 billion projected for an Alaskan natural gas pipeline, had put the Anderson Commission’s estimate in perspective.
The $2.88 billion cost of the Route 10 seaway had seemed beyond the pale in 1970, but now, even when adjusted for inflation at $5.29 billion, it seemed much less objectionable.
At a question and answer session with members of the press in New Orleans on July 22, after one reporter asked for more details regarding his rationale for supporting a new oil-conveying seaway, Carter responded, “I told you at least as much as I know,” prompting laughter from the crowd.
Press concluded with an offer to initiate an update by the National Academy of Sciences, which Carter approved.
During the late summer and fall of 1977, a multitude of agencies and organizations rushed to contribute to the revived discussion.
Article XII Carter’s sudden espousal of the sea-level canal annoyed the treaty negotiators, who considered it settled and subordinate to resolving differences over the United States military bases, canal annuities to Panama, and many other issues.
This would have been wide enough for all our warships as well as the largest oil tankers.
Despite his historical amnesia, Hollings exemplified the venerable view that complex political problems could be resolved via a technological approach.
But shoehorning the sea-level canal provision into the almost-complete treaty was complicated.
Bunker and Linowitz tried to obtain a United States veto over canal construction by a third country in Panama until the treaty’s expiration on the last day of 1999.
In response, at an August 5 conference in Bogota to finalize the Panamanian terms, Torrijos and the presidents of Colombia, Venezuela, Mexico, Costa Rica, and Jamaica called for the United States to reciprocate by agreeing not to negotiate with other Central American nations to build a new interoceanic route during the life of the treaty.
The Latin American presidents appealed to Carter to accept the condition; otherwise, Panama would walk away from the table.
The Panamanian negotiators later charged that United States insistence on the right to exclude other nations from excavating a sea-level channel through Panama jeopardized the treaty talks, an allegation that United States officials downplayed.
Another awkward, unforeseen consequence of Carter’s words played out as dozens of Latin American and United States dignitaries assembled in Washington, D.C. to celebrate the signing of the Torrijos-Carter Treaties.
The day before the ceremony, on September 6, 1977, eleven organizations spanning the spectrum of environmentalist advocacy telegrammed the White House with an urgent plea to reject Article XII of the Panama Canal Treaty.
Environmental Action Inc., the Environmental Policy Center, and FOE, which probably led the telegram effort.
It quoted from the 1970 report by the National Academy’s Committee on Ecological Research for the Interoceanic Canal and reminded the president of the 1975 telegram opposing any treaty option involving a sea-level waterway.
The coalition objected that the State Department had only released a draft EIS of the Panama Canal Treaty days earlier and that the academy had not yet issued its updated report for the White House.
Panamanian general Omar Torrijos and United States president Jimmy Carter at the signing of the Panama Canal Treaties in Washington, D.C., September 7,1977.
Prints and Photographs Division, Library of Congress, LC-DIG-ppmsca-09785. wide range of initiatives pertaining to pollution control, human health, energy, the urban environment, and population growth.
Consequently, on that date, May 23, 1977, Carter issued an executive order to prohibit the establishment of exotic organisms on federal lands and waters, and directed the secretaries of agriculture and the interior to develop legislation to address the problem.
Although Article XII seemed to contradict key environmental goals of the Carter administration, the environmentalists’ last-minute telegram did not stop the signing ceremony for the treaties.
Near the end of his brief remarks, President Carter stated, “In the spirit of reciprocity suggested by the leaders at the Bogota summit, the United States and Panama have agreed that any future sea-level canal will be built in Panama and with the cooperation of the United States.
But as the diplomatic process gave way to domestic politicking for the ratification of the accords, Carter could not ignore the environmentalists’ antiseaway publicity indefinitely.
Although he had embraced Senator Gravel’s vision of the sea-level canal as a utilitarian solution to serious problems regarding the United States energy supply, the proposal, as it had in the 1960s, raised difficult questions about the relationship between oceanic health and maritime infrastructure.
The Senate ratification campaign would soon force him to realize that federal officials could no longer dismiss such esoteric questions as easily as in the pre-NEPA years of the previous decade.
Conclusion Although the emergence of nuclear excavation technology had revived the dormant dream of an isthmian sea-level canal in the late 1950s, the demise of PNEs in the early 1970s did not lay it to rest.
In fact, the seaway idea outlived by several years the postwar enthusiasm for using buried thermonuclear bombs to overcome the economic and technical burdens of monumental engineering projects.
Project Plowshare funding finally ended in 1977, seven years after the Anderson Commission concluded it could not recommend atomic ditch-digging.
While conventional construction did pose much higher costs than those originally calculated for peaceful nuclear explosives, by the mid-1970s the economic and political calculus had changed.
The $8 billion Trans-Alaska Pipeline created a new benchmark for public and private stakeholders about what constituted reasonable expenditures for critical fossil fuel facilities and infrastructure.
The men appointed by President Johnson to investigate the seaway’s feasibility would have been amazed by the multivolume EIS issued by the Department of the Interior and Federal Task Force on Alaskan Oil Development in 1972.
Granted, Congress had demonstrated its authority to check the rapid rise of environmentalist influence on federal megaproject planning by exempting TAPS from further such review in the summer of 1973.
Perhaps President Carter had this in mind, as well as the shockwaves caused by the subsequent OPEC embargo, when he stunned his advisors by speaking out in favor of a treaty clause regarding U.S.-Panamanian cooperation to develop a second canal at the level of the seas.
The notorious water projects hit-list episode was but one case that confounded his environmentalist constituency.
In August 1977, outraged congressmen from both parties presented Carter with an appropriations bill that restored support for all the water projects for the 1978 fiscal year.
The president’s reluctant signing of the bill frustrated environmentalists, as did later initiatives to address the energy crisis, including one to fast-track synthetic fuel plants, refineries, and facilities.
Carter’s support for the sea-level canal should be seen within this context of supporting federal environmental regulations and projects, but not when they conflicted with his top priority of economic recovery.
As revealed by his executive order restricting the introduction of foreign plants and animals, Carter possessed a keen appreciation of the potential threats posed by nonnative invasive species.
However, the executive order’s framing with respect to the federal agencies overseeing agriculture and public lands, and his own farming background, suggests that Carter and his environmental lieutenants viewed nonnative species through a terrestrial rather than marine lens.
The specific insights of the late i96os-era biologists regarding marine species exchange profoundly influenced environmental organizations opposing the sea-level canal in the mid-1970s, and yet the science of marine invasion biology— and marine conservation biology more broadly—remained underfunded and underdeveloped.
Oceanography, fisheries science, and other marine disciplines still focused more on providing data to facilitate the development of ocean resources than on elucidating their biological diversity and vulnerability to human activities.
Along these lines, it is possible that Carter’s time in the navy during and after World War II—when naval officials, the shipping industry, and scientists alike sought to use the oceans, whether for fish and mineral extraction, nuclear waste storage, or national security purposes—shaped a view for him of the oceans as invulnerable to overexploitation.
That is not to say that Carter, nor others who sought to maximize the productivity of the seas, did not care for the life within.
Carter’s naval national security worldview, engineering mindset, trusteeship approach to governing, and commitment to solving the energy crisis by both conserving and producing energy—as well as his need for canal treaty ratification votes from every possible source of support—likely all played important roles in his advocacy of the sea-level canal.
Next on the agenda was another titanic challenge, securing Senate approval of the pacts before the 1978 midterm elections.
In what became one of the most contentious foreign policy debates and longest public relations efforts in United States history, high-level officials and surrogates met with hundreds of constituent groups and opinion makers, and cut deals with dozens of individual senators, to secure the sixty-seven senate votes needed for ratification.
Carter and his team spent considerable political capital to reassure reluctant Americans that the accords did not constitute an abject surrender of United States prerogatives.
Much less appreciated in this process was the role played by environmental groups, who made it clear after Carter revived the sea-level canal proposal that their support could not be taken for granted.
The Panama Canal Treaty, which entered into force on October 1,1979, and terminated on December 31, 1999, with the transfer of full control of the waterway to Panama, contained two major environmental provisions.
Article XII authorized the two nations to conduct a feasibility study for a sea-level waterway, prohibited Panama from building a new interoceanic canal and the United States from negotiating with other Central American countries to construct one, allowed the United States to add a third lane of locks to the existing canal, and banned the United States from using nuclear excavation techniques without Panama’s express consent.
NEPA had already transformed statist environmental management by enabling citizens to take legal action against agencies that failed to take the EIS process seriously, as epitomized by the 1970 TransAlaska Pipeline proceeding against the Department of the Interior and the 1971 Calvert Cliffs nuclear reactor licensing lawsuit against the Atomic Energy Commission.
As for the law’s applicability to international conventions, prior to 1977, the only treaties to undergo formal impact assessments by United States agencies focused on unequivocal environmental themes such as natural resource use, pollution control, and the endangered species trade.
The State Department’s completion of an EIS for the Panama Canal Treaty thus marked a milestone in environmental diplomacy.
The report was not a paragon of rigorous analysis, but it provided a new forum for addressing the ecological threats posed by the sea-level canal.
A decade after Ira Rubinoff and fellow biologists had tried to mobilize funds for taxonomic and evolutionary studies needed to predict the seaway’s effects on marine fauna, they participated once again in government initiatives to assess the megaproject, but now with the support of professional advocacy nongovernmental organizations and the presidential science advisor.
Although many members of Congress doubted the eventual need for a second canal, the continuing energy crisis made them more willing to hear out Senator Mike Gravel’s proposed remedy.
The i970S-era phase of the sea-level canal story illustrated the expanding international scope of United States environmentalist advocacy.
Some environmental arguments and rhetoric, however, did not reflect the Panama Canal Treaty’s anti-imperialistic spirit.
Conservative congressmen seeking to preserve United States sovereignty over the Canal Zone had long used the sea-level channel’s potential ecological threats for their own ends.
Marine biologists continued to promulgate the relevance of struggling naturalist disciplines to megaproject planning.
United States environmental NGOs compelled the administration to pay closer attention to the environmental consequences of both the sea-level canal and of the transfer of the original waterway and Canal Zone to Panama.
During the intense campaign to win the requisite senate votes for the treaties, the State Department responded to environmentalist pressure for a stronger EIS by issuing an extraordinary statement designed to mollify NGOs that might oppose ratification.
Only seven years after Lyndon Johnson’s canal study commissioners dismissed environmentalism as a passing fad, NEPA had enabled environmental interest groups to exert significant influence in Washington.
The Panama Canal Treaty EIS President Carter’s surprise announcement at the Yazoo City town hall on July 2.1,1977, about the value of keeping United States options open for a future Panamanian sea-level canal, created a flurry of extra work not only for the treaty negotiators, but also for several executive agency employees.
As the ambassadors raced against their August 10 deadline to strengthen the sea-level canal clause, officials debated how to meet environmentalists’ demands for a full NEPA review.
On August 1, Marion Edey, one of the still-unconfirmed members of the Council on Environmental Quality , the White House office responsible for reviewing environmental impact statements, wrote a long letter to Stuart Eizenstat, the president’s domestic affairs advisor, about the project’s environmental background.
Edey was a well-connected member of the D.C. environmental lobbying circuit, having coestablished (with David Brower, the president of Friends of the Earth) the League of Conservation Voters in 1970.
Having received the president’s authorization to ask the National Academy of Sciences to conduct a new assessment, Press immediately conveyed the request to academy president Philip Handler.
It was a tall order—to assemble seven years’ worth of work within eight weeks—but the academy agreed to sponsor a conference of experts in September and to prepare a report soon thereafter.
Press’s office apparently acted without having consulted the CEQ, as Edey wrote him on August 23 to outline the many questions her office considered paramount for the academy study.
Ironically, her letter mentioned that Katherine Fletcher, the domestic policy staffer who had nudged the CEQ back in April in response to environmentalist George Alderson’s request, had suggested that the CEQ and the Office of Science and Technology Policy work together on the seaway issue.
The failure of two White House agencies to communicate in a timelier manner revealed the disorganized executive-branch approach to the seaway proposal, as well as the mounting pressure by the Washington-based environmentalist community to subject the canal treaty to NEPA oversight.
In the meantime, on August 5, representatives of the CEQ and several of the concerned environmental groups met in Washington with the assistant secretary of state for oceans and international environmental and scientific affairs, Patsy Mink, to discuss the Panama Canal Treaty’s environmental impacts.
State Department officials admitted they had not yet started the assessment.
But just a few weeks later, on August 29, the draft EIS announcement appeared in the Federal Register, inviting interested parties to submit comments within thirty days.
The National Academy’s new ad hoc group had not yet met, let alone issued its requested report to the president.
Consequently, many of the eighteen federal agencies, nineteen private organizations, and seven individuals who responded to the Panama Canal Treaty draff EIS castigated the rushed job.
Not only was the report short , but the State Department violated the NEPA statute providing commentators forty-five days.
The agency did reinstate the full period of public comment (that is, until October 13,1977), but did not hold public hearings.
Biologists influenced by the earlier seaway debate had passed resolutions calling on the Panama Canal Company to protect the waterway’s freshwater barrier by not pumping in salt water to maintain adequate levels during periods of water scarcity.
After a record-setting drought in the winter of 1976-77 forced canal operators to restrict transits, however, scientists feared the proposal to augment the Gatun and Alajuela reservoirs with ocean water would gather momentum.
Commentators called for the final EIS to provide detailed analyses about a variety of other issues.
A United States nongovernmental organization, however, adopted an explicitly anti-imperialist approach to environmental management.
Having recently visited the country, Wright expressed confidence in the Panamanians’ commitment to protecting the canal watershed from deforestation-induced erosion.
The environmental quality committee representing both entities excoriated the draft EIS for not employing a broad enough view of human ecology.
Likewise, treaty opponent Senator James Allen of Alabama used the draft EIS to bolster his case against ratification.
Urging his fellow senators to “listen carefully to the recommendations of environmental groups,” he delivered a speech on September 28,1977, raising the specter of Panamanian-caused deforestation in the Canal Zone and the loss of environmental safeguards afforded by United States law.
Because the draft EIS had also considered how Panamanian-imposed canal toll increases might affect environmental and economic well-being, Allen focused on the increased atmospheric pollution and higher consumer costs that would ensue if shippers of coal, petroleum, and other raw materials destined for United States markets avoided the canal in favor of overland routes.
The final version of the EIS came out late in December 1977; it did not list any authors but identified William Mansfield III of the State Department’s Office of Environmental Affairs as the contact person.
The report retained a heavy, though not exclusive, focus on how environmental changes under the treaty might impact United States interests.
The loss of the Zone’s forests would also threaten wildlife, including ten mammals and five birds listed under the United States Endangered Species Act of 1973.
Otherwise, however, the final impact statement did not provide the in-depth historical evaluation of environmental management practices that several commentators sought.
The National Academy of Sciences was also hard at work; in a remarkable turnaround time after receiving the presidential science advisor’s request on August 1, an ad hoc group chaired by Alfred Beeton of the Great Lakes and Marine Waters Centers formed.
The Beeton Committee held a conference of two dozen experts on September 1-2, solicited comments from almost two dozen more, and issued its eleven-page report on September 28.
Rubinoff, who became STRI’s director in 1973, had since come out against the seaway proposal, calling instead for the construction of a third set of locks with saltwater pumps, tidal gates, and a “toxic barrier” to kill fouling and migratory marine organisms.
Dawson, Sylvia Earle, Joel Hedgpeth, Meredith Jones, John McCosker, William Newman, C Richard Robins, Richard Rosenblatt, Howard Sanders, Geerat Vermeij, and Gilbert Voss.
Despite his rocky relationship with the scientific community, even John Sheffey participated, presenting on physical barriers to faunal mixing and on the Anderson Commission itself.
The Beeton Committee report packed a lot of information into eleven pages, and provided the sea-level canal authors a fresh forum to explain why marine ecology mattered for maritime infrastructural development.
Like the 1970 Mayr Committee on Ecological Research for the Interoceanic Canal , the 1977 academy authors criticized the Anderson Commission for its notorious conclusion about the acceptable risks of adverse ecological consequences, and called for a barrier system to prevent the inevitable migration and colonization that would follow the opening of a sea-level waterway.
But despite the passage of seven years, isthmian marine ecology had barely advanced.
Few surveys had been conducted to identify the species capable of migrating, especially not in the deeper areas requiring special equipment and research vessels.
Basic knowledge of marine parasites and disease organisms, even for commercially important organisms, remained sparse.
The Beeton report also called for a more complex approach to predicting the seaway’s consequences for ocean life.
The earlier controversy’s focus on extinction events and charismatic species like the yellow-bellied sea snake and the crown-of-thorns starfish emphasized the direct effects of seaway construction at the expense of indirect effects on local marine communities.
Just as the original Panama Canal had destroyed local mangrove forests, sea grass beds, and coral reefs when crews dumped masses of dredge spoil along the coasts, changes which in turn affected the members of multiple marine food chains, a sea-level waterway would affect nutrient dynamics, food webs, and species abundance by altering oceanic currents and sediment flows.
State-of-the-art computer models, in concert with updated taxonomic information, offered promise for determining such localized effects.
On the plus side, he considered $7 million “a relatively small price to pay” for an updated assessment of the sea-level canal, especially if the energy crisis worsened enough to justify construction, now estimated at $6. billion.
After implicitly referencing the Beeton report, McIntyre emphasized the project’s questionable economic returns, even in the context of increasing energy-transportation problems.
At one of the first post-signing ceremony ratification campaign events held by the White House, on September 15, 1977, environmental groups constituted six of the thirty-two civic organizations represented.
Carter’s subsequent decision in early October not to authorize Gravel’s bill for a new sea-level canal study probably reflected a deeper appreciation of the proposal’s controversial history, as conveyed by the National Academy’s Beeton report.
Describing the group’s interpretation of the seaway as “a sinister move on the part of the oil lobby,” the magazine quoted from a scathing editorial by President David Brower that appeared in the November 1977 issue of Not Man Apart, FOE’s newsletter.
Likely drawing on his close relationship with Edey, he excoriated Carter for promoting the project without having solicited CEQ’s recommendations or directing an EIS to be conducted before the treaty talks began.
In Brower’s view, the Alaskan senator tried to circumvent Congress, the CEQ, and the public by persuading Carter to have the sea-level canal written into the treaty, thereby mandating a new government-funded feasibility study.
The country also faced massive changes due to a proposed highway through the Darien Gap and the newly completed Bayano Hydroelectric Complex, which displaced thousands of Indigenous people in the eastern portion of Panama west of the Darien.
The three huge projects embodied the challenges of reconciling economic development with respect for human rights and environmental quality.
Rubinoff and another Smithsonian official, Ross Simons, made that clear when the special assistant to the president, Joseph Aragon, paid them the compliment of asking for their take on the environmental issues raised by the Panama Canal Treaty.
As for the seaway, “perhaps the most emotional issue to environmentalists,” Rubinoff and Simons advised Carter’s team to assure them that no decision would be made in the absence of further scientific study.
Representatives of the most vocal environmental groups had also been calling for such assurance, though they would likely have objected to being described as emotional.
Such threats included larger oil spills by the massive tankers that would use a sea-level channel, the need to deepen United States ports to accommodate these vessels, and the effects on the urban ports of Panama City and Colon of reducing traffic through the existing canal.
It had only begun expanding its international presence since 1970, yet had achieved great success using NEPA to challenge foreign megaprojects slated to be built with United States funds.
In particular, the club and three other organizations sued the United States Department of Transportation and Federal Highway Administration in 1975 to demand a better EIS for the proposed completion of the Pan-American Highway through the Panama-Colombia border.
The plaintiffs sought a greater focus on preventing the spread of hoof-and-mouth disease from South American livestock across what had long functioned as a biogeographical barrier—the dense rainforests of the Darien.
Because the disease threatened to kill off a quarter of the North American cattle herd—a $10 billion loss—it gained a lot of traction.
A United States district court agreed that both the draft and final impact statements failed to adequately address aftosa, as well as the cultural survival of the affected Guna and Choco tribes.
Vance had a deep knowledge of U.S.-Panama affairs, having served as the Panama Canal’s sole shareholder (as secretary of the army) and Lyndon Johnson’s deputy secretary of defense during the 1964 Flag Riots.
Instead of a high-profile speech by the nation’s top foreign policy official, however, the environmental community had to settle for a glorified cover letter by the second-ranking foreign affairs leader, which was still not too shabby.
Christopher issued the “Statement on the Panama Canal Treaties and Environmental Protection” on January 12, 1978.
The document declared that Article XII provided only “for a study of the feasibility of such a canal without making a decision or commitment that a sea-level canal will be built,” which would include a full EIS addressing the reports of the National Academy.
He identified Article VI “as an integral part of the Panama Canal Treaty,” a dubious claim given the pact’s overriding focus on the operation, defense, and transfer of the waterway and associated lands and property.
The lawyer had a history of pressuring the State Department and other United States foreign affairs agencies to comply with NEPA; as he argued in 1974, Congress intended the law to extend beyond the territorial boundaries of the United States.
That was not to say that NEPA permitted interference in the internal affairs of other nations.
As for the joint commission outlined by Article VI, environmental groups would have to ensure that the enabling legislation met the State Department’s ambitious objectives.
Despite strong support among some of their colleagues for it, the leading protreaty senators, Robert Byrd of West Virginia and Howard Baker of Tennessee, expressed to Christopher their willingness to delete it in order to “pick up votes,” especially that of one senator, Robert Griffin of Michigan.
Christopher cautioned them against this maneuver on the grounds that the article was in the national interest, and that any deletions would put the treaty at risk of further revision.
Because Griffin appeared to be turning against the treaties anyway, Baker agreed to shelve the plan for the time being.
By early February, sixty-two senators had committed to support the treaties, twenty-eight opposed them, and ten remained undecided.
To obtain the requisite sixty-seven votes, the administration made many last-minute concessions, including one that infuriated the Panamanians and almost derailed the whole process—a reservation introduced by Arizona senator Dennis DeConcini allowing the United States to use military force in Panama to keep the canal open, if necessary, after the year 2000.
The Senate approved each of the pacts with one vote to spare; the Neutrality Treaty passed on March 16 and the Panama Canal Treaty on April 18 with identical roll calls.
It had been a bruising fight, requiring Carter officials to provide statements of reassurance not only to environmentalists fearing a future sea-level canal but also to reluctant treaty supporters fearing the loss of the perpetual unilateral right to defend the waterway.
Although the Trans-Alaska Pipeline was only transmitting a few hundred barrels per day, energy analysts expected that number to skyrocket in the near future.
On May 4, 1978, the Senate approved moving forward with Gravel’s bill to provide $8 million for a new commission to conduct a full NEPA review of the seaway project.
Though he had previously ignored the risks of marine species exchange, the measure included a flora, fauna, and ecosystem inventory of the Panamanian isthmus and assessment of the ecological effects of marine species movement.
The bill allocated three years for the commission to complete all its work, including the economic and technological feasibility studies.
The House of Representatives, where antitreaty sentiment remained strong, held three days of hearings to consider Gravel’s plan in June 1978.
In response to questions about the decreased annual transits, and to Senator Jesse Helms’s claim that 98 percent of the world fleet could still go through the Panama Canal, Gravel used data he had commissioned to argue the opposite.
Despite the drop in the number of ships, he argued that actual tonnage through the canal did meet earlier predictions due to the increase in average vessel size.
However, because of its reliance on supertankers, the oil industry could no longer make the most of the Panama route, and thus the canal could only be said to have accommodated 42 percent of the world shipping fleet in 1977, a figure that would likely drop to 7.64 percent by 2000.
Besides, Big Oil would not be the only beneficiary of a deep and wide new waterway; the United States construction, steelmaking, shipbuilding, dredging, coal mining, and West Coast timber industries would also profit.
I would rather the Congress not fight about something that is obsolete,” Gravel implored his colleagues, in spite of the arduous campaign to replace the archaic 1903 treaty.
When grilled about the project’s environmental effects, Gravel revealed his terrestrial bias.
Building the requisite infrastructure across the part of the continent that was only 50 miles wide as opposed to where it was 1,500 miles wide offered the least damaging solution to conveying the vital cargo eastward.
His TAPS battle scars might have taught him a hard lesson about the persistence of environmentalist opposition, or he sincerely believed that investing in a sea-level canal made more sense than expanding the nation’s oil pipeline infrastructure.
But one thing that had not changed was the frustration of many biologists upon seeing the proposal reemerge with only token attention to baseline research.
When asked if the $3 million needed for a decade-long investigation would be worth it if the sea-level canal were ruled out on economic and national security grounds, they affirmed so by focusing on the value of the isthmus for addressing one of biology’s most fundamental concepts, the origin of species.
Analyzing how fish, urchins, and numerous other organisms had changed after being separated by the isthmian land bridge for some three million years would provide new insights for evolutionary biology.
Robins had contributed to the infamous Battelle report that downplayed the threat of faunal mixing, and still seemed to harbor resentment against the biologists who had dismissed his team’s labors.
Under Rubinoff’s leadership, STRI increasingly expanded its Panamanian employment, training, and education programs, actions which helped the institution negotiate additional agreements with the government of Panama in 1985,1997, and 2000 to continue operating in the former Canal Zone.
Ortman of FOE delivered a sharp denunciation of the sea-level canal on several fronts, and his Not Man Apart article was entered into the record along with the telegram delivered to the White House on the eve of the Torrijos-Carter signing ceremony.
A representative of the Izaak Walton League of America, a venerable organization of about fifty thousand anglers—almost twice as many members as FOE—also spoke.
Both argued that Gravel’s bill did not afford adequate attention to ecological research due to its three-year timeframe, far less than biologists had requested.
One of the most interesting testimonies came from John Sheffey, the former executive director of the Anderson Commission.
He remained convinced that a sea-level canal would be a better investment than the third-locks expansion project, which would be rendered obsolete as ship sizes once again increased.
Yet he did not think it necessary to spend $8 million for a comprehensive new study.
The Rubinoffs and others had conducted breeding experiments in tanks and had towed species through the canal to start to provide a quantitative basis for predicting the effects of marine species mixing.
As he saw it, once the president had decided for economic, military, and political reasons to build a sea-level canal, scientists would have plenty of time to conduct baseline ecological studies during the fifteen-year process of negotiating, planning, and building it.
Even the needed geophysical studies, including in-depth analyses of subsurface geology, slope stability, and the hydrodynamics of ships moving through confined waters in variable currents, could await executive consent.
When asked by an incredulous congressional staffer if he would support a decision to build a seaway without having completed a geophysical analysis, Sheffey replied, “Sure.
At the hearing, Sheffey also provided deeper insight into President Johnson’s reasons for supporting the sea-level canal, or at least his perceptions thereof.
Once built, its relative invulnerability to sabotage would preclude on-site United States defense forces, and its comparative ease of operation and maintenance would enable the host country to quickly assume day-to-day operations.
As Representative Flood had fulminated to his colleagues, Sheffey told a Wall Street Journal reporter that a major purpose of the sea-level canal was to achieve “excellent treaty relationships” between the two countries and to end the clashes over canal operation and sovereignty.
Fifteen years after the Flag Riots of 1964, Sheffey still smarted from having believed the hype about PNEs.
As he confided to Jorden, the Plowshare physicists Edward Teller and Gerald Johnson had oversold the nuclear canal to Johnson’s administration and many members of Congress, persuading Sheffey to change his life and career so as not to miss out on such an exhilarating endeavor.
As for his argument for authorizing only a limited new study of the sea-level canal’s feasibility, Sheffey emphasized the long history of commissions that had investigated the canal question.
The economic and political circumstances of the 1970s did indeed differ significantly from those of the earlier periods during which powerful stakeholders had invoked the sea-level canal as an ideal solution to the problems of isthmian transportation, and United States control thereof.
Each phase of the controversial proposal generated novel understandings of nature and of how to engineer nature for diverse human goals.
Rubinoff spoke out against the project in an article that appeared in a 1975 volume associated with the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, a nine-year-long forum that led to an international agreement governing multiple aspects of marine resource use.
More broadly, as STRI’s director from 1973 to 2008, Rubinoff championed many initiatives to elucidate and protect Panama’s marine and terrestrial biodiversity and to integrate the institute into Panama’s scientific and educational community.
Edward O Wilson, the Harvard biologist who served on the National Academy’s first canal committee, also inched toward advocacy in the succeeding years.
He also called it his first explicit application of island biogeographical insights to conservation planning.
The renowned evolutionary biologist Ernst Mayr, who worked with both Rubinoff and Wilson at Harvard and who chaired CERIC, did not participate in the i970S-era controversy, nor did he address it in his later books on the history of biology.
When Mayr died in 2005 at the age of one hundred, Rubinoff paid homage to his forgotten leadership of the National Academy committee.
Many other stakeholders during the decade after Mayr stepped away from the debate worked to ensure the government paid as much attention to the megaproject’s ecological effects as to its economic, military, and geopolitical ones.
The National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 enabled citizen environmentalists to mobilize the insights of biologists in powerful, unexpected ways.
Adapting to the NEPA requirements entailed a steep learning curve for the State Department and White House.
The Carter administration spent a mountain of political capital to actualize the Panama Canal Treaties for both idealistic and pragmatic reasons.
Transferring ownership of the canal and buffer zone righted the wrongs inscribed in the unjust 1903 treaty and eradicated an offensive relic of colonialism by recognizing Panama’s sovereignty over all its lands and resources.
At the same time, the treaties ensured continued United States access to the interoceanic waterway and the right to send in troops to defend it if threatened.
Despite all the blowback suffered by protreaty forces for their supposed surrender of an invaluable asset, the United States retained a significant stake in its long-term investment.
Lesser known provisions of the Panama Canal Treaty committed the United States and Panama to study and negotiate a sea-level waterway and to coexecute the agreement in environmentally sensitive ways.
Carter and his diplomatic team sought to promote a more equitable relationship between the superpower and the small yet strategic nation, though they stopped short of immediately transferring all United States rights over the canal and its watershed to the Panamanian government.
They also precluded Panama from negotiating with other wealthy nations to build a better seaway during the treaty’s twenty-two-year life span, and did not ensure that the treaty EIS analyzed Panama’s options for managing the canal watershed.
Against all odds, the isthmian sea-level canal idea remained viable after both the demise of PNEs and the ratification of the new agreement with Panama.
The seaway proposal survived because it performed important kinds of work for many different stakeholders in the context of the mid-to-late 1970s United States energy crisis.
It provided an option for modernizing maritime transportation, for incorporating environmental values into public works planning, for prioritizing neglected forms of biological research, for considering the proper scope of extraterritorial environmental protection, and even for upholding remnants of the imperialistic status quo.
Far from being a mere gimmick, the sea-level canal proposal provided powerful visions of alternative futures for those who skillfully deployed it.
Conclusion Remembering the Unbuilt Canal E nvironmentalists did not kill the sea-level canal, neither in 1970 nor in 1978.
In each case, the United States government put the brakes on the megaproject because the fiscal, national security, foreign affairs, and domestic benefits did not converge at the right political moment to justify further investments of capital and energy.
Chairman Robert Anderson of the Canal Study Commission had outlined the stakes back in March 1966.
An eventual streamlined seaway held the promise of satisfying Panamanian aspirations for full sovereignty while maintaining United States access to the Zone’s strategic locale and assets for the foreseeable future.
By the time the Anderson Commission submitted its final report in 1970, however, presidential concerns about violating the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty had prevented Plowshare physicists from conducting all the needed PNE experiments.
A large portion of the preferred route would not hold up to nuclear dynamite anyway, according to the geological surveys.
However, the demise of cheap nuclear construction methods, combined with the loss of momentum for U.S.-Panama treaty reform and the nation’s huge budget deficits caused by the Vietnam War, played the major role in undermining high-level support for the 1960s iteration of the sea-level canal.
Later in the 1970s, in the context of increasing energy costs for consumers, of higher economic benchmarks for constructing critical energy infrastructure, and of the new treaty agreements with Panama, President Carter perceived that the sea-level canal’s moment might have come.
He secured a treaty option for the two nations to commit to a new study of a future seaway meant to transport Alaskan oil eastward.
But he did not anticipate the intensity of opposition by environmentalist groups, who now possessed the ability to challenge public works planning via the National Environmental Policy Act.
Carter’s team scrambled to show respect for his environmentalist constituency by ensuring that the State Department complete an environmental impact statement for the Panama Canal Treaty.
When activist groups criticized the final EIS as insufficient (for reasons that related not only to the sea-level canal per se), the administration tried to conciliate them by issuing a statement of reassurance.
It worked, thereby avoiding an embarrassing NEPA challenge to the treaty during the grueling ratification campaign of 1977-78.
Following the ratification events, the seaway proposal simmered on the back burner of United States economic and national security policy-making, especially as Japanese interests sought to assert their rising influence in the Western Hemisphere.
The Tripartite Hydrocarbon Highway Even after the Article XII fiasco, and after Congress rejected the bills proposed by Senator Gravel and Representative Murphy to conduct a new set of feasibility studies, President Carter remained intrigued by the promise of a seaway for conveying Alaskan oil to the energy-starved East Coast.
As the hearings to enact enabling legislation for the Panama Canal Treaties heated up after the 1978 midterm elections, environmental groups renewed their efforts to convince Carter to change course.
The Office of Technology Assessment staff did, however, consult with four of the biologists who had contributed to the 1960s debate and noted their concerns about the EIS’s lack of attention to the consequences of pumping seawater into the existing canal during droughts.
The Panama Canal Act of 1979 did not authorize funds for new seaway feasibility studies, but it did echo the language of Article XII committing the two nations to study the issue.
Otherwise, the congressional debates over implementing the treaties focused on military and economic issues.
The enabling laws took effect just three days before the treaties entered into force on October 1,1979, the first day the Panamanian flag flew alone over the former lands of the Canal Zone.
The possibility of cutting a new canal west of the Zone revived yet again in the new decade.
Although the 1970 report of the Anderson Commission had generated revilement in the United States, the Japanese read it eagerly.
By 1980, Japan’s postwar economic transformation was nearly complete, and it had embarked on a series of overseas development projects to secure strategic resources and its status as a global economic behemoth.
Panama likewise had a great interest in not allowing the canal to become obsolete once it acquired full control in 1000.
Anticipating that once again Gravel “might do an end-run to the President on this issue,” Carter’s lieutenants sought to manage the situation by “giving him a little bit more information” about the plan to inform the Panamanians and Japanese of the president’s interest in a tripartite feasibility study.
Gravel shared his thoughts in a 1979 interview with William Jorden, who as ambassador to Panama had played a major role in brokering the canal treaties and who was writing a book on the subject.
The deliberations did not begin, however, until the administration of Ronald Reagan, who defeated Carter in the November 1980 election.
Completed in 1981 with private financing, the eighty-one-mile-long Trans-Panama Pipeline proceeded without any state-mandated environmental review.
Like the Anderson Commission of 1965, it had an ambitious five-year agenda to analyze the impacts of a sea-level canal, modifications to the present one, and overland options such as pipelines or container-rail transit.
Unlike the previous group, however, the new commission was explicitly tasked with determining the environmental and social, as well as the economic and political, impacts of such alternatives.
Yet the questions raised in the 1960s about nonnative marine species exchange remained inchoate, underfunded, and unfamiliar, even to its Japanese boosters.
Nagano was dumbfounded, a sign that the scientific and environmentalist communities still had much work to do in Japan—and elsewhere. i8o CONCLUSION Ecological sensitivity was also in short supply at a 1986 international gathering in Anchorage, Alaska, devoted to megaproject planning.
Organized by a Swedish think tank, the International Federation of Institutes for Advanced Study, the conference featured presentations on such projects as a moon city, a dam across the Bering Strait, an Alaska-Norway ice highway, a river diversion network from the Pacific Northwest to thirty-three United States states and Mexico— and the Panatomic Canal.
Regardless, political obstacles now posed “insurmountable problems” to nuclear geoengineering.
After Reagan officials of the Council on Environmental Quality and the Environmental Protection Agency declined to help draft the terms of reference for the tripartite seaway study commission, the State Department asked the Smithsonian Institution to step in.
The Japanese stock market crash of 1989 led to a “lost decade” of growth and the end of its Lessepsian ambitions for a second Panama Canal.
Moreover, the United States invasion of Panama in 1989 to remove the dictator Manuel Noriega—whom officials accused of threatening the Panama Canal’s neutrality—refocused attention on whether the nation could manage the original waterway within a decade, let alone build a new one.
After the 1979 transfer of the Zone lands to Panama, many of the embittered Zonians who remained in the country blasted the Panamanian government for not cutting the grass properly, and reminisced about the Zone’s similarity to “a beautifully manicured golf course,” a function of the Panama Canal Company’s well-funded mosquito-control practices and large groundskeeper force.
More substantively, Panama had to deal with the problem of cleaning up unexploded ordnance left behind by the United States military and with implementing new forms of canal watershed management.
Remembering the Unbuilt Canal Challenges of Postcolonial Environmental Management Despite the challenges of the twenty-two-year-long transition, the 1999 transfer of the canal proceeded smoothly, earning the Panamanian government praise for doing a far more effective job of operating it than the United States.
When it came to the long-postponed issue of modernizing the waterway, however, environmentalists criticized the Autoridad del Canal de Panama , the government agency that replaced the Panama Canal Company, for replicating the undemocratic, heavy-handed decision-making processes that had prevailed previously.
The decision grew out of several 19 9 os-era meetings that deemed a sea-level canal too expensive.
Although the “Si” measure to expand the existing channel passed by an overwhelming 80 percent, only 40 percent of eligible voters participated, and opponents expressed concern that corruption and costs would spiral out of control.
Allegations that officials manipulated the voting process to ensure a favorable outcome, and the fact that the ACP did not complete the required EIS until nine months after the referendum, led to strong criticism from local and international observers.
Although Panama had sought for decades to escape the oversight of the United States, the colonial construct created by the canal remained palpable.
As Gonzalez argued in a 2008 assessment, the ACP promoted a technocratic rather than democratic model of environmental impact assessment—a process that privileged compliance with preestablished regulatory standards rather than public involvement.
The ACP completed the massive project over budget and two years behind schedule, in 2016.
To address the problem of the canal’s dwindling water supply, the engineers devised an innovative system of water-exchanging basins that enables the locks to reuse up to 60 percent of the water, rather than washing it all into the sea.
However, pressure on the Gatun and Alajuela Lake water storage system remains high, especially in drought years.
Environmentalist concern and scientific interest in the Panama Canal as a model system for testing predictions about tropical marine invasions revived during and following the third-locks expansion of 2007-16.
Related experiments have elucidated the apparently greater ecological resistance of the tropics to marine invasive species than the temperate zones.
These questions are more urgent than ever; with the Panama Canal’s doubled capacity for shipping traffic, marine species introductions will likely increase worldwide, especially in receiving ports of the United States Gulf and East Coasts.
Atlantic and Pacific marine biotic mixing has also begun to escalate via the Bering Strait as the Arctic sea ice melts.
Russian and other stakeholders began investing billions of dollars to develop a “Suez of the north,” but little if anything for environmental impact assessment.
The first official vessel to transit the new locks, an enormous Chinese vessel packed with almost 9,500 containers en route to the Pacific, heralded a new geopolitical era.
Other milestones followed with the first United States liquefied natural gas shipment to China in August 2016 and the first instance of three LNG tankers transiting the canal on the same day, in April 2018.
Transported in NeoPanamax vessels, United States LNG had not been profitable in Asia prior to 2016.
Since the canal expansion, the industry has expanded rapidly, developing new facilities and terminals to facilitate the booming commodity, a result of the concomitant hydraulic fracturing shale gas revolution in the United States.
Remembering the Unbuilt Canal .83 The LNG gas boom played out against the backdrop of plans to build the largest canal in history, a new Atlantic-Pacific link spanning Nicaragua.
But after President Daniel Ortega claimed in December 2014 that construction had already begun, the international scientific community mobilized against the megaproject.
Environmentalists and biologists from the Nicaragua Academy of Sciences, STRI, and elsewhere around the world raised grave concerns about the project’s effects on water resources and biodiversity, and urged the government to consider the environmental guidelines and human rights laws that now govern infrastructure decision-making in many countries.
The protests led the Nicaraguan leadership to authorize an environmental and social impact assessment, though critics deemed it superficial.
The country’s highest court paved the way for the work to resume by dismissing the last environmentalist challenges in 2017.
By then, however, the Chinese concessionaire had lost most of his telecom fortune and Panama had reestablished diplomatic and economic relations with China (and dropped them with Taiwan), intensifying assumptions that the plans had crumbled.
Since Nicaragua announced its plans for the Grand Canal, other nations have upped the ante by proposing even larger maritime highways.
The Panama Canal’s operators did begin building a third lane of locks in 1939, but after World War II scuttled the project, United States officials spent the rest of the century debating whether it made more economic, military, and political sense to engineer a new channel at sea level.
Because the waterway’s overall revenues now exceed $2 billion per year, the investment appears more than worthwhile.
Yet Panamanian officials must now contend with problems inconceivable to Roosevelt and his successors.
Global climate change is rendering it much more difficult to manage all kinds of infrastructural systems built during periods of relative climatic stability.
Recent severe drought events have lowered Gatun and Alajuela Lakes, which supply fresh water both for the canal and for Panama’s growing population, enough to force limits on cargo ships and thereby forfeit millions of dollars of tolls.
For the canal to remain viable, officials must now consider building expensive, disruptive new networks of reservoirs, dams, and tunnels for storing and transporting fresh water.
As anthropogenic carbon emissions alter climate patterns, the assumption that technocrats can easily manage unintended ecological consequences is no longer tenable.
Knowledge about likely bioenvironmental effects is now essential, not merely desirable, for making sound infrastructural investments. large-scale projects require the convergence of many forces—political, economic, technological, scientific, and environmental—to take shape.
It is also the case that grand infrastructural visions of the future sometimes fail to crystallize despite powerful coalitions in favor of them.
Checking the technocratic impulse to solve complex problems with environmentally disruptive technological solutions requires political will, analytical rigor, and awareness of the options foreclosed by high-modernist plans for accelerating modernity.
Throughout its many phases, the Central American sea-level canal inspired visions of development that held both liberating and constricting implications for the anticipated host countries.
The seaway proposals of the 1960s and 1970s served different United States presidential goals for improving relations with Panama as the original waterway and the Canal Zone slid into technopolitical obsolescence.
The proposals also had important, unexpected repercussions for environmental management and associated concepts of progress.
Environmental scientists and activists did not cause the cancellation of the seaway in any of its iterations.
They did, however, use the proposal to open up new discussions about the harmful consequences of maritime-induced bioinvasions, and about the kinds of science needed to quantify and predict the negative effects of marine invasive species on ecological and economic systems.
The resurgence of the sea-level canal proposal at strategic points in the intertwined history of the United States and Panama provides windows into moments of diplomatic, technological, scientific, and environmentalist transformation.
Such historical moments in turn remind us of the value of envisioning alternative futures, and of questioning technocratic prescriptions that promise to modernize landscapes and societies without ensuring environmental quality and equal justice for all.
The Central American Sea-Level Canal and the Environmental History of Unbuilt Megaprojects 1.
David Kirsch, “Project Plowshare”; Frenkel, “A Hot Idea”; Scott Kirsch, Proving Grounds ; Kaufman, Project Plowshare.
Heffernan, “Bringing the Desert to Bloom”; Heffernan, “Shifting Sands,” 618.
The Insane 1950s Plan to Use H-Bombs to Make Roads and Redirect Rivers,” Slate, Sept., 2015.
On the political role of scientific expertise, see Bocking, Ecologists and Environmental Politics. ii.
David Kirsch, “Project Plowshare,” 216; O’Neill, Firecracker Boys, 83; Scott Kirsch, Proving Grounds, 77.
Scott Kirsch, Proving Grounds, 76; Scott Kirsch and Mitchell, “Earth-Moving as the ‘Measure ofMan,’ ” 129.
Heffernan, “Bringing the Desert to Bloom,” 108; Scott Kirsch, Proving Grounds, 8.
See,g., Taylor , Making Bureaucracies Think-, Caldwell, National Environmental Policy Act-, Clark and Canter, Environmental Policy and NEPA-, Lindstrom and Smith, National Environmental Policy Act-, Dreyfus and Ingram, “National Environmental Policy Act”; Andrews, Managing the Environment, Managing Ourselves.
Rankin, “Zombie Projects”; Rowe, “Promises, Promises”; d’Avignon, “Shelf Projects”; Carse and Kneas, “Unbuilt and Unfinished,” 22.
On the blurring of boundaries between technology and nature, see,g., White, Organic Machine-, Stine and Tarr, “At the Intersection of Histories”; Reuss and Cutcliffe, Illusory Boundary.
English language monographs include Helferich, Humboldt’s Cosmos-, Sachs, Humboldt Current-, Walls, Passage to Cosmos-, Rebok, Humboldt andJefferson-, Wulf, Invention of Nature-, Echenberg, Humboldt’s Mexico.
Humboldt, Political Essay, 1:35, 4;zz; Humboldt and Bonpland, Personal Narrative, 6;z4z-43.
On the Raspadura Canal see Humboldt, Personal Narrative, 6:z6o; Frederick Collins, “The Isthmus of Darien,” 149.
Lloyd, “Account of Levellings Carried across the Isthmus of Panama”; Humboldt, Views of Nature, 191.
Murchison, Address to the Royal Geographical Society of London, 64; Bidwell, Isthmus of Panama, 99; Balf, Darkest Jungle, 59.
Frederick Collins, “The Isthmus of Darien and the Valley of the Atrato,” 148, i6i-6z.
For English language scholarly studies, see,g.,Ealy, Yanqui Politics and the Isthmian Canal-, McCullough, Path between the Seas-, Hogan, Panama Canal in American Politics-, Parker, Panama Fever-, Maurer and Yu, Big Ditch.
Report of the Board of Consulting Engineers for the Panama Canal, 35, 61.
For more detail on the mechanics of the isthmian sea-level canal’s requisite tidal lock, as articulated by a later generation of engineers, see Mehaffey, Isthmian Canal Studies — 1947, 66, 73, 75, 96.
Report ofthe Board of Consulting Engineersfor the Panama Canal, 8z, 85, 91.
Michael Donoghue, “The Panama Canal and the United States”; Missal, Seaway to the Future.
Missal, Seaway to the Future-, Henderson, “The Face of Empire”; Strong, “Jimmy Carter and the Panama Canal Treaties,” Z71.
English language analyses of Humboldt’s imperialist legacy include Pratt, Imperial Eyes-, Sachs, “The Ultimate ‘Other’ ”; Rupke, “A Geography of Enlightenment”; Walls, Passage to Cosmos.
Schwarz, “Alexander von Humboldt’s Visit to Washington”; Walls, Passage to Cosmos, izi.
Frenkel, “Geography, Empire and Environmental Determinism”; Carse, Beyond the BigDitch, 7Z-73.
Conniff, Black Labor on a White Canal-, Newton, Silver Men-, Julie Greene, Canal Builders.
Knapp, Red, White, and Blue Paradise-, Missal, Seaway to the Future-, Moore, Empire on Display, Michael Donoghue, Borderland on the Isthmus.
Report of the Board of Consulting Engineers for the Panama Canal, 10; APICSC, Interoceanic Canal Studies 1970, V-23.
Reines, “The Peaceful Nuclear Explosion”; Vortman, “Excavation of a Sea-Level Ship Canal,” 88.
Wolfe, “The Ecological Aspects of Project Chariot,” 62; Golley, History of the Ecosystem Concept in Ecology, 74.
Isthmian Canal Studies Board of Consultants, Report to the Committee on Merchant Atarine and Fisheries, 7.
Chiari to Kennedy, Sept., 1961, repr. in Star & Herald , Nov.,1961, in ICPQ, i6z.
Around this time, Ball, the under secretary of state, also started urging Kennedy to avoid United States involvement in Vietnam, and he later helped President Carter rally senatorial support for the ratification of the 1977 Panama Canal Treaties.
A-Blasts May Do the Job,” United States News & World Report,jane 10,1963.
See,g., Egan, Barry Commoner and the Science of Survival ; Benjamin Greene, Eisenhower, Science Advice, and the Nuclear Test-Ban Debate.
See,g., Doel and Harper, “Prometheus Unleashed”; Doel, “Scientists as Policymakers”; Dorsey, “Dealing with the Dinosaur”; Hamblin, Oceanographers and the Cold War, McNeill and Unger, Environmental Histories of the Cold War, Hecht, Entangled Geographies-, Hamblin, Arming Mother Nature-, Audra Wolfe, Competingwith the Soviets-, Bocking and Heidt, Cold Science.
Belinfante, Petren, and Vakil, Report ora the Events in Panama, January 9-12,1964.
The United States government owned the Panama Canal Company and was represented by the secretary of the army, whom the annual reports referred to as the stockholder and personal representative of the United States president.
Belinfante, Petren, and Vakil, Report on the Events in Panama, January 9-12,1964.
United States Congress, Authorizing the President to Appoint a Commission, 1.
Lyndon B Johnson, “Message to the Congress Transmitting First Annual Report of the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission,” August 3, 1965, in PPPUS, 1965,1:400.
Jorden, Panama Odyssey, 107; Phillips, Hall, and Black, Reining in the Rio Grande, chap.
Sheffey did not assume the official title of executive director until mid-1967; prior ZOO Notes to Chapter Four to then, he was called the acting executive director or executive secretary, but his duties remained the same.
John Sheffey, 70, Dies; Expert on the Panama Canal,” Washington Post, Nov.
Noble replaced Woodbury in June 1967, and Groves replaced Noble in June 1969.
United States Congress, Peaceful Applications of Nuclear Explosives, z-53.
UPI, “Johnson Urges Speed Up of $$ for Canal Survey,” El Panama America, Aug.,1965; “Funds for Canal Surveys,” Philadelphia Inquirer, Aug.,1965.
See,g., Robertson, Malthusian Moment-, Flippen, Conservative Conservationist.
Willard Libby quoted in “Plowshare Future Tied to Soviets,” Christian Science Monitor, Apr.,1966.
United States Canal Study Commission Inspecting Routes in Panama,” Aug.
Lyndon B Johnson, “Annual Budget Message to the Congress, Fiscal Year 1967,” Jan.
See also “LBJ Told Poverty Dented, But Canal Plans Slowed,” Tulsa Daily World, Aug 16,1966.
Richard E Bevir, “We Built Our Own Road through the Darien Gap,” Popular Mechanics, Aug.61, zo6.
These figures came from the i960 census, as reported in Torres de Arauz, Demographic Characteristics of Human Groups.
Reeve Waring, “Darien Sea-Level Canal Survey Starts,” Sunday American (Panama), Mar. zo, 1966; “Darien Indians Protest United States ‘Invasion,’ ” Panama American, Mar. zz, 1966.
See also “The Panama Canal Study Hurting for Time, Money,” Oakland Times, May z6,1966.
Minister Confirms Atomic Canal Study,” Sunday American , Apr.,1966; “Bar Flays EletaAdair Notes on Sea-Level Canal Studies,” Panama American, Jan.,1967.
Christobal Sarmiento, “What’s Happening in Darien Survey?,” Panama American, May Z9,1966.
Reuters, “Bulldozers Prowl for New Canal Site,” Christian Science Monitor, June 6,1966.
Bevir, “We Built Our Own Road through the Darien Gap,” Popular Mechanics, Aug.61; Howe, Chiefs, Scribes, and Ethnographers, 194; Scott Doggett, “Birds versus Buzz Saws in Jungle Joust,” Los Angeles Times, Sept, zi, Z004.
See also “Jungle Quest for Answers to Future Canal Near End,” Star & Herald , Feb., 1968.
Battelle Memorial Institute, Environmental Impact Assessment for Darien Gap Highway.
See also Judy Burton, “Storey Inspects Proposed Sites for New Canal,” Dallas Morning News, Apr.,1967.
Arlen J Large, “Blocked Canal,” Wall Street Journal, Sept., 1967; “US SeaLevel Canal Studies Going Smoothly, OICS Says,” Panama American, Sept., 1967; “Sea-Level Canal Studies Going Well, Chief Says,” Star & Herald , Sept., 1967; “OICS Phasing Out Studies of RP Sea-Level Canal Site,” Panama American, Sept.,1967.
Victor K McElheny, “ United States Peaceful A-Use Program Opposed,” Washington Post, Mar.,1967.
David Kirsch, Electric Car and the Burden of History, Laird, Solar Energy, Technology Policy, and Institutional Values.
Assessing Mankind’s Most Gigantic Biological Experiment I Bowler, Earth Encompassed, 108.
Thomas O’Toole, “Super-Clean Nuclear Explosive Now Appears within United States Grasp,” Washington Post, May 11,1968.
See,g., Tate and Allen, “The Proposed New Treaties for the Panama Canal,” Z76. zo.
Lyndon B Johnson, “Message to the Congress Transmitting the Fourth Annual Report of the Atlantic-Pacific Interoceanic Canal Study Commission,” Sept.,1968, in PPPUS, 1968-1969, z:466. zz.
Henson, “Baseline Environmental Survey.” zo 6 Notes to Chapter Five 36.
These authors included Chesher, Topp, Menzies, Glynn, Dunson, Newman, and Jones, and to a lesser extent, Graham, Hubbs, Kropach, Porter, and Vermeij.
Dreyfus and Ingram, “National Environmental Policy Act”; Taylor, Making Bureaucracies Think-, Caldwell, National Environmental Policy Act-, Andrews, Managing the Environment, Managing Ourselves-, Lindstrom and Smith, National Environmental Policy Act.
See especially Norse and Crowder, Marine Conservation Biology, xviii; Kroll, America’s Ocean Wilderness-, Oreskes, “Scaling Up Our Vision”; Rozwadowski, Vast Expanses.
Szylvian, “Transforming Lake Michigan”; Mann, Exotic Species in Mariculture. zo8 Notes to Chapter Five 79.
Elton, Ecology of Invasions, 94; Hildebrand, “Panama Canal as a Passageway for Fishes” 8z.
Rubinoff and RubinofF, “Interoceanic Colonization of a Marine Goby,” 477.
See also Carlton, “Transoceanic and Interoceanic Dispersal of Coastal Marine Organisms,” 319.
William H Gorishek, “Dream of Nuclear Canal Turns into Pick and Shovel Nightmare,” Panama American, Apr. zz, 1969.
Avoiding an Elastic Collision with Knowledge I See,g., Gottlieb, Forcing the Spring-, Egan, Barry Commoner and the Science of Survival-, Rubinson, Rethinking the American Antinuclear Movement-, Spears, Rethinking the American Environmental Movement.
Richard Nixon, “Statement about the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969,” Jan.,1970, in PPPUS, 1970, 3.
Boffey, “Sea-Level Canal”; Newman, “National Academy of Science Committee,” Z56 ; Leslie A Pray, “Ernst Mayr Dies,” The Scientist, Feb., zoo$; Sapp, What Is Natural-, Sapp, Coexistence.
Luther Carter, “National Academy of Sciences”; Boffey, Brain Bank of America.
Cole’s statement is poignant given that three years later the academy’s governing council apparently cut him from a list of nominees due to his environmental activism.
CERIC: General, 1968, NAS; Seitz to Mayr, May zz, 1968 ; Mayr to Frederick Seitz, Apr.,1968, Folder BIOLOGY & Agriculture: CERIC: General, 1968, NAS. iz.
Z9,1969; “RP, Colombia Propose New Canal to Cross Border of z Countries,” Panama American, Sept.,1969.
Thompson, “Improving the Quality of Life,” For the 1959 hearings see United States Congress, Biological and Environmental Effects of Nuclear War.
Murphy, “National Environmental Policy Act and the Licensing Process,” 963.
Joshua Lederberg, “Sea-Level Canal Points up Need for Environmental Data,” Washington Post, Feb.,1969.
Baker and Stebbins, Genetics of Colonizing Species-, Blu Buhs, Fire Ant Wars.
Interoceanic Canal, Com. on Ecological Res. for: Corres. re submission of Rept.
Bayer, Voss, and Robins, Bioenvironmental and Radiological Safety Feasibility Studies.
Entry Ai 36040-C, Container 5, RG zzo, NARA; CERIC, Marine Ecological Research, 155.
APICSC, Interoceanic Canal Studies 1970-, United States Congress, Sea-Level Canal Studies, 30Z-Z0.
See also Sayre, Interview ivith Robert M Sayre, by Thomas J Dunnigan, Oct.,1995.
Newman, “National Academy of Science Committee”; Dunson, “Sea Snakes and the Sea Level Canal Controversy”; Rubinoff, “Sea-Level Canal in Panama”; Beeton, Report of the Committee on Ecological Effects, 194; Sapp, Coexistence, 103. ioz.
Flood, “1971 Statement before the Subcommittee on Inter-American Affairs,” 71; Francis B Kent, “The Biological Unknowns of a New Panama Canal,” Washington Post, Jan., 1971.
Informally named after Panamanian general Omar Torrijos and United States president Jimmy Carter, the two pacts are officially titled “The Treaty Concerning the Permanent Neutrality and Operation of the Panama Canal,” which grants the United States permanent rights to defend the canal, and “The Panama Canal Treaty,” which grants Panama full sovereignty over the waterway; the two accords are commonly called the Panama Canal Treaties.
Major studies of the negotiations and ratification process include LaFeber, Panama Canal; Jorden, Panama Odyssey; Moffett, Limits of Victory; Major, Prize Possession.
On the long-term domestic political and economic effects of the treaties, see Moffett, Limits of Victory, chap.
Stine, “Environmental Policy during the Carter Presidency”; Reisner, Cadillac Desert, chap.
Kaufman and Kaufman, Presidency of James Earl Carter, 3Z; GodboId,//»y»jy and Rosalynn Carter, 176; Kaufman , Plans Unraveled, 16.
Scott Kirsch and Mitchell, “Earth-Moving as the ‘Measure of Man,’ ” iz8.
See also Scott Kirsch, Proving Grounds, zoz; “Harbor on North Slope Dug by Nuclear Blast Is Mulled, Teller Says,” Wall StreetJournal, Sept.
Smith, “Alaskan Oil to Begin Flowing Today; Pipeline Oil to Create Glut on West Coast,” Washington Eto, June zo, 1977, Ai; “Senate Rejected Mondale’s ’73 Prediction of Disaster,” Boston Globe, Mar.
United States Department of the Interior, Final Environmental Impact Statement, 1:1. zz.
Smith, “Alaskan Oil to Begin Flowing Today,” Washington Postfxme zo, 1977.
See also Associated Press, “Panama Canal Has Lost Strategic Value,” News & Sun-Sentinel , Mar.,1988.
United States Congress, National Outdoor Recreation Programs and Policies, Z98; Alderson, “Interview with George Alderson,” by Ted Hudson, 1989; Suisman, “American Environmental Movement’s Lost Victory”; Conway, High-Speed Dreams, 140, 145; Alderson, How You Can Influence Congress.
Ortman testimony, United States Congress, Sea-Level Canal Studies, 369.
Walter Pincus, “When a Campaign Vow Crashes into a Pork Barrel,” Washington Post, Apr.,1977.
Alderson later transmitted his files to his FOE successor David Ortman, who shared the letter with Congress during the 1978 hearings addressed in chapter 8.
See also “Enemies of the Sea-Level Canal,” New Scientist, Nov.,1977, Z71.
Jimmy Carter, “Remarks on a Question-and-Answer Session at a Public Meeting,” July zi, 1977, in PPPUS, 1977, z:i3z6.
Austin Scott, “Carter Visits Floating Oil Rig, Muses on a Sea-Level Canal,” Washington Post, July zz, 1977; James Nelson Goodsell, “Carter Remarks on Panama ii 8 Notes to Chapter Seven Stir Up a Tempest,” Christian Science Monitor, July 25, 1977; “Question-and-Answer Session with Reporters,” July 22,1977, in PPPUS, Jimmy Carter, 1977, 2:1338-39.
The $5.29 billion figure is from Gravel’s Panama Canal , which identified the source as a May 5, 1977, letter by Army Corps of Engineers general Ernest Graves.
The Panama Canal Company also used the figure of $5. billion in testimony before the Committee on Environment and Public Works on July 22,1977.
Quoted in Eleanor Randolph, “Talk of Another Canal,” Chicago Tribune, Aug.,1977.
Ernest F Hollings, “The Panama Canal,” The Fritz Hollings Report (Sept.
Jimmy Carter, “The Environment Message to the Congress,” May Z3, 1977, in PPPUS, 1977,1:967.
Carter, “The Environment Message to the Congress,” May Z3, 1977, in PPPUS, 1977,1:967.
Stine, “Environmental Policy during the Carter Presidency,” 187,191,195.
See,g., Doel, “Constituting the Postwar Earth Sciences”; Kroll, America’s Ocean Wilderness-, Hamblin , Poison in the Well-, Finley, All the Fish in the Sea-, Dorsey, Whales and Nations. ioz.
In addition, several of the implementation agreements for specific treaty articles pertained to environmental issues.
These included canal water conservation; the continuation of the research facilities of the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, United States Army Tropic Test Center, and Gorgas Memorial Institute of Tropical and Preventive Medicine; and the removal of hazards from defense sites.
Robinson, “Environmentalist Looks at the Panama Canal Treaties”; Robinson, “Introduction.” no Notes to Chapter Eight 4.
See also Lewis H Diuguid, “ United States Study of Canal Pacts Cites Peril to Watershed,” Washington Post, Oct., 1977; Leonard C Meeker and Don G Scroggin to William Mansfield III, Sept.,1977, in Department of State, Final EIS, P-15.
Harold B Green Jr., Patricia T Fulton, Charlotte Kennedy, Jeri Steele, and Melvin Borenam to William Mansfield III, Sept., 1977, 5, in Department of State, Final EIS, P-41.
Although Carter nominated her as one of the three members of CEQon May 16, 1977, she withdrew her name in January 1978 after senators delayed action on her confirmation due to her lobbying activities.
Ortman testimony in United States Congress, Sea-Level Canal Studies, 369; Beeton , Report of the Committee on Ecological Effects.
Lewis H Diuguid, “ United States Study of Canal Pacts Cites Peril to Watershed,” Washington Post, Oct.,1977, A30; Department of State, Final EIS, Q-4.
The historic water shortage also provided an opportunity for foresters to emphasize links between rural land use, deforestation, and the canal system.
R Michael Wright to William Mansfield III, Sept., 1977, in Department of State, Final EIS, P-37.
Brower quoted in “Enemies of the Sea-Level Canal,” New Scientist, Nov., 1977,271.
Robert Goodland, “Triple Threat to Panama’s Ecology,” Washington Post, Dec.
Ortman, “Mingling the Two Oceans,” in United States Congress, Sea-Level Canal Studies, 364.
Robinson, “Extraterritorial Environmental Protection Obligations,” 170.
Robinson, “Environmentalist Looks at the Panama Canal Treaties,” Z5-Z6.
Stephen Haycox quoted in David Westphal, “Gravel was a Maverick in the ’70s, and His Politickin’ Hasn’t Changed,” Macon Telegraph, Jan. z, zoo8.
Wilson Still Thrives on Being a Scientific Provocateur,” Quanta Magazine, May 15, Z019.
Shigeo Nagano Says He Can Do It,” Christian Science Monitor, }n\y Z9,1980.
Stephen Kinzer, “A Century Later, Idea for a Sea-Level Canal Revived,” Boston Globe, Feb.,1980; William Chapman, “Japan, United States Mull New Panama Canal,” Washington Post, Mar. zj, 1980.
Until its closure in 1996, the TPP carried7 billion barrels of Alaska North Slope crude; the pipeline was reopened in Z003 to transport Ecuadorian oil, and Notes to Conclusion 2 2-5 its flow direction reversed in 1008.
Smith, “Sohio Dropped Pactex Pipeline for Profit Gains, Experts Say,” Washington Post, Mar.,1979.
A similar i98os-era initiative to revive the project was also unsuccessful.
Ken Wells, “Think Tank Thinks Gigantic Thoughts, and Expensive Ones,” Wall Street Journal, Aug. z8,1986; “Col.
See also Edward Flattau, “Ecological Dangers of a Sea-Level Canal,” Chicago Tribune, Feb. zo, 1990. zi.
See also,g., Stephen Kinzer, “The Shift is Painful for Panama Zonians,” Boston Globe, Feb., 198Z; Darryl Fears, “For Some, Panama Canal Treaty Symbolizes a Paradise Lost,” Washington Post, Dec., 1999; Niko Price, “ ‘Zonians’ Mourn Dying Society,” Tulsa World, Aug.,1998; Lindsay-Poland, Emperors in the Jungle, 174.
Gonzalez, “Environmental Impact Assessment in Post-Colonial Societies,” 343.
Steven Mufson, “An Expanded Panama Canal Opens for Ships,” Chicago Tribune, June z, zoi6.
Marco Evers, “Russia Moves to Boost Arctic Shipping,” Spiegel Online, Aug.
Neighboring Seas Are Flowing into a Warming Arctic Ocean,” Yale Environment 360, May 10,1018.
Fred Pearce, “Mega-Canals Could Slice through Continents for Giant Ships,” New Scientist, Apr.,1017.
William Laurance, “Is the Global Era of Massive Infrastructure Projects Coming Notes to Conclusion ZZ7 to an End?,” Yale Environment 360, July 10, zoi8; McCall and Taylor, “Nicaragua’s ‘Grand Canal,’ ” 195.
BIBLIOGRAPHY Manuscript Collections Dwight D Eisenhower Presidential Library, Abilene, Kans.
The Foreign Affairs Oral History Collection of the Association for Diplomatic Studies and Training.
Beeton, Alfred M Report of the Committee on Ecological Effects of a Sea Level Canal, Environmental Studies Board to the Honorable Frank Press.
A Report to the Committee on Environment and Public Works, United States Senate.
Engineering with Nuclear Explosives (April 21, 22, 23, 1964), 3ZI-34; repr. in United States Congress.
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, Contract LLNLCONF-464374, zoio.
Report to the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, House of Representatives, United States Congress, on a Long-Range Programfor the Panama Canal June 1, i960.
General Report on the Economics of the Peaceful Uses of Underground Nuclear Explosions.
Phenomenology of Underground Nuclear Explosions, edited by Lawrence Radiation Laboratory-Livermore and AEC-San Francisco Operations Office, 8-13.
Hearings before the Subcommittee on National Parks and Recreation of the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs, House of Representatives March 13, is, 16, 22, and 23, 1973.
Hearings before the Special Subcommittee on Radiation of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy, Congress of the United States, Eighty-Sixth Congress June 22, 23, 2s, 2S, and 26, 1939.
Hearing before theJoint Committee on Atomic Energy, Congress of the United States, Eighty-Ninth Congress January s, 1963.
Hearings before the Committee on Commerce, United States Senate, Eighty-Eighth Congress, Second Session, on S 2428, a Bill to Authorize a Study of Means ofIncreasing the Capacity and Security ofthe Panama Canal, andfor Other Purposes; and S 2497, a Bill to Providefor an Investigation and Study to Determine a Site for the Construction of a Sea Level Interoceanic Canal Through the American Isthmus.
A Digest of Information; Prepared for the Committee on the Judiciary, United States Senate, by Its Subcommittee on Separation of Powers.
United States Department of the Interior and United States Federal Task Force on Alaskan Oil Development.
Final Environmental Impact Statement for the New Panama Canal Treaties.
Edited by Almon R Wright, Velma Hastings Cassidy, and David H Stauffer.
Edited by Edith James, N Stephen Kane, Robert McMahon, and Delia Pitts.
Edited by Bradley L Coleman, Alexander O Poster, and James F Siekmeier.
Panama Canal; Establishment of Commission to Study Sea-Level Canal and Alternatives.
In Proceedings of the United States Strategy Conference on Tropical Deforestation.
United States Department of State and United States Agency for International Development, 1978.
Selected Periodicals Atlantic Monthly Chicago Tribune Christian Science Monitor Los Angeles Times Neiv Scientist Neiv York Times Panama American Popular Mechanics The Scientist Bibliography 13 6 Science News Star & Herald United States News & World Report Wall Street Journal Washington Post Washington Star Published Primary Sources Alderson, George.
In Vol. of The Writings of William Paterson, Founder of the Bank ofEngland; with Biographical Notices of the Author, His Contemporaries, and His Race, edited by S Bannister, Z80-83.
Environmental Impact Assessmentfor Darien Gap Highway fi-om Tocumen, Panama, to Rio Leon, Colombia.
Marine Ecological Research for the Central American Interoceanic Canal.
A Multidisciplinary Perspective of a Tropical River Basin, edited by Russell S Harmon, Z8-44.
Personal Narrative of Travels to the Equinoctial Regions of the New Continent, During the Years 17(1(1-1804.
The Union of the Oceans by Ship-Canal without Locks, via the Atrato Valley.
Case Histories of the Japanese Oyster, Crassostreagigas , with Implications for Other Fisheries.
Martin, William E., United States Atomic Energy Commission, and Battelle Memorial Institute.
Moon, Katie, Vanessa M Adams, Stephanie R Januchowski-Hartley, Maksym Polyakov, Morena Mills, Duan Biggs, Andrew T Knight, Edward T Game, and Christopher M Raymond.
Ros, Macarena, Gail V Ashton, Mariana B Lacerda, James T Carlton, Maite Vazquez-Luis, Jose M Guerra-Garcia, and Gregory M Ruiz.
Schloder, Carmen, Joao Canning-CIode, Kristin Saltonstall, Ellen E Strong, Gregory M Ruiz, and Mark E Torchin.
Demographic Characteristics of Human Groups Inhabiting the Eastern Region of the Republic of Panama.
The True Story of the Darien Expedition and America’s Ill-Fated Race to Connect the Seas.
Environmental Knowledge in the North American Arctic during the Cold War.
Z46 Bibliography -, Christine Keiner, Pamela M Henson, Marixa Lasso, Paul S Sutter, Megan Raby, and Blake Scott.
Forgotten Architecture in the United States from Thomas Jefferson to the Space Age, edited by Alison Sky and Michelle Stone, 1—13.
Delgado, James P., Tomas Mendizabal, Frederick H Hanselmann, and Dominique Rissolo.
Jimmy Carter, America’s “Malaise,”and the Speech That Should Have Changed the Country.
Greene, Benjamin P Eisenhower, Science Advice, and the Nuclear Test-Ban Debate, 19451963.
Alexander von Humboldt and the Latin American Journey That Changed the Way We See the World.
Editorial Universitaria, Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, 1981.
Kaufman, Burton I., and Scott Kaufman, The Presidency of James Earl Carter.
Laird, Frank N Solar Energy, Technology Policy, and Institutional Values.
White House Politics in a New Light, edited by Mitchell B Lerner, zo-47.
Storm King Mountain and the Emergence of Modern American Environmentalism.
Judicial Misconstruction, Legislative Indifference, and Executive Neglect.
Science and Technology in Canadian History, edited by Edward Jones-Imhotep and Tina Adcock, 3Z6-47.
How America Took, Built, Ran, and Ultimately Gave Away the Panama Canal.
Niles, John M History of South America and Mexico; Comprising their Discovery, Geography, Politics, Commerce and Revolutions.
Joining Environmental History with Science and Technology Studies, edited by Dolly j0rgensen, Finn Arne Jorgensen, and Sara B Pritchard, 1-17.
Communities, the Environment, and Public Policy, edited by Laurel Sefton MacDowell, izi-49.
Hoover Institution Press, 1977. zs6 Bibliography Rycroft, Robert W., and Joseph S Szyliowicz.
Nineteenth-Century Exploration and the Roots of American Environmentalism.
Water, Science, and the Rise of the United States Army Corps of Engineers.
The United States Navy, the Marine Environment, and the Cartography of Empire.
A Biography; The Congressional Career of an Economic Savior and Cold War Nationalist.
Environment, Politics, and the Building of the TennesseeTombigbee Waterway.
Agent Orange, Vietnam, and the Scientists Who Changed the Way We Think about the Environment.
Histor IM0E1970 es of Contemporary America Jimmy Carter, the Politics of Family, and the Rise of the Religious Right, byj.
