Took advantage of the situation in Cuba to gain a foothold in an area that was crucial to America’s security.
Safeguarding one’s national security -A threat to one’s national security can lead to a country taking extreme measures.
USA • Over-reacted to situation and led to escalation of conflict. -E.g.
CIA under President Eisenhower had sought to help the anti-Castro rebels to overthrow the regime. -E.g.
America was trying to topple Castro through isolating Cuba, and in doing so, increased the hostility of the Castro regime against the USA and accentuated the fear of invasion, thereby prompting Castro to turn to Moscow for help to defend Cuba from America.
USSR deployed regiments and weapons to Cuba, including nuclear cruise missiles and mid-range ballistic missiles that could strike targets in USA’s interior.
This was an indication of economic expansion into an area that ranked high on America’s defence priority.
Sponsorship of Castro’s regime and subsequent creation of a de-facto military base in Cuba appeared to be a deliberate affront to America’s national security.
Transporting of military aid to Cuba thus escalated a crisis between 2 neighbouring countries into a Cold War issue that threatened World peace.
Cuba • Manipulated super-power politics to guarantee security of borders and to legitimise the new Castro regime.
Turned to USSR for economic and military help, so that it would not have to play the role of a submissive little brother to America.
By using USSR as a counter-weight to USA, Cuba was shrewdly manipulating super-power politics for its own advantage.
Castro was aware that Cuba’s distance from Moscow meant that it would be given a large measure of independence from Moscow, as opposed to the tight leash that it would be kept on had they decided to concede to American superiority.
USSR -Other factors: USA and Cuba -Conclusion: Pick one factor and show convincingly why that country was mostly to blame, in relation to the other countries.
Yes, USSR to blame • Defence lawyer : No, USSR not to blame, USA/Cuba more to blame.
Have to come up with a balanced assessment, but also to apportion blame.
Acts of economic sabotage organised by CIA. -Plans to assassinate Castro remained in place.
