Like PresidentsWilson and Trumanbefore him, PresidentBush sought to build a stable, lawful peace on the foundationof militaryvictory.
Many doubt whetherthis goal is attainable,and suspect that a more reasonablehope is, in the phraseof the editors of the New Republic, 'the chance of a less chronic disorder' in the Middle East and elsewhere.
Even if far short of a new world order, any new orderliness would be salutary in the chaotic, unipolar confusion of our immediate post-cold war era.
If, in a world of shaky regimes, contested borders, ethnic upheavalsand religious revivals, every act of aggressionrequiresthe mobilizationof three-quartersof a million troops, many sent across the seas to face well-armedtroublemakersand obtaintheir unconditional surrender, there will be very few cases of collective security.
Unfortunately,deterringdisorderlyconductof the sortexhibitedby Iraqin August 1990 will not be easy, because aggression of this nature is nearly impossible to anticipate.
Washington failed to realise until the last minute the importanceof sending signals that could have had a deterrenteffect on SaddamHussein.
They were expostulationsof perplexity, even disbelief, not explanationsof Iraqi decision making in the face of failed allied designs to deter them.
It bodes ill for future attemptsat avoiding new world disorder that, in this first worldwidecrisis and conflict afterthe cold war, the USA and its allies were unable to predict the onset or natureof the crisis, nor the war that would be requiredto resolve it.
First, despite the undoubtednoveltyof post-coldwar internationalrelations,historyprovidesrelevant insights.
In fact, as the article argues, there are stiking reverberationsbetween the darkestmoment of the cold war-the Cubanmissile crisis-and the first postcold war crisis.
Second, we turn to psychology, not of a technical sort, but rathera common sense analysis of the psychological evolution of leaders from anxiety to desperation-that is, to a point where deterrenceno longer has its intendedeffect because disasterappearsto be inevitable.
Third, we look broadlyat thepresent, looking for a class of states that would seem to be most at risk for creating the kind of disorder identified by Hoffmann.
Here we focus not on the end of the cold war as the source of much that is new and perplexing, but ratheron the consequencesof the Soviet collapse for Moscow's former clients and other potentialpariahs.
Fourth, and finally, we addressthefuture,andenvisionways in which today'stroublesomecountriescould become tomorrow's desperate despots.
History:the evolutionof old world desperation On 23 November 1990, CubanleaderFidel Castroreleasedpreviouslyundisclosed correspondencebetweenhimself and Soviet GeneralSecretaryNikita Khruschev.
This gesturewas Castro'scontributionto ongoing discussionsbetween American, Soviet, and Cuban scholars and participantsin the 1962 missile crisis, and was promptedby a requestfrom United States participantsin the process thatthe Cubangovernmentbegin to declassifydocumentationrelevantto SovietCubandecisionmaking.
The letterswere exchangesat the heightof the missile crisis, andrevealthatCastro took the extraordinarystep of calling for an all-out nuclearstrikeagainstthe USA if, as seemed increasinglylikely to Castro, the USA invaded Cuba.
There are many Cubans who are at this moment experiencing unspeakablebitterness and sadness.
It is well to rememberthat these desperatewords were actually communicated from one leaderto anotherin the missile crisis of 1962.
At that moment, for Fidel Castro, the cold war was suspended:the Soviets had capitulatedand in the process they had sold Cuba down the river; the USA was poised to destroy his regime; and there was absolutely nothing he could do to prevent the attack.
His choice, as he saw it, was between the total destructionof his country and martyrdomfor world socialism,andmeaninglessdeathanddestruction.In refusingCastro'srequest outright,Khrushchevwas, from the Cubanpointof view, condemningthe probable US liquidation of the Cuban Revolution to meaninglessness.
With theirbacks to the wall, and no way out, Butch and The Kid decide that death with honouris preferableto deathwithouthonour.
They come out of the hut shooting, trying to take at least a few of the lawmen down with them.
As they emerge from theirhut, smiling, guns blazing, the hills come alive with thunderousgunfire.
Interestingly, the viewer is filled not with incredulityat this obviously desperate and suicidal act, but with admirationfor its heroism in the face of unbeatableodds.
This is because by this point in the film, we are 'inside' the protagonists,somewhatas we can now more easily get 'inside' Castro'smind, then and now, due to the publicationof his letters to Khrushchev.
They are not, or at least they appearnot to be once we know something about the stories those who are desperateare telling themselves.
For if they truly believe that their choices have been reducedto deathwith honouror deathwith humiliation,then the first option becomes the rational choice.
Such desperatestatesof mindin leaders, while rationalfrom theirpoint of view, are likely to lead to actions which appear, to outsiders, to be suicidal at worst, reckless at best.
But we should note carefully what we actually mean when we characteriseactionsas suicidalor reckless:we meanthe actioncannotbe deterred.
It is too late, precisely because the situationhas been defined as yielding only an absolutely perverse pair of options, both of which lead to death and destruction.
Thatis why preventingnew world disorderrequiredby Hoffmanncannotbegin at the momentof desperation.Becauseleaderswill not be deterredeasily, we must pay closer attentionto an entireprocess.
In 1962, Castroperceivedthatthe Soviet Union had abandonedhim and his revolutionto the inevitableUS aggression, and that he had no control over events, and no effective options.
We now know that these beliefs led to genuine desperation.In the Iraqi case, much has been made of inveteratedomestic instabilityand the insecurityof SaddamHussein following the war with Iran, and of how his anxiety was heightenedtremendouslyby what he took to be the implicationsof Soviet capitulationin the cold war.
While some observers attributehis grab of Kuwait to greed, we argue that the invasion, as well as his enthusiasmfor a war whose outcome could only be the destruction of Iraq, resulted from a combinationof opportunityand insecurity.
The way to minimise new world disorder, given these examples, is to prevent the anxiety of potentiallytroublesomecountriesfrom evolving into desperation,as it did in the 1962 missile crisis, and as it apparentlydid in the Gulf crisis and war.
Moscow's formerclients are enteringa periodof uncertainty.They fear regimethreateningcrises and face the prospect of dire emergency on their immediate horizons.
North Korea and Cuba, especially, are on the leading edge of a multidimensionalprocess of deteriorationwhose ingredientsinclude unrelenting anti-Americanrhetoric,untimelyideological commitment,and aging charismatic leaders.
Former Soviet clients cannot avoid anxiety about Moscow's demise at a time of increased regional instability.
Some find themselves ideologically on the losing side of history, facing potentiallyominousidentitycrises as well as hard choices betweenpoliticaland economic liberalisationon the one hand, and regime survival on the other.
At the same time, all seem vulnerableto new forms of instability.For these potential(and in the case of Iraq, actual)losers in the world afterthe cold war, the onset of a crisis could contribute to the evolution of situations so perverse as to seem to their leaders to warrant steps which, to outsiders, might appearto be suicidal.
The trick, to reiterate, is to prevent manageable, deterrableanxiety from evolving into desperation and dangerous, 'suicidal' behaviour.
Economic endgame Moscow's collapse has ushered in the end of soft currency barteringand cheap energy, and broughtcutbacksin aid.
The economic hardshipsthat Soviet withdrawalis bringing to America's new friends in Eastern Europe are also being felt by its old adversaries.
Military abandonment A secondset of problemsconcernsmilitarytransfersandthe protectionfromexternal threats,as Moscow's formerclients can no longer count on easy access to military hardwareor superpowerprotection.
Long before the August 1991 coup, former Soviet clients began to suspectthatthe rug could be pulled out from underthem.
Now that handouts have been curtailed across the board and their patron has collapsed, former Soviet clients have nowhere to turn to preserve their security.
Condominium Former Soviet clients are no longer able to preserve a niche for themselves by playing the superpowersoff against one another.
The Sandinistaswere grateful thatWashingtoncut aid to the Contras,butthe negotiatingprocessthey were forced into by the reduction of Soviet support ultimately cost them control of Nicaragua.And Cambodia is being forced to share power with opposition factions including the hated Khmer Rouge.
Multilateralconflict resolution may be designedto addressregionalinstability.But by excludingthe felt needs of certain regimes from the collaborativebenefits of the post-cold war order, or by forcing them to comply with externallyimposed regional security arrangements,wealthy and powerful countriesmay inadvertentlygeneratemore anxiety thanthey know.
In Syria, for example, unconfirmedreportsclaim thatup to 50,000 troopswere neededto muzzle violent, popular resistance to the country's participationin the UN coalition, and dozens may have been killed.
Drawn out attemptsto bring North Korea in from the cold waralso illustratethe typeof constraintsfacedby thosewho advocateexpanding regional integrationand bilateral relations.
While Moscow's former clients face the challenges described above, previous cold war bastions of American interest such as Israel, Pakistan, South Korea, Taiwan, and others know that the United States can more easily choose to abandonthem now that containmentof Soviet expansion is no longer the monolithic goal of American foreign policy.
Israeli restraintduringthe Gulf War, for example, illustrateshow the country'srelationshipwith Washington,the leadership'sability to suppress retaliatoryinstincts for the sake of its longer term interest in seeing the Iraqi army destroyed by the USA, and the state's legitimacy in the eyes of its citizens, helped the regime preserve national security.
Had SaddamHussein possessed nuclearweapons, however, or used chemicalweapons, Israelmay have become sufficiently desperateto attack Iraq pre-emptively, or in retaliation.
No longer forced to take sides in the bipolarcompetition,or to be a targetof that competition,they have greaterincentivesfor opportunism,butare morevulnerableto the opportunism of neighbours.And, as in the past, some may provoke war in an attemptto divert attentionfrom domestic instabilityor to promote loyalty to the regime.Given the precarioussituationsin which Moscow's formerclients, in particular,already find themselves, it is not terriblydifficultto determinewhatthey fear.
First, the cold war's end has 'unlocked' the USA, and former Soviet clients are concernedaboutAmericanenthusiasmfor enforcing the rules and regulations of a US-proclaimednew world order.
They realise that the USA may now roam uncheckedby Russia,andthatit seems to be freeingitself fromburdensomemilitary obligations in Europe.
When PresidentBush said that the United States military will never again fight with its handstied behindits back, many in the Third World perceive this statementto be a euphemismfor the USA's delight over Moscow's inability to deter conventionalconflict.
Since there is no one to resist United States aggression, the argumentgoes, there are fewer reasons than formerly to limit the use of force and threats to use force.
But to many observers, Panamawas the middle step in a process that began in October, 1983 with the invasion of Grenada.
Desert Storm, which consigned the lessons of the Vietnam war to oblivion, is regarded as a meaningfulthird step.
Second, the recently declassified Castro-Khrushchev letters suggest that ABC weapons may be used during post-cold war regional crises.
While scholars such as KennethWaltz argue that deterrence in the ThirdWorld may be robust, the presentauthorsfear this may not be the case.
Although the stability of superpower deterrence reduced the likelihood of cataclysmic war for seceral decades, the US-Soviet experience may be a poor guide for predictingthe stabilityof ThirdWorlddeterrencein the new era.
Saddam Hussainrefrainedfrom attackingcoalitionforces or Israelicities with his chemical arsenal,but it seems clear in retrospectthathe calculatedthatIraqwould survive the recent war.
Fidel Castro, on the other hand, concluded in October 1962 that Cuba was about to be completely destroyed, leading to his contingent request for a nuclear first-strike.
The steadfastdecay of desperateThirdWorld regimes may contributeto crises and spirals of escalation in which neighbours come to fear that one or more opponentsis about to use ABC weapons againstthem first.
Importantly,therefore, it is not only true that unconventionalweapons may be used in post-coldwar crises.
Althoughestimatesvary, 11 Third World countries are thoughtto deploy mediumor long-rangeballistic missiles, and several others deploy short-rangesystems.
Cruise missile technology soon will become availableto many ThirdWorld countries.
Why the United States should care Some specialists believe that the end of the cold war has greatly reduced threats to Americansecurityand interestsemanatingfrom the ThirdWorld.
They predict that future violence will stay containedand limited to specific regions, and that the USA will not be drawninto a conflict in which it must decide between getting bogged down or losing the confidence and loyalty of allies.For these reasons, John Chipmanconcludes that, aside from humanitarianconcerns, violence in the ThirdWorldnow fails to pass the 'so what' test.
Yet, despite significant human suffering that was graphically, if briefly, dramatisedin the United States media, neither the coup itself nor Doe's personaldemise has impliedanything, one way or the other, for American security interests.
At the same time, however, we believe that advocates of the rosy, 'so-what' view can retain it only by ignoring the psychology of desperationand its consequences:anxietyover survivalof the regime, leadingto extravagant risk-taking, leading to crises, war, entrapment,suicidal behaviour and resultingcatastrophe.Such behaviour, even in the absence of ABC weapons, may mattera great deal to Washingtonbecause of its interest in pursuinglongterm multinationalcooperation, preventing violence directed at the USA, and avoiding entanglementin regional wars.
Finally,a desperateleadercoulddragthe USA intoan unintendedwarby attacking nations the USA values (Israel, South Korea, and Taiwan come immediately to mind), and could ignite cross-regionalconflict by using mediumor long-range missiles to attackother regions.
A partialexample of this phenomenonoccurred when Iraqimissile attacksagainstTel Aviv and Haifa incited Palestinianguerillas in southernLebanon to try to open up a symbolic second front against Israel.
Let us review the argument.First, the Cubanmissile crisis of 1962 embodies the centralfeaturesof the new world situation.To the USA, it representsthe moment the cold war was suspended,the lost opportunityto constructa 'new world order' a generationearlier than the present effort.
But to Cuba, and to other potentially troublesome countries, the Cuban Cuban missile crisis represents the abyss of desperationthat occurs when a threat from one regional power is coupled with capitulationof an importantally, leavingthe clientabandoned,completelyvulnerable to its neighbour'sdesigns.
Second, the anxietycurrentlyfelt in the capitalsof much of Third World is real and, from their perspective, realistic.
Finally, the anxiety in these statesmustbe acceptedas a fact anddealtwith constructively,before anxiety turns to desperation, leading to new world disorder and danger.
Usually, this is an anti-explanation,revealinga lack of understandingas to the storiesthe ostensibly'crazy'leadersare tellingthemselves.The betterwe understand the local rationales,the more clearly we will see where leaders are, on the road from merely anxious to truly desperate.
However, if any lesson has been learned from the last two administrations'coddling of SaddamHussein, it seems clear that while addressingthe sources of anxiety (such as economic distress, domestic instability, and regional tension) it is importantto maintain a simultaneous deterrentposture against unacceptableactions.
The USA has nothing importantto lose, for it has alreadywon the cold war.
Pursue the diplomatic openingwith Vietnam, and consideropeningup full relationswith otherpotentially troublesomestates including Cuba and North Korea, thereby depriving theirleadersof the United States ogre image they may be using to resist change.
Recognition should take priority, now at the end of the cold war, over other policy objectives,becausepariahsare unlikelyto moderatetheirbehaviourif excluded by a system that denies their legal right to exist.
Cease economic and trade embargoeswhere possible, and encouragepariahsto join the world economic community.
Explore incentives for future arms control efforts and informationexchanges, shouldregionaladversariesbecome secure enough to pursue such options.
Again be patient, realising that the evolution of the United States -Soviet verification regime took decades.
The importanceof reinforcing non-proliferationregimes alreadyin place is underscoredby the possibilitythat desperate, isolated leaders may use their nuclear weapons.
Even though these systems may be necessary during crises, they can be used offensively, provoking greater desperation, and they should not be deployed duringpeacetime.
In addition, stop violating multilateralarms sales limitations that were established after the Gulf War.
We now know from new data on the missile crisis that it is perfectly possible for a leaderto decidecontingentlyto choose all-outnuclearwar.
Theoristsof nuclear deterrence have for many years discussed the differences between rational and irrationalbehaviour.
Yet few have been able to articulatecircumstancesin which a sane individualcould come to see nuclearwar as a viable option.
Now, however, we know thatit has happened.And we are fortunatethatFidel Castrodid not control nuclear missiles in 1962.
We also know from the Gulf War, the first post-cold war event of major significance, that it is possible for a leader in this new world order to act repeatedlyin ways that lead to certain destructionand chaos.
This being the case, it may be wiser to forget trying to forge a new world orderandto concentrateinsteadon avoidingrelated,but idiosyncratic, new world desperationand disorder.
Notes 1 Fred Barnes, 'Brave new gimmick', The New Republic, 25 February 1991, p 15.
Tyler, ' United States pursuesdiplomaticsolutionin PersianGulf crisis; warnsIraq', WashingtonPost, 25 July 1990, p A17.
Also Jerry W Sanders, 'Retreat from world order', WorldPolicy Journal, 8, Spring 1991.
Germancampaignof 1944-45; Iran-Iraq war.80-88; Afghan government use of Scuds against resistance forces, 1989-90; Egyptianand Syrian launch of Scuds against Israeli militaryfacilities during 1973 war; Libyanattackon Americanfacility at Lampedusa, 1986.
Praeger, p 39; Marie-France Desjardins, 'Ballisticmissile proliferation',CanadianInstitutefor InternationalPeace and Security,September1990, p 2.
