Vanessa Bauza Havana Bureau Section: FOREIGN 2162 Words SERIES Page: 22A OpenURL Link The American F-8s swooped so low over Carlos Gonzalez's camp in western Cuba that the camouflage that covered his weapons would rattle and he could see the pilots saucily waving goodbye.
Even now, four decades later, the thought brings Gonzalez, 71, to the edge of his seat.
With blustery bravado, the former artilleryman shakes his fist in the air as he did to the low-flying jets that snapped photos of the nearby Soviet missiles his platoon guarded.
The world teetered on the brink of nuclear holocaust in October 1962, with 40,000 Soviet troops assembled in Cuba -four times the number that the United States knew about at the time -and nuclear warheads 50 times more powerful than those dropped on Hiroshima.
But what Gonzalez remembers most, what still brings a smile to his line-creased face, is his willingness to die rather than allow another ""imperialist"" invasion like the one at the Bay of Pigs in 1961.
President John F Kennedy's top advisers, former Soviet generals and Cuban officials including President Fidel Castro exchanged declassified documents that revealed they came even closer to an apocalypse than historians had thought.
Among the documents released was an account by a former Soviet intelligence officer aboard one of the submarines stationed at the naval quarantine imposed by Kennedy to stop additional weapons from reaching Cuba.
Unknown to American intelligence, Vadim Orlov's B-59 submarine and three others patrolling the waters around the island carried nuclear weapons.
On Oct., tensions rose further when the Soviets shot down a U-2 spy plane over eastern Cuba and Kennedy indicated time was running out.
In Orlov's sub, with communication to superiors impossible and United States destroyers persistently dropping explosives, one of the submarine's officers ordered a nuclear torpedo assembled.
He insisted conditions for firing the torpedo, including damage to the submarine's hull, had not been reached.
Crisis confirmation The crisis was set in motion on Oct. when Richard Heyser, a U-2 pilot, snapped the first photos confirming Soviet missiles outside Havana.
On Oct., Kennedy announced to the country what the photos had found eight days earlier and ordered the naval quarantine.
About 180,000 troops were mobilized along the United States Southeast, ready to invade Cuba if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev did not meet demands to withdraw the missiles.
On the heels of the CIA-backed exile invasion at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 and with counterrevolutionary insurgents planting bombs in Havana and hiding in the central Escambray mountains, Castro was convinced a United States attack was imminent and Cuba's very sovereignty was at stake.
With the outlines of United States destroyers visible on the horizon, he ordered his forces on high alert and positioned anti-aircraft weapons along Havana's seaside Malecon avenue where today cruise a tangle of modern Toyotas, old American land sharks, Chinese bicycles and Soviet Ladas.
A labyrinth of tunnels and trenches was built at Havana's fabled Nacional Hotel a few feet under the grassy bluff where tourists now sip mojitos.
Workers and students in green and blue militia uniforms marched the streets with rifles slung over their shoulders.
Finally, they thought, they had an ally to help ward off Yankee aggressors and weapons powerful enough to protect their new social experiment.
Operation Mongoose ""People were ready to fight and die for the revolution,"" said Elio Pena, 61, a guide at Havana's Museum of the Revolution.
Women substituted for their husbands at work and in some cases took cradles so they could care for their babies.
At the conference this weekend McNamara insisted Kennedy did not intend to invade Cuba before discovering the missiles, although Kennedy did authorize Operation Mongoose, a covert plan to overthrow the communist regime.
Along the margins of a nuanced, largely academic analysis of 40-year-old events, some made comparisons to the current situation with Iraq.
Most Kennedy advisers recommended an attack on Cuba, but Kennedy opted for a middle road, a naval quarantine.
Former Soviet commander Dmitry Timofeevich Yazov, who was stationed in Cuba at the time of the crisis, said Bush's position on Iraq shows American arrogance.
Cuban officials this weekend insisted Khrushchev put them at an almost insurmountable disadvantage by denying the installation of missiles, thereby giving Kennedy the moral high ground.
On Oct., 13 days after Kennedy was alerted to the spy plane photographs, war was averted when Khrushchev and Kennedy came to an agreement behind Castro's back.
Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles in exchange for Kennedy's guarantee he would not invade Cuba.
But the promise did little to convince many Cubans that they were safe from their powerful northern neighbor.
One man remembers a co-worker's astonishment at reading in the newspaper that the missiles were being repatriated.
Gonzalez, the former artilleryman, now thinks Khrushchev acted intelligently in removing the missiles.
But 40 years ago he felt his heart drop as he watched them carted away on huge trucks.
Though the Soviet Union continued to be Cuba's benefactor, the relationship would be marked for years by both Cuba's need for Soviet support and distrust of its leaders.
A transcript of a November 1962 conversation between Che Guevara and First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan reveals the complex relationship.
Guevara tells Mikoyan the Soviets ""offended our feelings by not consulting us"" about the missile withdrawal.
Putin made the comparison in a speech in Portugal, but warned that Cold War tensions should not be repeated.
The discovery in October 1962 that Moscow was secretly building nuclear missile launchpads in Cuba pushed the world close to nuclear war in a terrifying 13-day brinkmanship between Russia and the United States.
The United States has outlined plans to locate interceptor missiles in Poland and a radar in the Czech Republic in order to guard against possible missile attacks from Iran.
Moscow has reacted angrily to the plans, saying the missile defense system is actually aimed at Russia.
Perino added she was convinced Putin was willing to cooperate to resolve the dispute.
The two countries are also at odds over how to deal with Iran's suspect nuclear program.
But Bush believes that ""Russia agrees that Iran should not be allowed to have a nuclear weapon"" after talking with Putin earlier this week, Perino said.
Half a century ago, the Cuban missile crisis dominated global news as Washington and Moscow sparred right on the edge of thermonuclear war.
Despite the passage of time, this distinctively terrifying crisis holds important lessons for current foreign policy.
They include the exceptional difficulty of securing accurate intelligence, the uncertainty of events in a crisis and the vital importance of prudence at the top.
Intense current debate over nuclear plans and capabilities of Iran, plus other security concerns, give these insights considerable continuing importance.
After United States U-2 aircraft reconnaissance photos revealed that the Soviet Union was placing offensive nuclear missiles in Cuba, despite contrary assurances, President John F Kennedy and his advisers spent a week debating options.
On Oct., 1962, Kennedy addressed the nation and the world over television, declaring unequivocally that the United States would not permit such missiles in Cuba.
Until Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev on Oct. agreed to withdraw the missiles, Armageddon was only a misstep away.
Senior Kennedy administration officials, with the exception of Republican CIA Director John McCone, had assumed Moscow would never put long-range missiles in Cuba.
They erroneously thought Khrushchev and associates felt the move would be too risky.
Earlier, reconnaissance flights over Cuba had been severely curtailed to avoid antagonizing Moscow; they were resumed only because McCone aggressively, adamantly pressed the matter.
Hard photographic evidence of the Soviet deception was received just before the missiles were to be activated.
However, there was already substantial circumstantial evidence, including reports from reliable agents in Cuba, that something of this nature was under way.
At the start of the crisis, there was strong sentiment among Kennedy advisers, including the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for military destruction of the strategic missiles and launchers.
JFK decided instead on a naval blockade as the United States first step in response to the Soviet move.
Soviet commanders already had shorter-range nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba, and at least for a time the authority to use them in the event of an American invasion of the island.
A recent book by Michael Dobbs, “One Minute to Midnight,” documents at least one occasion in which a Soviet sub commander nearly launched one of these against a harassing United States Navy surface warship.
National security adviser McGeorge Bundy’s history of the nuclear age, “Danger and Survival,” published a quarter century after the crisis, reveals JFK privately accepted while publicly rejecting a Soviet proposal for a Cuba-Turkey missile trade.
He assembled an ad hoc group, the Executive Committee or ExComm, which freely debated a wide range of options.
In this atmosphere, the initial strong support for a military strike faded.
The previous year, a very inexperienced JFK had too casually signed off on a Cuba invasion plan strongly endorsed by the CIA and military — the experts.
Scripps Howard News Service Co pyrig ht 20 12 Chicag o Sun-Time s , Inc.
Hunted down by the United States Navy off Cuba during the 1962 missile crisis, a furious Soviet submarine commander ordered a nuclear-tipped torpedo armed for action but then controlled his anger and brought the sub to the surface, where American ships were waiting.
The previously unreported incident which might have pushed the two superpowers closer to nuclear war is disclosed in a book released this week.
The four diesel submarines, which were armed with conventional and nuclear-tipped torpedoes, sailed from the Arctic Kola Peninsula.
A spokesman for the Russian Defense Ministry refused to comment Friday on the incident described in the book.
The crisis ended with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev's agreement to withdraw the missiles in exchange for President John Kennedy's no-invasion pledge.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion The Associated Press, 'BOOK TELLS OF ENCOUNTER WITH SOVIET SUB IN 1962', St.
For 13 days in October 1962, America and the Soviet Union stood on the brink of nuclear war because an American spy plane took aerial photographs showing Soviet missile sites on Cuba, just 90 miles from the United States.
Under the compromise that ended the missile crisis, President John F Kennedy agreed not to invade Cuba and to remove nuclear weapons from Turkey if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev would remove the Soviet’s nuclear weapons from Cuba.
Kornbluh said some scholars consider Iran’s nuclear development “a Cuban missile crisis in slow motion” because it is taking years to build to the point at which the United States or Israel must decide whether or not to attack Iran.
That can be seen in the way the Obama administration “has pushed hard so far on Israel to continue the diplomatic route, the economic sanctions route,” Kornbluh said.
In contrast, a 21st-century crisis is waged on multiple fronts with more information coming at decision makers faster and with more pressure from the media, Williams said.
Unlike past conflicts, nations are not the only players; terrorists are participants, too, he said.
After decades of dissection, reams of analysis, conferences, and confessions, one could dismiss the Cuban missile crisis as irrelevant today -and be dead wrong.
For one, the confrontation aggravated a hostility between Cuba and the United States that continues to this day.
More broadly, seen in post-Cold War light, the events of October 1962 still have the power to horrify and astonish.
Horrify, because the world came far closer to nuclear devastation than most people realized at the time.
Astonish, because knowing what we know now, the world's nuclear arsenal still could destroy mankind many times over.
A new book brings to life tense White House discussions that took place after a United States U-2 spy plane flying over Cuba photographed Soviet-missile installations on Oct., 35 years ago.
The tapes reveal that President Kennedy and his advisers were keenly aware that any move -a surprise attack on Cuba, threatening Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, a blockade -could set off nuclear war.
Though United States leaders didn't know it then, at the time of the crisis the Soviets already had installed some 45 nuclear warheads in Cuba, 90 miles away from Key West, including nine short-range rockets that possibly could have been set off by battlefield commanders.
Today we can be thankful that neither nation pushed the ultimate button.
Yet the former enemies still maintain about 7,500 long-range, more-sophisticated nuclear weapons each -many times the destructive power of 1962.
And while the START II treaty calls for both Russia and the United States to cut back to 3,500 warheads, Russia's Duma, or parliament, remains reluctant to provide the needed final blessing.
Then there are the terrorist groups, rogue nations, and trigger-happy megalomaniacs who could be crazy enough to obtain and set off a nuclear device.
That's why, even 35 years after the world avoided nuclear war, we can't stop remembering how close we came.
For 13 days in October 1962, the United States and the Soviet Union faced each other in a standoff over the U.S.S.R.'s installation of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Through several galleries, visitors follow the crisis while looking at such artifacts as a 35-foot Soviet SA2 missile; the silvery engineering model of sputnik, the world's first artificial satellite; film canisters from the U2 spy planes that took photos of missile sites under construction in Cuba; and Cuban and American photos and newspaper pages.
Also on view are props from the movie Thirteen Days, based on Robert F Kennedy's book of the same name.
There's even a classroom bulletin board re-created by Joan Hammill, who was a third-grade teacher at St.
The display features a silvery aluminum-foil rocket and other Space Age designs made by her young students.
It starts with the first reports of missile sites being prepared in Cuba and follows with President John F Kennedy's announcement of the situation to the nation, the shooting down of an American plane over Cuba, the messages and negotiations between Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, and the naval blockade imposed by the United States.
Museum personnel went to Havana to obtain materials from the Cuban Museum of the Revolution, the National Library and other sources.
One is a dossier on Khrushchev, another is on Aleksandr Fomin, the KGB chief in Washington who was a go-between in the negotiations.
Admission to the crisis exhibit only is $5.95 for adults, $4.95 for seniors and $3.95 for students.
A Greenville man was the only United States serviceman killed by hostile fire during the 13-day crisis in 1962.
He was Major Rudolf Anderson Jr., who was 35 when the U2 spy plane he was piloting over Cuba was shot down by a Soviet surface-to-air missile.
Anderson died when his plane crashed in the island's eastern jungle United States officials first interpreted the action as a planned escalation of the conflict directed from the Kremlin.
It was later discovered that the order to shoot down Anderson's plane actually came from a Soviet commander on the ground in Cuba.
Many high-ranking officials in the United States military believed that the Anderson incident called for Americans to retaliate by bombing the offending missile site, but President John F Kennedy refused to retaliate.
At the time of the crisis, Anderson was stationed with his family wife, Jane, and two sons, Rudolph III and James at Laughlin Air Force Base in Texas.
He was a 1944 graduate of Greenville High School and a 1948 graduate of what was then Clemson College, where he majored in textile engineering.
Today, a memorial plaque dedicated to Anderson can be found in a ""Hall of Fame"" display at Greenville High School, and a memorial replica of his airplane is on display in Cleveland Park, in downtown Greenville.
And then, of course, there was the ominous alert, and a crying lieutenant.
When called to the orderly room in the middle of the night, where I typed up serial numbers of the equipment to be loaded on the flat cars, I couldn't help but notice one of our lieutenants was weeping.
Throughout the night, under flood lights and to the sounds of hammers striking wood blocks, the loading proceeded tanks, trucks, artillery.
Then the long haul by troop train from central Texas to near the Georgia coast, not far from a place called Hinesville.
They told us to remove our uniform patches chevrons, unit designations, everything.
We'd already begun to wonder about the miles of flatbed cars on railroad sidings loaded down with the olive-drab machines of war.
President John F Kennedy revealed on Oct. that the Soviets did have ballistic missiles in Cuba aimed at United States cities.
And they were shipping in more when the alert was sounded and Kennedy ordered an air and naval blockade to keep the cargo from reaching Cuba.
And the United States had 2,000 nuclear warheads that it could have launched at the Soviets.
So we were on our way to Cuba but, fortunately, made it no farther than the Savannah harbor.
Some of the field-grade officers at Fort Stewart, Ga., seemed irritated after the Russian ships turned back in the face the blockade.
Fort Stewart was to be the assault assembly point for the 1st Marine Division, airborne divisions and our outfit, the 1st Armored Division.
The armored division, which played a role in North Africa in World War II, had been reactivated a year earlier when the Berlin Wall went up, dragging thousands of us draftees into the Army kicking and screaming.
With Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev reaching agreement Oct. on dismantling the missiles in Cuba, our exercise ended with the burning of acetate invasion overlays red, yellow and blue arrows pointing at the elongated island 90 miles from the tip of Florida.
The burning was done in perforated steel drums with rocks inside to break up the ashes, lest unclassified eyes should see them.
The content of the tapes today confirmed our worst fears back then that these guys in the seats of power were serious.
Richard Russell of Georgia, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee.
The tone of some of these conversations sounds like dialogue from Stanley Kubrick's 1963 movie, ""Dr.
We've got to take a chance somewhere, sometime, if we're going to retain our position as a great world power.
A blockade, and political talk, would be considered by a lot of our friends and neutrals as being a pretty weak response to this.
Craig Eisendraft was a United States foreign service officer during the crisis.
In a Baltimore Sun review of the tape book, he said throughout the White House debate ""Kennedy seems considerably less in charge than the editors of this volume claim.
Nevertheless, when it's over, Kennedy who'd been much in the news these days with accounts of his extramarital affairs came to visit us in Georgia.
A little more than a year later, he would be dead from an assassin's bullet.
Lo uis P o s t-Dis patch Cit at ion John M McguireOf The Post-Dispatch Staff, 'THE DAY THE COLD WAR ALMOST IGNITEDSOLDIER RECALLS MYSTERY OF '62 MISSILE CRISIS', St.
The revelations came during a review of the Cuban missile crisis at a conference during the weekend at a trade union center in southwest Moscow.
Pierre Salinger, former President John F Kennedy's press secretary, a conference participant and now an ABC correspondent, on Sunday quoted a top Soviet source as saying in a private conversation that on Oct., 1962, Castro urged Premier Nikita S Khrushchev to immediately fire the missiles at the United States to head off an invasion.
Cuban participants in the conference refused to confirm or deny the report, Salinger said.
But this was the first joint meeting with the Cuban officials who guided their country through the crisis.
Khrushchev eventually withdrew the missiles in exchange for Kennedy's pledge not to invade Cuba.
At a news conference wrapping up the session Sunday, McNamara said the figures on Cuba's war readiness and casualty estimate were provided by Jorge Risquet, a member of Cuba's ruling Politburo.
American officials have said they were never sure whether any Soviet nuclear warheads had actually reached Cuba but that they assumed they had.
Dmitri A Volkogonov, director of the Defense Ministry's Institute of Military History, said that at the time of the crisis, 20 Soviet nuclear warheads were in Cuba.
He made the remarks in a closed session of the conference Saturday, and they were reported to The Associated Press on Sunday by Raymond Garthoff, a State Department official at the time of the crisis.
The total stockpile of Soviet nuclear warheads designed to fire on the United States at that time was 60, Garthoff quoted Volkogonov as saying.
Soviet officials had previously been evasive about whether nuclear warheads had actually reached Cuba, according to Garthoff.
In his memoirs, however, Khrushchev implied that at the time of the crisis, the Soviets were ready to deliver a nuclear strike from Cuba.
Dobrynin, said he didn't know at the time that Soviet warheads were already in Cuba.
Volkogonov said the warheads were not ready for firing, and Viktor G Komplektov, a deputy Soviet foreign minister, said their presence in Cuba did not mean they would be put on launchers in preparation for a nuclear strike.
He said ""not one"" of the missiles was ready and targeted at the United States.
The conference's aim is to shed light on events leading up to the crisis, which peaked when the United States learned there were Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba an island just 90 miles from the United States.
Following several tense days of negotiations with Washington, Nikita Khruschev withdrew the weapons without consulting with Havana a move that enraged Fidel Castro's government.
Also taking part in the Oct.-13 event will be a number of Soviet military officials, Fernandez said.
During a similar conference on the Bay of Pigs last year, Cuban organizers worked with National Security Archive directors to release a wealth of United States and Cuban documents on the unsuccessful CIAbacked invasion attempt.
Fernandez, also a key organizer in last year's conference, is a retired military officer who helped lead Cuban troops during the disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion the year before the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962.
Despite his young age, Carter's assignment meant he could have faced the grave responsibility of deploying interceptor missiles to derail a Soviet Union attack at any moment.
One step through the large, sliding doors of a barn at the Nike Missile Base was all it took to take Carter back to that time and to give the 12th-graders an experience they'll never forget.
The Nike Missile Base was named after the Nike Hercules missiles contained there.
The visit was organized by the students' history teacher, Charles Mahoney, to enhance their studies of the Cold War.
A park employee said the tour was a unique opportunity daily visitors are not allowed in the missile base area, which is fenced off from public access.
Carter, who helped get the site included in the National Register of Historic Places, hopes the tour and his experiences as a soldier have a lasting effect on the youths.
United States News Online Author: CHRISTINE ARMARIO Associated Press Section: Domestic, News 1711 Words OpenURL Link MIAMI — Julio Castro sat at his uncle's Miami home as President John F Kennedy came on the television the night of Oct., 1962, to tell the nation the Soviet Union was building launch sites for nuclear missiles in Cuba capable of reaching almost every city in the Western Hemisphere.
United States News Online Author: CHRISTINE ARMARIO Associated Press Section: Domestic 1711 Words OpenURL Link MIAMI — Julio Castro sat at his uncle's Miami home as President John F Kennedy came on the television the night of Oct., 1962, to tell the nation the Soviet Union was building launch sites for nuclear missiles in Cuba capable of reaching almost every city in the Western Hemisphere.
CHRISTINE ARMARIO Associated Press Section: Domestic 1711 Words OpenURL Link MIAMI — Julio Castro sat at his uncle's Miami home as President John F Kennedy came on the television the night of Oct., 1962, to tell the nation the Soviet Union was building launch sites for nuclear missiles in Cuba capable of reaching almost every city in the Western Hemisphere.
After the film was developed, later that day of Oct., 1962, Ecker continued on in the same plane to Washington.
Had he been, he might have had second thoughts about propping up the dying Cuban Communist dictatorship of Fidel and Raul Castro.
If Obama really wants change in Cuba, all he has to do is wait a while.
Back then, in 1961 and 1962, the two hard-core communist revolutionaries wanted to attack the United States, and for a while, they were in possession of enough nuclear-tipped missiles supplied by the Soviet Union to do it.
Instead of reflecting on that historic event, however, Obama seems hell-bent on appeasing, befriending and rewarding the architects of 50 years of brutal repression of the Cuban people in order to pad his thin legacy as president.
But he did bring up the Bay of Pigs, which was the earlier, U.S.-backed, aborted invasion of Cuba by a group of Cuban dissidents seeking to overthrow Fidel Castro.
The mission ended in failure when the conflicted United States failed to provide air support.
The discovery led to a dangerous crisis between the U.S., which demanded the missiles be dismantled and removed, and the Soviet Union, which was then the only other superpower in the world.
That crisis, which almost started a nuclear World War III, was resolved by Kennedy's heroic action in halting all Soviet shipping to Cuba with a naval blockade.
Kennedy then promised serious military action against the Soviet Union if the United States were attacked by the Cuban missiles.
Khrushchev removed the missiles from Cuba and in return the United States gave up a face-saving missile base in Turkey.
Kennedy's action garnered him a lot of respect and cast him and the United States in a favorable light throughout the world.
It was a seminal moment in American history, and it more than made up for the negative reaction to the earlier failed invasion of the Bay of Pigs.
Khrushchev, who earlier had belittled Kennedy as young and inexperienced, was taught a lesson, and the United States emerged from the crisis as a stronger nation.
To make matters worse, Obama, as is his habit, brought himself into the picture as well.
What that has to do with anything is anyone's guess, except for his strong implication that nothing much mattered in United States history before he arrived on the scene.
Maybe he should look into it, if only to learn how a real president acts.
