They asked if I might be interested in discussing John F Kennedy’s missile crisis letters to Nikita Khrushchev.
I explained that these letters were not really JFK letters at all, since they had been composed by committee rather than by Kennedy himself.
But, early on October 27, Khrushchev demanded that the United States also withdraw its Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
According to the traditional view, Robert Kennedy suggested accepting the proposal in Khrushchev’s first letter and simply ignoring the second message.
This strategy, which presumably led to resolving the crisis, came to be called the “Trollope Ploy”—a reference to a plot device by nineteenth-century British novelist Anthony Trollope, in which a woman interprets a casual romantic gesture, such as squeezing her hand, as a marriage proposal.The producer seemed interested in including a “revisionist” perspective in the program and we later did fifteen minutes of filming in which I carefully explained that the Trollope Ploy is a great story, but the ExComm tapes prove that it never really happened.
When the program was broadcast, however, the editors cut quickly from my five seconds to actor Martin Sheen—who had played JFK in a 1983 dramatization of the missile crisis.
Sheen recapitulated the standard account of the Trollope Ploy and praised its brilliance in helping the United States and the U.S.S.R. avoid nuclear war.
The filmmakers apparently decided that the conventional explanation was less complicated and made a more dramatic story.
In fact, even among historians and ExComm participants the Trollope Ploy remains an all but immovable fixture in the legend and lore of the Cuban missile crisis.
Ted Sorensen, an ExComm participant, had initially suggested in 1965 that JFK himself had “decided to treat the latest letter as propaganda and to concentrate on the Friday night letter” and had delegated RFK and Sorensen to come up with the right wording.
However, when Sorensen completed the manuscript of Thirteen Days, published in 1969 after RFK’s assassination, he did not challenge Bobby Kennedy’s claim to have first suggested this strategy.
Some controversy has continued about who actually initiated the Trollope Ploy.
Some ExComm participants and scholars have suggested that Llewellyn Thompson, former Ambassador to Moscow, came up with the idea.
Others have pointed to National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy or Assistant Secretary of State Edwin Martin.
President Kennedy himself immediately seized on the political benefit in this explanation of the settlement of the crisis since the secret agreement to remove the United States missiles from Turkey was just that—top secret—and remained so for decades.
Only hours after Khrushchev publicly agreed to remove the missiles, JFK phoned former Presidents Eisenhower, Truman and Hoover—and deliberately misinformed them.
He accurately reported that Khrushchev, on Friday, had privately suggested withdrawing the missiles in exchange for an American promise not to invade Cuba; but, on Saturday, the Kremlin leader had sent a public message offering to remove the missiles if the United States pulled its Jupiter missiles out of Turkey.
Eisenhower, who had dealt personally with Khrushchev, asked skeptically if the Soviets had tried to attach any other conditions.
Such deceptions shaped the administration’s cover story and helped generate the notion of the Trollope Ploy—which was indelibly fixed in public consciousness by the 1974 television film, “The Missiles of October,” based on RFK’s book.
In fact, listening carefully to the recently declassified ExComm tapes proves conclusively that the notion of the Trollope Ploy was actually invented to conceal the real agreement to remove United States missiles from Turkey.
It is a myth; it simply did not happen that way—much like the resilient fable that Lincoln dashed off the Gettysburg Address on the back of an envelope.
But JFK speculated, “He may be putting out another letter,” and called in press secretary Pierre Salinger.
We’re gonna be in an insupportable position on this matter if this becomes his proposal.
In the first place, we last year tried to get the missiles out of there because they’re not militarily useful, number one.
Salinger soon brought in a news ticker report which JFK read aloud, confirming Khrushchev’s new public offer to link the missiles in Cuba and Turkey.
President Kennedy recognized immediately that Rusk’s wording did not reflect his persistent stance on pursuing a Turkey-Cuba trade—his advisers appeared to be trying a rather transparent end run around his position.
Let’s not kid ourselves,” he repeated for the third time, “that’s the difficulty.
If the Turks were adamant, JFK continued, then the United States ought to get NATO to “put enough pressure on them.
President Kennedy, nonetheless, had no illusions about Khrushchev’s response to United States pressure to go back to Friday’s proposal, “which he isn’t gonna give us.
Thompson repeated that Khrushchev might still accept the Friday deal since he could still say that he had removed the United States threat to Cuba.
At the end of the late afternoon ExComm meeting, Defense Secretary Robert McNamara, Deputy Defense Secretary Roswell Gilpatric, Ball, Bundy, RFK, Rusk, Sorensen and Thompson joined President Kennedy, at his invitation, in the Oval Office.
JFK revealed that his brother Bobby was about to meet with Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and requested advice on what to tell the Soviet diplomat.
The group quickly agreed that RFK should warn Dobrynin that military action against Cuba was imminent and make clear, consistent with Khrushchev’s Friday letter, that the United States was prepared to pledge not to invade Cuba if the missiles were withdrawn.
But, the president also continued to press for a deal on the Turkish missiles.
Rusk, finally recognizing JFK’s determination, suggested that RFK advise the ambassador that a public quid pro quo for the missiles in Turkey was unacceptable, but the president was prepared to remove them once the Cuban crisis was resolved.
Robert Kennedy was instructed to tell Dobrynin that any Soviet reference to this secret proposal would make it null and void.
JFK clearly had no faith in the strategy of accepting Khrushchev’s Friday offer and ignoring his public Saturday message and instead worked secretly with Rusk to put together another fall-back plan.
The secretary of state arranged to have former deputy UN Secretary General Andrew Cordier put in place an emergency back channel strategy by which U Thant would announce, after receiving private word from Rusk that negotiations had failed, a UN plan through which the United States and the U.S.S.R. would mutually agree to remove their missiles from Turkey and Cuba.
JFK was prepared to gamble that if the United States publicly accepted this supposedly neutral plan, it would be very difficult for the Soviets to reject it.
Khrushchev’s unexpected decision the following morning made the Cordier gambit moot and Rusk did not reveal this closely-held secret for over twenty-five years.
Listening to the October 27 meeting tapes proves that ExComm participants and scholars have read far too much cunning and coherence into the discussion of the Trollope Ploy.
President Kennedy, as the tapes document, stubbornly and persistently contended that Khrushchev’s Saturday offer could not be ignored precisely because it had been made public.
In fact, JFK’s eventual message to Khrushchev did not ignore the Saturday proposal on Turkey, but left the door open to settling broader international issues once the immediate danger in Cuba had been neutralized.
Robert Kennedy did tirelessly press his brother not to give up on Khrushchev’s Friday proposal.
JFK, although skeptical and reluctant, finally agreed to try this scheme despite repeatedly predicting that the Soviet leader would inevitably “come back” to his public offer on the Turkish missiles.
The president had no illusions about forcing Khrushchev to settle for the terms in his earlier message and assented to this strategy largely to placate unyielding ExComm opposition.
In fact, as revealed by RFK’s meeting with Dobrynin and the other secret steps taken later that day and kept from much of the ExComm, JFK was determined not to allow this chance to avert nuclear catastrophe slip away.
In fact, President Kennedy’s inclination to pursue the Turkish option actually seems to have hardened in response to the dogged intractability of his advisers at the October 27 meetings.
The ExComm toughened JFK’s determination simply by repeatedly and all but unanimously opposing his preferred course of action—a deal on the Turkish missiles.
The later conclusion, based on the incomplete transcripts prepared by Bundy in the 1980s, that “Llewellyn Thompson certainly persuaded the President that it might actually work” is not corroborated by the definitive primary source—the ExComm tapes.
Maarja Krusten 10/31/2004 My musings about records being more reliable than lore and the difficulties faced by government archivists may seem somewhat obscure.
I have assumed readers would see the link to the Stern article, but on reflection, I have decided I need to be more explicit.
Stern writes, ""In fact, even among historians and ExComm participants the Trollope Ploy remains an all but immovable fixture in the legend and lore of the Cuban missile crisis.
Stern mentions leaks from the Kennedy brothers which contributed to the myths.
As an historian and a former archivist, I know how difficult it is to release records about controversial issues, especially if the information contradicts memoirs or myths.
I have to wonder how difficult it would have been for the government to release records about the Cuban missile crisis, if President Kennedy had not died prematurely and if Robert F Kennedy still were alive.
As late as the 1980s, President Nixon's lawyers appear to have had the impression that the Kennedy library was selective in its release of historical information.
As I noted elsewhere, while the National Archives struggled to screen and to release for public research Nixon's records during the 1980s, a House subcommittee discovered in 1986 that Richard Nixon's lawyers had gone to the Department of Justice to ask for a selective veto over what could be released from his records.
Maarja Krusten 10/31/2004 Presidential papers are administered under several different laws, with pre-Watergate Presidents and their families having the most power, on paper, to influence access.
I believe some of the difficulties with public control of Presidential papers relate to the relatively short restriction periods.
Arnold Shcherban 10/30/2004 Mr Stern, I apologize for misinterpreting your point.
By Soviet party leadership time-scale that normally equaled life-span, two years is a very short time.
While historians often focus on what records reveal about myths, few have focused on post-Watergate changes in record keeping or what it takes to release records.
Occasionally, an author such as Nigel Hamilton may write about his problems in getting access to records at the Kennedy Library.
In Kessler's view, the depository supposedly censors material ""because it detracts from the Kennedy image.
And then there is the problem of diminished record keeping in the post-Watergate era and how lack of records may make it harder to unravel myths in the future.
Public figures no longer write the kind of thoughtful, discursive letters and revealing memos that we used to see.
People in Washington are more public relations savvy than in earlier times and, thus, more adept at drafting memos and other records that conceal their motives and can fool the historian.
The result of all of this is that a historian of the years of Bill Clinton, George W Bush, or their successors may not have the kind of sources needed to understand who did what to whom and why as well as a scholar might for, say, the presidency of Franklin Roosevelt.
An article in the Washington Post, ""Story Tellers Pass on Lore"" described increased interest in story telling in federal agencies.
Concerned about losing institutional memory, some agencies are conducting oral history interviews or encouraging senior managers to tell war stories at conferences.
It is commendable that agencies are trying to preserve institutional memory and link the past to the present.
While managerial war stories may be great for mentoring, they can be tricky for history.
You could no more produce history based just on storytelling than you could write about the Vietnam War using only the memoirs of Henry A Kissinger and Richard Nixon.
Or get to the bottom of a corporate scandal by relying only on uncorroborated oral evidence.
Some story tellers may exaggerate their role in an agency's successes and shield their roles in failures.
Others may lack the ability to apply critical analysis to events in which they participated.
The principals may have a vested interest in presenting a certain view or spin on historical events.
Sheldon M Stern 10/26/2004 I find it difficult to understand how Mr Shcherban could read this article and conclude that I am being critical of JFK's decision to make the missile trade.
Arnold Shcherban 10/25/2004 I forgot to mention, that the consequent removal of Khruschev from the post of General Secretary of CPSS soon after the missile crisis was largely the result of his failure to protect Soviet strategic interests and the ""soft"" stance during the crisis from the point of view of the Soviet Politbureau, which greatly supports the conclusion of the Kennedy's definite victory.
It seems like the author made a lot of effort and research to finally reveal what a weak President Kennedy was, how he yielded under the Soviet pressure, and what a serious strategic and military mistake he made to exchange the withdrawal of the United States missiles from Turkey to the Soviet from Cuba.
The missiles ultimately removed from Turkey were considered largely outdated even before and regardless of the Soviet-Cuban crisis.
Moreover, the main nuclear strike planned from the Turkey territory would be done by strategic nuclear bombers/planes the quantity of which was significantly increased in the post-crisis period of time.
Therefore, in military-strategic sense, the United States lost practically nothing, but gained a lot, since Cuban missiles removed were the only nuclear delivery means Soviets ever had in close proximity to the United States territory, in great difference with the opposite situation.
Second, Kennedy, according to the author, was making allusions to the possible reaction of international community to the United States rejection of the proposed exchange.
Moreover, if looked upon by the unbiased observer, the Soviets moved in only after the Pig's Bay invasion, organized and sponsored by the US, in order to prevent the more devastating and seemed very possible for Cubans military move coming from their Big and sharply adversarial neighbor.
The Soviet citizens had not invade Turkey, and therefore, their nuclear move had much more recent historical causality than the deployment of the United States missiles and strategic bombers in Turkey.
Thus, the exchange was a wise move, both strategically and diplomatically.
As far, as the Kennedy's considerations on the representation of the move to the United States political and ideological mainstream, I think, as a leader of American politics he had no other reasonable choice, but to create the tough-stance deception mentioned by the author , in an apparent violation of the mainstream thinking, but benefitial for this country in reality.
