As Soviet ships challenged the US-imposed blockade in October 1962, Thant made several important proposals directly to the protagonists, United States President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev.
The first requested a moratorium on the United States quarantine and the movement of Soviet ships towards Cuba.
Though many of Kennedy's advisers looked upon Thant's initiative with derision, Kennedy asked Thant to send another message requesting again a cessation of Soviet shipping.
The United States side even suggested the contents of this message, which was sent almost word for word as the United States requested.
Thant's messages gave Khrushchev a way to stop his ships while saving face.
This ended the threat of a sea confrontation and enabled the superpowers to focus on the main issues of the conflict.
The eventual solution was first proposed publicly and given salience by Thant who pushed the United States to realize that the Soviets would trade missiles for guarantees of Cuban security.
Thant also travelled to Cuba to mollify Castro and confirm that missile deconstruction had begun.
Furthermore, he aided in the post-agreement negotiations to resolve verification issues.
This unheralded role in one of the most dangerous conflicts of the twentieth-century is described in detail in this article.
Introduction U Thant has put the world deeply in his debt.— President John F Kennedy On October 16, 1962, President Kennedy learned that the Soviet Union was building nuclear missile installations in Cuba.
In the deepening crisis, the United Nations, and speciﬁcally Secretary General Thant, was to play a signiﬁcant role in de-escalating and then resolving the nuclear standoff between the superpowers.
Thant sent appeals and messages, relayed proposals, offered reassurances, advanced the “non invasion for missiles” formula that formed the basis of the final agreement, shuttled to Cuba to mollify Castro, and helped secure a veriﬁcation arrangement.
Both traditionalists and revisionists pay minimal attention to Thant’s mediatory role, as the historiography indicates.
His predecessor, Secretary General Dag Hammarskjöld, had pioneered the UN’s third-party role, for instance by securing the release of eleven American ﬂiers held captive in the Peoples Republic of China in 1954–55, and again during the Suez Crisis of 1956.10 Hammarskjöld had expanded the prestige of the United Nations and his innovations helped give Thant a stronger role.
