Using primary material it describes the initial decision of the United States and the Soviet Union to establish a hot line and British attempts to become a third partner to the deal.
A number of subsequent examples of the hot line in use are also discussed, most notably the superpower hot line dialogue during the Arab-Israeli war of June 1967.
The various rationales and purposes of hot lines are analysed and it is argued that since 1962 they have increasingly been valued for the prestige they bring to diplomatic actors rather than for their utility in crisis situations.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR Haraldur Þór Egilsson is a student of International Politics from Reykjavik.
THE ORIGINS, USE AND DEVELOPMENT OF HOT LINE DIPLOMACY Haraldur Þór Egilsson Introduction The need for reliable and swift communications between governments has always been essential.
This need intensified during the nuclear age and was dangerously apparent during the Cuban missiles crisis.
To improve emergency communication with the intention to lessen the risk of war breaking out accidentally, by misunderstanding or miscalculation the superpowers created a hot line.
A hot line is a direct communication link between heads of governments used to prevent a crisis from escalating into armed conflict.
A direct communication link on the other hand is not confined to acute situations and therefore does not confer the same sense of urgency as the hot line.
Some of the generally accepted knowledge about the hot line is erroneously based on its popular image.
The aim of this paper is to outline the technical, diplomatic and political aspects of the hotline and examine whether the importance of hot lines has shifted from being a purely practical means of emergency communication to being used to symbolise the state of bilateral relations.
Origins of the Hot Line The idea of establishing a direct communication link between Moscow and Washington can be traced to the late 1950s.
Professor Thomas Schelling proposed the idea in his writings as early as 1958, and a group of American scientists suggested it to Nikita Khrushchev when he visited the United States in 1959.
In 1960 Gerard C Smith, a member of the Policy Planning Council of the State Department proposed that a hot line should be established.
Although the idea was not pursued for the time being the Council continued to, as President John F Kennedy put it, ‘persistently advance on appropriate 1 occasions’ such a communication link.
This was also discussed at a similar 1 time in the media, for example in Parade magazine.
Before the 1961 Vienna summit between Kennedy and Khrushchev the State Department suggested that the President should pursue the interest the Chairman had shown in a 2 ‘“white telephone” between the United States President and himself …’ The superpowers continued exploring the mutual interest in establishing a direct communication link between them both publicly and informally.
Khrushchev’s interest was confirmed early in 1962 in meetings between Pierre Salinger, President Kennedy’s Press Secretary, and Mikhail Khalarmov, Chief of the Press Division of the Soviet Foreign Ministry.
At the Geneva Disarmament Conference on April 18 1962 the United States proposed improving communications by establishing reliable links between heads of government.
In discussions with the Japanese Fisheries Minister in May 1962, Khrushchev openly stated his opinion that a direct line should be established between him and President Kennedy in case 5 things went wrong.
At critical moments during those fateful days the time to exchange messages through diplomatic channels, which included coding, decoding, translation, transmission and delivery, took not minutes but hours.
Usually it was the same young black man, who came to the embassy on a bicycle.
This led both sides to use public broadcasts to convey messages to each other.
At great speed, with sirens shrieking, a motorcade headed by Khrushchev’s assistant raced off from Khrushchev’s dacha to the radio station, where the message to President Kennedy was broadcast at once.
It was from this broadcast that I myself heard Khrushchev’s full reply, not by the cable with the text that arrived at the embassy via Western 7 Union two hours later.
Not only was this time consuming but the public knowledge of how things stood and each adversary’s conditions made it more difficult to resolve.
This method of communications clearly was not ideal and improvements were necessary.
The origin of the crisis was Khrushchev’s miscalculation of American reactions.
The crisis made it evident that secure, reliable and swift communications were vital.
The Americans wanted to take steps to prevent 8 war by accident, miscalculation or failure of communication.
The technology and techniques of modern warfare are such that much reliance is inevitable placed on the ability to respond rapidly and effectively to hostile military action.
Events which may occur in connexion with the efforts of one state to maintain its readiness to respond to such action may, in varying degrees and with varying consequences, be misconstrued by another.
The initiating state may have underestimated the ambiguity of such events and may have 9 miscalculated the response they would call forth.
The American proposal questioned the effectiveness of communication 10 available in times of serious military crisis and called for new measures.
Agreeing the need for a direct communication link was only part of the task.
What kind of a hot line, who and when to use it were important questions which had to be resolved.
Technical and Practical Aspects of the Hot Line One of the lasting myths surrounding the hot line is that it consists of a telephone link.
This was considered by both superpowers but there were 15 strong arguments against using a telephone connection.
The Americans asked the British General Post Office for quotations for both speech and teletype facilities.
Before the Geneva summit in 1961 the Americans were contemplating using a direct telephone connection between the State Department and the United States embassy in Moscow.
The Americans pointed out that a teletype system on a reserved line could have dual capabilities and be used for voice communication as well should that 17 prove desirable.
The superpowers agreed to a land line teletype link routed 18 through Moscow-Helsinki-Stockholm-London-Washington.
Even when the hot line was subsequently modified and upgraded speech facilities were not added.
When it was suggested in the State Department in 1983 that speech facilities should be added to the hot line many officials believed it already was a telephone as seen in the 19 movies.
The telephone is the fastest and most common communication link and has proved itself an important tool of diplomacy since the 1950s, when phone services were made more reliable by the introduction of submarine cables.
Diplomatic communications were previously mostly confined to telegrams, which have 20 continued to be the most important communications link of diplomacy.
With improved communications heads of government or ministers have the possibility to pick up a telephone and instantly or within minutes get their counterparts on the line.
The idea of heads of state salvaging world peace by dialling a counterpart captures the imagination.
But it is precisely the speed of this form of communication which makes it an unsuitable tool for crisis 21 management.
The argument against using a voice emergency communication link is both technical and political.
The hot line was designed to be used in the gravest situations, which make exchanges over a hot line even more precarious if done by telephone.
Telephone diplomacy can be a double-edged sword in communications between adversaries and is more suitable in relations between states on friendly terms.
It was more likely to lead to ‘inadvertent 17 UN Docs, Disarmament Commission ENDC 70 12.
The Regan Administration and the Stalemate in Nuclear Arms Control.2-323.
Misunderstanding because of these reasons or simply any ‘slip ups of the tongue or ill-considered statements’ will be easily mended or instantly forgiven by friends but can make relations even more strained in 23 relations between hostile states.
From a practical point of view there was also the problem of translation.
A vocal hot line required conversations to be translated instantaneously at both ends.
Even though velocity of communication was of utmost importance 24 in times of crisis accuracy in translation could not suffer because of it.
Using a telephone link could therefore increase the possibility of misunderstanding rather than eradicate it.
Organising translation was no easy matter as was discovered when the London-Moscow hot line was discussed in 1966.
Translators had to be on call 24 hours a day, which meant their residence had to be close to Whitehall.
This led to discussion about getting two bachelors to 25 live in a local flat or a hotel room.
The spontaneity of the telephone conversation makes it unpredictable and therefore impossible to script.
During conversations between heads of state in normal times this can be an advantage depending on the situation, topic and the person’s ability to think on his feet.
However in times of crisis mistakes come at a high price and none higher than when there exists a risk of nuclear war.
The words of a head of state carry most weight and are only retracted with much difficulty.
The teletype minimises the risk of personal friction between heads of state.
Exchanging written messages gives both parties time for reflection, to analyse and respond, even just to let off steam.
The telephone does not allow this latitude but on the contrary compels a response of some sort, which can result in a misguided reply or misunderstood answer.
This does not mean that translation or interpretation of printed messages is always reliable.
Carter’s attempt to use the hot line to bypass diplomatic channels to get straight to Brezhnev during the SALT-2 discussions proved disastrous.
The KGB translators on duty were not highly qualified and 22 UN Docs, Disarmament Commission ENDC 70 12.
Nevertheless, oral communication is less reliable than the written record and leaves more room for speculation than written exchanges.
Furthermore no time is lost on formalities or the danger of verbal decoys or stalling.
In a crisis a number of people beside the head of government take part in forming policy and actions.
The flow of information must be efficient and the quickest and 27 most reliable way of distributing this kind of information is in written form.
The first hot line established in 1963 as well as all subsequent hot lines have taken the form of text-facility links, teletype, telex or facsimile.
The only reference to a telephone hot line comes from an East German document in 1969.
In it the East German chargé d’affaires refers to the Peking-Moscow 28 hot line being a telephone link.
It is doubtful, considering that the Soviets were discussing or had established hot line links with France and Britain and had insisted on them being teletype, that they would establish a telephone link 29 with China with whom they generally did not have good relations.
The negotiation of the initial hot line agreement revealed that the teletype link had its shortcomings as well.
At the last moment the Soviets put in three final textual changes, which were accepted.
The last moment change of heart by the Soviets caused a lot of commotion in Moscow and Washington a few years later.
An unsuspecting Finnish farmer ploughing his field, unfamiliar with the communications link that lay in his fertile soil cut the only telegraph line between the superpowers.
Although the Finnish incident did not put the hot line in danger, because radio back-up facilities existed, it was clear that improvements would make the communications link more secure.
Originally the Washington-Moscow hot line was stationed in the National Military Command Centre at the 33 Pentagon.
But when it was first put to use during the Six Day War it was soon realised that it was inconvenient to have the United States terminal in the Pentagon.
Robert McNamara, Secretary of Defence, gave instructions that 34 messages should be sent directly to the White House.
During the SALT-I treaty discussion in the early 1970s the Soviets showed interest in modernising the hot line.
This was not least because of Soviet concern about their strained relations with China.
The Soviet delegation was particularly interested in new measures to avoid nuclear war by accident, misunderstanding or miscalculation.
Gerald C Smith, the U.S. chief negotiator, says it was apparent that the Soviets were particularly worried about a nuclear conflict caused deliberately by a third party.
In private and official discussions Soviet officials made veiled references to China 35 as a possible source of such events.
It is therefore not surprising that the Soviet Delegation quickly agreed to the United States suggestion that communications 36 facilities should be improved and upgraded.
Two satellite circuits were added to the hot line in order to increase its security and flexibility.
Making the hot line a satellite link instead of a land-telegraph link 37 served this purpose as well as making it less vulnerable in wartime.
Other minor but practical improvements have also been made on the 38 Molink, as American technicians nicknamed the hot line.
Clocks were placed on each end showing the time of day in the other capital after the SixDay War.
Whether this was because Moscow had started transmission at 3:00 A.M. is pure speculation.
In 1984 the hot line system was further improved by adding the capability to transmit facsimiles.
Whole pages of text, maps and charts could be exchanged instantaneously.
This was all done with the 39 intention of increasing the reliability and speed of information flow.
The 21st century hot line now consists of two satellite circuits and a landline teletype link, which is used as backup.
It is quicker and more reliable than 40 before with the possibility of exchanging graphic material.
Speech facilities have not been included in the modification of the Washington-Moscow hot line.
Because the link has fortunately not been in constant use it has had to be tested each day.
However some of the exchanges caused puzzlement at least on the Soviet end.
Blechman, “Efforts to Reduce the Risk of Accidental or Inadvertent War” U.S.— Soviet Security Cooperation.
During the Cuban Crisis the European powers had watched from the sidelines.
The Kennedy administration had kept its allies closely informed nd but their influence was marginal.
Dean Acheson flew to Paris on October 22 to keep French President Charles de Gaulle informed and to give him a copy of President Kennedy’s letter to Khrushchev and a draft of his speech.
Kennedy kept British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan personally informed through their mutual telephone link.
Nevertheless both Macmillan and de Gaulle realized that they were being informed after the decisions had been made.
De Gaulle stressed that it was important that governments keep in 42 close contact during serious times through embassies.
When the hot line issue was raised again after the October crisis warning bells went off in the British Government.
People here generally realise that we have very good communications with the Americans, including my direct line but they are beginning to ask whether we shall be in on the direct line to Moscow or whether decisions will be made by Khrushchev and Kennedy and communicated to us afterwards; in fact the whole Cuba position institutionalised.
At the moment we have no answer to these queries and have to pretend that we do not mind.
In fact it is quite a serious point and if the Russians and the Americans do set up their system I feel myself that we 43 ought to have a Moscow line as well as a Washington one.
Letting one country in on the hot line posed both political and technical problems.
From a technical point of view it was difficult to add more users to the hot line without complicated modification.
Too much information flow from different states in different languages could result in 44 ‘delay and confusion at a time when speed and decision were essential’ as the British embassy reported.
From a political point of view expanding or excluding states from the hot line posed a greater problem.
The usual suspects lined up as possible contenders for joining the hot line club.
Editors Charles S Sampson, Louis J Smith, General Editor David S Patterson.
November 20, 1963. 10 had aspirations to take part they were soon quashed.
It became clear early on that the proposed hot line was supposed to be an exclusive communications link between Washington and Moscow.
Even if an extension or expansion of the hot line was unlikely it was important to express the desire to be involved to ensure that no door was permanently closed and to avoid giving the impression of weakness to friends 46 and foe alike.
For these reasons the British government acted quickly and informed the United States Disarmament Agency that Britain wanted to be 47 included in such a link.
Although it was doubtful whether establishing a hot line connection would improve existing British diplomatic communication links the political arguments were strong for the U.K. to take part in such a project.
The Foreign Secretary suggested a separate link between London and Moscow to supplement the existing link between London and Washington.
But when it became known that the WashingtonMoscow line was to be routed through London the first option became a tiein to the line with a switchboard in London to create the possibility of threecornered conversations.
That would also have meant that all messages passed between the superpowers would be available to London.
However, the switchboard would give Britain the opportunity to communicate with either of the superpowers without necessarily informing the other.
The Foreign Office anticipated that the Americans and the Soviets could see this as an 48 impediment to their bilateral agreement.
The British demonstrated a persistent fear of rejection from either or both the superpowers.
An impromptu premature action could have damaged relations with the U.S and NATO solidarity.
Furthermore, the British government was alert to the danger of being a possible scapegoat for the 49 Soviets if the latter got cold feet.
For Britain to act without informing the U.S. could have put strains on relations between the two countries.
A hot line was long-term policy and it was decided to wait and see how things developed before attempting to get involved either directly or indirectly.
Even if the Americans were willing to let the U.K. in on the hot line the Russians also 50 had to approve.
They wanted to keep the agreement with the Soviet Union as it was and keep other states out.
At the same time they had to consider how it would affect their allies.
In light of the close relationship between the United States and Britain the latter were confident that they were frontrunners in the hot line race.
This feeling was strengthened by the fact that the Italians, French and Canadians were not 51 kept as closely informed.
After the British approached the Americans early in May 1963 Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, proposed that any consideration of expanding the hot line should be postponed until after the United States and Soviet Union had reached an agreement.
But when the negotiations were concluded a rather discouraging message 52 came from Rusk.
I must confess that, upon considerable reflection, I do not believe that it would be wise for us to raise with the Soviets at this time the question of transforming the contemplated “Hot Line” between Washington and Moscow into a tripartite system.
It is not our expectation that the “Hot Line” would be used for normal conduct of business but it would be reserved for the emergency use which was its rationale under disarmament proposals.
The letter was nothing more than a polite brush-off but left open the 54 possibility of a separate hot line between London and Moscow.
Rusk offered to assist the British in negotiations with the Soviets by discussing the technical 55 and financial arrangements involved between the superpowers.
But by the 56 end of the year British participation in the hot line had been shelved.
There were no pressing practical reasons to establish such a link and there was always the danger the Soviets could potentially use a hot line to try to divide 57 Britain and the United States in a moment of crisis.
Although the United States and USSR had been unwilling to let states participate in the hot line there was a third party whom they could have kept involved without creating political problems with their allies, namely the United Nations.
The Washington-Moscow hot line was not established to ease public concern but to lessen the risk of war by miscalculation or misunderstanding.
Using the hot line as a public diplomacy tool or for propaganda reasons was not the underlying factor.
However, the public and many states would have welcomed the involvement of the Secretary General of the United Nations in the hot line agreement.
This had been suggested early on by both the Americans and the Soviets and was one option the British considered if they 58 could not be involved directly themselves.
There was speculation about United Nations involvement in the hot line scheme in the media.
Neither the Americans nor the Soviets showed any real 60 interest in pursuing the idea and it was soon dropped.
For practical reasons it was sensible to keep the direct link as simple as possible by excluding states or international agencies other than the superpowers.
Controlling the information flow to friends and foes alike was important.
United Nations involvement could have increased the risk of leaks to parties that could try to influence or sabotage the superpowers’ actions.
It was not only states that were anxious not to be cut out of the picture.
The diplomatic establishment reacted cautiously to the idea of a direct government-to-government communications link.
Diplomatic Dimensions The diplomatic establishment saw its vested interests threatened by the hot line.
There was a possibility that such a direct line would not be confined to emergencies or crises but used in routine political discussions.
Misgivings of a similar kind had been aired in 1960 when the State Department’s Policy Planning Council proposed a hot line between the superpowers.
Ambassador Merchant openly objected to the proposal and the 63 idea was shelved for the time being.
Smith claims that because of the ambassador’s objections the idea was dropped.
Considering that presidential elections were near it is not inconceivable that the matter had simply been put on the shelf for the time being.
The FO’s Communications Department believed that messages passed through embassies were most likely to be effective.
Furthermore the 65 risk of misunderstanding was thought to be less likely.
Henry Kissinger claims that in times of crisis during his term in office getting messages 66 through the Soviet embassy was a quicker route than the hot line.
But this all depended on how good communications were between governments and their embassies.
When British officials got wind of the United States hot line proposals in 1962 they started to consider not only how to get involved but how effective and secure their own communications with Moscow were.
The outcome of this self-examination questioned the usefulness of British involvement in a direct government-to-government communication link.
The diplomatic communications system was considered very reliable and quick.
Good communications links existed with Washington, the White House and the embassy in Moscow.
President to make contact within two minutes through a commercial line teletype.
Furthermore there was a direct telephone between the President and the PM, which could suffice as an indirect British involvement.
However Foreign Office officials thought that road traffic 69 conditions in London could cause delays for a message going the other way. was at least revived shortly after the elections by Smith’s co-worker Henry Owen in cooperation with Walt Rostow.
The superpowers could have decided to enhance embassy communication between their capitals.
Ideas were discussed about having hot lines pass though embassies to monitor the exchanges of messages.
But although the messages did not pass through embassies they had to be kept informed not 70 least to elicit important information and advice from embassies.
Setting up a hot line would enable heads of state to engage in personal dialogue.
A hot line, facsimile or not, does not improve the ‘intimacy of ... exchanges’ but it 71 could ‘reduce Ambassadorial contacts’ for both sides.
However one of the lessons of the Cuban Crisis was that embassies had not been able to get to 72 higher placed officials.
Creating alternative communication routes was 73 simply sensible crisis management to preserve options.
Hot lines provide instant access and attention on the highest level, which might be closed to ambassadors in times of crisis.
Hot lines confer a sense of urgency, as Kissinger points out, and get the 74 attention of the most important people immediately.
For these reasons it had to be tempting to use it in other politically pressing matters even though its use ought to be confined to acute situations.
But as Gerard Smith says both parties to a hot line agreement would have to agree for the facilities to be used 75 in other circumstances than emergencies.
Symbolism and Significance of Hot Lines Hot lines are direct communication of a certain kind.
They were established to enable states with nuclear capabilities to engage in dialogue to avoid conflict breaking out.
Just by activating the hot line a signal of urgency is being sent to the receiver.
It is therefore difficult to make claims about how it has actually been used.
However on at least three occasions the WashingtonMoscow hot line has been used for matters not of direct consequence for war or peace.
When the SALT-II negotiations were stalled Zbigniew Brzezinski, Carter’s National Security Advisor, convinced the president to send a message to Brezhnev through the hot line in a way it had never been used before.
On another occasion Carter used the hot line to try to get Brezhnev to 77 help achieve a cease-fire in Lebanon through Soviet influence in Syria.
Ministers argued fiercely whether it was the appropriate to send a message through the 78 hot line in the Daniloff espionage case.
The elusive definition of a hot line has created a general misunderstanding about the usage of hot lines.
But this would merely have made Britain a mediator and the hot line would have ceased to be an emergency communication link.
It is likely that the Prime Minister was thinking of the 76 UN Docs, Disarmament Commission ENDC 70 12.
PRO CAB 164/2 Visit of the Prime Minister H Wilson to Moscow 1966, February and July. 17 hot line as an additional contact link for normal political dialogue but not a 80 hot line as such.
The communication link established in 1997 between Greece and Turkey was perhaps similar to Wilson’s ideas.
A direct line was created between NATO headquarters in Brussels and Athens and Ankara.
Although this communication link was termed a hot line it is questionable whether it fits the definition.
This could at best be defined as an indirect hot line with Brussels as a switchboard, similar to the British suggestion in 1963 when the Washington-Moscow hot line was established.
The lack of clarity in distinguishing between a hot line and other means of direct communications was even never more apparent than during the attempt to establish a hot line between Canberra and London in 1969-1971.
This was technically easy and using a ciphering equipment with telex not too expensive.
It was the opinion of British officials that Gorton had in mind a direct secure speech telephone, which they were not keen on establishing both because of cost but also for 83 technical reasons.
The matter dragged on for two years and new Prime Ministers entered the scene, McMahon in Australia and Heath in Britain.
To create a direct secure telephone was one thing but a hot line all together different.
If the Canberra-London communication link was to be used frequently then it was not a hot line at all but a personal contact line for heads of government.
These Commonwealth countries were very unlikely to be at each other’s throats.
Both governments had sufficient communication links between them already.
On the other hand it was a matter of prestige to have such a link between the states and giving it such an important name increased its political weight.
The political weight assigned to some acts is more significant than their intrinsic importance.
In 1992 a friendship treaty was signed in London between Britain and Russia, the first since the 1766 Treaty of Amity and Commerce.
It is not unlikely that the announcement served a public diplomacy agenda, to signify a change in relations between the two states.
Another possibility is that it wasn’t a hot line per se but merely a direct communication link to discuss 85 routine matters of state not confined to emergencies.
Whether the communication link in question is a hot line or not is sometimes irrelevant.
The political significance connected to it is such that other considerations fall into the shadows.
It could even be argued that the importance of hot line agreements between the superpowers for disarmament was rather slight.
From a psychological point of view its public appeal was and remains very important.
Creating a link between the leaders that controlled the majority of the Earth’s nuclear arms was reassuring.
It showed that an agreement was possible and differences could be 87 accommodated.
The public diplomacy side of the hot line was put into use early on by President Kennedy.
Seaborg, Kennedy, Khrushchev and the Test Ban.7. 19 to enhance understanding between the states by increasing contact and 88 communication.
The Soviets were not as keen to use the hot line as a public 89 propaganda tool and were eager to play down the significance of the hot line.
Perhaps it was a sour reminder of how much of a blunder the Cuban affair had been for the Soviet Union.
Not many years later when the superpowers reached an agreement on modernising the hot lines the Soviets played a different tune.
Whereas the original agreement had been signed by low-level officials in low-key fashion, pomp and circumstance were the order of the day on 30 September 1971.
At a signing ceremony both Secretary of State William Rogers and Foreign 91 Minister Andrei Gromyko provided ample photo opportunities.
The form of the new hot line agreement had proved the most difficult stage of the negotiations.
They wanted to make a fanfare out of this 92 achievement and the United States finally acquiesced.
The strengthening or building of confidence between governments has been one of the most valuable aspects of hot lines.
They have increasingly been used as an important first step in building or enhancing confidence between both friendly and unfriendly states, symbolizing improved relations or intention to do so.
During President de Gaulle’s visit to the Soviet Union at the end of June 1966 an agreement was announced that established a direct teleprinter line between the Kremlin and the Elysée Palace.
The ParisMoscow hot line had not required lengthy technical discussions and clearly 93 was a political decision.
Containing the Public Messages, Speeches, and Statements of the President.
For Britain it was important for its prestige to get a hot line link with the Soviets.
Hot lines have continued to serve as symbols of improved bilateral relations.
While the Soviet Union was going through a transition period under Mikhail Gorbachev and Boris Yeltsin a sudden thaw emerged in the Cold War structure.
One of the symbols of better relations with the Soviet Union and subsequently Russia was the establishment or upgrading of hot lines with its former enemies.
A hot line was established between Bonn and the Kremlin in 1989 consisting of a telefax connection.
German officials were ecstatic about the new connection and claimed it was better than what they had with the White 94 House.
A month later it was announced in Paris that the Paris-Kremlin hot line was to be improved from being a telex, which it had been during De 95 Gaulle’s time, to be replaced by a high-speed fax machine.
Three years later good and direct communication between the heads of the British and the Russian government were used to illustrate a new dawn in relations between the states.
The symbolic weight or in other words the public diplomacy value of linking a hot line to improved relations between these particular states outweighed other factors.
With the end of the Cold War the importance of good relations with China was underscored.
Both Russia and the United States tried hard to improve relations with the giant of the East.
The Soviets had a hot line to the PRC leadership which they used during the frontier confrontation with China in March 1969.
However, the Chinese communists refused to respond to Kosygin’s attempts to contact Mao Zedong or any other leader of the Chinese Politburo.
The attempts of the Soviet embassy to make clear Moscow’s desire for peace to the Chinese Foreign Ministry were also ignored.
The Chinese informed Moscow that the direct communication link ‘was no longer 94 The Guardian June 10.
This humiliation and disconnection of the hot line was perhaps a consequence of internal political struggle but also sent a message to the Soviets about how seriously the relations between the states had deteriorated.
Kissinger and Nixon’s desire to improve relations with China also resulted in a hot line proposal.
In a secret meeting with Zhou Enlai in Beijing in November 1973 Kissinger made the offer.
He suggested this could be done either by simply announcing the establishment of a hot line or by hiding it in an agreement on accidental nuclear war like the Soviet-American one.
The American proposal was interesting considering that the states had not established full diplomatic relations.
Embassies had not been opened but relations were conducted through liaison offices.
A hot line was a very visible signal of Sino-American rapprochement but at that moment it was probably too large a step to take for 99 the Chinese who never responded to the proposal.
Chinese leaders attempted to improve their relations and image after the 1989 massacre in Tienanmen Square.
The United States had promised China to assist the PRC with this process in exchange for their abstention on UN resolutions against Iraq.
Early in the 1990s there were discussions between the United States and China about establishing a hot line between the states.
But these discussions were postponed in 1996 when rapid reconciliation occurred between the old enemies Russia and China.
This served both the means of propaganda and reassuring the public that both nuclear powers were taking actions to minimize the possibility of nuclear war.
This was particularly significant from a Chinese point of view because it could be seen as confirmation of China’s superpower status.
Even an established hot line agreement has been used to mend bilateral relations.
The relations between the superpowers had deteriorated during President Carter’s last years in office, mostly because of the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan and difficult SALT negotiations.
President Reagan’s rhetoric and depiction of the Soviet Union as the evil empire did not improve relations between the superpowers during his first years in office.
In 1983 the Reagan team was looking for topics to set up a summit between Reagan and Andropov.
One of the issues raised as a possible topic to initiate talks was upgrading the hot line.
Although there existed a war of words between the two camps at the time and the Soviets were unwilling to enter into discussions about arms control they were willing to discuss upgrading the hot line, which shows how marginal and uncontroversial the topic had become.
On the American side the suggestion of discussing upgrading the hot line was not thought to be exciting enough to get a summit meeting.
Nevertheless it led to discussions which resulted in modification of the hot line.
Although the functional aspects of hot lines are the reason for their creation their symbolic value should not be overlooked.
The Reagan Administration and the Stalemate in Nuclear Arms Control.2-323.
The voice on the telephone was Robert McNamara informing President Lyndon B Johnson at 7:57 A.M. in the morning of 5 June 1967 that Moscow was calling on the hot line.
Each time the hot line was activated during the 1967 conflict the core of the Johnson Administration including the United States Ambassador to Moscow, Llewellyn Thompson, gathered round the teleprinter waiting anxiously for the translation.
At the same time their counterparts in the Kremlin waited in suspense to receive an answer.
Messages had to be carefully reconstructed, each word laid out to make sure the sentences they formed would not be misunderstood or misconstrued even though they were written in the White House’s Situation Room over scrambled eggs.
The hot line lived up to expectations and proved to be an effective tool to clear up misunderstandings, clarify intentions and avoid miscalculation which otherwise could have led to escalation of a conflict.
Through the hot line the Americans were able to clear false allegation from the Arabs that United States carrierbased planes had taken part in attacks on Egypt.
On 8 June a possible misunderstanding was avoided when Israeli gunboats attacked a United States Navy communications ship, the Liberty, killing 10 men and wounding hundreds.
The hot line was used to explain that the United States was sending an aircraft carrier to investigate and assist the Liberty.
A cease-fire agreement had been reached between Israel, Jordan and Egypt but fighting continued between Israel and Syria on the Golan Heights.
A rough translation of a hot line message from the Kremlin received on the morning of 10 June indicated that the Soviets were contemplating sending troops to the Middle East.
The atmosphere in the Situation Room in the White House was tense because the next message could decide which direction the conflict would take.
Ambassador Thompson checked the accuracy of translation of the Russian message.
Nonetheless Johnson realized that he had to send a ‘temperate and factual…’ hot line message to Kosygin.
As the hours passed by the messages from the Kremlin became more temperate and tension at both ends eased.
The overriding importance of the hot line was that it engaged immediately the heads of government and their top advisers, forcing prompt attention and decisions.
It is intended for use in the most critical moments in international relations.
At these times it can ensure better accuracy in understanding a message and sending one.
The written form also makes it possible, if desired, to distribute exchanges of hot line messages to the diplomatic establishment in a more accurate and secure way than if the hot line was a voice link.
The hot lines established since the WashingtonMoscow example have generally followed this precedent.
The hot line can have an advantage over normal diplomatic routes, for example the embassy, because a hot line message indicates importance and urgency and compels attention from the highest placed officials, which could be difficult to get to during crisis.
They can be essential in tilting the balance in preserving peace between states.
The Washington-Moscow hot line proved itself the first time it was needed during the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
In this instance it was useful in preventing escalating tensions between the superpowers.
The Washington-Moscow link fulfilled its expectation in that crisis by reducing the risk of war by misunderstanding or misapprehension.
In this sense its most prevalent use is to signal improved relations between states.
Establishing such a link can also be to underline strong and long lasting ties between states.
A fourth role of hot lines is to signify the importance of states themselves.
This is the prestige factor and the political reason why states seek to be involved in hot line agreements.
Hot lines have notably been established between the most powerful states but not among smaller states.
The Washington-Moscow hot line was a security device in relations between the most powerful nuclear powers.
It was primarily established to ensure that the superpowers would not inadvertently stumble into war with each other.
However in later years they seem to be pursued because of their prestige and symbolism rather than because of their practical value in emergencies.
It seems that it has become more common in recent years to establish hot line connections between states.
However it is questionable whether they are all hot lines by definition or merely direct communication links to discuss routine political issues.
This underlines how important hot lines are viewed in bilateral relations and for political prestige of states.
There are other means of communicating on political and less acute issues.
For sensitive discussions the embassy route still provides a secure and reliable means of communications.
But possessing a hot line link, even though merely in name, confers a sense of importance.
The overwhelming majority of states use them in their relations with the outside world.
Perhaps hot lines will lose their sense of prestige once they become ordinary tools of the diplomatic trade or are said to be so.
