JFK and the Cold War Main Idea Reading Strategy Reading Objectives As president, John F Kennedy had to Sequencing As you read about the crises • Describe Kennedy’s plan for the armed confront the challenges and fears of the of the Cold War, complete a time line forces.
Cold War. similar to the one below to record the • Explain how the Cold War influenced major events of the Cold War in the late foreign aid and the space program.
Key Terms and Names 1950s and early 1960s. flexible response, Peace Corps, space Section Theme race, Berlin Wall, Warren Commission Science and Technology During the Jan.
For several tension-filled days that fall, the world seemed headed for nuclear destruction.
United States officials had discovered that the Soviet Union had placed missiles in Cuba—a mere 90 miles from the shores of the United States.
When the Soviets refused to remove the weapons, a bitter weeklong standoff ensued in which the two superpowers hurled threats and warnings at each other and moved to the brink of nuclear war.
As Kennedy entered the White House, the nation’s dangerous rivalry with the Soviet Union continued to intensify.
In some Latin American nation through the deepening Cold War. countries, these conditions spurred the growth of leftKennedy appeared ready to stand up to the wing movements aimed at overthrowing their governSoviets.
Let every nation know, whether it wishes us ous Latin America” that would be less likely to supwell or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burport Communist-inspired revolutions. den, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose Over a 10-year period, the United States pledged any foe, to assure the survival and the success of $20 billion to help Latin American countries establish liberty. ” better schools, housing, health care, and fairer land distribution.
In some coun—quoted in Let the Word Go Forth tries—notably Chile, Colombia, Venezuela, and the Kennedy attempted to reduce the threat of nuclear Central American republics—the alliance did prowar and to stop the spread of communism with a range mote real reform.
These included a conventional weaponry money to keep themselves in power. program, economic aid, and the Peace Corps.
The Peace Corps Another program aimed at helping A More Flexible Response Kennedy took office at a less developed nations fight poverty was the Peace time of growing global instability.
Nationalism was Corps, an organization that sent young Americans to exploding throughout the developing world, and the perform humanitarian services in these countries.
Newsweek magazine wrote that the “greatest years in countries that had requested assistance. single problem that faces John Kennedy is how to They laid out sewage systems in Bolivia and trained meet the aggressive power of the Communist bloc.” medical technicians in Chad.
Others taught English or Kennedy felt that Eisenhower had relied too heavhelped to build roads.
By late 1963 thousands of Peace ily on nuclear weapons, which could only be used in Corps volunteers were serving in over 30 countries. extreme situations.
To allow for a “flexible response” Today, the Peace Corps is still active and remains one if nations needed help against Communist moveof Kennedy’s most enduring legacies. ments, the president pushed for a buildup of convenTECHNOLOGY tional troops and weapons.
Although costly, a flexible response plan would allow the United States to fight a The Cold War Moves Into limited style of warfare.
Space President Kennedy In adopting this plan, Kennedy supported the sought to increase the counHISTORY Special Forces, a small army unit created in the 1950s try’s presence not only to wage guerrilla warfare in limited conflicts. around the world but also in Student Web Kennedy expanded it and allowed the soldiers to space.
With Cold War tenActivity Visit the wear their distinctive “Green Beret” headgear. sions continuing to rise, the American Vision Web site at tav.glencoe.com United States and the Soviet and click on Student Aid to Other Countries One area of the world where Union engaged in a space Web Activities— Kennedy wanted to renew diplomatic focus was Latin race—vying for dominance Chapter 28 for an America.
Governments were often in the their competitive positions Frontier. hands of the wealthy few and many of their citizens on Earth.
By the time Neil Armstrong and Edwin Aldrin walked on the moon in 1969, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration had spent over $33 billion.
Since that time, NASA expenditures have affected far more than space ➤ Moon boot material developed for the space program is used missions.
It has advanced knowledge of the nature of the improved shock absorption and universe, and people have applied them provides superior stability and to many technical fields and manufacmotion control. turing processes.
Kennedy was determined that the first humans to immediately, Castro established ties with the Soviet reach the moon would be Americans, not Russians.
Union, instituted drastic land reforms, and seized In 1961 he recommended to Congress that “this foreign-owned businesses, many of them American. nation should commit itself to achieving the goal, Cuba’s alliance with the Soviets worried many before this decade is out, of landing a man on the Americans.
Kennedy’s dream was realized in July 1969, comfort, and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was during Richard Nixon’s first administration, when also expressing his intent to strengthen Cuba astronaut Neil Armstrong became the first person to militarily. set foot on the moon.
The Crises of the Cold War invasion was intended to touch off a popular uprisPresident Kennedy’s efforts to combat Communist ing against Castro. influence in other countries led to some of the most When Kennedy became president, his advisers intense crises of the Cold War.
In office fewer than three left Americans and people in many other nations months and trusting his experts, Kennedy agreed wondering whether the world would survive. to the operation with some changes.
On April 17, 1961, 1,400 armed Cuban exiles landed at the Bay The Bay of Pigs The first crisis occurred in Cuba, of Pigs on the south coast of Cuba.
La Brigada’s boats ran aground on There, Fidel Castro had overthrown the corrupt coral reefs, Kennedy cancelled their air support to Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista in 1959.
Using a minicomputer, the wheelchair responds to 35 single-word voice commands, helping physically challenged people perform tasks like picking up packages, opening doors, and turning on appliances.
Increased Safety ➤ Remote-controlled robots reduce human injury levels because they can perform hazardous tasks men and women used to carry out.
Robots can also perform operations no human being ever could, such as volcano research on the Puna Ridge of Kilauea, Hawaii.
A communications satellite now in development will provide better telephone, television, and data service between western Europe, the Americas, and Africa.
Another communications satellite has improved ship-to-shore communications, which used to be interrupted frequently by bad weather. expected popular uprising never happened.
Guards posted along the wall two days, Castro’s forces killed or captured almost shot at many of those attempting to escape from the all the members of La Brigada.
For nearly 30 years afterward, the Berlin Wall The Bay of Pigs was a dark moment for the stood as a visible symbol of the Cold War division Kennedy administration.
Over the summer of The Berlin Wall Goes Up Still reeling from the Bay 1962, American intelligence agencies learned that of Pigs fiasco, Kennedy faced another foreign policy Soviet technicians and equipment had arrived in Cuba challenge beginning in June 1961 when he met with and that military construction was in progress.
The Soviet leader on October 22, President Kennedy announced on telewas determined to test the resolve of the young presvision that American spy planes had taken aerial phoident.
Khrushchev also wanted to stop the flood of tographs showing that the Soviet Union had placed Germans pouring out of Communist East Germany long-range missiles in Cuba.
He demanded that the Western so close to the United States posed a dangerous threat. powers recognize East Germany and that the United Kennedy ordered a naval blockade to stop the States, Great Britain, and France withdraw from Soviets from delivering more missiles, demanded that Berlin, a city lying completely within East Germany. they dismantle existing missile sites, and warned that Kennedy refused and reaffirmed the West’s commitif any weapons were launched against the United ment to West Berlin.
States, he would respond fully against the Soviet Khrushchev retaliated by building a wall through Union.
Berlin, blocking movement between the Soviet sector Nuclear holocaust seemed imminent.
It would remove the misreduction since the beginning of the Cold War. siles if the United States promised not to invade In the long run, however, the missile crisis had Cuba and to remove its missiles from Turkey near the ominous consequences.
As American officials considered the United States forced upon the Soviet leadership offer, letters and cables flew between the two leaders undermined the position of Nikita Khrushchev and and their chief advisers. contributed to his fall from power a year later.
The The reality was that neither Kennedy nor new leadership was less interested in reaching agreeKhrushchev wanted nuclear war.
Perhaps more important, the who themselves want to perish and before they die crisis gave the Soviets evidence of their military infedestroy the world, could do this,” wrote the Soviet riority and helped produce a dramatic Soviet arms leader.
This buildup conOctober 28, the leaders reached an agreement. tributed to a comparable military increase in the Kennedy publicly agreed not to invade Cuba and priUnited States in the early 1980s.
For a time, the arms vately agreed to remove the Turkish missiles; the race undermined American support for negotiating Soviets agreed to remove their missiles from Cuba. with the Soviets.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union had The Death of a President been forced to consider the consequences of such a Soon after the Senate ratified the test ban treaty, war.
In the following months, each country seemed John F Kennedy’s presidency came to a shocking and ready to work to lessen world tensions.
On November 22, 1963, Kennedy and his 1963, the United States and the Soviet Union conwife traveled to Texas with Vice President Lyndon cluded years of negotiation by agreeing to a treaty Johnson for a series of political appearances.
As the to ban the testing of nuclear weapons in the presidential motorcade rode slowly through the History Cold War Peak Fears of communism peaked during the Cuban missile crisis.
Routine reconnaissance flights over Cuba revealed the construction of missile sites, fueling facilities, and launch pads.
Someone had shot the president twice—once in the throat and once in the head.
Horrified government officials sped Kennedy to a nearby hospital, where he was pronounced dead moments later.
Lee Harvey Oswald, the man accused of killing Kennedy, appeared to be a confused and embittered Marxist who had spent time in the Soviet Union.
He himself was shot to death while in police custody two days after the assassination.
The bizarre situation led some to speculate that the second gunman, local nightclub owner Jack Ruby, killed Oswald to protect others involved in the crime.
In 1964 a national commission headed by Chief Justice Warren concluded that Oswald was the lone assassin.
The report of the Warren Commission left some questions unanswered, and theories about a conspiracy to kill the president have persisted, though none has gained wide acceptance.
In the wake of the assassination, the United States and the world went into mourning.
Thousands traveled to Washington, D.C., and waited in a line that stretched for several miles outside the Capitol in order to walk History silently past the president’s flag-draped casket.
Millions of others spent hours in front of their televiA Final Salute John F Kennedy, Jr. bravely salutes his father’s coffin during the state funeral.
In the streets of New Delhi, India, crowds wave of emotion that followed the president’s death, wept.
In Africa, the president of Guinea said, “I have his successor, Lyndon Baines Johnson, would set out lost my only true friend in the outside world.” to promote many of the programs that Kennedy left John F Kennedy served as president for little more behind. than 1,000 days.
Yet his powerful personality and active approach to the presidency made a profound Reading Check Evaluating How did Kennedy’s impression on most Americans.
Organizing Use a graphic organizer to other innovations that have affected Progress. similar to the one below to list the proour daily lives and standard of living. grams that Kennedy used to reduce the Reviewing Themes threat of nuclear war and to try to stem 4.
Descriptive Writing Take on the role of an American citizen during the Cuban missile crisis.
Write a journal entry describing the mood of the country during that time.
