Waltz is a leading advocate of a school of thought known as nuclear optimism, which argues that fears of nuclear war are greatly exaggerated.
While not directly stating that the risk of nuclear deterrence failing is near zero, requiring it to work “more or less in perpetuity” either implies that or sees the destruction of civilization as acceptable.
In September 2009, after President Barack Obama was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his efforts to rekindle the vision of a world free of nuclear weapons, Time magazine had an online essay arguing that the Nobel Committee should have awarded the prize to the atomic bomb instead.
This handout is an exercise in critical thinking that reexamines whether society’s nuclear optimism is warranted.
BP’s 2010 Deepwater Horizon oil spill demonstrates why nuclear optimism would require much more evidence than the absence of world war in the last 66 years.
Five months later, BP’s drilling rig exploded, killing 11 workers, creating an environmental catastrophe, and proving that 50 years of success was inadequate evidence for complacency.
The Gulf of Mexico will eventually recover from the BP oil spill, but the same cannot be said for mistakenly extrapolating 66 years without a nuclear exchange into the indefinite future.
Where nuclear weapons are concerned, we cannot afford to wait for disaster to strike before realizing that complacency was unwarranted.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, Page 1 of 16 A temperamental nuclear coin Fortunately, an engineering discipline known as quantitative risk analysis or QRA 2 can illuminate the danger by gleaning more information from the available data than might first appear possible.
Start by thinking of each year since 1945 as a coin toss with a heavily weighted coin, so that tails shows much more frequently than heads.
Tails means that a nuclear war did not occur that year, while heads corresponds to a nuclear catastrophe, so nuclear optimism’s evidence corresponds to noting that the last 66 years produced 66 tails in a row.
Risk analysis reclaims valuable information by looking not only at whether each toss showed heads or tails, but also at how the coin behaved during the toss.
If all 66 tosses immediately landed tails without any hesitation, that would be evidence that the coin was more strongly weighted in favor of tails, and provide additional evidence in favor of nuclear optimism.
Conversely, if any of the tosses teetered on edge, leaning first one way and then the other, before finally showing tails, nuclear optimism would be on shaky ground.
This incident occurred at an extremely tense time, just two months after a Korean airliner had been shot down after it strayed into Soviet airspace, and less than eight months after President Ronald Reagan’s “Star Wars” speech.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, Page 2 of 16 attack as a military exercise.
Able Archer was just such an exercise, simulating the coordinated release of all NATO nuclear weapons.
Fortunately Yeltsin made the right decision and this false alarm did not occur during a crisis, such as the 2008 Georgian War, when it would have been more likely mistaken for the real thing.
In a dangerous coincidence, the Russian Air Force had scheduled an exercise that day, in which strategic bombers were to be flown toward the United States.
Fortunately, the Russians learned of the terrorist attack in time to ground their bombers.
The danger is compounded because most Americans are unaware that Georgia fired the first shots and Russia is not solely to blame.
Ongoing tensions could well produce a rematch, and Sarah Palin, reflecting the mood of many Americans, has said that the United States should be ready to go to war with Russia should that occur.
The majority of the above incidents occurred post-Cold War, challenging the widespread belief that the nuclear threat ended with the fall of the Berlin Wall.
India suffered a major attack on Mumbai by Pakistani-based terrorists in November 2008.
In October 2009, internal terrorists attacked Pakistan’s Army General Headquarters, killing nine soldiers and two civilians.
Khan, sometimes called “the father of the Islamic bomb,” ran a virtual nuclear supermarket and is believed to have sold Pakistani nuclear know-how to North Korea, Iran, and Libya.
In November 2007, two armed teams, probably with internal collusion, circumvented a 10,000 volt fence and other security measures.
These incidents show that the nuclear coin has teetered on edge far too often, yet society’s lack of concern and resultant inaction demonstrate that nuclear optimism is a widespread illusion.
A prerequisite for defusing the nuclear threat is to make society aware of the risk that it bears before catastrophe strikes.
That is precisely the kind of task for which risk analysis was developed.
As noted earlier, the HEU bomb dropped on Hiroshima was never tested before hand.
Quantitative risk analysis also has been applied to the risk of nuclear proliferation9 and nuclear terrorism, and both Los Alamos and Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories have performed such analysis for various aspects of the country’s nuclear programs.
It is therefore surprising that the applicability of quantitative risk analysis to estimating and reducing the failure rate of nuclear deterrence has only recently been recognized, and its serious employment is yet to be accomplished.
The state diagram introduced in Handout #1 and reproduced below depicts how quantitative risk analysis decomposes a catastrophic failure of nuclear deterrence into a sequence of smaller, partial failures.
The next section then spotlights modern day analogs that came close to repeating 1962’s errors in July 2008, and still retain that potential.
Because those more recent events did not produce a fullblown crisis, most people are unaware that they occurred.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, Page 5 of 16 from the Russian perspective.
Fortunately, that view has been recorded by Fyodr Burlatsky, one of Khrushchev’s speechwriters, as well as a man who was in the forefront of the Soviet reform movement.
It was the Americans themselves who pushed him in the direction of the Soviet Union.
He needed economic and political support and help with weapons, and he found all three in Moscow.
In April 1961 the Americans supported a raid by Cuban emigrees … The Bay of Pigs defeat strained anti-Cuban feelings in America to the limit.
Calls were made in Congress and in the press for a direct invasion of Cuba.
In a matter of six or seven minutes missiles launched from that base could devastate major centres in the Ukraine 10 Even the names used here and in Russia are indicative of our very different perspectives.
The Russians usually call it the Caribbean crisis, because they see it in a larger context, including the Bay of Pigs invasion the year before and the United States deploying similar missiles in Turkey.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, Page 6 of 16 and southern Russia.
In spite of the similarity between the Cuban and Turkish missiles, Khrushchev realized that America would find his deployment unacceptable and therefore did so secretly, disguising the missiles and expecting to confront the United States with a fait accompli.
Once the missiles were operational, America could not attack them or Cuba without inviting a horrific nuclear retaliation.
An opponent is deterred from threatening, or even pressuring, the allied nation out of fear for the consequences.
But that begs the question, addressed here, of how much risk is involved in threatening nuclear war over much more minor acts.
As the name “nuclear trip wire” so presciently implies, it is possible for the opponent to accidentally trip and spring the trap, except this trap destroys the trapper as well as the trapped.
Just as Kennedy did not think through likely Soviet responses to our Turkish missiles, Khrushchev did not envision what would happen if he was caught before completing his missile deployment – which is exactly what happened.
Russia demanding to be treated as a military equal and being denied that status; 3. the Berlin Crisis; 4. the Bay of Pigs invasion; 5. the American deployment of ballistic missiles in Turkey; and 6.
The actors involved in each step did not perceive their behavior as overly risky.
But compounded and viewed from their opponent’s perspective, those steps brought the world to the brink of nuclear disaster.
During the crisis, there were additional, fortunately unvisited states that would have made World War III even more likely.
The strong pressure noted by Burlatsky to correct the Bay of Pigs fiasco and remove Castro with a powerful American invasion force intensified after Khrushchev’s Cuban missiles were discovered.
But those arguing in favor of invasion were ignorant of the fact, not learned in the West until many years later, that the Soviets had battlefield Prof.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, Page 7 of 16 nuclear weapons on Cuba designed to be used against just such an American invasion.
Also totally unknown to the American participants, a Soviet submarine that was “hunted” and forced to surface by American destroyers as it approached Cuba carried a nuclear torpedo that its captain considered using against his American attackers.
Contrary to conventional wisdom, which sees both the Cold War and the nuclear threat as ghosts of the past, this section shows that in July 2008, we came perilously close to repeating that sequence of mistakes, and that those conditions continue to persist today.
Because the 2008 Cuban Bomber Crisis stopped just short of becoming a full-blown crisis, most people are unaware of it.
But, as shown below, we came within perhaps “half a step” of once again staring at the nuclear abyss and wondering how we got there.
Step #1: conflict between America and Castro’s Cuba Cuba still is an emotional land mine for Americans, with an economic embargo still in place.
In July 2008, when word reached Air Force Chief of Staff General Norton Schwartz that the Russians might deploy nuclear capable bombers to Cuba, he said that would cross “a red line,” even though that threatened move was in response to American actions seen as equally provocative by the Russians.
Russia demanding to be treated as a military equal and being denied that status The same is true today.
An additional irritant is the way D-Day ceremonies repeatedly give the impression that the West won World War II, overlooking the 12 Coleman argues that the possibility of Soviet tactical nukes was considered by some, but my reading of the history indicates that those arguing for an invasion either largely or completely ignored that information.
President Mikhail Gorbachev on the nuclear age and Russia’s future,” Harvard Political Review, January 13, 2008.
The link given in “2008 interview” will take you to a collection of articles, where you can search on Tatsis to find the beginning of this article.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, Page 8 of 16 immense Soviet contribution in the victory over Nazism.
Other irritants, such as the JacksonVanik Amendment discussed in Handout #5, are more minor, but add fuel for a potential fire.
The Berlin Crisis Several hotspots test Russian-American relations in ways that are similar to Berlin forty years ago.
The Bay of Pigs invasion The 2008 Georgian war is almost a mirror image of the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion.
In 1961, Kennedy was humiliated and therefore looking for ways to regain his manhood, both in the eyes of the Soviets and the American electorate.
In 2008, Georgia’s President Mikheil Saakashvili was soundly whipped by the Russians after his attempt to regain South Ossetia and Abkhazia by force.
Pushed by some of the same motivations that drove Kennedy, Saakashvili has taken actions that could result in a rematch.
The danger is increased because most Americans mistakenly believe that Russia’s invasion of Georgia was totally unprovoked.
In consequence, in September 2008, vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin said that we should be prepared to go to war with Russia should it invade Georgia again, and many Americans, including President Obama, still support NATO membership for Georgia.
The American deployment of ballistic missiles in Turkey The missile defense system President George W Bush planned for Eastern Europe, with American missiles in Poland, bears an ominous similarity to the Turkish missiles.
While these new missiles are seen as defensive and a non-issue in America, the Russians see them as offensive and part of an American military encirclement.
Russia’s fears are exacerbated by Poland’s seeing the system as protecting it against Russia.
While President Obama’s September 2009 decision to emphasize options that are less threatening to the Russians has partly defused the danger, basing part of the system in Romania leaves the issue far from resolved.
Also, a future American president could reactivate Bush’s original plan, further adding to the danger.
Khrushchev’s deployment of ballistic missiles in Cuba While there is not yet a modern day analog of this complete step, serious warning tremors occurred in July 2008.
That was when Izvestia, a Russian newspaper often used for strategic governmental leaks, reported that, if we proceeded with our Eastern European missile defense Prof.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, Page 9 of 16 system, then nuclear-armed Russian bombers would be deployed to Cuba.
While the Russian Foreign Ministry later dismissed Izvestia’s report as unfounded, some elements within the Russian Defense Ministry appear to be in a similar state of mind to the one that prompted Khrushchev to deploy his Cuban missiles.
Strategic rocket carriers Ty-160 and Ty-95MC can be sent to air bases in Latin America and Africa at any moment, said The Defense Ministry to Izvestia.
Moreover, we are talking not only about Cuba, but Venezuela and Algeria.
It is interesting to note that Venezuela’s President Hugo Chavez, having been on a visit to Moscow last Tuesday, said that Caracas would be happy to accept the Russian military.
Two months later, in September 2008, Russian bombers visited Venezuela.
Fortunately, neither that operation nor the above reported landings on Cuba received much public attention in the United States, and the crisis died down before reaching full blown proportions.
In terms of assessing future risks, it is instructive to consider whether the risk would have been greater if Obama, rather than Bush, had been president when the bombers made those 2008 flights.
That would be the case if Obama’s political opponents are more likely to use such an event to tar him as soft on national defense.
That in turn would spotlight the issue for the American electorate and place pressure on the president to act aggressively, thereby increasing the risk.
Both Kennedy and McNamara agreed that the Cuban missiles did not upset the strategic balance, but were heavily influenced by domestic politics – including the upcoming midterm elections – to counter the Soviet move with a strong response.
In some ways, these incidents in July 2008 stopped half a step short of a full-blown crisis, but that is little cause for comfort.
We were – and still are – at a very dangerous point in the process 14 This translation is courtesy of Dr.
Inna Sayfer, who also assisted with ensuring the accuracy of English language reports of Russian language news articles.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, Page 10 of 16 and need to recognize complacency as our true enemy.
It is essential that we start paying greater attention to these early warning signs of a potential disaster.
A Positive Role for Risk Analysis Thus far we have been applying risk analysis to illuminate the risk posed by our nuclear weapons strategy.
By identifying the most likely failure mechanisms, such as a crisis involving Cuba, risk analysis allows us to focus remedial efforts where they will be most effective.
One approach is to revisit the modern day analogs of the six steps that led to the 1962 Cuban crisis and see what they might tell us.
The risk would be greatly reduced if we reacted more rationally to events surrounding that island nation.
Given that Cuba, in and of itself, poses little or no threat to our national security, we should reexamine why we have such an emotional response to events there.
This step also shows the danger of drawing “red lines” in Russian-American confrontations.
In 1962, both Kennedy and Khrushchev became haunted by similar “red lines” they had drawn, but that were crossed.
They then faced the dilemma of either admitting that they had been bluffing, thereby losing all future credibility in nuclear standoffs, or following through with actions that would have risked hundreds of millions of lives.
Under attack by the Republicans for his passivity over Cuba, the president had issued a public statement on September 4 warning the Soviets that “the gravest issues would arise” if they developed “a significant offensive capability” in Cuba.
He had planted a marker in the sand, and was now committed to defending it.
Russia demanding to be treated as a military equal and being denied that status.
This risk would be reduced by reassessing the limits of American military power, the extent of Russian military power, and whether our words and deeds need to change as a result.
As demonstrated by the Russian reaction to President Obama’s 2009 D-Day speech, it would not take much to diminish tensions.
It’s the tale of the British people, whose courage during the Blitz forced Hitler to call off the invasion of England; the Canadians, who came even though they were never attacked; the Russians, who sustained some of the war’s heaviest casualties on the Eastern front; and all those French men and women who would rather have died resisting tyranny than lived within its grasp.
Russia Thursday protested that its role in defeating Nazi Germany in World War II had gone unrecognized at this month’s D-Day ceremonies.
Not a single word was said by Sarkozy, Brown or Harper about the decisive role in the victory of the Soviet Union, which took the hardest blows from Hitler’s army and sustained the heaviest casualties … Only United States President Barack Obama mentioned the Soviet Union’s contribution to defeating fascism and its horrendous losses at the ceremony to mark the 65th anniversary of the landings … Twenty-six million Soviet citizens paid the ultimate sacrifice in defeating Hitler’s project of Armageddon on Earth.
Nine out of every ten Wehrmacht personnel killed in battle were killed on the Eastern Front.
Modern day, hotspots, such as Chechnya, Georgia, Estonia, Cuba and Venezuela, test Russian-American relations in ways that are similar to Berlin forty years ago.
The risk can be reduced by reexamining our perspective on each of those hotspots and rooting out any mistaken assumptions.
While, ideally, the other nations involved would do the same, having one of the players behave more rationally is better than none.
Taking the August 2008 16 Richard K Betts, Nuclear Blackmail and Nuclear Balance, The Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, 1987, page 112.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, Page 12 of 16 Georgian War as an example, it would reduce the risk if Americans were to recognize that Georgia fired the first shots and Russia is not solely to blame.
The 2008 Georgian war is almost a mirror image of the 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion.
The best way to reduce the risk of this step is also to reexamine our perspective on Georgia to produce a more accurate picture.
America’s plans for missile defense in Europe bear an ominous similarity to the Turkish missiles we deployed in 1961-62.
This risk can be reduced by trying to put ourselves in the Russian’s shoes and see how our actions might make them respond.
Surprisingly, some far-sighted individuals did that both before our 1960‘s Turkish deployment and while our more recent Eastern European missile defense system was debated.
Unfortunately, these individuals were not heeded – sometimes by themselves, as we will see in the first example.
Such thinking, however, did not block his administration’s movement toward an agreement with Turkey to take some Jupiters.
Bernstein cites another instance of this ability to see the danger of our Turkish deployment.
While Castro’s revolution had taken control of Cuba the preceding winter, Castro was not yet a Communist.
As noted in earlier references to Burlatsky’s book on Khrushchev, “At that time Castro was neither a Communist nor a Marxist.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, Page 13 of 16 President Reagan’s March 23, 1983, “Star Wars” speech proposed missile defense as a solution to the nuclear dilemma.
But recognizing that, “If paired with offensive systems, they can be viewed as fostering an aggressive policy,” he promised that, “We seek neither military superiority nor political advantage.
In spite of that pledge, the work was done in secret, with the promise to share the technology with the Soviets to be fulfilled at some indefinite future time.
I think we ought to work on these military technologies ONLY openly and jointly.
And I go farther than Edward , … because I think we shouldn’t work on them unless we are willing that the Soviet Union have them as well.
Had we done that with MIRV we would not be in the present situation where we feel our land-based forces are vulnerable.
That’s really a test of whether the government regards this as truly stabilizing or just states that its stabilizing in order to sell the program.
If it is truly stabilizing for both sides to have it then let’s give it to the Soviet Union, let’s get the advantage of getting something in return – some access to their programs if possible.
In fact, it is surprisingly similar to the strategic vision that President Ronald Reagan laid out more than two decades ago.
They might also consider joint threat assessments, as well as undertake bilateral discussions on options for missile defense cooperation.
Lastly, we might consider placing Russian liaison officers at United States missile defense tracking sites in exchange for United States officers in Russian strategic command centers.
The transparency gained from such steps would be useful in offering reassurances that these radars are not meant for spying on Russia.
Hellman, “Nuclear Weapons, Risk and Hope,” Handout #6, STS152, AUT 2011-12, Page 14 of 16 But, should we ever find ourselves this close to the nuclear threshold, we still can reduce the risk by responding more rationally.
For example, in the 1962 crisis, Kennedy and his advisors regarded the downing of an American U-2 as a major provocation even though it had violated Cuban airspace.
Given that Hillel had spent his whole life studying the Torah, this was an insult and a joke.
This story is highly relevant to defusing the nuclear threat because many of the above recommendations for reducing the risk of a nuclear disaster are just applications of the Golden Rule.
For example, during the Georgian war of 2008, an essay in Newsweek compared the Russian invasion of Georgia to Hitler’s takeover of Czechoslovakia in 1938, even though that it has been determined that Georgia fired the first shots and bears some of the blame for that war.
These are just two examples where recommendations for reducing the nuclear risk are special cases of the Golden Rule, and I would not be surprised if moving away from dangerous double standards were all that is needed to start solving this seemingly unsolvable problem.
In the shortened version which started this section, I left out two points.
First, Hillel’s inquisitor is a Gentile, so the story is a Jewish put down of Gentiles.
Jews would be offended if the story were reversed, with a Jew asking a Christian saint to teach him the Gospels while he stood on one foot.
Second, in the full story, the inquisitor first goes to Hillel’s major competitor, a Jewish sage named Shammai.
Shammai is understandably insulted by the challenge and angrily shoos the man away.
While the Talmud doesn’t tell us, I am sure this story was created by followers of Hillel, not Shammai.
Under that assumption, this story violates the Golden Rule a second time, in that Hillel’s followers would have been angry if Shammai’s students had created its mirror image.
This goes to show that, even when trying to teach the Golden Rule, it is all too easy to violate it.
Constant vigilance, critical thinking, and critical self-examination are needed.
We need to carefully reexamine our thoughts and deeds to ensure that we are seeing ourselves and the world as clearly as possible, so that we can be as consistent as possible with our stated ideals – and have the greatest chance of avoiding a nuclear catastrophe.
