As Soviet ships headed toward Cuba with missiles on board, President Kennedy assembled a group of high-level personnel to discuss the crisis.
On October 22, he addressed the nation to explain what the government would do in the crisis.
On October 28, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev backed down and the ships turned around and headed back to the Soviet Union.
The United States and the Soviet Union had stood on the brink of nuclear war.
Second, I have directed the continued and increased close surveillance of Cuba and its military buildup.
Third, it shall be the policy of this nation to regard any nuclear missile launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere as an attack by the Soviet Union on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory response upon the Soviet Union.
Fourth, as a necessary military precaution I have reinforced our base at Guantanamo, evacuated today the dependents of our personnel there, and ordered additional military units to be on a standby alert basis.
Fifth, we are calling tonight for an immediate meeting of the Organ of Consultation, under the Organization of American States, to consider this threat to hemisphere security and to invoke Articles 6 and 8 of the Rio Treaty in support of all necessary action.
Sixth, under the Charter of the United Nations, we are asking tonight that an emergency meeting of the Security Council be convoked without delay to take action against this latest Soviet threat to world peace.
Our resolution will call for the prompt dismantling and withdrawal of all offensive weapons in Cuba, under the supervision of UN observers, before the quarantine can be lifted.
Seventh and finally, I call upon Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate this clandestine, reckless, and provocative threat to world peace and to stable relations between our two nations.
I speak to you as a friend, as one who know of your deep attachment to your fatherland, as one who shares your aspirations for liberty and justice for all.
And I have no doubt that most Cubans today look forward to the time when they will be truly free from foreign domination, free to choose their own leaders, free to select their own system, free to own their own land, free to speak and write and worship without fear or degradation.
