We hope that both the Symposium and this volume will help fill the large gaps in information previously available on the role of intelligence in this crisis.
The volume and Symposium are both products of CIA's new program of openness, which Robert Gates, Director of Central Intelligence , announced in his speech to the Oklahoma Press Association last February.
The Center now includes the CIA History Staff, first formed in 1951, and a new Historical Review Group, which has increased both the scope and pace of the program to declassify historical records that DCI William Casey established in 1985.
Mary S McAuliffe, Deputy Chief of the History Staff, has located and compiled the documents in this collection.
McAuliffe selected, using new guidelines prepared by a special CIA task force and approved by the DCI last spring.
We are especially grateful to the principal reviewer who handled this difficult process — including coordination with other departments and agencies — with great skill and dispatch.
We should also acknowledge the invaluable help of our History Assistant, Ms.
Diane Marvin, and of the members of the Directorate of Intelligence's Design Center and Publication Center, and of the Directorate of Administration's Printing and Photography Group, who prepared and produced this book with remarkable speed and virtuosity.
It contains the ""honeymoon cables"" that Director of Central Intelligence John A McCone sent to Headquarters from France a month before the missile crisis, as well as McCone's notes taken during the National Security Council Executive Committee meetings at the height of the crisis.
It also includes intelligence memorandums and estimates, briefing papers, Cuban refugee reports, and memorandums on Operation MONGOOSE, the clandestine program aimed at destabilizing the Castro regime.
Many of the evaluations of the missile threat contained here draw upon IRONBARK material, whose source was Soviet Col.
To the degree possible, the documents in this volume are organized according to the date of subject matter, so that a February 1963 document discussing a September 1962 event will appear among September 1962 documents.
In general, support documents follow documents that summarize a sequence of events.
To conserve space and speed declassification, excerpts have been taken from some of the lengthier entries.
In some cases, the summary or conclusion section of a document has been excerpted, while in others, material on topics unrelated to Cuba or the missile crisis has been omitted.
All such instances have been noted in the Contents list and in the documents* headings.
All the documents in this volume have been subject to declassification review, and portions of some have been deleted for security reasons.
In the weeks immediately preceding the missile crisis, DCI McCone was frequently out of town.
McCone was away from Washington on his honeymoon in France from the evening of 23 August through 23 September 1962.
He left for Los Angeles on business on the evening of 1 1 October 1962, coming back late on 14 October.
He returned to the West Coast on the afternoon of 15 October, immediately following news of the death of his stepson.
The discovery of missiles in Cuba brought him back to Washington on the evening of 16 October, where he remained for the rest of the crisis. v It should be noted that these documents, many of them written hastily during a time of national emergency, contain occasional errors.
Much has been written on the missile crisis during the 30 years that have elapsed since those 13 days in October, but the unavailability of classified material has left many questions still unanswered.
The CIA History Staff hopes that the publication of this volume, and the further releases that follow, will make possible a more complete understanding of this complex and deeply troubling event.
Mary S McAuliffe Deputy Chief, History Staff vi Persons Mentioned Brief Titles and Descriptions as of October 1962 Acheson, Dean Alsop, Joseph Alsop, Stewart Anderson, Adm.
George W M Jr., USN Ball, George W Bohlen, Charles E Bowles, Chester Bundy, McGeorge Cannon, Representative Clarence Carroll, Lt.
Johnson, Clarence Johnson, Lyndon B, Johnson, LL Alexis Karamessines, Thomas H Kaysen, Carl Keating, Senator Kenneth B Kennedy, John F Kennedy, Robert F Kent, Sherman Khrushchev, Nikita S Killian, James R., Jr.
Lyman L., USA Lovett, Robert A Lundahl, Arthur C Mansfield, Senator Mike Martin, Edwin M McCloy, John J McCone, John A McNamara, Robert S Miskovsky, M, C Norstad, Gen.
Smathers, Senator George A Sorensen, Theodore Stevenson, Adlai E Sweeney, Gen.
National Intelligence Estimate 85-2-62, ""The Situation and Prospects in Cuba,"" 1 August 1962 9 4.
V^al LCI iU IVXvV^UilC', V^-aUIC, 1*+ OCpLt/lllUw 17U^ ^JDAV'CLptJ / j 28.
Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62 91 ""The Military Buildup m Cuba,"" 19 September 1962 34.
Construction begins on SAM sites at Matanzas , Havana, Mariel, Bahia Honda, Santa Lucia, San Julian, & La Coloma.
Upsurge of Soviet arms shipments begins arriving in central Cuban ports.
Construction begins on SAM sites at Sagua la Grande, Caibarien, St Sancti Spiritus. 6 D C R C T 2.
OfrC RET T Date Western Cuba Central Cuba Eastern Cuba 5-10 SeptemberSoviet armored group arrives at Remedios.
National Intelligence Estimate 85-2-62, ""The Situation and Prospects in Cuba,"" 1 August 1962 NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE NUMBER 85-2-62 The Situation and Prospects in Cuba 1 August 1962 ■SECRET 9 SECRET ™* THE SITUATION AND PROSPECTS IN CUBA 1 THE PROBLEM To analyze the situation in Cuba and to estimate the prospects over the next year or so, with particular reference to Castro's relations with the Communists and to the potential for resistance to his regime.
B By force of circumstances, the USSR is becoming ever more deeply committed to preserve and strengthen the Castro regime.
The USSR, however, has avoided any formal commitment to protect and defend the regime in all contingencies.
C The Cuban armed forces are loyal to the personal leadership of the Castro brothers.
Their capabilities have been and are being greatly enhanced by the Soviet Bloc's provision of military equipment and instruction.
The background information contained in that document remains generally valid.
D The Cuban armed forces are well able to intimidate the general population and to suppress any popular insurrection likely to develop in present circumstances.
They are probably capable of containing and controlling any threat to the regime through guerrilla action and of repelling any invasion short of a direct United States military intervention in strength.
K The Cuban economy is in deep trouble, in part because of the United States embargo and a consequent shortage of convertible foreign exchange, in part because of agricultural and industrial mismanagement.
Despite remedial measures, it is unlikely that agricultural and industrial production can be significantly increased within the next year or so.
The expected increase in capital imports from the Bloc is unlikely to produce a net growth of the economy before the end of 1963.
F The Castro regime retains the positive support of about 20 percent of the population, but disaffection is increasing.
This trend is manifested in growing passive resistance and in occasional open demonstrations of resentment Few, however, dare to accept the risks of organized active resistance in present circumstances, for fear of the regime's massive apparatus for surveillance and repression.
G If arms and supplies became available and if confidence were created in the likelihood of outside support for a major Cuban uprising, resistance activity and potential would increase.
Even so it is unlikely that the regime could be overthrown unless events had already shaken the regime and brought into doubt its capacity for survival, and unless substantial outside support for the insurgents were forthcoming.
H The Castro regime still seeks to lead the 'inevitable"" revolution throughout Latin America, but its preoccupation with domestic problems tends to limit its activity in this 3. respect.
In Latin America there is widespread disillusionment regarding the Cuban revolution.
Nevertheless, militant pro-Castro groups exist in several countries, and Cuban subversive activity could prove effective in certain unstable situations:g., in Guatemala or Venezuela.
The appeal of the Cuban example will increase in Latin America if reform lags there and hopes and promises remain unfulfilled.
Soviet MHBMl in Cub* U On August 10th at a meeting in Secretary Rusk's Conference Room attended by Rusk* Johns on, McNimirt, Gilpatric, Bundy, Gen, Taylor and a number of ether* for the purpose of discussing General Lansdale'e Phase H activities, McCone reported on the sodden importation of materiel — at that time the characteristic; of which was unidentified — and Soviet personnel, and at that meeting speculated that this could be electronic equipment for use against Canavarel and/or military equipment including medium range ballistic missiles.
On August 21st at a meeting in Secretary Rusk's office attended by the same group, McCone again reviewed the situation as it developed since August 10th, reported definite information on surface to air missiles and again speculated on the probability of medium range ballistic missiles* 3* On August 22nd McCone gave the same informa t i o n to the President, adding certain details concerning the number of Soviet a nd China m pers onne l who had rece ntly entered Cuba as reported byg""^ \ who had just returned from Havs 4.
On August 23rd in a meeting with the President, Busk, McNamara, Gilpatric, General Taylor, Bundy and others, McCone again reviewed the situation and questioned the need for the extensive SAM installations unless they wera to make possible the concealment of MRBMs* 5* The same reasoning was applied in discussions with Senator Rue sell's Subcommittees.
My hunch is we might face prospect of Soviet shortrange surface-to-surface missiles of portable type in Cuba which could command important targets of southeast United States and possibly latin American Caribbean areas.
Appears to me quite possible measures now being taken are for purpose of insuring secrecy of some offensive capability such as MRBMs to be installed by Soviets after present phase completed and country secured from overflights.
Suggest BNE sfcdy motives behind these defensive measures which even seem to exceed those provided most satellites*"" 9.
On September 13th McCone received communication from Carter stating that the BNE continued to feel that the installation of SA 2a is most reasonably explained by other than a desire to hide MRBM build-up.
I vouM like to talk with you onP from Norstad's headquarter* to the Whit* House or Pentagon situation room tonight between 1700 and 1800 your time.
Do not wish to be overly alarming this matter but believe CIA and community must keep government informed of danger of a surprise and also that detection of preparatory steps possibly beyond our capability once Cuban defense system operative.
Thrust of press reports reaching me is that there exists a clear demarcation between defensive and offensive preparations and I question if we can be sure of this, I recognise Cuban policy decisions most delicate and beyond Agency or my competence.
U On 19 September Carter communicated the summary of the conclusions of Cuban SNEE of that date, paragraph D stating that in the opinion of the BNE, establishment of MKBMi in Cuba would be 3 15 4.
It is reported that during McCone' s absence* Acting DCI, at a meeting held in Mr Bandy 1 s office on 10 September, proposed an overflight which would cover the entire north and south perimeter of Cuba east of Havana and out to the eastern tip of Orient* Province except for an area in the immediate vicinity of Santa Clara where four SAM sites were known to exist and had been photographed.
The purpose of this flight was to make a final determination as to how many SAM sites existed or were under construction.
It is reported that because of Rusk's concern for the safety of the U~2 in view of the Sakolin violation on 7 September and the ChiNat loss on 10 September, the sense of the meeting that CZA be permitted to make 4 flights again** Cuba, two peripheral and two overflights of limited penetration, including the Isle of Pines.
On the 14th of September the meeting of the Special Group, JCS representative outlined capabilities for low level coverage.
Secretary of Defense indicated he did not wish this operation considered until the results were obtained from CIA reconnaissance as approved on September 11th.
On October 4th McCone noted to the Special Group that there had been no coverage of the center of Cuba and more particularly the entire western end of the Island for over a month, and all flights since S Sejrtember had been either peripheral or limited and therefore CIA did not know, nor could advise, whether an offensive capability was being created.
DCI objected strenuously to the limitations which had been . placed on overflights and there arose a considerable discussion (with some heat) as to whether limita tions had orhadnot b een placed on CIA by the Special Group.
On October 15th at a Special Meeting (and prior to receipt of the results of the October 14th flight), two additional XJ-2 ^<m^* to cover all of Cuba were approved and this was concurred in by higher authority.
CIA has received approximately 60 reports on this increased activity; 40 out of Opa Locka, and the balance from controlled sources considered dependable.
It appears that between 4000 and 6000 Soviet/ Bloc personnel have arrived in Cuba since 1 July.
Many are known to be technicians, some are suspected to be military personnel; there is no evidence of organized Soviet military units, as such, being included.
A great many of the arriving Soviet/ Bloc personnel are isolated from the Cuban population.
The unloading of most ships takes place under maximum security, with the Cuban population excluded from the port areas.
Large equipment is noticeable; large crates have been observed, which could contain airplane fuselages or missile components.
In some instances trucks or trailers have been lowered into ships holds, loaded, covered with tarpaulins and removed bodily.
Increased technical assistance to Cuban industry and agriculture and/or the Cuban Armed Forces.
Possible establishment of Soviet COMINT-ELINT facilities targetted against Canaveral and other important U S. installations.
The timing of this buildup coincides with Raoul Castro's trip to Moscow and this may in itself be significant.
Secretary Rusk, Secretary McNamara, Alexis Johnson, the Attorney General, DCI, General Taylor, General Lemnitzer and Mc George Bundy Subject: Cuba McCone stated that the purpose of the meeting was to again review the situation in Cuba in light of the most recent intelligence findings.
DCI recalled that in the August 10th Meeting he had reported such information as was then available on the accelerated Soviet supply of personnel and materiel to Cuba.
INT and possible electro -counter measure efforts or missile sites, probably ground-to-air.
DCI that continuing Soviet aid and technical assistance will present the United States with a more formidable problem in the future than it now confronts or has confronted in the past.
There was general agreement that the situation was critical and that the most dynamic action was indicated.
There was discussion of various courses of action open to us in case the Soviets place MRBM missiles on Cuban territory.
There was also discussion of blockades of Soviet and Bloc shipping into Cuba or alternatively a total blockade of Cuba.
Throughout these discussions, it was abundantly clear that in the minds of State, and Mr Bundy, speaking for the White House, there is a very definite inter -relationship between Cuba and other trouble spots, such, as Berlin.
Sabotage activities were planned on a priority basis and in all probability, we would witness more failures than successes.
To date we had experienced a very tight internal security situation and probably this would become more so in the future. 2 «. EYES C:l¥ 22 6.
EYCG G^lV' The Attorney General queried the meeting as to what other aggressive steps could be taken, questioning the feasibility of provoking an action against Guantanazno which would permit us to retaliate, or involving a third country in some way.
It was Mr Bundy's opinion that all overt actions would involve serious consequences throughout the world and therefore our operations must be covert at this time, although we should expect a high degree of at tribution.
The meeting was inconclusive with respect to any particular course of actionIt was felt that the President should be informed on the evolving situation and the DCI agreed to brief him at the Meeting on Wednesday, August 22nd at 6 o'clock.
We further agreed that the entire matter should be reviewed with the F resident by Rusk, McNamara, Bundy and McCone.
Mr Bundy undertook to arrange for this meeting following the Special Meeting scheduled for ten o 1 clock on Thursday, August 23rd.
Following this discussion, there was a brief discussion of the Donovan matter as covered in DCI's memorandum to Rusk and the Attorney General, copy of which is attached.
It was agreed that Mr Hurwitz would meet with Mr Donovan on Thursday, together with the Attorney General, and determine the extent of the commitment we would make for the government which would permit Mr Donovan to engage in the prisoner release negotiations.
DCI made it abundantly clear that the existing commitments to Committees of the Congress prevented CIA from using covert resources for this purpose.
McCone stated that in view of these commitments to the Congress he did not feel that he should meet with Mr Donovan.
Furthermore, that McCone stated that he felt that if a reasonable deal could be made for the release of the prisoners, the Committees of Congress would change the view expressed a year ago at the time of the tractor negotiation.
General Taylor The following points were covered: •es eves only 25 1. fflfi; CYCS ONL Y 3.
McCone reviewed all of the substance of the August 21st briefing of the Secretary of State, Defense and others as reported and recorded^ ex plained in considerab le detail the personal report y~ ^[concerning his personal obsei o bs ervations of his confidante s during a recent trip to Cuba as recorded in the attached memorandum.
The President expressed concern, but agreed with General Taylor andDCI that any policy matters would be discussed at the forthcoming meeting of the Principals to be held at the White House on August 23rd. ie^an^b^ad^^on^^ 4.
The President acknowledged receipt of McCone' s personal letter concerning his personal plans, indicated approval thereof and stated that he had responded in writing to the letter.
This point not cleared and should be pursued as strongly opposed by Chiefs.
The president requested a continuing analysis of the number and type of Soviet and Oriental personnel imported into Cuba; quantity and type of equipment and its probable use; all construction particularly anxious to know whether construction involved SAM sites might differ from the ground sites.
McNamara observed portable ground missiles could not be located under any circumstances.
DDCI should have Board of National Estimates working continuously on this analysis. sew mtrem. 27 8« -mm €yrs 0:. : ..r v 3.
President requested analysis of the danger to the United States and the effect on Latin America of missile installations.
President raised the question of whether we should make a statement in advance of our position, should the Soviets install missiles and the alternative actions open to us in such event.
In the course of the discussion, apparent many in the room related action in Cuba to Soviet actions in Turkey, Greece, Berlin, Far East and elsewhere.
McNamara agreed they were useless but difficult politically to remove them.
President raised question of what we could do against Soviet missile sites in Cuba.
Could we take them out by air or would a ground offensive be necessary or alternatively could they be destroyed by a substantial guerrilla effort.
President raised question of what we should do in Cuba if Soviets precipated a Berlin crisis.
This is the alternative to the proposition of what Soviets would do m Berlin if we moved in Cuba.
During the conversation I raised substance of my plan of action as outlined in the attached paper.
However, we should not start the political action and propaganda effort now until we had decided on the policy of following through to the complete solution of the Cuban problem . 2 28 8.
After the meeting in a private conversation -with Robert Kenned v, I stated that I felt Cuba was our most serious or obi em; also added , in my opinion, Cuba was the key to all of Latin America; if Cuba succeeds, we can expect -erii of Latin America to fall.
Arrival of many ship loads or equipment and materiel curing July and August.
The conclusion that stepped up plan will not, in the opinion of the National Board of Estimates, accomplish the stated purpose of overthrowing Castro from within, and moreover will be attributable to the United States and cause loss of face by the United States, and will contribute importantly to our intelligence gathering and will impede Castro regime's economic progress but will not be sufficient to frustrate the regime's. progress in view of the evidences of substantial ^Soviet technical assistance.
The above all lead to the conclusion that with the passage of time, it is possible there will evolve in Cuba a stronger rather than a weaker Castro dominated communist state, fully oriented to Moscow, to serve on the one hand as a model for similar actions by disciplined groups throughout Latin America, and on the other as a bridgehead for Soviet subversive activities in Central and South America.
Being dominated by Moscow, such a Cuba would also serve as a possible location for MRBMs, for COMINT and ELINT facilities targetted against United States activities, most particularly Canaveral, and finally as an ECM station which might adversely affect our soace and missile work.
The instanteous commitment of sufficient armed forces to occupy the country, destroy the regime, free the people, and establish in Cuba a peaceful country which will be a member of the community of American states.
Alternatively, actions under above might cause internal strife of sufficient proportion to prompt the action outlined under above with no further provocation.
All recipients of these copies to be advised that there is to be no further dissemination except on a minimum need-to-know basis to those people who might need to become involved in the preparation of the briefing for the President, dey were also to be advised that no actions were to be taken on the basis of the information.
U-2 photograjfay of 29 August confirms extensive Soviet nUitary deliveries to Cube, in recent veefcs.
Surfacetoair zdssile sites, guided zdsaile teats, sad additional land arpazjents wen c observed* 2.
One probable assembly area has been identified and SAM equipment has been located at one additional site.
A* The saall. amount of permanent construction at these sites and the speed of the work indicate the p r ogr aa is proceeding on a crash basis.
Soviet personnel doubtless vill nan the sites for at least the 9 to IS months vhile Cubans are being 3.
Ihe one area of SAM activity in Ctrlente province probably will be followed by several others In the vicinity.
Defector and clandestine reports from Las villas province indicate that at least two sites will be located there, but no confirmation or definite locations thus far. m:* 1 m SLCSb T 35 11.
B* Uie pattern nov emerging suggests as many as 2k sites may eventually ""be set up — enough to ""blanket the entire Island* fc.
At least 8 Kbmrclass missile boats have been delivered to Cuba In recent weeks.
A* Ebese PT-like boats carry two missile launchers each, with the radar guided missile effective against surface targets to ranges of between 15 and IT miles.
B Some Cuban naval personnel have received training in the USSR, but it is not known if this included Komar training.
C OJiese boats are in addition to 13 or more torpedo boats and 6 submarine chasers delivered by the USSR earlier this year.
Die photography shows that current deliveries to Cuba also contain land a rm am ent s, including tanks and possibly self-propelled guns.
B Dae photography of 29 August turned up the highest number of MIG aircraft yet noted, some 37.
Total mrnher of military or allltaryrelated ahipaents -to Cuba since the current deliveries bega n in zaio-July nay be as high as 65* 2.
Routine Soviet deliveries of econcnic aid and trade goods are being zaade largely an Vestem ships.
B At least 1,700 Soviet nilitary technicians arrived in Cuba in late July and early August in connection vtth these military activities.
C At least 1,300 oare Soviets are arriving unannounced this veekj no reports an their activities so far.
Action Generated by Dd Cable s^pNjg^^fc on ceriiing Cuban Low-Level Photography a5au5ensrve Weapons 1.
Based upon your proposal of Saturday, 25 August, that RF-101's be used over Cuba, General Carter asked General Lemnitzer on 27 August about the possibility of low-level photography using RF-101 or F8U aircraft.
At that time General Lemnitzer indicated that something probably could be dug up.
General Carter informed USIB at the 29 August meeting of his conversation with General Lemnitzer.
At the Special Group Meeting the following day, General Lemnitzer raised the issue and said that use of RF -101 or F8U aircraft flown by United States pilots would be feasible from the military point of view.
General Carter pressed the point by indicating that other types of photography did not give sufficient detail and precise identification of certain types of equipment.
After some discussion, the Group agreed to take cognizance of this matter and requested it be reopened at an appropriate time when specific targets and information needs could be identified.
This freeze continued until Saturday, 1 September, when the information was extended slightly further to the working analysts.
General Carter informed Secretary Gilpatric on 1 September that the General and&ari Kaysen agreed a full readout was necessary and that some low-altitude flights were needed to pinpoint the sites.
Not until Tuesday, 4 September, did the President announce the presence of a missile defense system in Cuba.
USIB was brought up to date in executive session at its 7 September meeting on information concerning the SA-2 sites, the new unknown site at Banes, ahcl also the freezing atmosphere of the White House.
General Carter requested all members to advise their principals and asked also to be alerted immediately if NSA came up with further information.
My hunch is we might face prospect of Soviet short-range surfaceto-surface missiles of portable types in Cuba which could command important targets in Southeast U S. and possibly Latin America and the Caribbean areas.
General Carter, as related above and follows, had already urged use of RF-101's relative to your ""hunch"" about missiles.
General Carter recollects showing your cable to Mr Bundy the following day, Saturday afternoon.
There is no evidence that the information was passed outside of the Agency, presumably because it was a reaffirmation of a position you had already taken before Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, General Taylor and Messrs.
On 8 September, upon learning COMOR made Cuba targets available to JRC for possible RF-101 coverage, General Carter instructed Mr Reber to check with Colonel Steakley to determine when JRC would seek Special Group approval.
Appears to me quite possible measures now being taken are for purpose of ensuring secrecy of some offensive capability such as MRBM's to be installed by Soviets after present phase completed and country secured from over -flights.
Suggest BNE study motives behind these defensive measures which even seem to exceed those provided most satellites.
General Carter sent an action memorandum on 10 September to the DD/I quoting this passage and asked the BNE to undertake the necessary analysis.
The response said that BNE ""still persuaded that costly crash operation to install SA-2's is reasonably explained by other than desire to hide later build-up and the Soviets likely to regard advantage of major offensive build-up not equal to dangers of U S. intervention.
The events of 10 September have already been chronicled in my separate memorandum.
However, it -was also this date that General Carter sent a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense calling further need to conduct tactical reconnaissance of Cuba, particularly the facility near Banes, indicating that the site would require in the near future photography of a larger scale than acquired by a and recommending that SecDef initiate necessary action to provide for employment of this tactical-type reconnaissance. -341 12.
On 13 September you cable < ^^ ^^^^^^ ah rour views of the importance of going ahead with s ecur ing ' r eiea s eof Cuban prisoners.
The following day , at the Special Group meeting, Colonel Steakley outlined capabilities for low-level coverage of certain targets in Cuba.
It was noted that the Secretary of Defense did not wish this operation considered further until the results of Agency reconnaissance in the same area were available.
Further conclusion was thus deferred until the next week's meeting, although Elder's memorandum for the record reveals that General Carter pushed hard to keep the Group disposed toward a favorable consideration later.
On 16 September you again cabled extensive comments on the Cuban situation making the point that we must carefully study the prospect of MRBM's in Cuba.
The DD/I's response, contained in a cable to you on 18 September, stated that an introduction of MRBM's was unlikely because of the risk of U S. intervention.
At the USIB meeting of 19 September, General Carter, in discussing terms of what would be necessary if a complete SA-2 defense would make use of the U-2 extremely hazardous if not impossible, again stated a d e s i r eto u sgS^~ * 0 1 1 s over Cuba.
He also said that he thought use of a^^^^ ^^ ^drone over Cuba could be justified to the Special Group,^raamgP^Ve cannot put a stop to collection; otherwise, the President would never know when the point of decision was reached.
After its use over Kamchatka, was disapprove^ General Carter uxged its possible use against Cuba and State appeared enthusiastic.
Ti^m to the DD/B^as signing them respon sibility ""within CIA also CIA responsiiS^en^recoSSssance operations against Cuban targets and for presentation of these OA operations to the Special Group after appropriate Agency and Community coordination, 11 17.
During this period, poor weather resulted in no exploitable take from U-2 operations* The Agency had made an operational determination that none of the four flights which evolved from the 10 September meeting would be made unless weather along the flight routes was less than 25% overcast.
The first of the four flights was made on 26 September; the last on 7 October.
The peripheral flights turned up additional SAM sites and coastal defense cruise -missile sites, but that is about all.
Conclusions of the Cuban SNIE, approved by USIB on 19 September, were cabled to you that day.
It would indicate a far greater willingness to increase the level of risk in United States -Soviet relations than the Soviet Union has displayed thus far, and consequently would have important policy implications with respect to other areas and other oroblems in EastWest relations. "" -3mm 43 12.
The following day, 20 September, you cabled I suggesting a most careful consideration of the conclusion introduction of offensive missiles was unlikely.
It had already been endorsed by the Intelligence Community and released.
KNCCHE O/DCX ™ #■> «■» •* S SEPTEMBER 1962 CLASSIFIED MESSAGE C ""PAGE i cr 5 TOUTING TO il CCNFt DIRECTOR CCI 1-2 4 S/C >4 EYES ONLY 1 3| ' ~.r'J ROUTINE CXJT 7iJ5S7 PRIORITY ISfO ROM CAT cnc D « XXJT74587 35013 1.
The following is a reconstruction of the reasons for the meeting at the White House in Mr Mc George Buddy's office on 10 September 1962 at approximately 5:45m., and a report cn '-hat transpired at that meeting.
This memorandum is based upon discus sio with Mr Parrott of th e White House , General Carter, Dr.
BBBB recor< * s that at approximately 10:00 on the morning of 10 bepr either he received a telephone call from Mr Parrott passing on a request made by Mr Bundy on behalf of the Secretary of State.
Mr Parrott indicated that Mr Bundy desired an answer within a half hour.
Mr McMahon immediately contacted zhe Cn air man of COMOR which was in session at that moment, and they agreed to provide a response as quickly as possible.
Mr Parrott called a secon time to advise Mr McMahon that Mr Roger Kilsman had advised that 61 21. would accept the responsibility for providing the answers to the Secretary of State, and that he had scheduled a meeting that afternoon with Mr James Reber, the Chairman of COMOR, in order to obtain the answers, 4.
Mr Rusk asserted that although the information was needed, everything should be done to minimize the risk element and avoid a third incident.
He urged that the routes be so designed as to have the U-2 f s over the Island the minimum possible time, and there was general discussion on the desirability of avoiding the SAM sites.
The Secretary of State also made the point that he did not wish to have overflights mixed with peripheral flights, as he wished to maintain the right to fly over international waters with peripheral flights.
He raised the question as to whether some of the needed coverage couldn l t be obtained from peripheral flights with oblique photography.
The CIA representatives showed the members of the group a map of Cuba and the planned routes.
The SAM sites which had already been identified were pointed out and it was noted that the routes planned would avoid these sites.
It was noted, however, that there could be new sites which had not yet been identified along the planned routes.
The CIA representatives also stressed the importance of the intelligence requirements.
Bundy and Rusk indicated that the group would not object to the overflights provided there were no incidents and that the routes taken over the land mass of Cuba were the shortest possible and avoided the surface-to-air missile sites.
The minutes of this meeting were prepared on the next day by Mr Tom Parrott who did not attend the meeting.
WfOt DIRECTOR DC1 1-2 S/C 3 -* HRITY EYES ONL ROUTING DEFERRED ROUTINE SIS CEN PRIORITY OPERATIONAL IMMEDIATE 0UT75SQ5 cm DiR 357^ 1.
TO THE WHITE HOUSE OR PENTAGON SITUATION ROOM -TONIGHT "" • BETWEEN 1700 AND 1800.
A review of all available evidence leads us to conclude it is highly likely that the suspect missile site near Banes , Cuba is a facility for launching cruise missiles against ship targets at fairly close ranges « 2.
It consists of two 30 foot rail launchers in revetments, each connected by cable to a Soviet Whiff tracking radar.
Ground support equipment consists of eight canvas-covered, missile-type trailers, two probable generators and electronic vans, and other general purpose vehicles.
Although our knowledge of Soviet cruise missiles is incomplete, we know of three systems which could fit i those facilities observed at Banes.
He have eliminated ; other operational Soviet cruise missile systems, with ranges from 1000 to 4000 nn, because their missiles probably would be too large for the Banes facility.
SS-N-2-a Komar class patrol craftlaunched cruise anti-ship homing missile, launched from inclined rails 25 to 30 feet long* With the Komar radar, the effective system range is 10 to 15 nm.
SS-C-1-the ""missile-in-a-bottle"", first shown in the 1961 Moscow 7 November parade.
This missile is launched from an inclined ramp within a tube mounted on a large four axle truck.
The Whiff radar seen at the ; site has not been noted with known cruise missile systems but could be used for target acquisition in this installation.
The fact that the site is near the coast suggests that the range of its missile is short; otherwise it could be located inland in a less vulnerable area.
It is located where short-range missiles could defend against seaborne assault on deep water ports in Nipe Bay south of Banes.
Because neither the SS-N-1 nor the SS-C-1 has sufficient range to hit any target in the United States, such missiles would fit this policy pat* tern.
If the analysis that the Banes missile site is a coastal defense installation is correct, it would follow that similar facilities may be set up at a number of other locations favorable for protecting beaches against amphibious attack.
We doubt that Cubans have been given sufficient training in the use of such missiles to allow them to have operational control over the sites.
It seems likely that Soviet technical training personnel would be needed for some time to come and would be available for operating the installation in time of crisis.
Their output is being sent to the Soviet Bloc and is equivalent to 20 percent of Soviet production.
The more important of these two plants is on the bay protected by the Banes site.
CONTRAST UNQUOTE BETWEEN DEFENSIVE AID TO CUBA AND United States MILITARY BASES SURROUNDING BLOC/ 2.
IKUJ1KC OfflCfl.'COOIOINAIIXC otucit* REPRODUCTION 3Y OTHER THAN THE ISSUING 0.
HOWEVER BELIEVE WE MUST GIVE THOSE MAKING DECISION OUR BEST ESTIMATE OF POSSIBLE DEVELOPMENTS AM) ALTERNATIVE SITUATIONS WHICH MIGHT EVCLVE AM) UNEXPECTEDLY CONFRONT US. . . t END Cf VZSSAGZ Reverse Blank 79 29.
AS 50TED IH 85-2 , EOEEVBB, PHWfflT SEATS OF COBAK XOCSQKT XS TEST BAD AHD EDBSTAffHAL UHUHM WILL BS ISSLAZSD TJSTTL AP3XR 19^3* 2.
SHIS 85-3 K^g-yfB XE&S *™>g XS A HUEEE C30CHD IH W HI CH MBilV S OR CgF SSI TC — CEAHAC3XB Or BDCCUXIP IS A IfiHSB OP iH'IWHKfgfATTflff* VAEICCS ALTERHA3IVES ULUSIHC OfflCtl COQIOtKATIHC QFFlCttS REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUING OfHCP IS PROHIBITED. officii 83 30.
REPRODUCTION BY OTHER THAN THE ISSUJNG""OFFICE IS PROHIBITED? .•• ■>'gw'no.
Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62 ""The Military Buildup in Cuba,"" 19 September 1962 SPECIAL NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE ESTIMATE NUMBER 85-3-62 The Military Buildup in Cuba 19 September 1962 91 THE MILITARY BUILDUP IN CUBA THE PROBLEM To assess the strategic and political significance of the recent military buildup in Cuba and of the possible future development of additional military capabilities there.
CONCLUSIONS A We believe that the USSR values its position in Cuba primarily for the political advantages to be derived from it, and consequently that the main purpose of the present military buildup in Cuba is to strengthen the Communist regime there against what the Cubans and the Soviets conceive to be a danger that the United States may attempt by one means or another to overthrow it.
At the same time, they evidently recognize that the development of an offensive military base in Cuba might provoke United States military intervention and thus defeat their present purpose.
Their political significance is that, in conjunction with the Soviet statement of 11 September, they are likely to be regarded as ensuring the continuation of the Castro regime in power, with consequent discouragement to the opposition at home and in exile.
The threat inherent in these developments is that, to the extent that the Castro regime thereby gains a sense of security at home, -SECRET 1 92 33, it will be emboldened to become more aggressive in fomenting revolutionary activity in Latin America.
A decision to provide such weapons will continue to depend heavily on the Soviet estimate as to whether they could be introduced without provoking a United States military reactionD The USSR could derive considerable military advantage from the establishment of Soviet medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba, or from the establishment of a Soviet submarine base there.
It would indi cat e a far greater wilhTifmess tn increase the level qfrisk inJJg^oviet relations than the _US g3 h** di^ Wy^^i£J^r^smd consequently _ would have importantj)olicyjm^ ^otEer""aTeas and oS er^Pcohl ems in East-West relatio ns.
Many Latin Americans will fear and resent a Soviet military intrusion into the Hemisphere, but will regard the problem as one to be met by the United States and not their responsibility.
We estimate the chances are better now than they were at Punta del Este to obtain the necessary two-thirds OAS majority for sanctions and other steps short of direct military action aimed at Cuba.
If it became clear that the USSR was establishing an ""offensive"" base in Cuba, most Latin American governments would expect the United States to eliminate it, by whatever means were necessary, but many of them would still seek to avoid direct involvement rrrnrr Reverse Blank 93 34.
The agents reported this information as soon as they were able, but in most cases had to depend on secret writing for communication.
Hence, there was a lag of several days at least before their information became available.
Refugee reports were delayed considerably longer for other, and uncontrollable, reasons — the tine of the ^individual 's decision to leave Cuba, his discovery of means for doing so, and his delivery to an interrogation center.
Many of then, because of the tine-lags noted above, did not arrive in Washington until after 14 October, and some are still coning in.
Nevertheless, by about 1 October, the San Cristobal area had been pinpointed as a suspect MRBM site and photographic confirmation had been requested.
This represents a considerable technical achievements To understand why, it is again necessary to backtrack in time.
Since the moment of Castro's triumphal march into Havana, the Intelligence Community had been flooded with reports of Soviet weapons shipments and missile installations in Cuba.
There were several hundred such reports, claiming the presence of everything from -small arms to ICBils, before August 1960,e., before the USSR had supplied Cuba with any weapons at all.
On 15 February 1962 an interagency -interrogation ""center was established by CIA at Opa Locka, near Miami, to handle Cuban refugees and improve the quality of intelligence collected from them.
Tne establishment of Opa Locka coincided with a sharp drop in reports of missile activity"" received in Washington/ When the .defensive phase of the Soviet buildup began, the volume of Opa Locka reporting rose very rapidly, and provided good information on the types of equipment coming in, on the use of Soviet personnel and on the security precautions imposed by the Soviets on this operation.
In all cases, NPIC either lacked the ""necessary coverage or made a negative finding.
An example of its procedures is the handling of targets in the Sagua La Grande v , area.
Readout of the 29 August coverage showed an SA-2 site near Sagua La Grande which apparently was the. basis for the reported activity there, and the target card was changed to show a confirmed SA-2 site.
It should be noted that knowledge that this site was in the area could have led analysts to misinterpret any subsequent reports of MRBM activity as part of the SAH development , but in fact no such reports were received.
The CIA analytic"" apparatus , .however, recognized and correlated the first authentic reports of MHBil equipment ever to be received in Washington, and took action upon them.
This report, which was disseminated by CIA on 21 September, contained sufficient accurate detail to alert intelligence analysts. f .f An observation on 17 September ox a convoy moving toward the San Cristobal area.
Tnis information, received on 27 September, dovetailed, in many respects with the earlier report.
The arrival of the second report led CIA analysts to a tentative conclusion that the two observers had in fact seen the sane convoy,-^ and that there was a possibility of the SS-4 identification, being genuine.
OXTKO. th;j is UN EVALUATED ^fobmation. scjrce graoikgs ass definitive, appsaisal of content is tentative.
September 1962 CENTRAL IN7SUJGSNCE AGENCY . eL COUSTTf Caha SUBJECT Itocrihle Kissilc Site in Havana.
PAGES g tws ts UN EVALUATED exk>xvatx>n I «XttC& cu*aa rational, Eavana, -when I observed and courted 20 Soviet trunks tcviss 20 Ions trailers going vsst cn Avenida 23~e truck convey vas preceded oy a Jeep containing ailitianen. £s tresis vera driven try Soviets la civilian «k£hes — short-sleeved shirts fci varices colors.
As the track convey seared its destination at Csnpo l£bertad, the rrfHtln.
Jeep vas vaved off, eni the Soviet tracks end trailers proceeded into Cerpo libcrtad.
Ihc trucks appeared to oe described these ""boxes contained. 6x5, 7i»ir-157j canvas -covered • atified then fron photogrs^is I Tn the fccika of the trucks of various oizes.
I do not knowi&at h* The trailers, the longest I have ever seen in Cuba, verc tvo-oodo, four-reeled.
Tza the tr.ll era of the r-iecile it locked as if the hottcn and tvo sides cf the nissile had a vooden franc, niri tko entire riftr*!vas canvas -covered.
It locked as if the tail era of tie canvas silhouetted the tvo top firs of the f ccr fins of the Kiasile.
She tcp cf the canvas -covered nissile vas taller than the top of the trcck-tcvins it.
Since it vas dark, I could not sec -who the drivers of the truclto vere.
V 3» She trucks vere followed ""by citfit Soviet-cuilt flatbed-type trailers 1 epproydEatcly 22 feet lone, seven of vhich vere carrying vhat looked liko j In^e tubes extending over the entire length of the flatbed end completely '{ covered vith canvas.
AG took sharp exception stating the Special Group had not withheld approval on any specified actions to his knowledge, but to the contrary had urged and insisted upon action by the Lansdale operating organization.
There followed a sharp exchange which finally was clarifying inasmuch as it resulted in a reaffirmation of a determination to move forward.
In effect it seemed to be the consensus that phase two in 41. as approved on September 6, was now outmoded, that more dynamic action was indicated, that hesitancy about overflights must be reconsidered , that actions'which could be attributed to indigenous Cubans would not be important or very effective, and that a very considerable amount of attribution and ""noise"" must be expected.
As a result, General Lansdale was instructed to give consideration to new and more dynamic approaches, the specific items of sabotage should be brought forward immediately and new ones conceived, that a plan for mining harbors should be developed and presented, and the possibility of capturing Castro forces for interrogation should be studied.
With respect to overflights, were instructed to prepare and present to the Special Group on next Tuesday at a special meeting alternate recommendations for overflights.
These to include the use of U-2s on complete sweeps (as contrasted with peripheral or limited missions), the use of firefly drones, the use of 101s or other reconnaissance planes onx low level, intermediate level, and high level missions, and other possible reconnaissance operations.
Consideration was given to stating publicly that we propose to overfly Cuba in the interest of our own security and the security of the Western Hemisphere, and then to proceed even though doing so involved risk.
It was the consensus that we could not accept restrictions which would foreclose gaining all reasonable knowledge of military installations in Cuba.
During the meeting McCone reviewed the earlier meeting with General kansdale, and pointed out to the group that this meeting clarified General Lansdale's authority over the entire MONGOOSE operation and that the CIA organization was responsive to his policy and operational guidance , and this was thoroughly understood.
Consideration was given to the existing guidelines and it was the consensus that the August 1st guidelines for phase two were in« adequate and new guidelines must be considered.
Me Cone reviewed detail* of the Donovan negotiation*, discussions with the President, Attorney General* Eisenhower, the decisions not to approach Congressional leadership, the discussion with Senator Jayits, and the final report from Donovan.
McCone stated there was a feeling in CIA and Defense that the ""activist policy"" which founded the Mongoose operation was gone and that while no specific operational activities had been the amount of 1 'noise"" from minor incidents such as the sugar* die students firing on the Havana Hotel and other matters and the extreme caution expressed by State had led to this conclusion.
More importantly, however, the decisions to restrict U-2 flight* had placed the United States Intelligence Community in a position where It could not report with assurance the development of offensive capabilities in Cuba.
McCone stated he thought this a probability rather than a mere possibility* Bundy took issue stating that he felt the Soviets would not go that far, that he was satisfied mat no offensive capability would be installed la Cuba because of its world-wide effects and therefore seemed relaxed over the fact that the Intelligence Community cannot produce hard information onthis important subject.
McCone said mat Bundy 4 * viewpoint was reflected by many in the Intelligence Community, perhaps a majority, but he just did not agree and furthermore did not think the United States could afford to take such a risk.
Bundy then philosophized on Cuba stating that he felt that our policy was not clear, our objectives not determined and therefore our efforts were not productive.
Bundy was not critical of either or of the TansrUU operations'* It was obvious that he was not m sympathy with a more active role such as those discussed at 5412 on Thursday as he felt none of them would bring Castro down nor would they particularly enhance XL S position of world leadership.
McCono la reporting on tha discussions at Thursday's 5412 moating repeated tha views of tha President and expressed by tha Attorney General it waa agreed that tha whole Government policy with reference to Cuba must be resolved promptly aa basic to farther actions on our part.
Bandy 1 a views ware that wa should either make a judgment that we would have to go in militarily or alternatively we would have to learn to live with Castro* and his Cuba and adjust our policies accordingly.
Bundy stated that Adenauer did not express the concern of the U S. policy reflected by Eisenhower and reported in the memorandum.
Bundy rejected the idea of regular NSC meetings stating that every President has to organise his Government aa he desires and that the Eisenhower pattern was not necessarily adaptable to the Kennedy type of administration.
It waa agreed that we would have a fartheT discussion over tha waskand.
Implicatioiis of an Announcement by the President that the United States would Conduct Overhead Reconnaissance of Cuba, and of the Actual Reconnaissance Thereafter NOTE: The following are the conclusions reached by a panel of members of the Board of National Estimates and of the ONE Staff 1« The President's announcement would be vigorously condemned by the Soviets and the Cubans as evincing an intention to commit acts of international aggression.
The weight of publicly expressed opinion in the free world would probably condemn the announcement as threatening a marked increase in international tensions.
Having international law on their side, they would hope to achieve a UN condemnation of the United States for acts threatening peace.
The UN situation would be complicated, and it is possible that in one way or another the United States could avert a formal resolution.
Nevertheless, it is highly unlikely that the United States would find much support among the assembled nations.
The USSR would not consider that the United States announcement created such, a dangerous situation as to require it to reduce its support of Castro.
Moreover, it would judge that, in political terms, it could ill afford to make any reduction at such a time.
On the other hand, we do not believe that the announcement, or succeeding overflights, would cause the USSR to alter its Cuban policy in a direction which i n cr eased the provocation offered to the US,g., the provision of mediumrange missile bases.
In reacting publicly, the Soviets would probably reaffirm their commitment to Cuba's defense, though they would probably not make the commitment more specific or binding.
We think it unlikely that the Soviets would retaliate directly with any major moves against the Western position in Berlin.
In confronting the Allies with local crises which raise the level of risk in Berlin, they generally prefer to choose a time when United States opinion is not highly agitated over other EastWe st issues.
The Soviets and Cubans would make every effort to shoot down any reconnaissance vehicle that came over Cuba.
If they succeeded in doing so, the tensions would be somewhat increased, though the international political effects of the shootdown would not in themselves be as great as if it had occurred without the prior Presidential announcement.
II October 1962 4 1 October 11, 1962 MEMORANDUM ON JX)NOYAN PROJECT Immediately 4ft or my die cue s ion with the Cannon Committee , I went to the White Houae and explained to the Preeident and McGeorge Bundy the position* taken by Ford and Mahon, as covered in separate memorandum prepared by Mr Warner # The President made the judgment that we should proceed with the negotiations , recognizing there would be some political cons eons nee s and criticisms, but he, the President, was willing to accept this as a fact.
I then showed the President photographs of the crates which presumably would carry, or were carrying, XL 28s, Soviet medium bombers , and were deck loaded on a ship which had arrived in Havana in the early days of October « The President requested that such information be withheld at least until after elections as if the Information got into the press, a new and more violent Cuban issue would be injected into the campaign and this would seriously affect his independence of action.
McCone stated that these particular photographs could not be restricted as they had been disseminated to the Intelligence Community and several Joint and specified commands, such as CINCLANT, SAC, NORAD, and others and would be reported in the CIA Bulletin on Thursday morning.
The President then requested that the report be worded to indicate a probability rather than an actuality because In the final analysis we Only saw crates, not the bombers themselves.
The President further requested that all future information be suppressed.
It was then agreed that future information would be disseminated to members of USIB, with appropriate instructions that only those responsible for giving the President advice be given the information.
It was therefore agreed that the USXB members would be instructed to restrict the information to their personal offices and fully and currently inform the Chiefs of Staff, the Chairman, the Service Secretaries and the Secretary of Defense* Similar re* strictive action would be taken in State.
Therefore all those involved in ""giving advice to the President"" would be fully informed.
However operational divisions and the joint and specified commands would not be informed at this time, except at the direction of the above people who are receiving the information.
At this point the President mentioned that ""we'll have to do something drastic about Cuba"" and I am anxiously looking forward to the JCS operational plan which is to be presented to me next week* McCone effected the above instructions by calling Mr Cline* who was unavailable, and then Mr Sheldon who agreed to prepare a procedure for review on Thursday morning.
McCone then called the Attorney General and advised him of his talk with the Cannon Committee* Tne Attorney General had no particular comment.
At six o'clock McCone received a report from Houston that Donovan had gone into a meeting at five o'clock.
At 11(15 General Eisenhower called McCone stating he was sorry a meeting could not be arranged, he was leaving very early the following morning for Gettysburg* McCone reported that negotiations were in progress and he also reported objections stated by several members of Congress.
Positive action might be indicated and then he said there had been two instances where action was warranted but had not been taken.
Eisenhower did not elaborate; however, I know from previous discussions he feels that when Castro embraced Communism publicly and announced publicly his allegiance to Moscow, we had then a reason to act militarily and if we had chosen to so act, such action would have been defendable.
On Thursday morning McCone reported by telephone to Mr Kennedy, reviewing the Eisenhower discussion and stating that he, McCone, was concerned over Donovan's safety in view of the rash of publicity, most particularly the Herald Tribune article, and that he had instructed that contact be made with Donovan and that if things were not proceeding satisfactorily and a conclusion to the negotiations along the lines agreed in sight, than Donovan should come out.
McCone stated he was not so sure and that he therefore concluded to bring Donovan out unless things were going well.
With reference to the political impli c ati o ns, McCone re c a l led that he had told the President and the AG that he would take all, or his full share of responsibility, that ha wished ths AG to bear this in mind as the position taken in this respect by Mr McCone in the first conversation after his return from Europe still stood.
U-2 Overflights of Cuba, 29 August through 14 October 1962 The August 29th flight flew over most of the island and photographed much of it.
The photography revealed that eight SAM sites were under construction in the western half of the island.
The flight also discovered an installation at Banes in the eastern end of the island that was not familiar to the photo interpreters.
Subsequent research by the interpreters, comparing the August 29th photography with that of two similar installations recently noted elsewhere, had by September 14th enabled them to identify the installation as a cruise missile site.
The finding of SA-2's in Cuba on the August 29th flight presented us with a new problem in planning U-2 fbghts over Cuba.
Today, there is general acceptance of the fact that we are carrying out overhead reconnaissance of Cuba and that we will continue to do so as long as our national security requires it.
This almost universal approval of U-2 flights over Cuba is an attitude that has existed only since the middle of last October.
Pr*or to the finding of offensive ballistic missiles In Cuba, quite a different public attitude existed.
Within the intelligence community there was always at the backs of our minds the knowledge that in the event of a mishap we would have to be able to explain, convincingly and in detail, the justification — in terms of the highest priority intelligence needs-for having undertaken the mission.
Elsewhere in Government and among persons whose stated views strongly influence public opinion there were serious reservations regarding the use of the U-2.
There were expressions of extreme concern from some pubi c leaders over the increase in tension that might result from overflights, and others voiced the opinion that such flights were illegal or immoral.
The vulnerability of the U-2 to Soviet SA-2 systems and the discovery of those systems in Cuba contributed further complicating factors in weighing risks against the need for hard intelligence.
The situation as of September 1962 must be viewed against this background of universal repugnance, or, at the very least, extreme uneasiness regarding overflights.
Because of the widespread apprehension over use of the U-2, we took particular care to ensure that each flight produced the maximum of information of value to the entire intelligence community.
Each track was drawn to cover high priority targets agreed upon by an inter -agency group known as the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance, a committee of the Un ted States Intelligence Board.
It is designed for one purpose -long flights at very high altitudes and at relatively low speeds.
Therefore, before we committed one to a mission we wanted to be absolutely certain that the intelligence need was great enough to justify the risk of loss of the pilot and aircraft.
The Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance was the intelligence community's vehicle for making the target studies.
All CIA overflights were programmed through the medium of the CIA Monthly Forecast.
Because of the need to husband our resources and to ensure that highest quality photography was obtained from each U-2 flight, it was the practice not to launch a mission unless weather over most of the critical targets was predicted to be less than 25 per cent overcast.
After reviewing the result of the August 29th mission, the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance, in undeniably good judgment, recommended that the next mission should cover those areas of the island which were not photographed on the August 29th flight and that particular attention should be paid to the then unidentified site at Banes.
It was important to learn whether the Soviets had made a limited deployment of SA-2' s to Cuba or whether an island-wide defense was being built.
The next mission was successfully flown on schedule on September 5th over the eastern and central portions of the island.
Three additional SAM sites were detected in the central portion of the island.
Unfortunately, the flight encountered heavy cloud cover over eastern Cuba.
General Carter requested the f Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance to consider the kind of information that could be obtained thus.
The Committee met on September first and third and reported its views on what might be accomplished through low-level flights.
As a result of the Committee's deliberations and because of the heavy cloud cover encountered over eastern Cuba on the September 5th mission, General Carter, on September 10th, 1962, addressed a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense recommending that the.
Secretary initiate the necessary action to provide for employment of tactical-type reconnaissance against Banes, which was still unidentified, or other targets identified by the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance as being suitable for low-level reconnaissance.
The Secretary of Defense felt it preferable not to mount a low-level reconnaissance of Banes until the results of CIA high-level reconnaissance became available.
As noted in the first paragraph, continuing research had by September 14th identified the Banes installation as a cruise missile site.
The Secretary of State expressed concern at CIA's planned coverage of Cuba, involving extensive peripheral coverage as well as two legs directly over Cuban air space, all in one flight.
He said that he had no objection to the peripheral parts and, in fact, thought it useful to continue to establish our right to fly over international waters.
On the other hand, he recognized the necessity of obtaining vertical coverage of the Isle of Pines and the eastern portion of Cuba.
He felt, however, that it was unwise to combine extensive overflying of international waters with actual overflights.
Two flights were to be wholly peripheral, involving no land overflight.
One was to cover the Isle of Pines, and the other was to overfly the eastern end of the island targeted against Banes and Guantanamo.
There was a three-week period from the 5th to the 26th of September during which only one flight was flown , and it yielded no useable photography.
We finally acquired a moderately complete mosaic of the SA-2 defense of Cuba by piece -meal photography search carried out in late September and early October.
The few periods of acceptable weather were so fleeting that they, kad passed before flights could be mounted.
The weather was checked for a possible mission every day beginning on September 6th, There was a oneor twoday period around the middle of the month when the forecasts were moderately favorable, A flight to the northeast was scheduled for the 16th.
It went to the final briefing on the 15th, but was delayed for 24 hours because of weather and was cancelled when the weather continued unfavorable.
Planning for a flight over the Isle of Pines was under way on September 15th.
The mission was flown on September 17th, but by then the weather had turned sour and no useable photography was acquired.
Another mission was under consideration between September 18th and 21st, but the weather was bad and the mission was cancelled.
The mission to cover the Guantanamo and Banes areas was under consideration beginning 22 September.
On that date the mission was successfully flown and three SAM sites were discovered.
One of the four tracks was originally approved to cover only the Isle of Pines.
Mr McCone called Mr U Alexis Johnson on September 28th and got approval to include coverage of the Bay of Pigs area.
The SAM and the cruise missile sites at Siguanea on the Isle of Pines were discovered.
Two of the three remaining missions for September were considered during the period September 29th through October 2nd.
The next flight under consideration was that along the periphery of the southeastern coast.
It was briefed on October 4th and successfully flew the mission on the 5th.
The flight along the northeastern coast was successfully flown the next day.
The next step was to discover how far advanced the earlier SAM sites were.
This information could / be obtained only by taking the risk of overflying an SA-2 site that might be operational.
At an interdepartmental group meeting on October 4th, the DCI made a strong representation for extensive overflights of Cuba.
The group requestedg^^JjCS, and CIA to examine all alternative means of conducting aerial reconnaissance and to report back as soon as possible.
A meeting was called on October 9th to hear this report, and at this meeting the flight was planned which was actually flown on the 14th of October.
Additionally, from September 18th through October 2nd, agent and refugee reports dovetailed sufficiently to create a suspicion that there was something of unusual importance going on in a definite area west of Havana and that this unusual activity might be concerned with MRBM's.
These reports, however, were not of sufficient credibility to warrant their being used in intelligence publications.
On October 12th, operational control of U-2 overflights of Cuba was transferred to the Strategic Air Command of the United States Air Force.
The mission was successfully flown by SAC on October 14th over the suspect area west of Havana and near the SAM site thought most likely to be operational.
The flight was the first to discover the presence of MRBM's, As of October 16th, blanket authority was given for unrestricted overflights of Cuba.
Attached at Tab A is a summary of weather forecasts and the status of missions, 5 September through 14 October 1962.
IS October late, X wu informed that the latest readout from Cuban U-2 photography indicated Initial deployment of Medium Range Ballistic Missiles* I immediately authoriaed the dissemination of this information on a very limited needto -know basis to USIB members and their immediate commanders.
On Tuesday morning at 11:45 I attended an NSC Meeting at the White House which included the President, Secretary Rusk, Secretary Ball, Secretary Martin, Secretary McNamaxa, Secretary GUpatric, General Taylor, the Vice President, Secretary Dillon, the Attorney General, Mr McGeorge Bundy, and myself. made a preliminary briefing to the group as to what we thought we saw and Mr Lundahl and Mr Graybeal expanded thereon.
At the end of the intelligence portion of the briefing, the group went into general discussion.
Secretary Rusk was greatly disturbed about this new development but pointed out that Mr McCone had predicted such a possibility back in mid-August.
Perhaps we should get in touch with Castro through a third party and tell him it was now or never and that he was selling Cuba down the river by getting involved with Soviet missile bases; f • We should try to create maximum confusion and not worry too much about the noise levelHere he was referring to infiltration and sabotage efforts; We should review our policy on a provisional government and try to get all the various factions working togetherIn any event* we must keep Cuba isolated from the Free World although in doing so we must aot isolate ourselves* 3.
In the final analysis Mr* Rusk felt that we had to either make a quick surprise attack and knock out these bases or to lay on a heavy propaganda barrage in all areas which might cause a withdrawal.
Rusk stated that we could not in our thinking separate Berlin and other trouble areas in the world.
Mr Bundy pointed out that the Soviet decision must have been made early in the summer and that these missiles probably arrived in Cuba at about the time the President was making his policy statements.
Bundy thought there was a real possibility that Khrushchev may be confused or misled as to the temper of the American people and the intimate concern we all have over Cuba* 5.
Ha authorized ** many U-2 fltgfrf aa nasded to gat full, complete, 100% coverage of the island.
Ha asked for a report on the latest analysis of just what the *wiTiHTig toward Cuba is ux Latin American countries as wall as NATO as to any action the U S. might take; some unanswered questions on whether or not to surface the fact that we were making surveillance flights and whether or not to surface mis new information; also whether to precede any military action by some form of political pressure action; what would be the effect of military strikes, how long would it take to organize, how many sorties would be required, etc.
An n a Cheruiauit, widow of lie late General, at klOl Cathedral Avenue.
He said he had heard stories that CIA officers were alleging that intelligence on offensive nissile bases in Cuba had been available for several days before it was called to the attention of the President, fie asked ne to confirm thaf 1 was responsible for the analysis of this kind of intelligence and appropriate dissemination of it to higher authorities, and to tell him the facts in the case.
I told the President that I was responsible in CIA for substantive analysis of intelligence and the dissemination of current intelligence to the President and the National Security Council.
I said I could state categorically that the stories he had heard were untrue, since I was sure the mission with the first photography of the }&BU offensive bases was flown on lh October and it took approximately 2k hours for the film to be returned, processed, delivered to the National Photographic Interpretation Center and scanned by PI analysts.
I said I was sure the technical analysis did not turn up the evidence until late afternoon or early evening of 1$ October, that I myself heard of it first at that time, and that we completed the analysis before passing xhe information formally to the Vihite House onie morning of 16 October.
UUnder direct orders frca the President, given to me and General Carter at the .<hite House several weeks earlier when the possibility that the Banes c cast-defense niissile was a longer-range weapon, I had issued instructions to the Director, SPIC, to see that intelligence on new offensive Treasons in Cuba cane to ne as socn as analysis had identified the type of weapon and that absolutely no dissemination of this intelligence should be made without ^y approval.
Cm 15 Cctcber I spent all afternoon at the ooening session of the Cc^cnwealth-US Intelligence -fethcds Conference.
I do not know how long they had been waiting to see nie but it could not have been many minutes or they would have passed a message to me at the Conference Room.
The DCI had gone to the tfest Coast and General Carter was then at an informal reception for the Commonwealth conferees in the Executive Dining Room at the Headquarters building in LIcLean.
I was the host but delayed my arrival until 1815 to study this intelligence.
Upon arrival I called General Carter aside and advised him in broad terms of the intelligence.
I said it would take several hours to wrap up a definitive report with fully considered analysis.
General Carter said he was going to dinner with General Taylor and General Carroll and would let them know.
McGeorge Bundy for the Wiite House and he said he thought he might be at the dinner and would notify him there ♦ 6.
I assumed General Garter would have alerted the Pentagon adequately via JCS and DIA but that he might have missed the ""flbite House* Accordingly I called LCr.
HcGeorge BunoY, found he had not seen General Carter, and double-talked the information to him in broad terms.
He was very clear as to the import despite being short on facts due to the problem of security over the phone.
I then called Roger Hilsman of the State Department and conveyed the same information to him.
I had more difficulty indicating securely to him that I really meant UEEftPs rather than aircraft or other equipment we had anticipated, but the light finally dawned and he called the Secretary of State to pass on the word.
Early the next morning, 16 October, at about 0830, I talked again on the phone to Mr Bundy.
Bundy' s invitation I went immediately to his office, having cleared this with General Carter, who had another engagement and instructed me to follow through on the ""White House formal notification.
If I rezezber correctly, Alex Jc'nnscn also cane in to get the briefing.
Bundy said that he had arranged an 1100 neeting with the President to fill bin in and consider tne United States policy problems involved.
At 0930 General Carter arrived* I shenred bin the nenorandun ire had prepared, discussed the evidence, and adrised bin Graybeal could support bin fully *ith analytical back-up.
I said I felt the Acting SCI should handle the briefing of the President, with which General Carter agreed; that he probably did not need ne, with which he sonewhat reluctantly agreed; and that senebedy had better get back to see that the DCI cn the VTest Coast got the word, and continue research and analysis on the Cuban nissile problea — frith all of which General Carter heartily agreed.
At 2:30 this afternoon, the Attorney General convened in his office a seating on Operation KO2JG0CS3 consisting of General Lansdale and Colonel Patcbell, General Johnson of the Joint Staff, Robert Hurwitch of State , Hewson Ryan of USIA, and the under si#ied« 2.
He indicated that there had been noticeable improvement during the year /^ the collection of intelligence but that other actions had failed to influence significantly the course of events in Cuba.
He spoke of the weekly meetings of top officials on this problem and again noted the small accomplishments despite the fact that Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, General Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, and he personally had all been charged by the President with finding a solution.
He traced the history of General Lansdale 1 s personal appointment by the President a year ago • The Attorney General then stated that in view of this lack of progress, he was going to give Operation MONGOOSE more personal attention.
In order to do this, he will hold a meeting every morning at 0930 with the MONGOOSE operational respresentatives from the various agencies (Lansdale, Harvey, Hurwitch, Ryan, and General Johnson) • 3.
He obviously did not like the earlier memorandum, since he felt it showed no n pash a in getting on vith the acts of sabotage.
I defined ""sensible"" in Cuban terminology these days as meaning an action which would contribute to the liberation of their country, another way of saying that the United States, perhaps in conjunction with other Latin countries, would bail them out militarily* fly point was specifically echoed by Hewson Byan.
The Attorney General' s rejoinder was a plea for new ideas of things that could be done against Cuba.
The meeting concluded with the reaffirmation by the Attorney General of his desire to hold a meeting each day, beginning tomorrow.
Director of Central Intelligence Director., Defense Intelligence Agency SUBJECT : Additional Information Mission 3101 1.
An examination of photography from Mission 3101 dated 14 October 1962 has revealed an MR3M Launch Site and two new military encampments located along the southern edge of the Sierra Del Rosario in west central Cuba.
The Launch Site and one of the encampments contains a total of at least 14 canvas -covered missile trailers measuring approximately 67 feet in length and 9 feet in width.
The overall length of the trailers including the tow bar is approximately 80 feet.
The other encampment contains vehicles and tents with no missile trailers observed in search to date.
The westernmost position has. a missile tractor/trailer aligned with the erector.
Other equipment includes 18 trailers/vans, approximately 60 miscellaneous vehicles , 18 large tents, 22 small tents, 4 ""buildings under construction and open storage.
Equipment includes at least 6 canvas covered nissile trailers, approximately 75 vehicles and 18 tents.
Bohlen, Amb. inompson, Amo, ACaeson, oecty. &a±l t Mr Sorenson, Mr Martin, Mr Johnson 9:30m.
Meeting at State Department with study group 19 October 1962 Friday 11:00m.
Ball seemed to feel military action would throw the NATO allies in disarray and permit Britain and France to separate from us on Berlin policy.
Stated Kohl or discuss lone with Khrushchev did not fit in with Soviet action in Cuba.
Suggested we might give Khrushchev an ""out"" on the grounds that he does not know what is going on in Cuba and discussed various types of action ranging from a limited military strike to minimise losses ton the calling of a Summit conference.
During the discussion Taylor and Ball speculated as to whether this whole thing was not a ""mock up ft designed to draw out action by us. and that the war heads were not there.
MeNamara urged avoiding taking a position, considering all alternatives, with meetings this afternoon and this evening in preparation of final discussion with the President tomorrow.
Urged exploration of all facts and listed the following; About 50 or 60 MIG 17s and 19s now in Cuba and these apparently have no offensive capability.
One MIG 21 has been seen and a number of suspicious crates also seen indicating some MIG 21 capability and we do not know whether the MIG 21 has an offensive capability.
IL» 28 f s have been delivered Three MRBM sites under construction and can be ready in two weeks Warhead locations unknown; also unknown whether MRBM'i are nuclear or conventional.
McCone responded by reading numbered paragraphs 2, 3, and 4 of attached memorandum dated October 17th.
General Taylor and Thompson discussed political nature of problem including possibility of forcing settlement in Berlin and elsewhere Khrushchev wished show down on Berlin and this gives a show down issue.
Believes Khrushchev would be surprised to find we know about MRBMsj Thompson emphasised Khrushchev wants Berlih settlement but on his terms.
And will probably deny knowledge of Cuban situation but at any event would / Justify actions because of our missiles in Italy and Turkey.
Also Khrushchev recognises that action by would be devislve among our allies.
McNamara discussed many operational questions concerning the use of Soviet nuclear warheads in Cuba; how communications could be arranged; what authority was In the field.
Thompson believes Soviet nuclear warheads was under very tight control.
McCone reviewed recent Chlcadee ^/ reports, indicated considerable automony in hands of field commanders much mo re so than we have.
The establishment of medium range strike capability in Cuba by the Soviets was predicted by me in at least a dozen reports since the Soviet buildup was noted in early August.
Provide Cuba with an offensive or retaliatory power for use if attacked.
Establish a ""hall mark"" of accomplishment by other Latin American countries, most particularly Mexico, and other Central American countries within strike range of the United States.
The MRBM capability we have witnessed will expand and the defensive establishments to protect this capability likewise will be expanded.
There appears to me to be no other explanation for the extensive and elaborate air defense establishment.
In my opinion the missiles are Soviet, they will remain under Soviet operational control as do ours, they will be equipped with nuclear warheads under Soviet control (because conventional warheads would be absolutely ineffective), Cubans will supply most of the manpower needs with the Soviets permanently exercising operational command and control.
Nevertheless, there will be a substantial number of Soviets on site at all times.
The establishment of a ""trading position"" to force removal of United States overseas baaes^du^' T^l-J^ % To satisfy their ambitions in Latin America by this show of determination and courage against the American Imperialist.
This will increase tension everywhere and undoubtedly bring retaliation against United States foreign mi litary installations , where substantial United States casualties would result.
The situation cannot be toleratedHowever, the United States should not act without warning and thus be forced to live with a ""Pearl Harbor indictment"" for the indefinite future.
Give them 24 hours to commence dismantling and re* moval of MRBMs, coastal defense missiles, surface to air missiles, ILZEs and all other aircraft which have a dual defensive -offensive capability, including MIG 21s.
Whether .nilitary action should be taken prior to a warning to, or discussions with, Khrushchev and Castro.
Notification to or consultation with our allies, Including NATO, OAS, and others.
Effect on the ''balance of nuclear power equation* 1 of the MRBM installations in Cuba.
Three principal courses of action are open to us, and of course there are variations of each.
It was pointed out clearly that Western Europe, Greece, Turkey, and other countries had lived under the Soviet MRBMs for years; therefore, why should the United States be so concerned.
Resort to an all-out blockade which would probably require a declaration of war and to be effective would mean the interruption of all incoming shipping.
Strafing MRBM installations and air fields with MIGs. and plus all SAM sites and coastal missile sites. , , and above plus ail other significant military installations, none of which were identified.
If the response is unsatisfactory, pursuing a course of military action.
If the response is unsatisfactory, referring to the OAS and the United Nations prior to taking military action.
U) Warning to Khrushchev and Castro and if the response is unsatisfactory, convening Congress, seeking a declaration of war, and proceeding with an all-out blockade.
Strike militarily with no warning, the level of the military effort being dependent upon evolving circumstances.
In all probability this type of action would escalate into invasion * * ^cupation, although th« meeting was not agreed on this point.
Blockade with no warning and no advance notice such as a declaration of war, with the President depending upon existing Congressional resolutions for authority.
McCone memorandum, ""Brief Discussion with the President— 9:30m.— 17 October 1962"" Britf Discussion with the President 9:30m. 17 October 1962 Confirmed the situation and explored possible actions.
McCone referred to but did not recommend warnings as outlined in paragraph 7.
President seemed inclined to act promptly if at all, without warning, targeting on MRBM's and possibly airfields.
Stated Congressional Resolution gave him all authority he needed and this was confirmed by Bundy, and therefore seemed inclined to act.
Conversation with General Eisenhower Wednesday, 17 October 1962 At President Kennedy's request I called on General Eisenhower today at 12:00 o'clock.
President Kennedy had asked that I carefully avoid indicating any particular line of action as none had been agreed upon, and this was observed.
I briefed Eisenhower on ail aspects of the recent Cuban-Soviet build-up and showed him the U-2 pictures of three MRBM missile sites under development.
Eisenhower expressed no particular surprise indicating that he felt this offensive build-up would probably occur.
He then expressed criticism of the Bay of Pigs failure and also the fact that we did not respond more energetically when Castro publicly embraced Communism.
With respect to the current situation, Eisenhower felt that it would prove to be intolerable, that its purposes can not be clearly defined, and that** discussions » adamant demands to either Khrushchev or Castro or both, would be of no avail.
In discussing blockades, he mentioned the difficulty of type of action we would take if and when a Soviet ship, laden with military hardware and personnel, is stopped on the high seas.
Eisenhower questioned limited military action as being indecisive, irritating world opinion, creating fear in all areas where the Soviets could retaliate with limited action and therefore would be iaadee*«*ve.\riad 0liCra ^ He recalled that when President Truman ordered limited air support in the first two or three days of the Korean war, he, Eisenhower, told the President that from a military standpoint this would not work and more decisive action was required.
Throughout the conversation Eisenhower seemed to lean toward military action which would cut off Havana and therefore take over the heart of the government.
He thought this might be done by airborne divisions but was not familiar with the size of the Cuban forces in the immediate area, nor the equipment.
Eisenhower seemed to feel that such a plan would be more decisive, would mean less bloodshed, could be accomplished more quickly than a landing and a conventional type of slow invasion.
I told General Eisenhower that I did not expect an answer but both the President and I wished him to be fully informed and that I would like to consult with him from time to time.
The 4:00 o'clock meeting adjourned at about 7:00, and reassembled at 10:00m., in Secretary Ball's conference room, adjourning at 11:45m.
At 9:30m^DCI went to see the President, then went to Gettysburg to see General Eisenhower.
The purpose of the discussion was to develop a plan of action in connection with Cuba, and the alternatives are summarized in my memorandum of October 18th addressed to USTB, copy of which is attached.
This memorandum will record views as they were expressed and developed throughout the meetings.
Ambassador Bohlen warned against any action against Cuba, particularly an air strike without warning, stating such would be divisive with all Allies and subject us to criticism throughout the world.
He advocated writing both Khrushchev and Castro; if their response was negative or unsatisfactory then we should plan action; advise our principal allies, seek a two -thirds vote from the OAS and then act.
The Attorney General and Bohlen exchanged views as to just what type of an answer we could expect from Khrushchev and what he might do if we threatened an attack.
During this discussion Secretary Rusk seemed to favor asking Congress for a declaration of a state of war against Cuba and then proceed with OAS, NATO, etc., but always preserve flexibility as to the type of action.
Bohlen consistently warned that world opinion would be against us if we carried out a military strike.
This point was discussed back and forth by various people throughout both days of discussion.
We should proceed at once with the necessary military actions and should do no talking.
We should have no consultations with Khrushchev, Castro, or our allies, but should fully alert our allies in the most persuasive manner by high level people.
The President should forget about the elections and should cancel all future campaign speeches.
As an alternate to military action, a plan was discussed involving a declaration of war and the creation of an all-out blockade.
General Taylor at this point indicated that he favored a blockade although in subsequent meetings he seemed inclined towards a military strike.
MeCone gave an intelligence estimate on the effects of a blockade, indicating its seriousness would depend upon how ""hard"" a blockade it turned out to be, and finally stated that the main objective of taking Cuba away from Castro had been lost and we have been overly consumed with the missile problem.
McCone stated that we must all bear in mind that we have two objectives, one, disposing of the missile sites, and the other, getting rid of Castro's communism in the Western Hemisphere.
The meeting adjourned for dinner and in the evening Secretary Rusk came forward with the following plan.
Soviet bases and offensive weapons in the Western Hemisphere would raise serious problems and therefore on September 5th and 13th the President has in effect warned both Khrushchev and Castro.
Rusk continued that more talks with Khrushchev /in extended parlays and therefore he recommended against such an approach.
On Wednesday, we strike with missiles and simultaneously send a message to Khrushchev, NATO, OAS, etc.
We should be alert for an attack on Turkey and be prepared for the consequences in Berlin, Quemoy, Matsu, Korea, etc.
Rusk made the estimate that world opinion would go along, 42 allies would go along and some neutrals would be favorable.
Latin Americans must be told that we are acting in the interests of the Western Hemisphere.
Rusk advocated that the first step we take out the missiles and thus remove the immediate problem of the establishment of an offensive capability, but that we be prepared for subsequent steps.
He emphasized the United States cannot accept missiles in our security interests and in view of statements made by the President and others and our various policy declarations.
Bohlen continued to persist for diplomatic approach but Rusk and several others were not at this point persuaded.
McNamara raised iimumerable questions concerning military operations; the manner in which the strike could be properly covered with protective air and how it might be restricted and also the advisability of case one, as contrasted with case one, two and /or three.
Both Ambassador Thompson and Secretary Martin in discussing the Rusk proposal favored a blockade, coupled with a declaration of war.
Political actions 4 page s Political actions in support of major military action These were all referred to as State papers and some were revised the following day.
Also, proposed letter to Khrushchev was tabled, paper dealing with probable Castro response to United States appeal and a proposed letter to Fidel Castro, marked ""To Mr F C"", all included in State papers.
At the conclusion of the meetings which served the purpose of airing the views of all parties responsible for giving advice to the President, the alternatives open to us were summarized by the Attorney General and are covered in my memorandum to USIB, dated October 18th. 3 pages.
Kuw^ver, 5uch regirz^nts u&'jally include a technical sinjc^ « > T and the third site rould be the location -3177 IRONS ARK of this unit.
The possibility that launch siv*3 :T\n ;>s relr^sated must not be overlooked.
Fencing of two areas io evident on ""jic :ocond day, and substantial progress is being made on crecA'ag * emporaTy buildings.
Savors the 1020 nm missile system, and indicate .i ta&t Shis system will be some operational in a maftfcer o£ days.
October 1962 7-» -C:-UVi'1 ^ 19 October 1962 MEMORANDUM FOR FILE * ^/Oi^^u^JuJ^ sJ-<*& Early in the morning of October 18th, Secretary McNamara called Mr Mc Cone at his residence expressing great concern over the reports from N3pIC as a result of their examination of the two flights run on * October'Vgth.
State tabled revisions in their papers on covering a limited one-time strike and blockade, most of which are dated 10/18 11:00m.
President questioned Lundahl further if the uninitiated could be persuaded that the photographs presented offensive MRBM missiles.
Secretary Rusk then stated that developments in the last 24 hours had substantially changed his thinking.
He first questioned whether, if it is necessary to move against Cuba, and then concluded that it was because Cuba can become a formidable military threat.
He also referred to the President's recent public statements and indicated a feeling that if no action was taken, we would free the Soviets to act any place they wished and at their own will.
Also, Rusk stated the failure on our part to act would make our situation unmanageable elsewhere in the world.
He furthermore indicated that this would be an indication of weakness which would have serious effect on our Allies.
Secretary pointed out to the President that action would involve risks.
The President must expect action in Berlin, Korea and possibly against the United States itself.
He raised the question of solidarity of the Alliance and seemed to dismiss this question, feeling that the Alliance would hold together.
Rusk stated that if we enter upon positive action, we can not say for sure what the final Soviet response will be and therefore what the final outcome will be.
However he felt that the American people will accept danger and suffering if they are convinced doing so is necessary and that they ha%-e a clear conscience.
The Secretary reviewed the circumstances surrounding the outbreak of World War I, World War II, and the Korean war.
This, he indicated , v AiiSftight have the possibility of prevention of action and settlement by political meana, The other course open was the declaration of war, Rusk expressed himself in favor of leaning upon the Rio pact, but does not dismiss the alternative of a unilateral declaration of war as the ultimate action we must take.
The alternate is a quick strike* Ambassador Bohlen was not present but hia views were expressed in a message which was read in which he strongly advocated diplomatic effort and stated that military action prior to this would be wrong.
He alBO stated that limited quick military action was an illusion and that any military action would rapidly escalate into an invasion.
McNamara at this point presented the alternatives referred to the previous day, stating that alternatives one and two were not conclusive and that we would have to resort to alternative 3 and in fact this would lead us ultimately into an invasion.
General Taylor generally reviewed the situation stating that the Chiefs looked upon Cuba as a forward base of serious proportions, that it cannot be taken out totally by air; that the military operation would be sizeable, nevertheless necessary.
Ambassador Thompson urged that any action be preceeded by a declaration of war; he strongly advocated that we institute a blockade and not resort to military action unless and until it is determined that Castro and Khrushchev refuse to reverse their activities and actually remove the missiles which are now in place.
Secretary Dillon questioned what would be accomplished by talking to Khrushchev.
He pointed out that we would probably become engaged in discussions from which we could not extract ourselves and therefore our freedom of action would be frustrated.
Dillon was very positive that whatever action we take should be done without consultation with Khrushchev, Rusk seemed to disagree indicating there was a possibility that Khrushchev might be persuaded to reduce his efforts but he admitted also that he might step them up as a result of discussions. president Kennedy was non-committal, however he seemed to continually raise questions of reactionsof our allies, NATO, South America, public opinion and others.
Raised the question whether we s/"" • should not move the missiles out of Turkey.
All readily agreed they were not much use but a political question was involved.
Buridy thought this a good idea either under conditions of a strike or during a ' preliminary talk.
He agreed that we could move out of Turkey and Italy; pointed out the political complicationsAt this point McNamara seemed to be reconsidering his prior position of advocating military action and laid special emphasis on the fact that the price of Soviet retaliation, whether in Berlin or elsewhere, would be very high and we would not be able to control itSecretary Ball throughout the conversation maintained the position that strike without warning was not acceptable and that we should not proceed without discussion with Khrushchev.
President Kennedy then said that he thought at some point Khrushchev would say that if we made a move against Cuba, he would take Berlin.
McNamara surmised perhaps that was the price we must pay and perhaps we'd lose Berlin anyway.
There followed an exchange of view on the possibility of the Soviets taking Berlin and our prospect of retaining it.
President Kennedy rather summed up the dilemma stating that action of a type contemplated would be opposed by the alliance on the other hand, lack of action will create disunity, lack of confidence and disintegration of our several alliances and friendly relations with countries who have confidence in us.
As a result of discussions of the ""price 11 of a strike, there followed a long discussion of the possibilities of a blockade, the advantages of it, and manner in which it would be carried out, etc.
There seemed to be differences of opinion as to whether the blockade should be total, or should only involve military equipment which would mean blockading Soviet ships.
Also there were continued references to blockading ships carrying offensive weapons and there seemed to be a differentiation in the minds of some in the policy of blockading offensive weapons as contrasted to blockading all weapons.
There followed discussion as to policies the President s""hould follow with respect to calling Congress into session, asking for a declaration of war, advising the country and authorizing action.
There was a discussion concerning the President's meeting with Gromyko and the position he should take should the Cuban question come up.
The President was advised to draw Gromyko out and it was indicated he probably would receive a flat denial that there were any offensive weapons in Cuba.
Meeting adjourned with the President requesting that we organize into two groups.
One to study the advantages of what might be called a slow course of action which would involve a blockade to be followed by such further actions as appeared necessary as the situation evolved.
At least one Soviet regiment consisting of eight launchers and sixteen 1020-nm medium range ballistic missiles is now deployed in western Cuba at two launch sites.
These sites presently contain unrevetted, field-type launchers which rely on mobile erection, checkout, and support equipment.
These missiles are probably those reported moving into this area during September.
Although there is continuing improvement of these sites, these mobile missiles must be considered operational now and could be launched within 18 hours after the decision to launch* A refire from each launcher could be accomplished within 5 hours after the initial firing.
Fixed, soft sites which could achieve initial operational capability during December 1962 are now being developed near Havana* We believe that the 2200-nm intermediate range ballistic missile is probably intended for these sites.
Photography of these sites show eight, fixed launch pads under construction which probably equate to an additional missile regiment with eight ready missiles and eight for refire.
All of these offensive missile systems are Soviet manned and controlled.
We believe that offensive action by these systems would be commanded from the Soviet Union but have not yet found the command and control communication links.
There is no positive evidence of the presence of nuclear warheads in Cuba, nor have weapons storage facilities of the standard, highly secure Soviet type been identified.
TOP SCC RET IRCN3ASK munitions 1 storage areas south of Havana which could be converted to Soviet needs in a relatively short time.
Temporary storage could be provided in ships or field sites which might not be identified.
Nevertheless, one must assume that nuclear warheads could now be available in Cuba to support the offensive missile capability as it becomes operational.
The warheads expected for these missiles weigh approximately 3,000 pounds and have yields in the low megaton range.
In an alert status, these cruise missiles can be fired in about 10 minutes, with subsequent firings from each launcher at 5 minute intervals.
There are now 22 surface-to-air missiles sites located in Cuba, nine of which are believed to be individually operational at the present time.
Each site contains six missiles with six additional missiles in an adjacent hold area.
The initial firing can take place anytime after an alert, providing the site has reached readiness.
There are now at least sixteen 1 020nm Soviet ballistic missiles in Cuba which are in such a state of readiness that they could be fired within 18 hours of a decision to launch.
It is likely that other installations now being examined in photography will raise the number to 32, all of which could be ready in the next week.
Furthermore, 8 launchers with sixteen 2200-nm missiles will probably be operational in Cuba during December 1962.
We must emphasize that this is the visible threat, and that additional missiles may be discovered as additional photography is analyzed.
Support and Supply 10* Offensive missiles systems are being introduced into Cuba primarily through the Port of Mariel.
Possible central missile checkout, storage and repair bases have been tentatively located at Soroa near the western deployment sites and at Managua south of Havana.
It is significant that all three of the Soviet missiles now being deployed in Cuba (SS~4, SS-5, SA-2) probably use red fuming nitric acid as an oxidizer so that a common propellant supply and storage could be used. Significance 11.
The magnitude of the total Soviet missile force being deployed indicates that the USSR intends to develop Cuba into a prime strategic base, rather than as a token show of strength, 12.
This overseas strategic force is protected by an extensive SA-2 deployment in Cuba.
The USSR is making a major military investment in Cuba with some of their most effective guided missile systems.
The planning for this operation must have started at least one year ago and put into motion last spring.
This site is in a | more advanced state of readiness and could have the essential features I for an operational capability within one month.
The other site is similar to the fieldtype installation described in paragraph 1.
A discussion among the principals on October ;1 8th indicated a probable decision, if any action is taken against Cuba, to initiate a limited blockade designed to prevent the importation into Cuba of additional arms.
To do this the United States. would make such statements concerning a condition of war as is necessary to meet the legal requirements of such a blockade, but a formal ""declaration of war against Cuba"" would be avoided if possible and resorted to only if absolutely necessary.
The blockade could be extended at our discretion to include POL and possibly a total 1 blockade"" if Castro persisted in the offensive build-up.
Continued surveillance would go ""forward 30 that we would know of the siutation within Cuba as it evolved.
The blockade would start possibly on Monday, following a public announcement by the President which would include a display of photographic intelligence, persuasive notification to. our Allies among the Soviets and the Cubans, but with no prior consultations with our Allies or any Latin Americans unless it proved necessary for legal reasons to assemble the OAS and secure-the necessary approval to invoke the Rio Pact.
More extreme steps such as limited air strike, comprehensive air strike, or military invasion would be withheld awaiting developments.
Tht* argument in favor of the blockade was principally that it initiated a positive action which could be intensified at our will or could be relaxed depending upon evolving circumstances , Soviet reactions are expected to be severe and veryprobably involve a blockade of Berlin and a widespread propaganda effort, however it was considered thai w<» could have some control over the extent of Soviet reaction and in the event of a confrontation, would be negotiating from a position of positive action which would be inre ; ns r ified at our own direction.
The opinions range from doing nothing on the one hand/ to immediate military action on the other There exist differences. of opinion as to the handling of Khrushchev, Castro, NATO, the OAS and Latin American states; and finally, a question of the ""declaration of war"" awaits legal opinion; also differences exist concerning the intensity of the blockade with some advocating a more comprehensive blockade which would include POL at the very start.
October 1962 Cctcber 19, 1362 3bcfs wttcb woaid asaka a& strito mora actigp ta hl* to M^drtde grsop* L Prior astlc* to STrnytrbFT by a«agag» torn tte Presides* gftrtag ajrtat* pmirtMIWy ctf Ucktog dow aod ajrengfeaptag our cut with otf dUit and vozld oplnioa 1a tto erosi Xhnishctow tafcas neb actio s as Hocta dlag Bariia* > «3ort to try to mtoalte samba* of *o*teifl HUad^ or atlaastatevwa waz*ad to tteJd tMa.
Kocaoftfcexa aaa* spall oat oar propoart action, to sbaofal Indicate It wttt fa* atnotbf aertowv) ' tmjatnreaawl la aer pesiifca before world apidctu toarpto — Prestdtat mlgk aiato rtferecce to iCTict stmctlo* of -FUhtcg Port* ittOaka, saytog Uat in vter otittfr 3wtet acttoaa to art c oavlae cd Soviets were oca7.
Ho attack oaBagaaa to aroid fciUteg feral^ <flptort at* aad > aarorcring ps&Uc oplidoa against a In those cocstrfea.
It is possible that the USSR is installing these missiles primarily in order to use them in bargaining for United States concessions elsewhere.
The public withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba would create serious problems in the USS^s relations with Castro; it would cast doubt on the firmness of the Soviet intention to protect the Castro regime and perhaps on their commitments elsewhere.
If the United States accepts the strategic missile buildup in Cuba, the Soviets would continue the buildup of strategic weapons in Cuba* We have no basis for estimating the force level which they would wish to reach, but it seems clear already that they intend to go beyond a token capability.
We consider in Annex B the possible effects of a missile buildup in Cuba upon the overall relationship of strategic military power.
United States acceptance of the strategic missile buildup would provide strong encouragement to Communist a , pro-Communist s, and the more anti-American sectors of opinion in Latin America and elsewhere.
It seems clear that, especially over the long run, there vculd ""be a less cf confidence in IS pever erd determination and a serious decline of IS influence generally* EFFECT CF KAEKIKG 5.
If the United States confronts Khrushchev vith its incvledge of the hPSM deployment and presses for a withdrawal, ve do not believe the Soviets vould halt the deployment.
Instead, they would propose negotiations on the general question of foreign bases, claiming equal right to establish Soviet bases and assuring the United States of tight control over the missiles.
They would probably link Cuba with the Berlin situation and emphasize their patience and preference for negotiations, implying that Berlin was held hostage to United States actions in Cuba, 6.
This vculd he true vbether the action vas United to an effort to neutralize tte strategic nissiles, cr these dssiles plus airfields, surface -tc-air nissile sites, cr cruise nissile sites, cr in fact an outright invasion designed to destroy the Castro regime.
We cust of course recognize the possibility that the"" Soviets, under pressure to respond, vould again miscalculate and respond in a vay vhich, through a series of actions and reactions, could escalate to general var* 11* Cn. the other hand, the Soviets have no public treaty vith Cuba and have not acknowledged that Soviet bases are on the island.
At least one Soviet regiment of 1020-nm ^SS-4) medium range ballistic missiles is now deployed in western Cuba at two launch sites near San Cristobal.
Kach of these sites presently contains eight missiles and four unrevetted, fieldtype launchers which rely on mobile erection, checkout, and support equipment.
Although there is continuing improvement of these sites, this regiment must be considered operational now.
The presence of eight missiles at each site indicates a refire capability from each of the four launchers.
A third facility in this area, previously identified as Launch Site 3, could be either a technical support area for this regiment or a third launch site; however, the early stage of development precludes a positive identification of this activity.
An additional regiment of Soviet 1020nm missiles is now deployed at two sites east of Havana in the Sagua La Grande area, nine miles apart.
These sites closely resemble the sites at San Cristobal but appear to be more permanent in nature.
Terrain features have dictated considerable clearing and grading for deployment of the system.
Also, there are permanent structures at the launch pad areas which are not found at the San Cristobal sites.
There are four launch positions at each site and we estimate an operational capability for each site within one week.
The sizes of the missiles, associated equipment, and buildings found at the San Cristobal and Sagua La Grande sites are almost identical and are compatible with the 1020-nm MRBM system.
Two fixed sites are under construction in the Guanajay area near Havana.
Four launchers, two blockhouses, and underground propellant storage are being built at each site.
Site 1 is considered to be in a midto late-stage of construction and should be operational within six weeks.
Site 2 is in an earlier stage of construction and couid be operational between 15 and 30 December 1962.
There are no missiles or support equipment detectable within the Guanajay Area at the present time. Command and Control 4.
All of the offensive missile systems in Cuba are Soviet manned and controlled.
We believe that offensive action by these systems would be commanded from the Soviet Union, but have not yet identified the communication link.
This site could become operational at about the same time as the associated Launch Site 1.
Construction of similar facilities has not yet been identified at other sites.
There is still no evidence of currently operational nuclear storage facilities in Cuba.
Nevertheless, one must assume that nuclear weapons could now be in Cuba to support the operational missile capability as it becomes available.
The 1020-nm missiles would probably be equipped with nuclear warheads yielding 2 to 3 megatons.
We believe that there are now at least two regiments equipped with 1020-nm MRBM's in Cuba.
One is locate din the San Cristobal area and the other in the Sagua La Grande area.
In addition, we believe a regiment equipped with 2200-nm lRBM's is being deployed to the Guanajay area.
When operational, present MRBM and IRBM units will have an aggregate total of 24 launchers.
Offensive missile systems are being introduced into Cuba, probably through the Port of Mariel.
A new Soviet ship, the Poltava, possibly designed as a ballistic missile transport, has been noted making frequent trips between the USSR and Cuba.
This ship has made two trips to Cuba since 17 July, and is next estimated to arrive in Cuba on or about 2 November 1962.
It is significant that three of the Soviet missiles now being deployed in Cuba £S-4, SS-5, SA-2) probably use red fuming nitric acid as the oxidizer, permitting exploitation of a common system for propellant supply and storage.
These cruise missiles have a range of 35 to 40 miles and are probably derived from the AS-i.
They can be fired in about 10 minutes in an alert status, with subsequent firings from each launcher at 5 minute intervals.
There are now 26 surface-to-air missile sites located in Cuba, two of which appear to be alternate sites.
Of these, 16 are believed to be individually operational at the present time.
The initial firing can take place anytime after an alert, providing the site has reached readiness status.
There arc several refugee reports indicating the presence of tactical ^FROG) missiles in Cuba, although there is no photographic confirmation thus far.
Some of the deployment characteristics include permanent elements which suggests that provision is being made for Soviet presence of long duration.
The rate of deployment to date, as well as the speed and variety of construction, indicates that the Soviet military build up in Cuba is being carried out on an urgent basis.
This build-up has proceeded by deploying defensive weapons first, followed by deployment of offensive weapons.
The pattern of missile deployment appears calculated to achieve quick operational status and then to complete site construction.
By deploying stockpiled MRBMTRBMs at overseas bases, the Soviet Union will supplement its 1CBM home force in a significant way.
This same offensive force also poses a common threat to the United States and a large portion of Latin America for the first time.
CERTAHi United States COBSES CP ACTICH CH CUBA TEE PRCBI£M To estimate the major consequences of certain United States courses of action with respect to Cuba THE ESTIMATE _ 1 STATUS CF SOVIET MILITARY BUILDUP IN CUBA 1.
Firm evidence indicates the presence in Cuba of four KRBM and two IRBM launch sites in various stages of construction and organizes into at least three regiments.
Of these, two regiments of eight launchers each are mobile and designed to launch KIBMs with a range of about 1,100m., while one regiment of eig ht fixed la unchers^ pa y be designed for IRBMs with a ran^e of about 2,200m.
We have no direct evidence that nuclear weapons are now present in Cuba, and it is unlikely that we would be able to obtain such evidence.
However, the construction of at least one probable nuclear storage facility is a strong indication of the Soviet intent to provide nuclear warheads.
In any case, it is prudent to assume that when the missiles are otherwise operational, nuclear warheads will be available* These could be brought in by air, submarine, or surface ship.
After the IRBM sites are completed and ^missiles are on launcher, a state of readiness of five hours may be maintained.
Both systems are believed to be provided with two missiles per launcher, providing a refire capability from each launcher after about four to six additional hours for the MRBMs and six to eight hours for the IRBMs.
Cuban-based MRBMs and IRBMs with nuclear warheads would augment the present limited Soviet ICBM capability by virtue of their ability to strike at similar types of targets with warheads of generally similar yields.
In the near future, therefore, Soviet gross capabilities for Initial attack on IK military and civilian targets can be increased considerably by Cuban-based nissiles.
If the missile buildup in Cuba continues, the Soviet capability to blunt a retaliatory attack will be progressively enhanced.
A major Soviet objective in their military buildup in Cuba is , — , . — — 1 .i d , — — % to demonstrate that the world balance of forces has shifted so far in their favor that the United States can no longer prevent the advance of Soviet ofi 1 — ■ 1 "" ■ i i 1 1 ,. „jj fensive power even into its own hemisphere.
In this connection they assume, of course, that these deployments sooner or later will become publicly known.
At the same time, they expect their missile forces in Cuba to make an important contribution to ""their .total str ategic capability vis-a-vis the US. i 8.
Consequently, it is unlikely that the USSR is installing these missiles primarily in order to use thera in bargaining for United States concessions elsewhere.
Moreover, the public withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba would create serious problems in the USSR 1 s relations with Castro; it would cast doubt on the firmness of the Soviet intention to protect the Castro regime and perhaps on their commitments elsewhere.
PSALM *-E-T United States ACQUI3SC25C2 Ui TES BUILDUP 9* If the United States acquiesces to the presence of strategic nissiles in Cuba, ve believe that the Soviets will continue the buildup.
Ve have no basis for esticating the force level vhich they vould vish to reach, but it seems entirely clear now that they are going veil beyond a token capability.
This course of United States action would provide strong encourage osrrt to Communists, pro-Connunists, and the more anti -American sectors of opinion in latin America.
We believe that, especially over the long run, there vould be loss of confidence in United States power and determination and a serious decline of United States influence, particularly in latin America.
Should any additional latin American government fall to the Communists the Soviets vould feel free to establish bases in the country in question if they chose.
A major immediate consequence vould be that the Soviets vould probably estimate lover risks in pressing the United States hard in other confrontations, such as Berlin.
PS AIM They would probably link Cuba with the Berlin situation and emphasize their patience and preference for negotiations, implying that Berlin was held hostage to United States actions in Cuba.
There is some slight chance that a warning to Castro might make a difference, since the Soviets could regard this as a chance to stand aside, but it also would give time for offers to negotiate, continued buildup, and counterpressures, and we think the result in the end would be the same.
We believe that even under a total blockade individual aircraft and submarines might get through to deliver vital military items, g., nuclear warheads.
If United States enforce rent of the blockade involved use of force by the US, the Soviets night respond en an equivalent level, but would, seek to avoid escalation.
Thus any blockade situation would place the Soviets under no imediate pressure to cheese a response vith force* They cculd rely on political oeans to cccpel the to desist, and reserve a resort to force until the United States had actually used force.
They vould estimate that the inherent difficulties of enforcing the blockade and the generally adverse reactions, including those of United States allies to it, would result in enormous pressures on the United States to desist.
They could heighten these pressures by threatening retaliation in Berlin or actually undertaking major harass cents on the access routes, vhich could become tantamount to a blockade, and vould probably do so at some stage.
We do not believe that even a severe blockade, of itself, would bring down the Cuban regime* Castro vould tighten internal security and, unless action against the regice subsequently developed on Cuban soil, the Cuban population would be increasingly reluctant to oppose the regime.
In the case of United States use of force against Cuban territory, the likelihood of a Soviet response by force, either locally or for retaliation elsewhere, would he greater than in the case of blockade.
U ll-B-T Soviets would be placed automatically under great pressure to respond in ways which, if they could not save Cuba, would inflict an offsetting injury to United States interests* This would be true whether the action was limited to an effort to neutralize the stra .c missiles, or these missiles plus airfields, surface-to-air missile sites, or cruise missile sites, or in fact an outright invasion designed to destroy the Castro regime.
We must of course recognize the possibility that the Soviets, under pressure to respond, would again miscalculate and respond in a way which, through a series of actions and reactions, could escalate to^general war.
On the other hand, the Soviets have no public treaty with Cuba and have not acknowledged that Soviet bases are on the island* This situation provides them with a pretext for treating United States military action against Cuba as, an affair which does not directly involve them, and thereby avoiding the risks of a strong response.
The most likely location for broad retaliation outside Cuba appears to be Berlin.
They vould probably react here vith major harassments, interruptions of access to the city or even a blockade, vith or without the signing of a separate peace treaty.
Retaliation against sorne United States installation overseas is possible but in our view unlikely.
We believe that there vould probably be a difference between Soviet reaction to all-out invasion and Soviet reaction to nore limited United States use of force against selected objectives in Cuba.
We believe that the Soviets would be somewhat less likely to retaliate with military force in areas outside Cuba in response to speedy, effective invasion than in response to more limited forms of military action against Cuba.
Ve recognize that such an estimate cannot be made with very great assurance and do not rule out the possibility of Soviet retaliation outside Cuba in case of invasion.
But we believe that a rapid occupation of Cuba would be more likely to make the Soviets pause in opening new .theaters of conflict than limited action or action which drags out.
We want to bring you up to datelon the deployment of Soviet military weapons systems to Cuba.
One of these sites appears to be in a stage of construction that ^ gg s ^d leacjto an estimate of operational readiness wjti4» six weeks from now,e. about 1 December and the other in a stage indicating operational readiness between 15 December and the end of the year.
We have not seen nuclear warheads for any of these missiles. but we do not rely on ever seeing them in our photography We have found what appears to be a nuclear warhead storage facility at one of the IRBM sites at Guanajay, near Havana.
They could be in temporary storage prior to completion of the storage facility we have, seen.
U October 1962 Mission 3101 IS Odooer 1962 Mission* 3102 & 3103 17 Octoier 1962 Missions 3104. 3105, 3106, 3107, 3108, end 3109; end preliminary caelyiisof 13 October 1962 Minion 3111.
NOTICE This supplement up-dates and amplifies ^^^^^^^^ dated 2000 hours, 19 October 1962.
An emergency operational capability to launch some of the missiles on hand within about 8 hours could now exist at the four MRBM sites.
They appear to be pursuing an urgent but systematic plan to achieve an operational capability which will maximize the effectiveness of the missile regiments.
Within the sites the steps necessary to achieve an immediate operational capability have not occurred.
For example, at San Cristobal Site 2 the three launchers and five missiles present continue to be bunched together in a field.
Were an immediate launch capability intended one would expect deployment of the launcher to the vicinity of the intended launch positions.
Activity in Site 1 and Site 2 continues to indicate an urgent effort to achieve full operational readiness.
The launch crews, missiles and associated equipment are in the immediate area.
By full operational readiness we mean the ability to launch in salvo four missiles per site with a refire capability of four missiles per site within 4 to 6 hours.
The MRBM sites at Sagua La Grande were first identified on 17 October and were covered by photography twice that day.
The status of preparation at the two sites on 17 October was approximately the same.
It is believed that the missile regiment was moving into the area on 17 October, inasmuch as 35 vehicles arrived in a support area at Site 1 within the 1 3/4 hour period between two photographic coverages.
Construction activity and random location of missile support equipment indicate that development of the area was not complete.
The presence of missiles and launchers indicates that the sites have an emergency operational capability.
However, the regiment could reach full operational readiness at these sites by 1 November.
A detailed reexamination of the evidence available at this time indicates that the operational date for these launch sites may be somewhat earlier than our previous estimate.
Construction activity appears to be progressing at a more rapid pace than that observed in the USSR at similar facilities.
Several features of the sites such as the control bunkers, excavations for fuel tanks, and blast w^alls for component protection are several days more advanced than previously determined.
Mission 3111 on 18 October indicates that concrete is being installed at all four pads at Site 1.
A curved-roof building similar to that at Guanajay Site 1, but only about 35 by 67 feet has been observed at the newly identified possible misj sile site near Remedios.
Foundations of structures which j might be intended to be future nuclear warhead storage facilities have been j observed at the San Cristobal Sites 1 and 3 and at Sagua La Grande Site 1.
The appearance of concrete arches nearby indicates that these buildings will be earth-covered.
The tank trailers observed in the quay area of the Punta Gerardo port facility are similar to those seen in 22 May 1962 photography taken before security fences were erected.
Search of the major airfields in Cuba has not as yet revealed any structures that can be identified as intended for nuclear storage.
There are now 24 primary surface-to-air missile sites located in Cuba , Two of these sites, Santa Lucia and Deleite, each have an alternate site located 3 to 5 nm from the primary site.
These alternate sites are pre -surveyed, have no equipment and could possibly be used for mobility training exercises.
Of the 24 primary sites, 20 are individually operational at the present time.
The remaining primary SA-2 sites could be operational sites in approximately one week.
Photography shows large quantities of surface-to-air missile cannisters and missile transporters.
Each KOMAR craft carries two homing missiles which have an effective range of 10 to 15 nm and carry 2000 pound HE warheads.
The KOMARs have all been transported to Cuba as deck cargo on Soviet ships, two and four per shipload.
Whereas it probably took several weeks to establish base and logistic support for the first KOMARs to become integrated fully operational units, additional units can probably become operational within one week after offloading.
The apparent Soviet objective to rapidly achieve full operational status for thei* MRBM and IRBM regiments rather than to achieve an imme^^ capability at each site as the missiles and equipment arrive, may be very significant to the planners judging various Soviet courses of action.
It consists of 4 large excavations in a symmetrical pattern; however, their function cannot be determined at this time.
This installation is, however, considered to be a suspected surface-to-surface missile site.
The Members of the United States Intelligence Board SUBJECT : Evaluation of Offensive Threat in Cuba 1.
The attached copy of the subject intelligence memorandum is forwarded for your information, guidance, and appropriate action.
As agreed by the USIB, it is to be used as background material for oral briefings to authorized personnel only.
Requests for additional copies or for initial distribution from offices not under your immediate control, but in your department of the Government, will be referred to you for action.
A significant deployment of guided missiles to Cuba is already well advanced, and has proceeded by first deploying a large force of defensive weapons, followed quickly by long-range offensive guided missiles and aircraft.
A mixed force of 1000and 2200-nm ballistic missiles in Cuba' provides for the first time a significant strategic strike capability against almost all targets in the U S., and against a large portion of Canada and Latin America.
The planning for this operation must have started at least one year ago and the actual deployment itself began last spring.
The equipment for 1000-nm ballistic missiles is now being deployed in Western Cuba at four launch sites near San Cristobal.
Two of these are now operational and the other two are proceeding to this status on an accelerated basis.
The missiles are probably those reported moving into this area during September.
Each of the four sites contains eight missiles and four unrevetted, field type launchers which rely on mobile erection, checkout, and support equipment.
Other 1000-nm ballistic missiles are also deployed at two sites nine miles apart, east of Havana in the Sagua La Grande area.
Also, there are permanent structures at the launch positions at each site and we estimate an operational capability for each site within one week.
Two fixed sites for 2200-nm, ballistic missiles are under construction in the Guanajay area near Havana.
Site 2 is in an earlier stage of construction and could be operational between 15 and 30 December 1962.
There are no missiles or support equipment detectable within the Guanajay Area at the present time.
An additional fixed site has been observed at Remedies in Eastern Cuba which is similar to those at Guanajay.
Tnis is probably a valid indicator of deployment of a second grouping of 2200-nm ballistic missiles.
Approximately 22 of these bombers, most still in crates, are now present.
We believe that a nuclear warhead storage site is under construction adjacent to the more complete of the fixed missile launch sites near Guanajay.
A curvedroof building similar to that at Guanajay Site 1, but only about 35 by 67 feet has been observed at the newly identified possible missile site near Remedios.
Foundations of structures which may be intended to be future nuclear warhead storage facilities have been observed at the San Cristobal Sites 1 and 3 and at Sagua La Grande Site 1.
Search of the major airfields in Cuba has not as yet revealed any structures that can be identified as intended for nuclear storage, 1L There is still no evidence of currently operational nuclear storage facilities in Cuba, Nevertheless, one must assume that nuclear weapons could now be in Cuba to support the operational missile capability as it becomes available.
Offensive missile systems are being introduced into Cuba through the Port of Mariel and perhaps other ports.
Possible central missile checkout, storage, and repair bases have been located at Soroa, between the two eastern deployment areas, and at Managua, south of Havana.
It is significant that all of the ballistic and air defense missiles now being deployed in Cuba probably use a common oxidizer, permitting exploitation of a common system for propellant supply and storage.
The remaining primary surface-to-air missile sites could be operational in approximately one week.
Each craft carries. two homing missiles which have an effective range of 10 to 15 nm and carry 2000-pound, high-explosive warheads.
They must return to base or to a tender for reloading, although tenders for these craft have not yet been identified in Cuba.
All of these missile launching patrol craft in Cuba are considered to be operational.
All have been recently observed operating in the Mariel area, but it is not known whether they are based there or were operating from other bases.
General Sweeney reviewed in considerable detail the plans for an air strike against the missile bases, the air fields, a few SAM sites in critical locations and finally the plans for invasion.
It was decided that at a minimum an air strike must include both the missile sites and the air fields and such SAM sites as are necessary, and General Taylor was instructed to plan accordingly , 3.
Secretary McNamara and General Taylor told the President that an air strike could not provide absolute assurance that all missiles were destroyed; they indicated a 90 per cent probability.
They also stated that any warning would very possibly cause the movement of missiles to obscure unknown locations from which they could become operational.
General Taylor therefore recommended* on the basis of military grounds, that the air strike be conducted immediately, suggesting tomorrow morning, and that it be without warning.
Secretary McNamara confirmed the military appraisal expressed above but made no recommendation as to policy.
In response to direct questioning from the President, the Attorney General and McCone advised against surprise attack for the reasons discussed at previous meetings.
McCone urged on the other hand that the President in a public statement indicate an intention to remove the missiles and other potential weapons by means and at a time of his own choosing if surveillance did not prove conclusively that the Soviets and the Cubans were removing them, 6* The meeting adjourned to be reconvened at 2:30, with additional principals in attendance.
October 21, 1962"" 6 October 21, 1962 MEMORANDUM OF DISCUSSION WITH THE PRESIDENT ALONE, On my report of my discussion with General Eisenhower at my residence this morning, the following information was given later to the Attorney General.
Any military action would be inconclusive and therefore inadvisable unless it employed invasion and occupation of Cuba.
Eisenhower gave this opinion on a basis of his experience in war in countless examples of air strikes which though most effective, were never completely conclusive 2.
From a military point of view a surprise attack would be most effective and most desirable if followed in a minimum time by invasion.
However* from a broader point of view, he opposed surprise attack because of the indictment, the resulting tensions, and the fact that such action by the United States would license other countries to resort to violent military action without notice.
Therefore Eisenhower would accept the handicaps from a military point of view, of warning or notice, and therefore would follow the suggested plan of initiating a blockade, conducting intense surveillance, and announcing the intention of taking military action if the Soviets and the Cubans either maintained the status quo of their missile installations or continued the construction of theii missile bases.
General Eisenhower emphasized he was giving his opinion based solely on intelligence and without the benefit of a study of the war plans or the most recent diplomatic exchanges with Castro, Khrushchev, our allies, etc.
It seemed fair to conclude that his views as expressed above represent a flash judgment rather than a considered judgment arrived at with all facets of the problem laid before him.
Metting with the Vice President on 21 October 1962 On Sunday night, October 21 at 8:30 I briefed Vice President Lyndon Johnson at the request of the President, conveyed through MCGeorge Bundy* The briefing involved a review of photography by Lundahl paralleling briefings given to General Eisenhower and others* We then discussed policy and details of the proposed speech by the President in considerable detail.
There seemed to be mounting pressure in the United States for intervention.
Significantly expand Soviet capabilities for initial attack on United States targets; 3« Thus weaken Western resolve and unity in countering Soviet moves in the East-West global contest, particularly over Berlin and Germany.
A Repeated aerial photography of Cuba, which has been compared with a mass of aerial photography of the USSR; B Photography of Soviet ships en route to Cuba from low-altitude aircraft and by surface observers in various locations; C A firm knowledge, developed from many sources over the years, of Soviet military doctrine and practice; D Interrogation in detail of the 1,500-2,000 refugees a week coming into Florida from Cuba; E* Agent operations.
The first indication that the USSR had taken a decision on Cuba came in late July.
A At that time, 4 Soviet passenger ships after a voyage under secrecy conditions arrived at the western Cuban naval base, Kariel.
W 2GB-~&SCTCtfT 0400^21 Oct 62 B In early August, dry cargo vessels began arriving in unprecedented numbers* 1.
Of these, only about 15 were clearly not involved in delivering military cargo.
Most of the Bloc cargoes supporting the Cuban civilian economy — which now requires assistance ranging from baby food and grain to machinery parts — is now moving in Western flag vessels.
One MIG-21 was seen, as were eight Koaarclass missile boats and one land-based antishipping cruise missile site.
D In early September, consequently, we had ample evidence of a significant buildup.
All confirmed deliveries, however, fitted into a pattern of weapons which are essentially defensive in design and in normal operational employment.
On basis of such evidence President issued his statements of 4 and 13 September that Soviet activity in Cuba was defensive in nature.
Support sites — six presently identified, still fieldtype, but signs of permanenttype installation appearing* 3* Readiness— -as of 17 October, 17 sites appeared — in photography — to have both missiles on launchers and the essential radar in position ♦ Only one, however, has emplaced around it the radar-controlled guns which normally are installed to provide some defense against lowflying aircraft.
However, at least one site has the C-band radar — the latest Soviet model now being widely deployed in the USSR and East Germany.
About 60 15 f s, 17' s and 19* s arrived prior to 1 January f 62, and there are now at least 39 MIG-21s.
Standard Soviet GCI units (one identified this far through photography) will control these fighters.
Soviet diplomacy and pronouncements have been carefully geared to military build-up; amounts to well-thought-out deception plan.
In early October we obtained our first hard information on the delivery of Soviet offensive weapons to Cuba.
A We photographed 10 crates on a ship bound for Cuba of a kind especially designed to contain the fuselage of an IL-28 jet light bomber.
B« 21 of these crates were later photographed at San Julian airfield in the extreme west of Cuba.
The observation of IL-28 crates led us to mount an intensive reconnaissance effort, beginning on 15 October, The photography showed, for the first time, the deployment of surface-to-surface ballistic missile systems.
A , We have identified four and possibly six sites for the l,10G-n.m. missile and two fixed sites for the 2,200-n.m. missile.
Each launcher in turn normally has two missiles assigned it, all sixteen of which we have identified at the site.
B Another two sites are near Sagua La Grande just east of Havana, We have identified six of the eight launchers and seven of the sixteen missiles.
C There is preliminary evidence of two additional sites near San Cristobal.
D The keys to these identifications are the size of the missile body, the unique erectorlauncher equipment, and the position and spacing of equipment.
It has an autonomous guidance system giving a CEP of 1, to 1 1/2 nautical miles, it carries a warhead of 2,500-3,500 pounds, yielding 2-3 megatons.
F Photography alone cannot permit us to be very precise about the operational readiness of these missiles.
C We know less about the 2,200-mile missile, but believe it to be also single-stage, using s tor able liquid fuels and with an autonomous guidance system.
We have no direct evidence that nuclear weapons are now in Cuba — and we are not likely to get any.
Based on known voyages of ships, we believe:<at least 8,000 Soviet military and about 3,000 nonmilitary personnel are now in Cuba, A This matches fairly well with our estimate that the Soviets would need about 10,000 military for the assembly activity now going on.
B We think this total will rise to about 14,000 when all weapons systems now in Cuba are operational.
C Sites now identified trill, when completed, give Soviets total of 36 launchers and 72 missiles.
U October 1962 Mission 3101 ISOciefcer 1962 Missions 3102 & 3103 17 O^toWr 1962 Missions 3104, 3105.
DEFINITIONS An Emergency Operational Capability exists when a site could launch some missiles should a decision be made to do so.
A Full Operational Capability is achieved when a site has reached a steady state of readiness with the ability to salvo its first missile load within about 6 to 8 hours and with the ability to refire within 4 to 6 hours.
The comparative photographic coverage indicates that, while an emergency operational capability could exist at several offensive missile sites, the' Soviet objective in Cuba is to attain full operational capability at all sites as soon as possible, rather than to prepare each site for an emergency launch capability as soon as the missiles and equipment arrive in the area.
This will represent a first salvo potential of 40 missiles with a refire capability of an additional 40 missiles.
Director of Central Intelligence i Director, Defense Intelligence Agency 1 SUBJECT: Additional Information Missions 3111 and 3H3 [ 1.
A newly identified confirmed MRBM launch site was located on Mission 3H3.
The newly identified unimproved field type MRBM launch site is located 2. nm NNW of Candelaria at 22° 47' 45 ""N 82°58'40""W in the San Cristobal area.
The site contains two tent areas totalling 26 tents and at least 60 vehicles.
Seven missile trailers and two missile erectors were identified at the site.
At three of the four excavations there are 10 to 12 precast hollow concrete objects.
MR Site 1 The seven canvas covered missiles are now draped with netting and three of the four erectors are canvas covered.
MR Site 2 The six missiles and three erectors are parked in a common area.
MR Site 3 Cloud cover prevents a complete analysis; however, one erector and possibly two others are observed.
The Sauga La Grande area MR Site 4 consists of four launch positions, two containing erectors and six canvas covered missiles on trailers and MR Site 5 consists of four erectors on pads and four canvas covered missiles on trailers.
Construction activity continues on IR sites 1 and 2 in the Guana jay area.
They have been sent to all Chiefs of Stations with some minor variations to cover local conditions.
FURTHER TO REFERENCE IT IS EXPECTED THAT CHIEF OF MISSION YOUR AREA WILL* RECEIVE COMMUNICATION FRCM ^^^« HCS PERTAINING TO RECENT CRITICAL DEVELOPMENTS IN CUBA AND SETTING FORTH OUTLINE OF ACTIONS CONTEMPLATED BY §$9.
The Soviet decision to embark on the cur\ rent military buildup in Cuba probably was nade in j April 1962.
The decision paralleled political and economic moves which greatly strengthened the Sovieti Cuban relationship.
The program probably was planned I and set in motion during the period April through | June.
In the second week of July the first shipments | of materiel began to leave Soviet ports, accompanied | by passenger ships carrying military personnel.
Prior to April 1962 the USSR's policy toward Castro's self-proclaimed adherence to Communism was still unclear and its support of Cuba was within the bounds of ""normal"" Soviet trade and aid policy, e., ties governed by longterm credit agreements and Cuba's ability to pay.
In early April, however, Moscow chose to acquiesce in Castro's assertion of his authority over the so-called ""old Communists"" and to acknowledge the ""socialist"" character of the Cuban regime.
Shortly thereafter, negotiations for the bloc to come to the aid of Cuba's faltering economy were initiated, and in early May agreements were signed for the bloc to provide additional amounts of foodstuffs, consumer goods, raw materials, and other badly needed imports.
A decision to undertake the current military buildup probably was made along with these economic and political moves.
In return, agreement evidently was reached for stationing Soviet strategic forces on the island.
The buildup in Cuba has been taking place in stages which can be distinguished reasonably well* The first deliveries of men and equipment arrived in late July, and through most of August they appear to have been primarily of equipment for SAM and coastal defense missile installations* Work started first in western Cub?. r,nd gradually spread throughout the island.
We cannot determine precisely when the first equipment for MRBM/ IRBM installations arrived, but available information suggests work on the first site began about 29 August and the first missiles of this kind probably arrived in the first half of September* Two top-level meetings between the Cubans and Khrushchev were held in this period; one when Raul Castro visited Moscow in July at the start of the shipments and one in late August early September when Che Guevara traveled to the USSR* 4.
Since early September, military shipments probably have included equipment for all the missile installations as well as aircraft and land armaments.
Most of the 39 or more MIG-21S arrived during the first week of September* Two shipments of IL-28 bombers — 22 aircraft in all — appear to have arrived in late September, and a third shipment may be en route.
Soviet vessels are en route with probable military cargoes, and one or two are leaving Soviet ports almost daily* -2270 79.
Tte 3 sites still sees likely to reach full operational readiness in December.
Ecvever, emergency operational readiness of some of the JK3*s night be reached somewhat earlier.
Of the 2^ primary surface-to-air missile sites in Cuba, ve believe i 22 are nov operational. 1 i i The Soviet fleet support vessel, lEESS, is nov in the Atlantic on a i t high-speed run from the Kola Inlet Northern Fleet Base near Murmansk in Russia.
Leadership meeting on October 22nd at 5:00 ATTENDED BY: The Leadership, except for Senator Hayden.
The Freiident, Rusk* McNaxnara, McCone and Ambassador Thompson McCone read a summary of the situation, copy of which is attached.
This statement had been discussed with the President, Attorney General and Bundy and had been modified to conform to their views.
There were a few questions of a substantive nature, Hickenlooper asking when missiles would be in operational status.
McCone replied with the existing figures as reported in the morning report.
Hickenlooper then asked if the Cuban situation is tied in to the China/ India confrontation.
Thompson then}ftr3w3* e more probable that Cuba may force a showdown on Berlin* Secretary Rusk then reviewed his current appraisal of the Soviet Union indicating there had been some radical moves within the USSR which were indicating a tougher line.
It appeared the hard-liners are coming in to ascendency and the soft co-existent line seems to be disappearing.
The President concluded whatever we do involves a risk; however we must make careful calculations and take a chance* To do nothing would be a great mistake.
The blockade of Cuba on the importation of offensive weapons was to be undertaken, *U ships would be stopped and those containing offensive weapons would not be permitted to proceed.
We have no idea how the Bloc will react but the indications are, from unconfirmed sources , they will attempt to run the blockade.
We are taking all military preparations for either an air strike or an invasion.
It was the President's considered judgment that if we have to resort to active military actions* then this would involve an invasion.
Rusk then stated that our proposed action gave the other side a chance to pause.
They may pull back or they may rapidly intensify the entire situation existing between the Soviet Union and the United States.
Senator Russell then demanded stronger steps, stated he did not think we needed time to pause.
The President had warned them in September and no further warning was necessary.
We must not take a gamble and must not temporise; Khrushchev has once again rattled his missiles; he can become firmer and firmer, and we must react.
If we delay* if we give notification, if we telegraph our punches, the result will be more a difficult military action and more American lives will be sacrificed.
The thrust of Senator Russell's remarks were to demand military action.
Indicating that tMi might load to some form of military action; that there would be many altarnativa courses ope n to us.
The President then reviewed in some detail time r equir edff^lcl^' Vinson then asked if the Joint Chiefs of Staff actually approved the plans for the invasion.
The plans had been developed over a 10 -month period and had been submitted to the President by the JCS on a number of occasions.
This question did not^refer to whether the JCS did or did not approve the proposed actions of blockade against Cuba.
The President then reviewed matters again, read an intelligence note from a United Nations source which indicated Soviet intention to grab Berlin.
Halle ck questioned whether we were absolutely sure these weapons were offensive.
He said, ""One might question whether the missiles are or are not offensive.
He then read the message received from the Prime Minister which in effect agreed to support us in the United Nations and then raised many warnings including the dangers to Berlin, Turkey, Pakistan, Iran, etc., etc.
Sena cor Saltonstaii brought up the question of the legality, of the blockade, A great many Senators expressed concern over the proposed action with the OAS, indicating that they felt the OAS would delay rather than act.
Saltonstaii then asked whether a blockade would be legal if the OAS did not support it* The President answered that it probably would not; however we would proceed anyway.
Fulb right then stated that in his opinion the blockade was the worst of the alternatives open to us and it was a definite eifront to Russia and that the moment that we had to damage or sink a Soviet ship because of their failure to recognise or respect the blockade we would be at war with Russia and the war would be caused because of our own initiative.
Fulbright then repeated his position and stated in his opinion it would be far better to launch an attack and to take out the bases from Cuba.
McNamara stated that this would involve the spilling of Russian blood since there were so many thousand Russians manning these bases.
Fulbright responded that this made no difference because they were there in Cuba to help on Cuban bases.
Therefore he felt the Soviets would not react if some Russians got killed in Cuba.
The time has come for an invasion under the President's statement of February 13th, Fulbright repeated that an act on Russian ships is an act of war against Russia and on the other hand, an attack or an invasion of Cuba was an act against Cuba, not Russia.
Fulbright also expressed reservations concerning the possible OAS action.
The President took issue with Fulbright, stating that he felt that an attack on these bases, which we knew were manned by Soviet personnel, would involve large numbers of Soviet casualities and this would be more provocative than a confrontation with a Soviet ship.
During this meeting Senator Hickenlooper expressed himself as opposed to the action and in favor of direct military action.
U Ocio^r 1552 Mission 3101 15 Ocic^er 7962 Mission* 31D2 & 3103 17 Octcb-cr 1552 .wijiio-ii 3SCJ, 3IC5.
Emphasis ■continues to be placed on the READINESS status of the offensive missiles in Cuba.
This report is based on photographic coverage through Mission 3117 of 20 October 1962.
There are no changes in the estimates of operational readiness for the nine offensive missile sites.
Thr^e additional MRBMs and four additional MRBM launchers raise the totals to 33 missiles and 23 launchers.
One additional SAM site is now considered operational, bringing the total individually operational sites to 23 of the 24 active sites so far identified.5.
No new intelligence information has been received which modifies the nuclear storage situation since the last joint supplement.
Tarrwlahl displayed the most recent photograph* end a map showing 97 per cent coverage of the Island.
Robert Kennedy stated that the question had been raised as to why the situation was not reported earlier, what was wrong with our t Intelligence* It was agreed that the rapidity with which the MRBM site construction took place, and other events took place, accounted for the suddenness of the findings and that the leadership and selected press should be contacted privately.
DC1 was requested to contact Eulbright, Russell, Vinson, HaUeck, Dirksen. and Hickenlooper, and for the press, Alsop, Krock and David Lawrence.
McNamara raissd questions of when blockade proclamation will be issued, become effective, and discussed plans for the intercept of the first ship which would be the Xlmovsk* It was decided that if OAS acted on Tuesday, the proclamation would be iesued, effective Wednesday morning* October 24.
The President discussed the program, defending the steps taken, stated earlier action would not have been supported and would not have shut off the possibility of missile*, emp has ised that mobile missiles ca come in at any time and be set up rapidly.
McKtnar* then raised question of reaction to firing on a tj~2, indicated pilot* instructed to take evasive action.
It was decided that we would be immediately informed through jCS to the Secretary of Defense and a prompt decision for retaliation would then be made by the President* Taylor reported eight attack aircraft are maintained in hot alert and can destroy SAM sites within two hours or approximately the time that the would get back if the attack on it failed.
It was decided that if the President was not available, McNamara would have authority to act.
General Taylor agreed that he would take up and confirm today CIA request that our representatives be stationed with JCS planning staff and in the Flag Plot and in the JCS War Room.
If there is any delay on this please inform me so that I can again communicate with Taylor.
McNamara noted that they had no air intercept capability and would not attempt at this time to develop their plan of air intercept.
It was requested that CIA and Defense carefully analyse air traffic and report currently so that if there is a marked build-up, the Committee will be advised and appropriate action can be taken.
Six flights were approved and General Taylor ordered them off immediately.
It was presumed that they will return not later than 1:00 o'clock today.
It la vary important that KP1C and DCI's office receive p riivU at mllMt mcmtat DDQ to follow.
Almo imp rtint thAt tf photography is productive of new and mora convincing information, prints sh ould bo ant to Governor Stmm<a at once.
After a brief discussion of comm uai eatlo ns B toady stated that subject under study by Dr.
Wieaner, and urged State* Defense and CIA communications specialists to contact Wiesner.
Action ; Following meeting McCone, Wieaner , Smith and Edwards met and reviewed the CZA Latin American ^gmrr^Trf^rt^m system.
This whole c o m muni ca ti on problem is to be followed up energetically by CIA with Wiesner and all appropriate actions taken.
Secretary Ball reported Governor Stevenson and Mr McGoy felt they did not have enough information to make a convincing cue before the UN Security Council.
They requested a large map marked in color, showing the actual locations of a few of the sites, possibly one MKBM site, one IRBM site and one or two air fields; pictures of the sites showing progressive construction with-dates indicated; indication, but not necessarily the numbers* of allof the sites; a pre -May 1, i960 U-2 picture of the Soviet MRBM/ERBM site to show similarity.
Bundy explained idea of creating a staff to support the Committee indicating each member should have a working staff member, details to be worked out later.
DDd should consider appropriate assignment after conferring with State and Defense and determining their nominees.
This will be more or less full time and this staff man can handle Agency representation and also support me.
Meetings with Mr* Krock, Mr David Lawrence, and Mr Scott At 12:40 Mr Arthur Krock called at my office at my invitation* I reviewed the situation generally with him. answering question* concerning the background of the decision*, the arguments in favor of the course of action versus a blockade coupled with the political debate on the one hand and surprise military action on the other.
At 5:00 o'clock at my invitation Mr David Lawrence and Mr Scon called at my office and I reviewed the situation with them.
They questioned me concerning the evidence and I showed them several pictures which they accepted as convincing evidence.
They questioned me in considerable detail as to why we did not know this sooner, how Keating got his information and the penetration of intelligence activities during the months of August and September* I explained the situation substantially aft outlined to the leadership at their meeting.
X felt that neither was convinced and that both attached some ""other motive "" to the timing.
However, they did recognise that MRBM sites can be installed quickly and with very little advanced preparation which can be detected.
Both gentlemen Questioned me at considerable length as to why Administration spokesmen spoke ao categorically that the build-up was purely defensive and that no offensive capability was being installed.
They were concerned about repeated statements by the President, Chester Bowies, the Vice Fresident and other Administration spokesmen , but most particularly the State Department briefing held on Thursday, October 18th, which was two or three days after the original data was in our hands, at which time th» briefers again repeated the statement that the ""build-up involved defensive and no offensive weapons.
H They said they thought this briefing was a deceptive mistake and wondered why the briefing was carried on.
He said, ""McCone, I guess we're going to have to blow you out of this for not reorganising your estimating processes, most particularly your Board of National Estimates.
He said this was just another example of how the CIA estimating processes were not objective and served special interests.
Hence, he said, they were going to prepare an article and expose the whole situation to the public.
Scott apparently has read the latest Cuban estimate published about' Septembe r 20th, which contains wording as quoted above.
I feel Grogan should talk with him and perhaps 1 should talk with him also.
Congressional and 'Press, I have been forced to defend the Executive Branch of the Government and CIA against the questions why did we not know about this sooner and did we not estimate or forecast this eventuality.
Meetings with Senator Russell, Senator Kickeruocpei and Chairman Vinson 1.
At the President's request I contacted several members of the leadership of the Congress with the following results.
In a meeting on Aug s Tfrt 23rd, Senator Russell indicated a less critical attitude toward Administration policy than was evident at the leadership meeting the night before.
He in general approved the plan of actions, indicating strong reservations concerning the effectiveness and the utility of the blockade, expressed serious < concern over the Soviet/ United States confrontation which would result j from the blockade, and accepted the course of action only I because it would lead to the next phase which would be that of j taking the missiles and offensive weapons out of Cuba at a time and by means of our own determination.
Russell favored more positive action against Cuba which would involve not only air strike but invasion.
In the initial part of the discussion he felt the President's speech had not established a clear-cut right for military action; however, by careful reference to the speech (a copy of which I had with me) he agreed that the wording did give the President right of action without further notification.
In general, Russell's attitude was considerably different than the leadership meeting and might be summed up as reserved approval.
During the conversation, I outlined my feelings that our | purposes must be to remove the missiles and also to remove j Castro as is outlined in a separate memorandum, | 2.
Senator Hickenlooper approved the speech, the action, and the anticipated further action without reservation.
He expressed confidence in the President as did Senator Russell but serious reservations concerning some of the Presidents advisors who he felt would influence the President to follow a very weak and compromising line.
However, it appeared to me that Hickenlooper was greatly relieved by the speech and more satisfied with our Cuban policy than was evident at the leadership meeting.
He approved it but he had concluded that military action would be necessary and this he heartily approved.
Vinson feels that we must dispose of the Castro problem as well as the missiles.
In this regard, I outlined my feelings as covered by separate memorandum.
Vinson tended to review the activities of the Navy with Admiral Anderson and others, insisting that we must be sure that we are going to do enough, that our blockade is going to be effective, and that if we invade, we must invade with great force, an assured victory, quick victory, otherwise Cuban resistance will be rallied and our casualties will be great.
Both Vinson and Russell were very inquisitive as to the position of the Joint Chiefs.
I explained this as expressed by Taylor, pointing out that their position of a sudden unannounced military strike was reasonable in view of their responsibilities, however, it must also be recognized that civilians with broader responsibilities,e. military and political as well, necessarily had to moderate the JCS view.
I stated that I felt the JCS view would insure the most successful military operations with the least American losses but that I opposed it and felt that the military handicaps resulting from our course of action must be reverted to, can be overcome by increase in the weight of the military operation.
None of the three felt that we should have undertaken a surprise attack; however, Russell in particular felt that a warning and a following military operation might have been preferable to the blockade.
I pointed out that the warning now had been given and action could be taken now n at a time of our own choosing and by means of our own determination"" and after again reviewing the wording of the speech, Russell agreed this was correct.
All members present pine Counsel for Defense Department X Committee reviewed the blockade proclamation and approved iU Uvu signed by the President at 6:00m.
GUpatric reported that this would have little or no effect on the American economy.
McCone questioned these findings; however Gilpatric said that this had been thoroughly studied and McCone v s concerns as expressed at the morning meeting were unfounded.
Bundy stated that this is complicated as the two posts are so commingled that they really must be held by one ™»™ Taylor raised question that if this was done it would hart Lemnitser's prestige.
The President said that he felt that Norstad was so experienced and so capable and his Judgment so sound, as evidenced by today's cable, copy of which I have not seen, t>i» he would take the risk of NATO country criti cisms , he did not tb i n^ that Lemnitxer would be hurt, and he wished Norstad to remain.
In the prolonged discussion of report on CivU Defense problems, the President seemed particularly concerned over the situation if we should 1 enrich attacks which might result In four or five missiles being delivered on the United States.
Replied that many arrangements could be made without too much publicity, such as repositioning food, actually obtaining space, putting up ehelter eigne , etc.
X got tha conclusion that not very much could or would be done; that whatever was done would involve a great deal of publicity and public alarm.
Prior to the departure of Secretary McNamara at approximately 7s 00 o'clock, McCone (who had not been called upon for an intelligence appraisal) stated to the President that he felt certain intelligence should be reported to the meeting prior to the departure of Secretary McNamara as some items observed by the Intelligence.
Some of Mission 5002, the low altitude photographic coverage of 23 October 1962, arrived during the preparation of this report and preliminary comments have been incorporated in the discussion of the GuanajaylRBM sites.
There are two changes in the estimated dates of full operational capability.
San Cristobal MRBM Site 2 and Sagua La Grande MRBM Site 1 are now estimated to achieve this status on 25 October instead of 22 October as previously estimated.
Seven Soviet ships with cargo hatch openings of 75 feet or longer have now been identified as possible ballistic missile carriers.
They have made 13 trips to Cuba to date, and three are currently enroute to Cuba.
No new intelligence information has been received which modifies the nuclear storage situation.
Communist reaction to the United States quarantine action against Cuba has not gone beyond the highly critical but uncommitting statement issued yesterday by the Soviet government.
Of these 22, nine are in positions which would permit arrival by the end of October.
Attended byi Congressional Lreedership , the President, Rusk, McNamara, McCone and Robert Lovett, McCone gave a brief intelligence summary, copy attached.
Secretary Rusk reported on the United Nations, stated there is no confirmed Soviet reaction or statement of intentions but discussed exchange with Bert rand Russell and dismissed this as unofficial.
The President categorically stated on several occasions through the meeting there was no formal or informal direct approach for a Kennedy /Khrushchev meeting and no negotiations toward that end.
McNamara reported on military operations, stated that as of this hour there had been ""no interceptions of Soviet ships; none were necessary.
Mansfield spoke of the importance of confidential nature of the meeting, referring to Roland Evans 1 article in the Herald Tribune which summarised in accurate detail views of all who attended the prior meeting.
It was the consensus that the discussions at leaderI ship meetings must be kept most confidential.
Rusk then reported that Secretary General U Thant would issue a statement calling for a twoweek moratorium.
Emphasis continues to be placed on the READINESS status, or changes therein, of the offensive missiles in Cuba.
The quality of the recent, low-altitude photography permits positive identification of many types of missile associated equipment.
As yet there is no evidence of change in the pace of construction activities.
There is increasing evidence of the use of camouflage at several sites.
We have analyzed the capability of the Soviets to transport nuclear warheads for these missiles from the USSR to Cuba using submarines and aircraft.
A TU-114 can fly non-stop fromOlenya in the Soviet Union to Cuba with up to 10 nuclear warheads on an approximate great circle route which would not pass over any other country.
New, low-altitude photography of 23 October confirms previous estimates of the general characteristics and rate of construction of the probable nuclear warhead bunkers at several sites.
Cuban armed forces continue their alert, .with military aircraft on stand down since the morning of 23 October.
There are indications that known and suspected dissidents are being rounded up.
As of 0600 EDT at least 14 of the 22 Soviet ships which were known to be en route to Cuba had turned back.
Two of the dry cargo ships not known to have reversed course may be carrying non-miljLtarv cargo , _b ut the BELOVODSK M^V has 12 HOUND helicopaanges in course"" ""appear to ""Save been executed in midday on 23 October, before the President signed the proclamation establishing the quarantine.
Ill* We still see no signs of any crash procedure in measures to increase the readiness of Soviet armed forces.
Attention remains centered on neutralist efforts in the UN to find machinery for easing tension.
Latin American countries are beginning to offer military units for the quarantine, and there is generally little adverse reaction in the hemisphere.
McCone reported on intelligence, reviewing summary of 25 October, including penciled memo randoms as indicated, plus Cline memorandum of 25 October on talks with Sir Kenneth Strong, and the Watch Report of same date.
I called special attention to the BELOVODSX and reported on Page II -5 and the searching of the Cubana airplane by Canadians as reported on page IV-2.
McNamara reported that at 7:00 o 1 clock a destroyer intercepted the tanker BUCHAREST which responded destination was Havana, cargo was petroleum and the BUCHAREST was permitted to proceed under surveillance.
He recommended orders be issued to immediately board Bloc ships and then the BUCHAREST be boarded.
Decision was reached that Navy be instructed to board the next Soviet ship contacted which would be the GROZNY, a tanker but which was carrying a deck load which might be missile field tanks.
Contact was to be made with the GROZNY as early as possible and that was estimated to be about 8:00 o'clock in the evening, Friday, October 26th.
McCone then noted the number of ships in the Eastern Atlantic and in the Baltic and Mediterranean which had turned back.
Dillon asked about ships in the Pacific, The President asked whether Soviet ships bound elsewhere than Cuba had changed course.
There was a further discussion of the policy of stopping or hailing non-Bloc ships.
Draft of United States reply to the U Thant letter was approved with modifications.
It was agreed at the meeting that we must insist upon the removal of missiles from Cuba in addition to demands that construction be stopped and that UN inspectors be permitted at once.
Bundy reviewed Khrushchev letter to the President of the 24th of October and the Kennedy reply.
ALL, MEMBERS PRESENT McCone gave intelligence briefing covered by Situation Report of 10/25 and followed with resume of Bloc shipping dated 10/25 end summarized answer* to specific qu estions as indicated on the third page; also referred briefly toB ■ reaction to the Soviet government statement.
There followed a long discussion of policy matters, notes of which are covered in the attached* The meeting considered three drafts of scenarios of three possible courses of action* that is, air strike, the political path and progressive economic blockade, all of which are attached.
Yon asked me to give you a paper by 5:00m. today on the San Roman/ Attorney General /Harvey /Lansdale/MONGC OSS problem in connection with submarines and the 50 -Cuban project.
I have talked only to Bill Harvey but in the light of my prior knowledge of Special Group/ MONGOOSE /Lans dale /voice level, etc., it is my clear opinion that this whole problem is centered around jurisdictional bureaucracy not unlike the tangle I had with Gilpatric and the Air Forces.
Lansdale feels badly cut out of the picture and appears to be seeking to reconstitute the MONGOOSE Special Group operations during this period of impending crisis.
I need not tell you that Lansdale 's organization and the MONGOOSE concept of clearing actions through Special Group is an impossible procedure under current circumstances.
The deliberative MONGOOSE system was not utilized for this particular projectHarvey rightly realized that intelligence collection was essential and that it should be geared to a turnover of the assets to the military in place in the event military operations took place.
It was this requirement that generated the need for submarines and the need for the 50 -odd Cubans.
General Johnson of the JCS Staff was knowledgeable and General Lansdale was subsequently informed and assisted in obtaining the submarines.
The detailed planning is still going on but cannot be firm until the subi marine commanders are available.
The Cubans are not owned by San Roman but have been recruited and checked out by CIA and in a number of cases have been CIA agents for a long time.
This is pure intelligence collection and the establishment of intelligence assets in place.
It is being closely coordinated with the JCS Planning Staff and Lansdale knows about it.
It obviously cannot be planned, controlled, and operated through the cumbersome procedures of MONGOOSE and therefore it is not in MONGOOSE channels.
Supplement 6 to Joint Evaluation of Soviet Missile Threat in Cuba, 26 October 1962 i Excerpt) T CP 3l ^ZET SUPPLEMENT 6 TO JOINT EVALUATION OF SOVIET MISSILE THREAT IN CUBA PREPARED BY Guided Missile and Astronautics intelligence Committee Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee National Photographic Interpretation Center.
NOTICE This supplement updates and amplifies previous reports/ Emphasis is ' placed on the READINESS status, construction pace and any significant changes at the offensive missile sites in Cuba.
The 25 October photography of four.MRBM sites shows continued rapid construction activity at each site.
This activity apparently continues to be directed toward achieving a full operational capability as soon as possible.
Camouflage and canvas covering of critical equipment is also continuing.
As yet there is no evidence indicating any intention to move or dismantle these sites, 2.
No new missile sites have been identified,, although continued analysis of previous photography has revealed some road improvement 'activity in the Remedios area which is considered indicative of plans for the second IRBM site estimated for this area.
Only two Soviet freighters — and five tankers, one of them already past the quarantine line — still are headed for Cuba.
The BELOVODSK, with twelve MI-4 helicopters, is inthe North Atlantic; the PUGACHEV appears to have slowed or stopped several days west of the Panama Canal.
A total of 16 dry cargo ships now are carried as having turned back toward the USSR on 23 October.
Two Soviet civil air flights are scheduled for Havana with passengers; cargo, if any, is not known.
No fffifYi Qr depi nvTn^r>+-g:_K^nia , alert in East Germany, where two areas along the West German border have been closed off for exercises.
Moscow highlights Khrushchev * s acceptance of U Thant's appeal in a bid to start USSoviet negotiations.
Peiping, however, is irritated that the Soviet response to United States action is not stronger.
There is no major change or significant new development in non-bloc reaction to the crisis.
Most"" of the OAS nations have offered to participate in some form in the quarantine , and, NATO members have agreed with minor reservations to deny'' landing and overflight rights to Soviet planes bound for Cuba. ' sites.
One, the CIA i plan to have ten teams go into Cuba by submarine to gather intelligence on missile bases and other points of interest.
McCone stated there was an organizational problem with Lansdale iinde-r current conditions and a meeting had been called for this afternoon to resolve this problem and to establish a course of action on the Lansdale MONGOOSE organization.
The President stated that he felt the Lansdale organization should be used and suggested it might serve as a Subcommittee of the NSC Executive Committee.
McNamara, Gilpatric, General Taylor, Johnson, Ed Martin, Don Wilson, the Attorney General, McCone, Lansdale, Harvey, and Parrott.
It became immediately apparent that Lansdale felt himself lacking in authority and not in channel of either operations or information with JCS or SecDef 's office.
There was considerable criticism by innuendo of the CIA/Lansdale relationship.
McCone stated that he understood the MONGOOSE goal was to encourage the Cuban people to take Cuba away from Castro and to set up a proper form of government.
He said CIA had, and would continue to support Lansdale whom we recognized as the director of this operation.
He felt that any indication that CIA was not affording such support to Lansdale was completely erroneous.
On the other hand, CIA by long-standing arrangements, details of which were most recently confirmed, are obligated to support the military to the extent desired by the JCS in any combat theatre, and therefore probably some CIA moves made for the purpose of meeting this objective had been misunderstood by Lansdale.
It was decided that a new Cuban political office to plan for the postinvasion government of Cuba would be secretly set up by the State Department.
The group reaffirmed that Lansdale is to be in charge, of the MONGOOSE operations which will cover all covert activities of any department of government, including State, CIA, USIA, etc.
General Lansdale is then to determine /assets available in the government can produce the information desired by Defense and State, and then program a procedure to be followed.
It is expected that Lansdale will make these determinations at the earliest moment and confer further with the co mm ittee or individual representative s thereof.
NOTICE Emphasis continues to be placed on the READINESS status, pace of construction and any significant changes at the offensive missile sites in Cuba.
This report is based primarily upon detailed analysis of the 25 October low-altitude coverage . SUMMARY 1.
Detailed analysis confirms the rapid pace of construction reported in our last supplement.
As of 25 October there was no evidence indicating any intention to halt construction, dismantle or move these sites.
There are no changes in the dates of estimated operational capability for the MRBM and IRBM sites.
This means a capability to launch up to 24 MRBM missiles within 6 to 8 hours of a decision to do so, andarefire capability of up to 24 additional MRBMs within 4 to 6 hours . within 3.
No IRBM missiles, missile transporters, erectors or associated equipment have been observed to date.
There has been no K^^S^^j^ ev idence of attempts at interdiction of United States reconnaissanc^urcrat^^^^ 9.
Despite Krushchev's statement to Mr Knox of 24 October, we still lack positive evidence that nuclear weapons are deployed in Cuba.
TOP SECRE T 27 October 1962 SUMMARY CONTENTS I Based on the latest low-level reconnissance mission, three of the four MRBM sites at San Cristobal and the two sites at Sagua La Grande appear to be fully operational.
However, they remain under orders not to take any hostile action unless attacked.
Steps toward establishing an integrated air defense system are under way.
On the diplomatic front, Cuban representatives are trying to plant the idea that Havana would be receptive to UN mediation.
They indicate, however, that a prerequisite must be ft proof "" that the United States does not intend to attack Cuba.
Despite Khrushchev's declaration to U Thant that Soviet ships would temporarily avoid the quarantine area, we have no information as yet that the six Soviet and three satellite ships en route have changed course.
A Swedish vessel, believed to be under charter to the USSR, refused to stop yesterday when intercepted by a United States destroyer and was allowed to continue to Havana.
No significant redeployment of Soviet ground, air or naval forces have been noted.
However, there are continuing indications of increased readiness among some units.
ThreeFclass submarines have been identified on the surface inside or near the quarantine line.
In Western Europe, further support for the United States has come from several quarters and unfavorable reactions are decidedly in the minority.
Official London seems intent on checking premature optmism which is showing up in widely scattered parts of the world, particularly among the neutrals.
There are reports that anti-US demonstrations have broken out in several Latin American capitals, including Buenos Aires, Caracas, and La Paz.
This report does not attempt to estimate Soviet intent to attack the United States* SUMMARY 1.
We still have no direct knowledge of thermonuclear warheads in Cuba, but believe it prudent to assume that the Soviet missile force there is so armed.
We estimate that all 24 MR BM launchers are now fully operational, representing a capability to salvo 24 1000-mile missiles within 6 to 8 hours of a decision to launch, 3.
No new MRBM or IRBM sites have been detected in the past day, although we have not had high-altitude coverage appropriate for search since 23 October 1962.
Construction at the Soviet IRBM sites in Cuba continues at a rapid pace and missile support equipment is now being moved to the vicinity of Guana jay Site 1.
The entire missile -launching force at the Soviet MRBM sites in Cuba is being checked out on a rapid basis.
Automatic anti-aircraft weapons and personnel trenches for protection against air attack are now evident at many of the MRBM sites.
These weapons have been introduced in the last few days and probably account for the ground fire now being noted on the low-level photographic missions.
Camouflage against aerial photography is being extended at the missile sites and is becoming more effective.
A missile propellant offloading and transhipping facility has now been identified at the double -fenced area at Punta Gerada in Bahia Honda.
This was suspected formerly of being a port of entry for nuclear weapons.
The loss of the U-2 over Banes was probably caused by intercept by an SA-2 from the Banes site, orpilot hypoxia, with the former appearing more likely on the basis of present information.
However, the use of high frequency radio is also indicated by the presence of high frequency antennae at Sagua La Grande sites 1 and 2.
Construction of probable nuclear storage facilities was continuing on 26 and 27 October.
None of the bunkers observed at probable nuclear £221 SUeS beUeVed t0 be in ° peration althou S b tha < * f Guanajay fKBM Site Mo. is essentially complete.
The existence of a second, probable nuclear storage area at the Sagua La Grande launch complex indicates that each launch site is probably intended to have individual, permanent nuclear storage.
SUMMARY CONTENTS I Surveillance of 26 October and preliminary analysis of yesterday's coverage shows that the development of both IRBM and MRBM sites in Cuba is continuing its rapid pace.
U Thant is thinking seriously of accepting Castro's invitation to visit Cuba, and night go as early as Tuesday.
REMEDIOS SITE # 1 { N22-57-25 W82-36-55 ) C PROBABLE NUCLEAR STORAGE INSTALLATIONS 1.
It was decided to use RB-66's, which are now in Florida with UN observers aboard if arrangements can be made by the UN in time.
The DCI has been authorized to release to General Rickhye all pertinen t information on the buildup in Cuba, protecting only intelligence aourcesf BH1 I Therefore, the portfolios can be released.
A draft reply to Khrushchev is to be written by Ambassador Llewellyn Thompson in Alexis Johnson's office.
DD/I is to insure that the CIA input is taken account of* Cline was instructed to support the DCI's position that the removal of the missiles should not end by giving Castro's a sanctuary and thus sustain his subversive threat to other Latin American nations.
October 1962 ( Excerpt j SUPPLEMENT 9 TO JOINT EVALUATION OF SOVIET MISSILE THREAT IN CUBA PREPARED BY Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee National Photographic Interpretation Center 2200 HOURS 28 OCTOBER 1962 107.
Activity was continuing at all the MRBM and IRBM missile sites covered on Saturday, 27 October.
Camouflage and covering with canvas and natural concealment was continuing at the MRBM sites and is becoming more effective.
However, we have identified oxidizer trailers and possible fuel transporters among the support equipment near Guanajay IRBM Site 1.
These fuel transporters are larger in size than similar fuel transporters at MRBM sites.
No new MRBM or IRBM sites have been detected; however, we have had no high altitude coverage appropriate for search since 23 October 1962.
Soviet Offensive Weapons in Cuba 1* The enclosed table includes a list of Soviet offensive aissile weapons and associated equi^aent in Cuba* 2.
Very little equipnent has been observed at the three IRSM sites in Cuba* The only cquipnent identified, in addition to structures under construction, has been two possible fuel trucks and two possible oxidant trucks* It the IRBMs and other associated equipment are in Cuba they are probably in an unlocated facility between the port of Maricl and the sites.
A study of Soviet sea shipments to Cuba, however, indicates that it is unlikely that aaay IRBMs had reached Cuba prior to the institution of the Quarantine.
There are, however, nuclear weapon storage bunkers under construction at each of the MRBM and 1RBM sites.
If nuclear weapons are in Cuba they are probably in an unioaated facility between the entry port of Mariel and the sites.
All IL-2S aircraft are at San Julian in western Cuba; three or four appear to be assembled.
An additional 23 or 24 aircraft in crates have also boen observed at this airfield.
Each disasseebied aircraft consists of 1 fuselage crate 60X8X10 feet; 2 win* cratos 9X40X8 feet; and 2 engine crates 9X30X8 feet.
There are also numerous general purpose support equipment associated vith MRBM/IRBM units, such as trucks, vehicles etc.
Implied numbers are those ve estimate to be organic with Soviet MRBM/IRBM units or represent the highest number observed.
THE DULSCTOR I» On 23 October you gave a brief intelligence report saying that construction at the sites was continuing.
On 25 October you told the Group there had been no ch ange in the construction pace; you covered the Watch.
Committge^r ep o rt-i^^SSg^ that Soviet armed forces were increasing simi^mmimmtim state of readiness; you described the Soviet ships ^^i^route to Cuba carrying; helicopters;*^ covered the departure of a Cubans, plane from Can a d a to Havana^ and also briefed on the turn-around of 15 of the 22 Soviet ships.
At an evening meeting status of Soviet shipping f roxL briefed in detail on the 4.
On 26 October, which was attended by Stevenson, you covered the Watch Co mmi ttee report which concluded that Soviet armed forces had completed measures for an alert butthat jfaere were no significant deployments.
You mentioned the point that press stories based on special intelligence must be prevented* After the meeting you talked with the President and Secretary Rusk emphasizing that Castro\<#e4fc£T remain in Cuba with a greater security and this is the situation we must be careful of.
On 30 October you told the Group available data does not indicate preparation for dismantling and noted continued construction of nuclear storage bunkers.
Many of the mis sile£ erectors had been removed and are no longer visible.
Committee Report which concluded that Soviet armed forces remain on alert and you reviewed briefly current developments in l^aos, South Vietnam, and India, n Soviet nuclear subs, and Soviet nuclear tests and you pointed out that our ability to analyze these tests had been impared by DOD withdrawal of collection vehicles.
On 31 October you told the Group that there was continued evidence of construction and conce alm ent but noted that evidence that some of the launchers had been moved from the MRBM sites might fee consgued>«*h the first step at dismantling.
You further pointed out that photos^compared with those taken on Saturday and order^S^to cease were probably not issued until S unday night or Monday morning.
There was discussion of the ""intelligence gap"" and you reviewed the Cuban SNIE of 19 September, noting that it failed to fully appraise^oS^eports available.
On 1 November you briefed on details concerning U Thant's mission to Havana.
You pointed out that Cuba probably would engage in reconnaissance with anti aircraft fire since they had^clfti nlft /that they had developed a pattern of reconnaissance.
You noted there had been no reconnaissance in Eastern Cuba since 23 October.
Decision was made at this meeting to cover I«ieE2&, }L~ 1 $ t&>< ^ Sih Julian and MRBM sites.
On 2 November you told the Group there was evidence that the Soviets were dismantling missiles, but the assembly of I a le 28 bombers was continuing.
Deploynent and Withdrawal of Soviet Missiles and Other Significant Weapons in Cuba NOTE This memorandum assesses our evidence concerning the number of Soviet missiles deployed to and subsequently withdrawn from Cuba, the chances that Soviet missiles remain in Cuba, and the situation and outlook with respect to rates of withdrawal of IL-28s and other significant Soviet weapons in Cuba.
We cannot exclude the possibility that more ■■ -actually arrived/ and that some therefore remain, but we think that any such number would be small* Available evidence also warrants the conclusion that the Soviets are preparing to withdraw the IL-28s.
The Soviets normally provide two missiles for every HRBM and IRBM launcher and, since several of the launchers already had two, we believe that they intended to provide two each for the others, or a total of 72 for the 36 launchers identified.
In addition, there is sone evidence suggesting that the Soviets planned a third deploynent area, in eastern Cuba, to follow upon those in the western and central parts of the country.
This estimate is based on the following factors:* Our analysis indicates the missiles were shipped in one piece — less only warheads — on the transporter in a package about 68 feet long as hold cargo , Of the Soviet dry cargo ships involved in the Cuban arms buildup, only seven ships have hatches which would allow stowage of this missile package.
We have reasonably good data on the size of these ships* Because of the time in port for both the loading and unloading, apparent Soviet loading practice in deliveries to Cuba, and the size of the ships, we believe the most probable load was six to seven missiles per ship* More would have required extensive shoring between decks and this does not appear to have occurred.
The Soviet claim of 42 is consistent with our evidence, but we -2358 110.
The analy\ sis of these thirteen voyages in Annex B inclines » t us to accept a figure not much higher than the 36 we can account for.
Such a renewed crisis would find the Soviets in i an even more disadvantageous position than before to protect their interests or avoid humiliation.
Photography of 25 November indicates that 20 IL-28 fuselage crates remained unopened at San Julian air base and ' some of the remaining 13 which had previously been partially or fully assembled were being dismantled.
We express our deep appreciation of the cooperation and assistance which vras . . . freely and promptly given.
THE WHITE HOUSE V/ASHINGTON PRESIDENT '3 FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY BOARD February 4, 1963 leraMSDTJH FOR THE PRESIDENT Your Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board has completed a review of actions which were taken by the foreign intelligence agencies of our Government to discharge their responsibility for' intelligence coverage , assessment and reporting on the Soviet military build-up in Cuba during the months preceding your report to the Nation on October 22, 1962* concerning the USSR's establishment of offensive missile sites in Cuba.
In our reconstruction of intelligence coverage of Soviet , activities on the island of Cuba, it is noted that two principal, consecutive phases were involved.
The second"" phase consisted of a rauch briefer period beginning on Octoberi-r and culminating with the Presidential, announcement on October 22 concerning measures for meeting the Soviet offensive threat in Cuba, The event, of course, which provided a demarcation of these two • phases was the acquisition on October 14 of U~2 photographic evidence that the Soviet Union had taken steos to establish, a strategic nuclear missile complex in Cuba.
HA-£ ■As to the pre -October 14 period s we con clude that our fo reigr, j^teljj^nc^effort_should Ji^Jbeer^orvjz ffectiv e^in obtaihTng^oecuate and timely intelligence as to the nature ""ahc scot „ ^ scope of the Soviet military build-up as it developed over, a period of months, and ijJL exploiting the available intelligence as a basis for estimating Soviet and Cuban plans and intentions.
The Secretary of State objected to this combining of an actual overflight with the over-, fly ins of international waters.
V'e also feel that the Special Group should be possessed/ of a mechanise which would automatically pick up such omissions of reporting.
Cuba, An important cautionary statement appeared in a discussion paragraph, namely, that the contingency of' such a development should be examined carefully, even though it would run counter to current Soviet policy.
Turning to another important aspect of the intelligence assessment function, v;e find"" t~r.cz in the analysis cf intelligence indicators end in the production of current Intel licence reports, the into Hi gene a ccr -.unity Tailed to get across to key Government fofficials the most accurate possible picture of nha; the Soviets October 14. the fact hindsight is easier to apcly than foresight in determining i the significance of oartlculfcr indicators included in the mass, reoorts available for intelligence analysis.
Neither you nor your principal policy advisers were . \ provided at appropriate intervals with meaningful, cumulative assessments of "" the available intelligence indicators.
Had the intelligence community systematically prepared and periodically presented compilations of accumulated indicators, this ivould have permitted appropriate pel Icy -level consideration of developments . in Cuba end of /alternative courses of action as required.
We believe a further and exhaustive examination, not,*' limited to Cuba, should be raado by the intelligence community of the complex analytic process employed throughout the community in the assessment of intelligence indicators.
We base this belief on the nature of the indicatortype data which our review -discloses was available during the period from May to October 1962.
Thirty five examples of such available indicators are set forth in Annex A to this report.
In cataloging such examples we appreciate fully that we have the benefit of a perspective which was not then possessed by the intelligence community.
We are also aware that the illustrations listed are but a small number taken from the great volume of reports v/hich were received and which included some demonstrably erroneous information.
We urge that the annexed illustrations be read not only for their individual content but also for the purpose of noting the cumulative significance of the information being received.
Intelligence Reporting Oar review of the intelligence reporting process reveals that limitations which were placed on the publication and dissemination of reports and information concerning the situation in Cuba were either misinterpreted or misan^lied.
Because of the Director's rese rvation s concerning estimates on Cuban order of battle., he instructed CIA • analysts to check out with the National Photographic Interpretation Center any report that was susceptible of photographic verification.
The purpose was to establish by all available means the authenticity of refugee and agent reports.
One conseouence was that during the pre -October 14 period as information became available / on the offensive build-up in Cuba, it was not published by the CIA even in the President T s Intelligence Checklist.
The President"" placed limitations on the publication of reports on weaoons which might be offensive, pending receipt of further information concerning a suspected missile installation at Banes.
On October 9 these instructions were reiterated by the President who emphasised .the importance of maintaining the tightest possible control of all information relating to offensive weapons.
The President's directive restricting the publication of intelligence on offensive weapons was clearly wise, necessary, and essential to the national interest.
Hie misinterpretations of this directive endangered the necessary flow of information and serve as a warning that in future situations requiring such restrictions attention must bo given to establishing secure channels for transmission of vital information to officials having a clear need to know.
Emergenc y, P 1 gnnlng ' The Cuba experience points up the need for advance planning to ensure that our human and material intelligence resources are sufficient, and are adequately organised, to meet the demands of an emergency such as that which confronted our Government in this instance.
When the President found it necessary to restrict the publication of information on offensive missiles in Cuba and to confine such information to designated categories of recipients, the intelligence community did not have in readiness a plan to meet the reporting requirements of such an emergency.
Defense Intelligence Agency from' disseminating outsidethe Washington area intelligence publications on the developing Cuba situation.
Moreover, in the absence of a central processing facility for developing photographic fiin in quantity, under appropriate security safeguards, it *.;as necessary to naita use of z~iini laboratories at scattered locations considerably removed from Washington.
The President The Whit* Houm I am returning the report of the President 1 » Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board dated Fcbru arj^ jth commenting on the intelligence community 1 ■ actioni in connection with the Cuban crisis.
I will not attempt to comment on the specifics of the report* It is my understanding that the Board will make recommendations to you for cor* recti ve measures which they feel should be taken within the intelligence community.
This . same attitude apparently dictated the Secretary of State's action in revising a C2A -proposed flight at the Special Group meeting held in Mr Bundy's office on September 10th.
It was. believe, the same attitude that caused the Special Group in considering my request on October 4th for extensive Cuban reconnaissance to ask pg$gg| JCS, and CIA to study all alternative means of conducting aerial reconnaissance and to report back on October 9th.
In retrospect, it might be contended that there was a failure to exercise sufficient urgency in proposing U-2 reconnaissance missions; however, I am inclined to believe that any one reaching such a conclusion must first carefully weigh the serious considerations that enter into a decision to overfly denied territory.
Nevertheless , one can now readily conclude that greater emphasis should have been placed by the estimators on certain of the ""Intelligence Indicators"" attached as Annex A to the Board report.
I have examined this performance personally and in depth, and Incidentally with a critical eye.
I believe that the conclusions reached from my study made for the Board at your request reflect a more reasonable judgment of the performance of the intelligence community in the six months' period prior to the October crisis.
Attachment JAM:mfb:bd Orig Addressee 1 ~ DCI White House 1 DCI Chrono of offensive missiles to Cuba.
A relatively short period of time ensued between the introduction of strategic weapons into Cuba, particularly strategic missiles, and the commencement of the flow, although meager, of tangible reports of their presences detection of their possible presence and targeting of the suspect areas of their location was accomplished in a compressed time frame; and the intelligence cycle did move with extraordinary rapidity through the stages of collection, analysis, targeting for verification, and positive identification.
Aerial photography was very effective and our best means of establishing hard intelligence.
The 19 September estimate, while indicating the improbability that the Soviet Union would place MKBM 1 * and IRBM's in Cuba, did state that ""this contingency must be examined carefully, even though it would run counter to current Soviet policy 11 ; the estimators in preparing the 19 September estimate gave great weight to the philosophical argument concerning Soviet intentions and thus did not fully weigh the many indicators, 10.
