Developments in the last two decades, particularly the collapse of the Soviet Union and the substantial declassification of relevant documents by the United States government, have furnished scholars with ample new material to expand and revise the rich historiography.
Memoirs, especially those of former Soviet officials, have also proliferated, animating the debate.
The new century has opened the way to a fresh approach that eschews ideological wrangling in favor of dialogue and collaboration among scholars of the former rivals.
Nevertheless, the leading role of the superpowers remains a defining feature of this history’s narrative, with the Cuban experience playing a subsidiary role in the momentous clash of titans.
The Missile Crisis As Seen From Cuba stands out as a determined effort to incorporate the Cuban perspective on events prior to, during, and after the actual incident.
The book’s balanced selection of sources integrates data from official records of the three main protagonists in a step-by-step account that also features vignettes of each side’s apparent take on the event and its aftermath.
This encompassing approach yields a panoramic outlook, allowing the reader a glance at the sort of interaction that defined the crisis.
In addition, as the author points out, “government management advanced in close interconnection with military actions ,” establishing social organizations, efficient support networks, and policies that became paramount to the regime’s survival in the long run.
In general, Diez Acosta seems to suggest that the Bay of Pigs assault and the missile standoff signified an ultimately beneficial, rite of passage for the Cuban revolution, contributing to the system’s consolidation and endurance.
The book’s approach to the events seems to aim at defining the standoff as yet another, albeit potentially disastrous, imperialist clash of wills.
The subliminal “we say/ you say” play on developments, is another of the work’s inventive features.
A few other instances further suggest vestiges of the Cold War approach to this historiography.
Similarly, Diez Acosta’s meticulous account of the Soviets’ military buildup in Cuba, including his assertion that the United States intelligence services had dangerously miscalculated the Soviet nuclear capability in the island , lacks citation of precise sources.
Although the author strives to remain objective throughout his discussion, the ideological underpinnings in his discourse seem also unavoidable at times.
His recurrent reference to “the people of Cuba” seems troubling , considering that the only Cuban voices we hear throughout the account are those of Fidel Castro and Che Guevara.
In some instances, the insertion of elements with specific metaphoric content to construct a subliminal, ideological vision becomes quite evident.
For example, the narrative on CIA plots in the island incorporates the “coward/courageous” binary to identify the right sort of Cuban, a stereotype reminiscent of the macho-oriented, homophobic formula that also colored Cuban political discourse at the time.
As is the case with most of the details regarding the CIA’s “secret war” in the island prior to the crisis , Diez Acosta’s evidence on the Cuban mercenaries mainly reproduces the allegations published in other Cuban sources.
Despite uneven sourcing, the work still accomplishes its aim of contributing a novel approach to the episode.
In addition, by incorporating Cuba’s experience into the picture, Diez Acosta’s book may have set into motion another sort of blockade, one that could finally interrupt the former superpowers’ intellectual monopoly over the history and story of the Missile Crisis.
But in order to accomplish this successfully, Cuba and its historiography may also have to evolve into a new era, beyond the Cold War juxtaposition of victims and villains; heroes and rogues.
Notes 1 The list of sources on the subject is too voluminous to include here.
Katharine H Cross ASPECT (Alliance for Social, Political, Ethical & Cultural Thought) Virginia Tech kcathar@vt.edu S cholarly interest in the history of Haiti has resurged in recent years, largely focused on the Haitian Revolution.
Kate Ramsey’s The Spirits and the Law should not be overlooked as a run-of-the-mill addition to either body of work.
Ramsey’s award-winning1 first book offers a valuable perspective on both the broader history of Haiti and the sociopolitical role of Vodou as she examines the creation and enforcement of laws that restricted ritual practices between the colonial period and the fall of the Duvalier regime.
Second, attempts to enforce these laws were subverted and manipulated insofar as it served local populations.
The Spirits and the Law examines the Haitian government’s approach to vaudoux as a potential threat to order and civil society, and the international community’s view of it as evidence against Haiti’s modernity.
The government’s concerns about spiritual gatherings and practices were amplified by outside forces, namely the Catholic Church and the US military.
The greater the attempts to exert control over ritual practice, the more distorted and perverse became their perceptions of vaudoux, and vice versa.
