United States relations with the Soviet Union were declining, and the world seemed to be proceeding deeper into crisis and conflict.
A prime example of this was displayed on the evening of October 22, 1962, when Kennedy addressed the nation via television.
The president had undisputable evidence that Soviet-built nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States and many Latin American countries were in place in Cuba, 90 miles from the United States shoreline.
In the following decades, especially during the 1990s as Soviet documents became available, records revealed that in late October 1962, the world was indeed at the brink of a nuclear holocaust.
The intersection of the careers of a United States president and a newly established leader of a small nearby island, Fidel Castro Ruz , would keep the world's population on the edge of their seats for many days.
A Young Fidel Castro Born in Mayarí, Cuba, in 1926, Castro grew up in a solidly middle-class home.
During most of Castro's early years, Fulgencio Batista y Zaldívar , an oppressive dictator , ruled Cuba.
Batista had been in complete control of the island since 1933, either directly or through other presidents.
Batista's economic policies helped establish light industries, such as canneries, and allowed foreign companies, many from the United States, to build their businesses in Cuba.
United States corporations dominated the sugar industry, oil production, and other key aspects of the island's economy.
Most of Cuba's wealth was owned by a tiny percentage of the population; most Cuban citizens lived in dire poverty.
Under these circumstances, Cuba was ripe for revolution, and Castro, the handsome, intense young lawyer, proved to be a charismatic leader.
After his release in 1955, Castro went to Mexico and immediately gathered rebels together.
In December 1956, Castro and his men landed in Cuba and carried on guerrilla, or irregular and independent, attacks against Batista's army for the next few years.
The people of Cuba, especially the many who lived in poverty, increasingly supported the young revolutionaries, or those seeking radical change.
Initially, the United States supported Castro, who was not a communist at the time.
Communists believe that the best economic system is one that eliminates private ownership of property.
Under this system, the goods produced and the wealth accumulated are, in theory, shared equally by all.
Communism is in direct contrast with the values of democratic, capitalist countries such as the United States.
A democratic government system requires government leaders and others who hold public office to be elected by the citizens in general elections.
Candidates represent different political parties—and ultimately, all the people who vote for them.
Capitalist economic systems allow private ownership of property and businesses.
Competition in a free, or open, market determines prices, production, and distribution of goods.
The American media, including Life and Reader's Digest magazines, hailed Castro as an educated, daring, determined soldier.
He cut rents, proposed improved education and health care, and instituted farming reform, or dramatic change.
He broke up large estates into smaller parcels for common citizens to farm.
However, Castro made no movement toward setting up free elections, which he had earlier promised to do.
Appalled at Castro's actions, many middle-class and wealthy Cubans fled to the United States.
From there, they began an anti-Castro campaign aimed at influencing the Cubans who stayed behind.
To Castro's dismay, the United States did nothing to stop the anti-Castro effort.
When Castro sought aid for his reforms from the United States, he was refused.
During 1960, Cuba's relations with the United States rapidly slid downhill.
The Soviet Union was ready and able to step in, signing a trade agreement with Castro in February 1960.
Moving Toward Communism During mid-1960, Castro nationalized, or took control and ownership of, a billion dollars' worth of United States businesses in Cuba, including American oil refineries and banks.
In response, United States president Dwight D Eisenhower halted United States importation of Cuban sugar, but the Soviet Union quickly agreed to buy the surplus.
Khrushchev warmly received Castro and privately gloated that communism had its first toehold in the Americas.
On January 3, 1961, the United States and Cuba broke all diplomatic ties.
For the most part, the American populace of the early 1960s believed that no leader would voluntarily turn toward communism; they figured that the Soviets must have been behind Castro all along.
President Eisenhower had early on suspected that Castro would take Cuba down the communist path, so in March 1960 he had secretly authorized the use of $13 million to train Cuban exiles, the people who had fled Cuba, to carry out an invasion of Cuba and oust Castro.
The top-secret training took place in the Central American countries of Guatemala and Nicaragua.
The Bay Of Pigs Fiasco When President Kennedy took office, he inherited the Cuban problem.
He had been briefed by Eisenhower's administration about the plans to remove Castro.
Surprised, Kennedy nevertheless allowed the CIA and the Cuban exiles to proceed.
However, knowing that it would look bad for a powerful nation to invade a tiny island, he refused to involve the American military; United States military aircraft would not be allowed to provide cover for the invasion.
Kennedy hoped it would appear that the United States had played no part.
The CIA and the fifteen hundred exiles, sure that the Cuban people would rise up and aid their effort against Castro, went ahead with their invasion on April 17, 1961, at a swampy beach area known as the Bay of Pigs.
Castro had gotten word of the planned invasion through informants who knew some of the exiles and had his army ready with Soviet-made tanks.
It was clear the failed invasion was backed by the United States, because the band of exiles could have never become so organized or bold otherwise.
He vowed that in the future he would consider more carefully the advice of those surrounding him.
Instead, the Bay of Pigs invasion seemed to increase their support of Castro.
Now firmly in the communist camp, Castro railed against American imperialism.
He always dressed in a military uniform, he had a scruffy beard, and his cigar seemed to be permanently attached to his mouth.
Convinced that Castro was a serious threat to the United States, President Kennedy ordered Operation Mongoose, a top-secret plan to oust Castro.
Operation Mongoose encompassed various plots, from placing hallucinatory drugs in Castro's drinking water to assassinating him.
Communism On The March Khrushchev was eager to maintain the forward progress of communism in the Western Hemisphere.
By the spring of 1962, he had already sent many advisors and arms to Cuba.
Cuba's locale was a logistic dream for Khrushchev and a nightmare for the United States.
Khrushchev fumed over the fact that United States missiles with nuclear warheads were openly located in Turkey, Italy, and the United Kingdom, within easy striking distance of the Soviet Union.
The Soviets had never placed nuclear weapons outside their country's boundaries, because the weapons positioned inside the Soviet Union had the capability of annihilating Western Europe and reaching the United States.
Nevertheless, Khrushchev knew that if he stationed nuclear weapons in Cuba, only 90 miles from the United States coastline, it would cause Americans a great deal of anxiety.
When approached with the idea, Castro was not convinced that he wanted his island to be an outpost of Soviet nuclear weapons.
But he soon agreed, and sent his brother Raúl and a Cuban military delegation to Moscow to work out the details.
Castro wanted the missiles openly placed on Cuba, with the full knowledge of the international community.
But Khrushchev insisted on secrecy; he believed that once the missiles were in place, the United States could not act without the possibility of provoking war.
So in secrecy the Soviets planned to install forty missile launchers in Cuba.
Of the forty, twenty-four would be SS-5 medium-range ballistic missile launchers, each armed with two missiles.
The other sixteen missile launchers would be long-range, capable of sending missiles northward to Canada and south into Latin America.
Calculations showed that the only major United States city they could not reach was Seattle, Washington.
In July 1962, Soviet ships sailed toward Cuba with their cargo of missile equipment.
Also headed for Cuba was the latest Soviet military equipment plus over forty thousand Soviet troops.
Soviet fighter planes known as MiG's, some bombers to be assembled in Cuba, and surface-to-air missiles to protect the nuclear missile sites all moved across the Atlantic Ocean to Cuba.
All the while, the Soviet government consistently assured the United States that the arms buildup in Cuba was purely defensive in nature—that the Soviet Union had no need to station missiles outside its own territory.
Revelations Of October 14, 1962 Alarming intelligence reports from the National Security Agency began late in 1960 and continued in 1961.
The NSA was America's prime intelligence organization that listened to and analyzed foreign communications.
Through intercepted messages, the NSA determined that Cuba was significantly building up its weapons, with the Soviet Union's help.
Additionally, the NSA heard Spanish being spoken on a surveillance tape from Czechoslovakia, an Eastern European nation under Soviet control; it turned out that Cuban fighter pilots were being trained in Czechoslovakia by the Soviet military.
The NSA also intercepted messages that indicated that Soviet ships headed for Havana, Cuba, had no cargo listed—a quiet method of concealing the equipment they carried.
The NSA reported on construction of SAM sites and new radar installations of air defense systems in Cuba.
United States officials in Washington, D.C., grew increasingly worried.
Nevertheless, all these systems could be categorized as defensive systems, and Soviet authorities continued to insist that everything they provided to Cuba was purely defensive.
U-2 reconnaissance aircraft, secret planes that gathered information, flew at high altitudes over Cuba, and the pictures they brought back did not indicate any offensive weapons sites in Cuba.
Then on October 14, 1962, a U-2 mission returned with chilling photographs.
Processed and analyzed on October 15, the photos showed the first clear evidence of medium-range ballistic missiles at construction sites in an area known as San Cristóbal.
The photographs arrived on the desk of the president's national security advisor, McGeorge Bundy , on the evening of October 15.
The MRBM installation appeared almost complete; the longer-range equipment looked as if it would not be ready until the end of the year.
Knowing that sleep would be hard to come by for a while, a grim Bundy decided to let the president sleep that night.
At 9m. the next morning, Bundy showed and explained the photographs to President Kennedy.
Kennedy immediately called together a small group of senior cabinet members, security officials, and military leaders to assess the situation and advise him.
The group became known as Ex-Comm, short for Executive Committee of the National Security Council; it stayed almost continuously in session for the next two weeks.
With an eye cast toward historical documentation, Kennedy secretly had all the brainstorming discussions of Ex-Comm tape-recorded.
The following days brought the United States and the Soviet Union to the brink of nuclear war.
When the Ex-Comm tapes became available in the 1990s at the close of the Cold War, they confirmed that there were several moments when one more command or one slight move on either country's part could have unleashed a nuclear holocaust.
On October 16, 17, and 18 Ex-Comm discussions included a variety of proposals, from doing nothing, at least not immediately, to staging an invasion of Cuba.
Hawks favored immediate military strikes to take out the missiles and Castro's communist government.
Key hawks were General Maxwell Taylor , chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other military leaders at the Pentagon.
Doves, fearing massive casualties, favored a strategy of diplomacy and less aggressive tactics.
At the outset, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy , the president's brother, joined the Joint Chiefs of Staff in supporting an invasion or a surprise air strike.
However, after further discussions, he decided an air strike was not in the best interests of the United States.
In fact, many Ex-Comm members changed their minds—supporting one position, then another—as ideas were discussed.
President Kennedy and Ex-Comm could not permit this armed Soviet intrusion into the Americas, within easy reach of North, Central, and South America.
If the United States did not respond, the committee reasoned, Khrushchev would push for more communist influence in the region; this would undermine United States leadership in the Western Hemisphere and cause a massive negative reaction among the American public.
Kennedy's political future would be in doubt, and fear of eventually being surrounded by Soviet-controlled communist states would increase.
President Kennedy Addresses The American People On Thursday, October 18, intelligence reports given to Ex-Comm indicated that medium-range missiles were almost ready, capable of being launched from Cuba in about eighteen hours.
That afternoon, Soviet foreign minister Andrey Gromyko , in the United States for a United Nations meeting, met with President Kennedy at the White House.
Gromyko still insisted that Soviet military assistance for Cuba was only defensive.
Late that night, Ex-Comm decided against immediate invasion of Cuba and settled tentatively on a more cautious plan—a naval blockade around Cuba that would prevent any additional Soviet ships and their military cargo from reaching Cuba.
As plans favoring the blockade firmed up, he cancelled the rest of his campaign appearances.
Kennedy thought the blockade most likely would not trigger immediate war.
While demonstrating that the United States would not tolerate the missiles, the United States response still gave Khrushchev a way out and time to withdraw from the situation.
Because blockades were against international law, the term ""quarantine"" was used instead.
Once the decision for a quarantine was made, Kennedy requested that the television networks clear out a prime-time evening slot on Monday, October 22, for an urgent address to the nation.
Anatoly Dobrynin , the Soviet ambassador to the United States, who knew nothing of the offensive missiles, was handed the text of Kennedy's speech shortly before airtime.
Dumbfounded, he quietly went back and sat in his embassy office, attempting to gather himself before relaying Kennedy's message to Moscow's leaders.
Addressing the American people, President Kennedy explained the situation fully.
Kennedy called for immediate meetings of the Organization of American States and the United Nations Security Council.
As Kennedy spoke, the Joint Chiefs of Staff put the level of United States military alert worldwide at DEFCON 3, heightened state of preparedness for nuclear war.
For the first time in history, all planes of the U.S. air defense system were armed with nuclear weapons.
United States nuclear submarines took up assigned positions, and nuclear missiles located in the United States were readied for firing.
To The Brink Of Nuclear War On October 23, Khrushchev denounced the quarantine as a violation of international law.
Khrushchev vowed that his ships would continue on course, that any American ship trying to stop them would be fired on by Soviet submarines stationed around Cuba.
Those Soviet submarines had each been armed with a nuclear warhead, and their crew members had orders to fire if provoked.
The secretary general of the United Nations issued a plea to the United States and the Soviet Union, asking them not to push the world into war.
On the morning of October 24, the United States quarantine went into place, and the United States military went to DEFCON 2, the last level before nuclear war.
He relayed a message to President Kennedy calling the quarantine an aggressive act, and the missiles already in Cuba remained.
However, on October 25, the Soviet vessels carrying military equipment turned around.
Those with no military equipment proceeded; they were searched and then allowed to go on to Havana.
Meantime, at President Kennedy's request, Robert Kennedy was having secret ""backdoor"" meetings with Soviet ambassador Dobrynin.
On the evening of October 26, a long emotional letter from Khrushchev offered to remove the missiles from Cuba if the United States vowed not to invade Cuba.
Dobrynin and Robert Kennedy met, and Dobrynin brought up the offensive United States missiles located in Turkey.
The next morning, October 27, before President Kennedy could respond to Khrushchev's first letter, a second, more demanding letter insisted that the United States agree to remove the missiles in Turkey if the Soviets agreed to remove the missiles in Cuba.
Events that Saturday—known as Black Saturday because many felt it was the day the world came closest to annihilation—turned even uglier.
A United States U-2 flight over Alaska drifted into Soviet airspace, and the Soviets regarded it as a test of their defense system.
The U-2 simply drifted out of Soviet airspace without incident, but it caused much tension among Soviet leaders.
Then in Cuba, another American U-2 was spotted and brought down with a surface-to-air missile.
Amid the worsening situation, the United States military command was clamoring for a fight.
An Illustrated History, 1945–1991, Jeremy Isaacs and Taylor Downing report that Secretary of Defense McNamara walked out of the White House that evening into the open air and thought he would never live to see another Saturday.
Robert Kennedy advised the president to simply ignore Khrushchev's demands in the second letter and accept the terms of the first letter.
Robert Kennedy then met with Dobrynin and informed him that the United States would halt the quarantine and not invade Cuba if the Soviets would pull out the missiles.
When Dobrynin asked about the missiles in Turkey, Kennedy assured him that those missiles would be removed after the crisis was over.
However, Kennedy insisted that this agreement be kept secret, because the United States could not appear to withdraw protection for Western Europe for its own purposes.
Soviet leaders did not realize that the United States considered the missiles in Turkey outdated and had intended to remove them soon anyway.
The next morning, October 28, Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles from Cuba.
Khrushchev proceeded to bring the Soviet missiles back to the Soviet Union.
Both Khrushchev and President Kennedy could claim their diplomacy halted the crisis when it appeared to be spiraling out of control.
Castro, on the other hand, gained no advantage from their agreement; he was outraged over the missiles being removed, angered because he was totally left out of the negotiations by Krushchev and not even consulted about their removal, but he could do nothing about it.
Despite the appearance of defeat, Khrushchev's main goal was to keep Cuba communist, and in the early twenty-first century, Cuba remained a communist country.
By the spring of 1963, the United States had removed all its missiles from Turkey.
Few people knew that the missiles in Turkey had been replaced by much more effective missiles on a Polaris submarine.
The world had been to the brink of nuclear war, but at that point, having scared themselves mightily, the super-powers compromised.
Sobered leaders in Washington, D.C., and Moscow began serious talks to start the process of bringing nuclear weapons under control with a test-ban treaty.
In June 1963, a direct hot line was set up between Washington, D.C., and Moscow to help reduce the chance of nuclear war occurring because of miscalculation or misunderstanding.
The intersection of the careers of a United States president and a newly established leader of a small nearby island, Fidel Castro Ruz , would keep the world's population on the edge of their seats for many days.A young Fidel CastroBorn in Mayarí, Cuba, in 1926, Castro grew up in a solidly middle-class home.
Under these circumstances, Cuba was ripe for revolution, and Castro, the handsome, intense young lawyer, proved to be a charismatic leader.In 1953, Castro attempted to overthrow Batista and was sent to prison.
Within weeks, Castro established himself as premier.Initially, the United States supported Castro, who was not a communist at the time.
Competition in a free, or open, market determines prices, production, and distribution of goods.The American media, including Life and Reader's Digest magazines, hailed Castro as an educated, daring, determined soldier.
They overwhelmingly supported a hard-line anti-Castro policy.President Eisenhower had early on suspected that Castro would take Cuba down the communist path, so in March 1960 he had secretly authorized the use of $13 million to train Cuban exiles, the people who had fled Cuba, to carry out an invasion of Cuba and oust Castro.
The top-secret training took place in the Central American countries of Guatemala and Nicaragua.The Bay of Pigs fiascoWhen President Kennedy took office, he inherited the Cuban problem.
The CIA and the fifteen hundred exiles, sure that the Cuban people would rise up and aid their effort against Castro, went ahead with their invasion on April 17, 1961, at a swampy beach area known as the Bay of Pigs.Castro had gotten word of the planned invasion through informants who knew some of the exiles and hadhis army ready with Soviet-made tanks.
He vowed that in the future he would consider more carefully the advice of those surrounding him.The Cuban people had not risen up to overthrow Castro as expected.
However, Operation Mongoose never materialized.Communism on the marchKhrushchev was eager to maintain the forward progress of communism in the Western Hemisphere.
Nevertheless, Khrushchev knew that if he stationed nuclear weapons in Cuba, only 90 miles from the United States coastline, it would cause Americans a great deal of anxiety.When approached with the idea, Castro was not convinced that he wanted his island to be an outpost of Soviet nuclear weapons.
Calculations showed that the only major United States city they could not reach was Seattle, Washington.In July 1962, Soviet ships sailed toward Cuba with their cargo of missile equipment.
These assurances would soon prove to be lies.Revelations of October 14, 1962Alarming intelligence reports from the National Security Agency began late in 1960 and continued in 1961.
Through intercepted messages, the NSA determined that Cuba was significantly building up its weapons, with the Soviet Union's help.Additionally, the NSA heard Spanish being spoken on a surveillance tape from Czechoslovakia, an Eastern European nation under Soviet control; it turned out that Cuban fighter pilots were being trained in Czechoslovakia by the Soviet military.
U-2 reconnaissance aircraft, secret planes that gathered information, flew at high altitudes over Cuba, and the pictures they brought back did not indicate any offensive weapons sites in Cuba.Then on October 14, 1962, a U-2 mission returned with chilling photographs.
Knowing that sleep would be hard to come by for a while, a grim Bundy decided to let the president sleep that night.At 9m. the next morning, Bundy showed and explained the photographs to President Kennedy.
With an eye cast toward historical documentation, Kennedy secretly had all the brainstorming discussions of Ex-Comm tape-recorded.The following days brought the United States and the Soviet Union to the brink of nuclear war.
Kennedy's political future would be in doubt, and fear of eventually being surrounded by Soviet-controlled communist states would increase.President Kennedy addresses the American peopleOn Thursday, October 18, intelligence reports given to Ex-Comm indicated that medium-range missiles were almost ready, capable of being launched from Cuba in about eighteen hours.
Because blockades were against international law, the term ""quarantine"" was used instead.Once the decision for a quarantine was made, Kennedy requested that the television networks clear out a prime-time evening slot on Monday, October 22, for an urgent address to the nation.
Dumbfounded, he quietly went back and sat in his embassy office, attempting to gather himself before relaying Kennedy's message to Moscow's leaders.Addressing the American people, President Kennedy explained the situation fully.
United States nuclear submarines took up assigned positions, and nuclear missiles located in the United States were readied for firing.To the brink of nuclear warOn October 23, Khrushchev denounced the quarantine as a violation of international law.
The secretary general of the United Nations issued a plea to the United States and the Soviet Union, asking them not to push the world into war.On the morning of October 24, the United States quarantine went into place, and the United States military went to DEFCON 2, the last level before nuclear war.
Those with no military equipment proceeded; they were searched and then allowed to go on to Havana.Meantime, at President Kennedy's request, Robert Kennedy was having secret ""backdoor"" meetings with Soviet ambassador Dobrynin.
An Illustrated History, 1945–1991, Jeremy Isaacs and Taylor Downing report that Secretary of Defense McNamara walked out of the White House that evening into the open air and thought he would never live to see another Saturday.Robert Kennedy advised the president to simply ignore Khrushchev's demands in the second letter and accept the terms of the first letter.
Khrushchev proceeded to bring the Soviet missiles back to the Soviet Union.Both Khrushchev and President Kennedy could claim their diplomacy halted the crisis when it appeared to be spiraling out of control.
Despite the appearance of defeat, Khrushchev's main goal was to keep Cuba communist, and in the early twenty-first century, Cuba remained a communist country.By the spring of 1963, the United States had removed all its missiles from Turkey.
Press reports never mentioned that their removal had anything to do with the Cuban MissileCrisis.
Few people knew that the missiles in Turkey had been replaced by much more effective missiles on a Polaris submarine.The world had been to the brink of nuclear war, but at that point, having scared themselves mightily, the super-powers compromised.
John F Kennedy, Containing the Public Messages, Speeches, and Statements of the President, 1963.
The Presidential Portfolio—History as Told through the John F Kennedy Library and Museum.
Failed U.S.-backed invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs by fifteen hundred Cuban exiles opposed to Fidel Castro, on April 17, 1961.
An economic system in which property and businesses are privately owned.
A system of government in which the nation's leaders are selected by a single political party that controls all aspects of society.
Private ownership of property is eliminated and government directs all economic production.
The goods produced and accumulated wealth are, in theory, shared relatively equally by all.
A showdown in October 1962 that brought the Soviet Union and the United States close to war over the existence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba.Democracy: A system of government that allows multiple political parties.
Kennedy's Favorite Spy PhotographMounted on a wall in President Kennedy's office was a photograph of a Cuban launch site for Soviet SAMs, surface-to-air missiles.
The picture clearly shows roads in a six-pointed star pattern connecting the launch sites.
Kennedy liked the photograph because of the clarity of the geometric design of the missile installations.
Three groups played key roles in providing information from surveillance and reconnaissance missions.
NSA is America's premier organization assigned to protect United States information systems and listen in on and analyze foreign intelligence information.
In World War II SIGINT broke the codes of the Japanese military, helping bring an end to the war.
SIGINT monitored the Soviet arms buildup in Cuba at its earliest stages, in mid-1960.
SIGINT listened in on and analyzed Soviet communications discussing the operation to supply Cuba with weapons; they also heard messages from Soviet ships headed for Havana.
Then they intercepted Cuban discussions about the arrival of ""Russian equipment"" at the unloading docks.By May 1961, SIGINT listened to radio chatter from Cuba about special ship cargo—defensive radar systems associated with antiaircraft weapons.
Then in August and September 1962, SIGINT picked up information that SAMs, surface-to-air missiles, had arrived on the island.
Subsequently it reported that fifteen SAMs were operational, most likely in position to protect secret operations.
In other words, the SAMs were in position to shoot down United States Air Force reconnaissance flights.The Strategic Air Command of the United States Air Force operated the high-flying U-2 aircraft that photographed various portions of Cuba.
In October 1962, photographs taken on U-2 missions revealed definite construction of bases for intermediate-range ballistic missiles only 90 miles from the United States coastline.While U-2s continued their high-altitude photography, the Tactical Air Command , also part of the United States Air Force, used the RF-101C aircraft to take low-level photographs of Cuban missile sites and of the docks where Soviet ships brought their cargo.
On October 27, one U-2 was lost over Cuba when it was shot down by a SAM.SIGINT provided round-the-clock information to senior military and political leaders.
She and Lieutenant General Gordon Blake took the responsibility of overseeing the staff of the command center and getting information to the White House.
It was SIGINT, through interception of radio messages from Soviet vessels, that first notified President Kennedy on October 24 that the ""quarantine"" appeared to be working.
Mapping the location of the Soviet vessels, SIGINT confirmed that the ships appeared to be stopped in the water outside the ring of American ships.SIGINT, along with U-2 and RF-101C aircraft, continued surveillance and reconnaissance as the Cuban missiles were dismantled and shipped back to the Soviet Union.
Cold War Reference Library × Cite this article Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
Within the “Cite this article” tool, pick a style to see how all available information looks when formatted according to that style.
Because each style has its own formatting nuances that evolve over time and not all information is available for every reference entry or article, Encyclopedia.com cannot guarantee each citation it generates.
Therefore, that information is unavailable for most Encyclopedia.com content.
Refer to each style’s convention regarding the best way to format page numbers and retrieval dates.
In addition to the MLA, Chicago, and APA styles, your school, university, publication, or institution may have its own requirements for citations.
The outcome of the crisis has been linked to the development of a direct Teletype “hotline” between Moscow and Washington, D.C., the initial stages of superpower détente, and the ratification of a bilateral atmospheric testing ban on nuclear weapons.LEADING UP TO OCTOBER 1962Despite the failed United States effort to overthrow Cuban dictator Fidel Castro during the Bay of Pigs invasion in April 1961, President John F Kennedy continued to make Castro’s removal a primary goal.
In November 1961, Kennedy initiated Operation Mongoose, a covert operations plan designed to incite dissident Cubans against Castro.
Perhaps as a result, Castro, who enjoyed the Soviet Union’s political and military backing, began receiving regular covert shipments of Soviet arms, ostensibly for defensive purposes only.SOVIET NUCLEAR MISSILES IN CUBAOn October 14, 1962, a U2 spy plane, flying a routine Strategic Air Command mission over Cuba, snapped a series of photographs that became the first direct evidence of Soviet medium-range ballistic nuclear missiles in Cuba.
These missiles clearly constituted an offensive weapons buildup on the island.On the morning of October 16, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy presented a detailed analysis of the photographic evidence to Kennedy at an Oval Office briefing.
Just before noon, Kennedy convened the first meeting of fourteen administration officials and advisers.
The group became known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExComm.Time was of the essence.
ExComm members received estimates that the Soviet missiles could be at full operation within fourteen days, with individual missiles readied within eighteen hours under a crash program.
This placed major American cities, including Dallas and Washington, D.C., within range of a strike.
Later, photographic evidence concluded that several SS-5s, with a range of 2,200 nautical miles, were also included in the Soviet arms shipments.For the next seven days, ExComm debated the merits of three general approaches to the developing crisis, all while keeping a tight public lid on the Cuban discovery.
The first was a surgical airstrike targeting as many missile sites as possible.
The second was an air strike followed by a United States military invasion of Cuba.
The third was a blockade of Soviet ships thought to be carrying additional materials in support of the offensive weapons program.In an attempt to allow diplomatic approaches an opportunity to work, Kennedy opted for the blockade, which was termed a quarantine so as to avoid warlike denotations.THE QUARANTINEOn October 22, in anticipation of a Cuban and/or Soviet reaction to the quarantine, the joint chiefs of staff placed United States military forces worldwide on DEFCON 3 alert.
At five that afternoon, Kennedy met with seventeen congressional leaders from both major parties to discuss the situation.
The president received some support for the quarantine, but notable exceptions included Senators J William Fulbright and Richard B Russell, both of whom believed that the strategy would not compel the Soviets to abandon their missiles.By six that evening, Secretary of State Dean Rusk met with the Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, and presented the ambassador with an advanced copy of Kennedy’s address.
At seven, Kennedy addressed the American public in a seventeen-minute speech.
His major objective, in addition to calling public attention to the Soviet missiles in Cuba, was to outline the United States response—the quarantine of all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba.Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev’s reply to Kennedy’s speech arrived on the morning of October 23.
Premier Khrushchev’s letter insisted that the Soviet missiles in Cuba were defensive in nature, and that the proposed United States response constituted a grave threat to world peace.Kennedy was concerned that Berlin, which was divided into segments of East and West at the end of World War II, would become a focal point for Soviet retaliation.
As such, he directed the Central Intelligence Agency to develop plans for protecting Berlin in the event the Soviets mounted a quarantine around the city.By the evening of October 23, Kennedy and ExComm had new worries much closer to home.
Earlier in the day, the CIA began tracking several Soviet submarines unexpectedly moving toward Cuba.
This made the Navy’s job of conducting the quarantine more complicated, as it now had to track the changing position of the Soviet subs in order to ensure the safety of its own vessels.The quarantine, which received the unanimous backing of the Organization of American States, went into effect at 10:00m. on October 24.
Early morning intelligence on that day suggested that sixteen of the nineteen Soviet cargo ships identified as Cuban bound were reversing course.
The remaining three, however, were nearing the quarantine line, including the Gagarin and Komiles.
Naval intelligence reported that one of the Soviet subs had taken a position between the two ships.
Kennedy, though wishing to avoid conflict with the sub, authorized the aircraft carrier USS Essex to take whatever defensive measures were necessary against the submarine.
This was perhaps the most dangerous moment of the cold war, as both superpowers were armed and mere moments from turning the war hot.
Just prior to any armed hostilities, however, both Soviet ships stopped dead in the water, and eventually reversed course.Realizing that a diplomatic resolution to the crisis was imperative, Kennedy and senior ExComm advisers began to consider offering the Soviets a missile trade.
Specifically, if Khrushchev pulled his missiles out of Cuba, the United States would dismantle and remove its Jupiter missiles in Turkey.RAISING THE STAKESOctober 25 found the United States ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai Stevenson, publicly confronting the Soviet ambassador, Valerian Zorin, in front of the United Nations Security Council.
The Soviet Union had, until this date, denied that offensive Soviet missiles were in Cuba.
At this point, Stevenson showed the council, and the world, several reconnaissance photographs of the Cuban missiles.This triumph was short-lived.
By five that evening, CIA director John McCone reported to ExComm that some of the Cuban missiles were now operational.By the morning of October 26, Kennedy was convinced that only an invasion of Cuba could succeed in removing the missiles.
ExComm initiated preliminary civil defense measures for the American Southeast, while the State Department began to devise plans for establishing a new civil government in the wake of Castro’s deposing.
By that afternoon, the United States military was poised to conduct a land invasion.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara advised Kennedy to expect heavy American casualties in the campaign.At six that evening, the State Department received a letter from Khruschev proposing that the United States declare it would not invade Cuba in exchange for the Soviets dismantling the missiles.
Later that evening, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, the president’s closest adviser and brother, held another in a series of private meetings with Dobrynin.
It was at this meeting that Kennedy, with the president’s approval, began to specifically discuss the option of a Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade.Any positive momentum from this meeting stalled on the morning of October 27.
A second letter from Khruschev arrived at the State Department around eleven.
This letter replaced the noninvasion pledge with the requirement of a complete removal of United States missiles in Turkey.
This raised the stakes for the Kennedy administration, as any public agreement on the Jupiter missiles would appear as a quid pro quo, with the United States forced to develop its security and foreign policies under severe threat.The situation deteriorated even further when a U2, piloted by Major Rudolf Anderson, was shot down over Cuba around noon.
Sensing that he was losing control of the crisis, Kennedy decided not to retaliate against the anti-aircraft site that fired on Anderson, much to the consternation of his military leaders.At an ExComm meeting later that evening, the idea of responding only to the offer in Khrushchev’s first letter—the noninvasion pledge—while ignoring the terms of the second letter, was debated.
Robert Kennedy was sent to discuss the terms with Dobrynin, which included an agreement not to publicly disclose the Turkey-for-Cuba missile trade, so as to avoid the appearance of a quid pro quo.MAXIMUM DANGER AVERTEDPresident Kennedy, while hopeful that a deal would be reached, activated twenty-four Air Force units in preparation for a Cuban invasion to occur no later than October 29.
A CIA update in the early morning of October 28 claimed that all MRBM sites in Cuba were now operational.
At nine that morning, Radio Moscow broadcast Khrushchev’s reply to the terms outlined to Dobrynin the night before.
In it, Khruschev stated that all Soviet missiles in Cuba would be dismantled and crated.
This volume has perhaps the greatest continuing impact for scholars and other interested persons alike.
Model One assesses foreign policy from the rational actor approach, which considers each state as an individual or person, and attempts to understand actor behavior according to specified risks and payoffs.
Model Two examines the crisis from the vantage point of the individual agencies involved, while Model Three attempts to capture the individual interests and proclivities of the major players involved.Allison and Zelikow use the unique exigencies presented by the crisis to suggest that the models are incompatible in understanding the strategic calculus between states.
At the same time, it is not clear that there is much true difference between the models, especially two and three, as all three are steeped in the rational choice tradition.
Harper and Row.Brian Robert Calfano International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences × Cite this article Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
Washington and Moscow each recognized a need for diffusing their mutual tensions in the wake of the crisis, while their European and Asian counterparts generally developed a greater desire for an alternative to seemingly moribund Soviet and United States leadership.THE CRISISCuba was the focus of the crisis, but the roots of this conflict lay in long-standing Soviet and United States antagonism and insecurities.
Castro's threats to nationalize foreign property on the island might seem a dangerous example to revolutionary groups throughout a region long considered a United States sphere of influence, they reasoned, while Cuba was simply too close for comfort for United States leaders ever vigilant against communist outposts.
By the time John F Kennedy took office the following year vowing to ""oppose aggression or subversion anywhere in the Americas,"" plans for a U.S.-supported invasion by Cuban exiles were already advanced, and the new president approved the operation with minimal oversight.The failed Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961 proved one of Kennedy's greatest fiascos.
Cuba's affect on United States security and prestige, the president believed, threatened to tilt the Cold War's delicate balance in communism's favor.Correctly believing that United States leaders sought his fall from power, Castro sought Moscow's protection, a move the Soviets embraced.
Soviet ships eventually halted just short of the quarantine line two days later, but as missile-site construction continued in Cuba, each side continued to prepare for war.Cooler heads eventually prevailed.
Only Castro seemed displeased by the peaceful conclusion of the crisis.
It would take several years and millions in aid before he would trust the Soviets again.THE AFTERMATHThe ramifications of this near brush with disaster dramatically changed the course of the Cold War, and Europe's role in the conflict especially.
In areas such as Southeast Asia and Central America, subsequent United States policy makers would put this ""flexible response"" strategy to the test without fear of a nuclear exchange.Soviet leaders drew similar and different conclusions from the conflict, shaped by their perception that they had lost the confrontation because of the very disparity of power that the missile deployment in Cuba had been designed to eliminate in the first place.
Europe Since 1914: Encyclopedia of the Age of War and Reconstruction × Cite this article Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
The United States demanded that the Soviet Union remove these missiles and imposed a naval blockade on Cuba, threatening to sink any Soviet ships that approached the island without permitting their cargoes to be inspected.
Eventually, the Soviet Union announced that it would remove the missiles, and the crisis ended.
The roots of the Cuban missile crisis go back, in part, to an earlier crisis—the failed Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba by Cuban expatriates trained, supplied, and directed by the United States Central Intelligence Agency.
The purpose of the failed invasion was to overthrow Fidel Castro's leftist rule of Cuba, but had two unintended effects.
First, it frightened Castro, causing him to make concessions to the U.S.S.R, which wanted to place military bases on the island of Cuba, in exchange for protection against further United States invasion attempts.
Khrushchev, the Soviet leader, read United States weakness in the Bay of Pigs fiasco, and blustered publicly that he might retaliate by driving the United States out of West Berlin.
United States President John Kennedy, in return, openly boasted that the United States possessed many more nuclear missiles and warheads than the U.S.S.R., and would consider striking first with them if it ever found itself at a military disadvantage.
Kennedy's claim was true; in 1962, the U.S.S.R. had at most 20 or 30—perhaps as few as four — functional, deployed intercontinental ballistic missiles ; the United States had several hundred.
A missile gap did exist, as Kennedy knew, but in reverse; it had always been the United States that was far ahead of the U.S.S.R. in such weapons.
Once in office, Kennedy dropped the old story about the ""missile gap"" and brandished the United States's nuclear superiority openly against Khrushchev.Khruschev's response was to secretly build missile bases on Cuban soil to compensate for Soviet inferiority in ICBMs.
These missiles were medium-range and intermediate-range, rather than intercontinental, but from Cuba could reach the entire continental United States except its northwest corner.
Similar missiles had been by stationed the United States for years in Turkey, which borders southern Russia.
Castro gave permission to the Soviets to build Cuban missile bases in trade for a promise of protection against United States invasion and for cancellation of Cuban monetary debts.Construction of the Cuban bases proceeded throughout the summer of 1962.
The United States was aware, from various intelligence sources, that the Soviets were building up military forces on the island, but did not realize that intermediate-range nuclear weapons were part of the plan.
Kennedy issued warnings to Khrushchev that the United States would not tolerate a major military buildup in Cuba, but would do ""whatever must be done"" to guarantee United States security; Kennedy and his advisors believed that Khrushchev would take these grave warnings seriously, and werealso aware that the U.S.S.R. had never yet placed nuclear weapons outside Russian territory; these factors made it seem unlikely that nuclear weapons were part of the Cuban buildup.
Nevertheless, they were.U-2 spy planes were making regular flights over Cuba, observing the military buildup.
On October 14, a U-2 spy plane photographed an area near San Cristóbal, Cuba, revealing launch pads, missile erectors, and transport trucks for medium-range missiles.
Much like the Kennedy administration's claims during the Bay of Pigs crisis that the United States had no illegal intentions in Cuba, Khrushchev's claims to have no desire to base missiles in Cuba had proved to be untrue.
Immediate attack on the Soviet missiles sites in Cuba, followed by a full invasion of the island using 180,000 United States troops.
A naval blockade of Cuba, to be lifted only if the Soviets removed its missiles.
If the blockade did not work—and it was a risky plan, as such a blockade is, by international law, an act of war—the invasion plan would be carried out.On October 22, 1962, Kennedy addressed the American people by television.
He stated:""This sudden, clandestine decision to station strategic weapons for the first time outside of Soviet soil is a deliberately provocative and unjustified change in the status quo which cannot be accepted by this country if our courage and our commitments are ever to be trusted again…To halt this offensive buildup, a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated.
Over the next four days, ships carrying Russian goods were searched at sea, and several Soviet vessels carrying missiles were turned back by United States naval vessels.
The United States Strategic Air Command placed all its B-52 intercontinental bombers on 15-minute takeoff alert on October 20; on October 22, it placed them on a revolving airborne alert, with a percentage of bombers airborne at all times, ready to head over the North Pole toward the Soviet Union.
ICBM crews were also placed on highest alert, ready to launch, and nuclear-armed Polaris submarines moved to their pre-assigned war stations at sea.
The Soviet Union already had over 45,000 of its own troops on Cuba , armed with 90 shortrange nuclear warheads that would have been used against a United States invasion force.
A United States invasion of Cuba, had it occurred, could have escalated rapidly to nuclear war, first in Cuba and then globally.
The entire world, including Kennedy and Khrushchev and their advisors, feared throughout the crisis that global nuclear war was extremely probable.
If nuclear war had occurred, it could have caused hundreds of millions of deaths, and significantly destroyed the U.S., the U.S.S.R., and many other nations as functioning societies.On October 26, Khrushchev sent a private message to Kennedy indicating that he would be willing to remove the missiles if the United States would promise not to invade Cuba.
The following day, a more formal message said that Soviet Union would remove its missiles only if the United States would remove its Jupiter-class intermediate-range missiles from Turkey.
In secret negotiations between Soviet ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and United States attorney general Robert Kennedy , the United States did promise not to invade Cuba in exchange for withdrawal of the Soviet missiles; it did not, however, promise to remove its missiles from Turkey.
These missiles were considered largely symbolic by United States strategists, and were technically unreliable and obsolete.
Additionally, their threat to the U.S.S.R. could have been replaced by deployment of a Poseidon submarine carrying nuclear missiles to the eastern Mediterranean.
In secret, therefore, Kennedy seriously considered trading the missiles in Turkey for the missiles in Cuba, although in public he refused to do.
On October 28—one day before the deadline urged by the United States Joint Chiefs of Staff for launching a Cuban invasion—the Soviets stated that they would remove their missiles from Cuba.
The crisis abated.Many historians have viewed Kennedy's handling of the Cuban missile crisis as a masterpiece of statesmanship.
The Soviet Union backed down; its missiles were removed; United States goals were fully met; American geomilitary prestige was preserved.
Other historians argue that the Kennedy administration was not as deft in reality as it seemed publicly.
Kennedy and his advisors were badly frightened; Secretary of State Dean Rusk began to weep when told, at the height of the crisis, that a U-2 plane had been shot down over Cuba.
Robert Kennedy said later that his brother had put events in motion that he could not control.What is certain is that Khrushchev and Kennedy were both willing to risk global nuclear war for dubious gains.
The Soviets were soon to achieve strategic nuclear parity with the United States simply by building more and better ICBMs; any strategic advantage to be gained by placing missiles in Cuba would, therefore, be short-term.
By the same token, no long-term United States interests were at stake in the deployment of Soviet intermediate-range missiles to Cuba, as within a few years every city in the continental United States would be vulnerable to Soviet ICBMs and submarinelaunched ballistic missiles anyway.
Kennedy was thus, willing to gamble the world's future not to save the United States from an imminent military threat, but because to tolerate the Soviet buildup in Cuba would, in his words, ""have politically changed the balance of power.
The United States emerged from the Cuban missile crisis with greatly expanded confidence in its own geopolitical skill.
Its policymakers had verified, as they believed, that ""showing resolve"" was more effective than diplomacy, the United Nations, or international law—with the proviso that the United States should be more willing to commit conventional military forces in a crisis, in order to keep back from the nuclear abyss.
Today, many historians argue that United States willingness to invade Vietnam is directly attributable to its success during the Cuban missile crisis.
SEE ALSOBay of Pigs Encyclopedia of Espionage, Intelligence, and Security GILMAN, LARRY × Cite this article Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
On 15 October, 1962, United States intelligence discovered Soviet strategic nuclear missile bases under construction in Cuba, leading to the most dramatic and dangerous crisis of the nuclear age.
After a week of secret deliberation with a group of advisers , President John F Kennedy demanded that the missiles be withdrawn and imposed a naval “quarantine” on shipments of “offensive” weapons to Cuba.
Kennedy ordered a massive redeployment of United States forces to the Caribbean and placed the Strategic Air Command on heightened alert.Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev was furious at what he considered Kennedy's flagrant interference in Soviet‐Cuban affairs and his violation of freedom of navigation.
But by the time the quarantine took effect on the morning of 24 October—after a unanimous endorsement by the Organization of American States—Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships not to challenge the blockade.
For several days a settlement proved elusive and pressure built for more decisive action.Neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev wanted to risk nuclear war over the issue, and both became increasingly concerned that an accident or inadvertent military action might trigger escalation.
An apparent break in the tension came on 26 October, when, in a rambling, emotional letter, Khrushchev offered to withdraw the missiles in return for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
Most of Kennedy's advisers argued strongly against this, on the ground that it would be interpreted by the Soviets as evidence of American weakness, and by NATO as betrayal of an ally.
Kennedy decided to ignore Khrushchev's latest demand and accept his earlier offer.As the ExComm deliberated on 27 October, word reached the White House that an American U‐2 reconnaissance plane had been shot down over Cuba, and that another had inadvertently strayed over Siberian air space, narrowly avoiding a similar fate.
Ignoring the ExComm's advice, he secretly agreed that the United States would withdraw its missiles from Turkey “within a few months” as a private quid pro quo to a UN‐verified withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba.
Khrushchev accepted, and on 28 October the acute phase of the crisis came to an end.
Castro, feeling betrayed by his Soviet patron, refused to allow United Nations inspectors on Cuban soil to verify the withdrawal.
But satisfied by aerial photography that the Soviets had withdrawn the weapons the United States considered offensive, Kennedy issued a proclamation terminating the quarantine on 21 November.The causes of the crisis have long been debated.
Khrushchev conceived the deployment in the late spring of 1962, after a hasty and uncritical decision‐making process involving only a small group of advisers.
His goals appear to have been to deter a feared American invasion of Cuba; to redress the United States's massive superiority in strategic nuclear weapons, publicly revealed by the United States in October 1961, exploding the myth of a “missile gap” favoring the Soviet Union; and less importantly, to reciprocate the Jupiter deployment in Turkey.The crisis provides textbook illustrations of important misperceptions and miscalculations.
The United States government had calculated that the Soviet Union would not deploy nuclear weapons to Cuba because such a move would be inconsistent with past Soviet behavior, and because it seemed obvious that it would trigger a major confrontation.
The Kennedy administration also failed to appreciate the extent to which the public demolition of the missile gap myth heightened the Soviets' sense of vulnerability; the strength of Soviet and Cuban fears of a United States invasion of Cuba ; and the strength and sincerity of the Soviet view that if the United States had the right to deploy missiles in Turkey, the Soviet Union had the right to deploy missiles in Cuba.
Consequently, Kennedy failed to deter the move in a timely fashion, issuing stern warnings against it only in September 1962, when the secret deployment was well underway.Similarly, Khrushchev grossly overestimated the willingness of Kennedy and the American people to tolerate a major disruption in the hemispheric status quo; under estimated the likelihood that American intelligence would discover the missiles prematurely; and failed to appreciate that the secrecy and deception surrounding the deployment would inflame American passions.
Kennedy and Khrushchev prevented the conflict from escalating while they sought and found a mutually satisfactory solution.
They did so by avoiding irreversible steps, curtailing unwarranted bluster, and avoiding backing each other into a corner.
Other scholars have criticized the handling of the crisis as being too timid or too reckless.
Kennedy's critics on the right lament his unwillingness to seize the opportunity to destroy Castro; his critics on the other side of the spectrum condemn his willingness to risk nuclear war merely to delay the inevitable—the vulnerability of the American homeland to Soviet nuclear weapons.
Hard‐liners in the Soviet military severely criticized Khrushchev for yielding to United States pressure.
A series of agreements intended to restrain the arms race and improve crisis stability followed, most notably the Hot‐Line Agreement and Limited Test Ban Treaty of 1963.
Richard Ned Lebow and and Janice Gross Stein , We All Lost the Cold War, 1994.
David A Welch The Oxford Companion to American Military History John Whiteclay Chambers II × Cite this article Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
The crisis began on October 14, 1962, when American U-2 spy planes flying over Cuba brought back photographs revealing that sites for mediumand intermediate-range ballistic missiles were under construction.
The Cuban missiles posed a serious strategic problem for President John F Kennedy because they were capable of hitting targets deep within United States territory.
The missiles also posed a political dilemma for the president because of his campaign promises to contain Communism aggressively.
Coming after the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961 and with only weeks to go before the mid-term 1962 elections, Kennedy believed that American voters would see any decision that allowed offensive weapons to remain only ninety miles from United States soil as a sign of weakness.It is still uncertain why the Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev and Cuban leader Fidel Castro decided to install offensive missiles in Cuba.
Some have speculated that the Communist leaders saw the missiles as a way to defend Cuba from another United States invasion.
Others surmise that Khrushchev saw the missiles as a way to alter the strategic balance of power in the Cold War by creating the impression that the United States lacked the resolve to confront Communism.
It also seems possible that the Soviet leader saw the missiles as diplomatic bargaining chips he could use to extract concessions from the United States on other sensitive Cold War issues.To address the threat posed to United States interests by the Cuban missiles, Kennedy convened an executive committee of the National Security Council.
The EXCOMM consisted of thirteen advisers, including Secretary of State Dean Rusk, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, CIA Director John McCone, Attorney General Robert F Kennedy, National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, and Special Counsel Theodore Sorensen.
For twelve days beginning on October 16, the EXCOMM met in secret to plan the United States response.Almost from the beginning of deliberations, the EXCOMM concluded that the United States had to take some action that would remove the missiles from Cuba.
Among the proposals discussed was a preemptive air strike to destroy the missile bases before they became operational.
Kennedy rejected this plan when the United States Air Force could not guarantee that all missile sites would be destroyed.
The EXCOMM also discussed a land invasion of Cuba that would both destroy all offensive weapons and remove Castro from power.
The president, worried that this strategy would provoke a Soviet retaliation against West Berlin or lead to general war, also rejected this plan.
In the end, the EXCOMM agreed to impose a ""quarantine"" of Cuba, blocking all shipments of weapons to Cuba.
Kennedy believed that this option would demonstrate the United States resolve to prevent the missiles from becoming operational and would also provide time for a diplomatic solution to be found.The quarantine of Cuba began on the morning of October 22.
Later that evening, in a televised address, Kennedy revealed to the American people for the first time the existence of the Cuban missiles and the plan for their removal.
For the next several days Cold War tensions reached their zenith as the world waited for the Soviet response.
The first part of that answer came two days later when the first Soviet ships bound for Cuba reversed course to avoid the United States blockade.
On October 26 Khrushchev sent two cable messages to Kennedy that provided the second part of the Soviet response.
In the first message the Soviet leader offered to remove the missiles in return for a United States pledge not to invade Cuba.
In it Khrushchev demanded that until the United States pledged not to invade Cuba and also dismantled its Jupiter missiles in Turkey, the Soviet offensive weapons would remain on the Caribbean island.
Although the United States had already decided to remove the Jupiter missiles because they were obsolete, the president refused to include them in any settlement for fear that it would appear that his administration had been forced to make concessions to the Soviets.
On the advice of Robert Kennedy, the president resolved this dilemma by accepting the terms of the first letter he had received from Khrushchev and simply ignoring the second letter.While the Kennedy administration waited for a response, Robert Kennedy met secretly with the Soviet ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, on October 27.
At the same meeting, the president's brother made clear that the United States was willing to remove all the Jupiter missiles from Turkey in the near future but insisted that their removal could not be part of the public settlement reached by the two Cold War adversaries.
The realization that any slight miscalculation during the crisis could have triggered a nuclear war led both nations to establish a ""hot line"" providing rapid, direct communications between Washington and Moscow.
The crisis also apparently encouraged Premier Khrushchev to soften his rhetoric against the United States, for he again began to emphasize the importance of ""peaceful coexistence"" with the United States.
It similarly led President Kennedy the following year to initiate negotiations with the Soviets for nuclear arms reduction.
The product of this effort was the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, signed on July 25, 1963, which ended atomic tests in the air and underwater.
Americans at War × Cite this article Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
Often regarded as the most dangerous crisis of the nuclear age, the Cuban missile crisis of October 1962 was a culmination of several Cold War tensions that had been building for some time.
As a result of Cuban leader Fidel Castro's turn toward Soviet-style communism in the early 1960s and the failed U.S.-sponsored Bay of Pigs invasion of April 1961, United States Cuban relations were openly hostile by 1962.
In April and May 1962, the Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev decided to deploy Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, just ninety miles from Florida.
Refugee reports also suggested that Soviet ballistic missiles were on the island.
Although United States intelligence could not confirm these reports, critics of President John F Kennedy's administration used them in political attacks during the lead-up to the November congressional elections.
On 14 October, a U-2 aerial reconnaissance flight over Cuba returned photographs of long, canvas-covered objects.
The president was informed of the discovery on the morning of 16 October and immediately convened a White House meeting of his top national security advisers, a body that later became officially known as the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExComm.
Kennedy decided not to confront the Soviets until he and the ExComm could consider and prepare courses of action.
During this series of top secret meetings, several courses of action were considered, ranging from direct military strikes on the missile sites, a full-scale invasion of Cuba, a quid pro quo removal of American Jupiter missiles in Turkey, and a blockade of the island.
Acutely aware that miscalculation by either side could spark nuclear war, Kennedy settled upon a blockade of Cuba in tandem with an ultimatum to the Soviets to remove the missiles, both to be announced during a special national broadcast on television during the evening of 22 October.
In that broadcast, Kennedy declared that a naval quarantine of Cuba would go into effect on the morning of 24 October and would not be lifted until all offensive weapons had been removed.
On 24 October, as United States strategic nuclear forces were placed on DEFCON 2, the highest alert status below actual nuclear war, the world waited anxiously for the Soviet response to the quarantine.
Despite some tense moments, the deadline ultimately passed without serious incident, as several Soviet-chartered ships either changed course or stopped short of the quarantine line.
On 25 October, the United States ambassador to the United Nations, Adlai E Stevenson, famously confronted his Soviet counterpart, Valerian Zorin, with photographic evidence and said he would ""wait until hell freezes over"" for a Soviet explanation.
At United States insistence, the Organization of the American States officially condemned the Soviet-Cuban action and thereby formalized Cuba's hemispheric isolation.Over the next few days, United States intelligence reported that not only were the MRBMs nearing operational status, but there were also intermediate-range ballistic missiles and tactical nuclear weapons on the island.
While United States forces continued to mobilize, a series of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev was supplemented by several secret unofficial channels, the most notable of which was Attorney General Robert F Kennedy's secret meetings with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to the United States, and Georgi Bolshakov, the intelligence chief at the Soviet embassy.On Saturday, 27 October, the crisis was at its peak.
During the afternoon, reports came in of an American U-2 being shot down over Cuba by a surface-to-air missile.
As tension mounted, the Joint Chiefs of Staff reported that they were ready to launch an invasion of Cuba within twenty-four hours.
In communications on 27 and 28 October, Khrushchev formally capitulated by agreeing to dismantle the missiles and ship them back to the Soviet Union.
In turn, Kennedy publicly announced that he had pledged to provide a noninvasion guarantee to Cuba conditional on the offensive weapons being removed and the implementation of effective international verification.
Secretly, he also agreed to remove the American Jupiter missiles from Turkey.Although the crisis had been largely defused peacefully, it was not over.
Castro refused to allow UN inspectors onto Cuban sovereign territory, and Khrushchev initially refused to accept that the Soviet IL-28 Beagle bombers were offensive weapons.
Intensive discussions through the United Nations finally led to Khrushchev agreeing on 20 November to remove the bombers in exchange for a lifting of the naval quarantine.For many, the crisis demonstrated the dangers of the nuclear age.
Subsequently, a telephone hotline was established linking the White House and the Kremlin and efforts were intensified to secure arms control agreements and détente.BIBLIOGRAPHYFursenko, Aleksandr, and Timothy Naftali.
Dictionary of American History Coleman, David G × Cite this article Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
The crisis also illustrated the limitations of international law, as the United States relied on military actions and threats to accomplish its goal.The crisis grew out of political changes in Cuba.
Castro became premier of the new government.At first, the United States supported the Castro government.
In 1960, Castro openly embraced communism and signed Cuba's first trade agreement with the Soviet Union.Many Cubans had left the island of Cuba for the United States following the Castro revolution.
The exile army was captured.Convinced that the United States would attempt another invasion, Castro asked Premier Nikita Khrushchev, of the Soviet Union, for nuclear missiles.
Attorney General robert kennedy served on Ex Com and became the key adviser to President Kennedy during the crisis.Military officials advocated bombing the missile sites or invading Cuba.
Bypassing private, diplomatic procedures, Kennedy went on national television on October 22 and informed the United States of the missile sites, the naval blockade, and his resolve to take any action necessary to prevent the missile deployment.Tension built during the last days of October as the world awaited the approach of Soviet missile-bearing ships at the blockade line.
If that happened, nuclear war seemed probable.During the crisis, the united nations was not used as a vehicle for negotiation or mediation.
Ambassador adlai stevenson, from the United States, presented photographs of the missile sites to back up United States claims.On October 24, the crisis began to ease, as 12 Soviet ships on their way to Cuba were, on orders from Moscow, diverted or halted.
On October 28, the Soviets announced on Radio Moscow that the missile sites were being dismantled.Some historians maintain that President Kennedy acted heroically to meet a threat to the security of the United States.
Most agree that the crisis was probably the closest the Soviet Union and the United States ever got to nuclear war.The significance of the crisis to international law and the management of international crises has led to many books, articles, and scholarly conferences.
Cold War International History Project, Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.
West's Encyclopedia of American Law × Cite this article Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
Raul Castro and Che Guevara traveled to Moscow in early July to formalize the agreement.
Nuclear missiles began arriving in Cuba secretly during the first half of September under a Moscow project code-named Operation Anadyr.Several post-crisis accounts cite fears in both Moscow and Havana of a United States invasion of Cuba.
They were provoked in part by United States activities surrounding Operation Mongoose, a post-Bay of Pigs covert effort by Washington aimed at removing Cuba's Fidel Castro, which was coupled with a Soviet desire to redress what was then a 17-to-1 nuclear missile imbalance in favor of the United States.Rumors swirled for weeks of Soviet missiles in Cuba, but confirmation did not come until an American U2 surveillance flight over the island on October 14, 1962.
Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev responded on October 27 in a message broadcast by Radio Moscow, in which he called for the dismantling of United States missile bases in Turkey in exchange for withdrawal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Almost simultaneously, a Khrushchev letter to Kennedy arrived at the United States Embassy in Moscow with essentially the same message.The basic agreement resolving the crisis called for removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba under United Nations supervision while promising removal of the naval quarantine and a pledge by the Kennedy administration not to invade Cuba.
While withdrawing the Jupiter missiles from Turkey was not a quid pro quo for withdrawing the Soviet missiles from Cuba, it was part of the discussions for settlement of the missile crisis.
The settlement made no mention of withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey, but that obviously was an unspoken part of the agreement, and the missiles were withdrawn within six months.A new message from Khrushchev, broadcast over Radio Moscow on October 28, effectively terminated the crisis.
While the validity of that argument has never been tested, President Nixon reaffirmed the no-invasion pledge the early 1970s, when it appeared the Soviets might be building a submarine base at Cienfuegos, on Cuba's south coast.See alsoCastro Ruz, Fidel; Castro Ruz, Raúl; Communism; Guevara, Ernesto ""Che""; Soviet-Latin American Relations.BIBLIOGRAPHYBohling, Don.
Michael A Palushin Don Bohning Encyclopedia of Latin American History and Culture × Cite this article Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
Many believed that war might break out between the United States and the Soviet Union over the latter's basing of nuclear-armed missiles in Cuba.Fidel Castro came to power in Cuba promising to restore the liberal 1940 constitution but immediately took more radical steps, including an economic agreement in 1960 with the Soviet Union.
In turn, the Soviet premier, Nikita Khrushchev, promised in June to defend Cuba with Soviet nuclear arms.
In early 1961, the United States broke relations with Havana, and in April it helped thousands of Cuban exiles stage an abortive uprising at the Bay of Pigs.Khrushchev was convinced that the United States would strike again, this time with American soldiers; and he believed that Castro's defeat would be a fatal blow to his own leadership.
He decided that basing Soviet missiles in Cuba would deter the United States from a strike against the Castro regime.
Moreover, so he reasoned, the Cuba-based medium-range missiles would compensate for the USSR's marked inferiority to America's ICBM capabilities.
Finally, a successful showdown with Washington might improve Moscow's deteriorating relations with China.In April 1962, Khrushchev raised the possibility of basing Soviet missiles in Cuba with his defense minister, Rodion Malinovsky.
He hoped to deploy the missiles by October and then inform Kennedy after the congressional elections in November.
He apparently expected the Americans to accept the deployment of the Soviet missiles as calmly as the Kremlin had accepted the basing of United States missiles in Turkey.
Foreign minister Andrei Gromyko, when finally consulted, flatly told Khrushchev that Soviet missiles in Cuba would ""cause a political explosion"" in the United States, but the premier was unmoved.
In late April, a Soviet delegation met with Khrushchev before departing for Cuba.
Later the Presidium voted unanimously to approve the move.Perhaps most remarkably, Khrushchev believed that the deployment of sixty missiles with forty launchers, not to mention the support personnel and equipment, could be done secretly.
General Anatoly Gribkov warned that the installation process in Cuba could not be concealed.
In July 1962, the American government learned that the USSR had started missile deliveries to Cuba.
By the end of August, American intelligence reported that Soviet technicians were in Cuba, supervising new military construction.
Rather than calling a halt to the operation, Khrushchev ordered it accelerated, while repeatedly assuring Washington that no build-up was taking place.On October 14, United States aerial reconnaissance discovered a medium-range ballistic missile mounted on a launching site.
Such a missile could hit the eastern United States in a matter of minutes.
On October 16, Kennedy and his closest advisers met to discuss the crisis and immediately agreed that the missile must be removed.
On October 22, Kennedy announced a ""quarantine"" around Cuba, much to Khrushchev's delight.
Despite his apparent satisfaction, Khrushchev fired off a letter to Kennedy accusing him of interfering in Cuban affairs and threatening world peace.
He then went to the opera.The turning point came on October 24, when Attorney General Robert Kennedy told the Soviet ambassador that the United States would stop the Soviet ships, strongly implying that it would do so even if it meant war.
Khrushchev reacted angrily, but a letter from President Kennedy on October 25 pushed the premier toward compromise.
With this letter, Khrushchev finally realized that the crisis was not worth the gamble and began to back down.
Another war scare occurred on the twenty-seventh with the downing of a U-2 over Cuba, but by this point both leaders were ready and even anxious to end the crisis.
On October 29, the premier informed Kennedy that the missiles and offensive weapons in Cuba would be removed.
This humiliation, combined with failures in domestic policies, cost him his job in 1964.
Macmillan.Hugh Phillips Encyclopedia of Russian History PHILLIPS, HUGH × Cite this article Pick a style below, and copy the text for your bibliography.
But Where to Put it National Security in the Nuclear Age Thompson, Llewellyn E., Jr.
