Robert Frost, the nation's most famous poet , delivered a poem to open the memorable inauguration.
JFK followed by delivering what is still regarded as one of the finest inaugural addresses ever.
JFK's Cabinet was balanced ideologically, reflecting the closeness of the election–it included two Republicans, one as Secretary of the Treasury and the other, Robert McNamara, as Secretary of Defense.
Most controversial was the president's decision to pick his younger brother, Robert F Kennedy, as Attorney General.
JFK faced his first serious crisis just four months after being inaugurated in January 1961.
In 1959, a guerrilla leader named Fidel Castro had toppled the corrupt Batista dictatorship and made himself ruler of Cuba, an island nation just south of Florida.
Over the next two years, to Washington's alarm, Castro began to move toward a Communist-style government, while seeking aid from the Soviet Union.
Under Eisenhower, the United States had formulated a plan to topple the Cuban dictator, using a force of C.I.A.-trained anti-Castro Cubans.
JFK allowed the plan to go forward in April of 1961, but tried to reduce United States involvement.
The result was a fiasco, as the invasion force was slaughtered and the survivors taken prisoner, while American warships watched, helpless, from a few miles out to sea.
This Bay of Pigs disaster (named for the ill-fated landing area) was a black eye for the U.S.'s image overseas, and it emboldened the Soviet Union.
JFK took ""sole responsibility"" for what happened, and leaders of both parties rallied around the president.
In the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs, Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev saw JFK as a weak, inexperienced figure whom the U.S.S.R. could easily bully.
In June of 1961, the two world leaders met at a summit in the Austrian capital of Vienna.
Since the city as a whole lay in Communist East Germany (which was, in turn, under the thumb of the U.S.S.R.), the Communists were constantly threatening to cut off access to West Berlin, thus strangling the democratic half of the city.
In Vienna, Khrushchev renewed this threat, suggesting that the Soviet Union might sign a treaty with East Germany that would cut off all access by western nations to West Berlin.
JFK stood firm, and the promised blockade never materialized; but the East Germans did throw up an ugly concrete and barb-wired wall between East and West Berlin, to prevent their own people from leaving for the West.
The Berlin Wall became a symbol of the Cold War, one that would endure until 1989.
Khrushchev, probing for weakness, authorized the construction of Soviet missile bases in Cuba, from which the entire United States could be threatened with nuclear attack.
On October 16, 1962, JFK's military advisers handed him aerial reconnaissance photographs showing these missile emplacements.
Many of the president's generals urged an immediate invasion of Cuba, but JFK held out hope for a peaceful settlement.
On October 22, he announced that a United States naval and air quarantine would go into effect, preventing any further missile shipments from Russia to Cuba.
He also demanded that the Soviets remove any and all nuclear weapons already in place.
As Russian ships steamed closer to the blockade cordon, a flurry of telegrams shot back and forth between Washington and Moscow.
Khrushchev, alternately conciliatory and bellicose, claimed that he was only trying to protect Castro's government from United States invasion, and then suggested that the missiles might be removed if the United States dismantled its own Jupiter missiles in Turkey, just across the Black Sea from the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev would remove the missiles from Cuba in return for JFK's public pledge that the United States would cease trying to undermine Castro's government, and his private pledge that the United States would dismantle the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
In a sense, the Soviets were winners, since they could claim to have protected their client state in Cuba and forced the U.S. to remove its missiles from Turkey.
In the court of world opinion, though, it looked as if the Kennedy administration had called the Soviet Union's bluff.
More importantly, JFK's skillful and judicious diplomacy had managed to protect American interests and stave off the terrifying and very real threat of nuclear annihilation.
The world may never have been closer to nuclear war than in October 1963, and it is to JFK's credit that such a war never came.
