At no other spot on the globe are forces of the United States in such close and potentially hostile proximity to the forces of the Soviet Union nor joined over an issue of such overriding national interest to both states.
Even the recent contact of NATO and Soviet naval forces in the Mediterranean Sea provides greater latitude of political-military maneuverability for Western policy makers than does the Berlin situation.
As the decade of the 1970’ s begins, the question of how best to lengthen the Berlin fuse is again being discussed.
The first is a review of Berlin’s significance to American foreign policy during the period 1961-1971.
I have purposely limited this part of the paper to Berlin’s role as seen by the President, since the President is the individual charged with the responsibility of determining America’s foreign policy.
The second context in which the Berlin question is examined is its relationship to the relatively recent foreign policy emphasis of the Federal Republic of Germany to seek detente with its East European neighbors.
That policy, termed Ostpolitik , has produced some dramatic developments within the period 1969-1971, and the success or failure of Ostpolitik is inextricably linked to a solution of the Berlin question.
The crisis which was in its waning days had begun officially on November 27, 1958, when Nikita S Khrushchev threatened to sign a separate peace treaty with East Germany if the remaining abnormality of World War II, the occupation status of Berlin, could not be resolved within six months.
This was not a particularly new threat; not new, that is, until the six-month ultimatum was inserted.
In 1959, 78,406 applied for emergency admission to the Federal Republic of Germany.
During the first seven months of 1961, 63,061 were processed through the refugee center in Berlin-Narienfelde.
In August, 1961, 47,433 reached refugee camps in West Berlin, Ulzen, and 2 Giessen.
Total figures for those seeking a new home in the West are impossible to obtain since many refugees never checked through one of the receiving stations.
Estimates run close to the four million mark for the period 1945-1961, two and one-half million of those escaping during the 3 twelve years prior to the erection of the Wall.
The situation was rife with instability, and the East German regime, following directives from Moscow,""* took the steps necessary to protect its self interest — the Wall was built.
The effects were dramatic, immediate, and lasting; only a handful of refugees have managed to escape since the end of August, 1961.
However, only Presidents Kennedy and Nixon have had to deal with the Berlin question on a level which inspired political analysts of mass communications to speculate on the direction which the policy would take.
The Administration of Lyndon Baines Johnson was able to deal with the Berlin question in a very low profile manner.
If one were to attempt some form of graphic presentation of this phenomenon, using as a measure of public interest such things as Presidential utterances, government publications, and newspaper editorials, the result would be a slightly distended, inverted bell curve.
The curve would drop sharply in early 1962, and begin a recovery climb at the end of 1968.
Because this study examines a period of contemporary history, the conclusions drawn may be more apparent than real as a result of the better than even chance that significant data which could alter the conclusions is not available either for reasons of national security or the personal preference of individuals in possession of such data.
Even before his election, Kennedy’s policy inclination on Berlin was quite clear.
Even though the Soviet Premier’s menacing remarks concerning the link between his personal prestige and a settlement on Berlin were made during the last days of the Eisenhower Presidency, there is little doubt that they were intended for consumption by the incoming American 2 Chief Executive.
Once in office, Kennedy moved to assess more fully the Western commitments to Berlin and the wherewithal to carry through on them.
The initial steps involved a request for an appraisal of the situation in Berlin from former Secretary of State Dean Acheson, and a review of defense capabilities by Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara.
Within a few months, it became apparent that the Acheson report and the McNamara findings dovetailed neatly, however the results which could be expected if the Berlin crisis deepened would be an exchange of nuclear weapons ^Schlesinger, Arthur M Jr., A Thousand Days , Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 1965, 347.
The Acheson memorandum opted for a nocompromise, no-negotiation, f ight-if-we-have-to posture.
The McNamara findings indicated that the profound majority of the Western military eggs were in the nuclear basket.
Contingency plans for a military confrontation with the Soviets over Berlin provided for almost no intermediate steps between declaration of emergency and Presidential authorization for nuclear delivery.
On October 16, 1959, in Lake Charles, Louisiana, Kennedy spoke of the need for conventional 4 weapons and a limited, non-nuclear war capability in the atomic age.
Even before Kennedy’s meeting with Khrushchev in Vienna in June, 1961, the President had begun the process of shifting the emphasis of American military power away from an undue reliance on nuclear deterrence.
The Berlin crisis provided a real-life situation to dramatize the necessity for a nation’s possession of a flexible response capability.
If the crisis in Berlin were to deteriorate into a shooting war, all of the elements of the President’s program for shifting away from an all-or-nothing strategy would play significant roles.
In consonance with that possibility, the efforts to sell Congress on the budgetary increases required for such a program consistently linked the shift in defense posture with the threat in Berlin.
At the same time, however, those who testified before Congress were careful to point out that the new defense program was not tailored exclusively to the Berlin situation, but rather provided the President with a greater range of military alternatives to meet crises anywhere in the world.
Another of the strengths of Berlin as a lever for adoption of the new defense program was the simple fact that the United States .was already committed to the defense of Berlin.
Although the we-owe-it-tothe-boys-at-the-f ront aspect was not explicitly pursued, it was implicit in the discussions concerning the staying power of forces in Europe should the Soviet Union launch a concerted conventional weapons offensive.
The Administration’s carefully orchestrated campaign to win support for a flexible response military inventory was not Machiavellian in nature.
That so many of the attributes of the Berlin crisis dovetailed neatly into the campaign was no mere coincidence.
Berlin was the point at which United States and Soviet armed forces stood muzzle-to-muzzle , and was therefore the place where military confrontation could most logically be expected to occur.
With a military plan which leapfrogged from provocation to nuclear exchange, the results would be disastrous.
Neither 8 Laos nor Cuba, in 1961, could claim so many positive attributes for adoption of a flexible response capability, Theodore Sorensen contends that the President did not finalize plans for dealing with renewed Soviet pressure on Berlin until after the Vienna meeting.
The first dealt with a choice of accepting or rejecting the Acheson paper's recommendation against suggesting negotiations on the Berlin question; the second with the most effective method of employing flexible military response to future hostile Soviet initiatives in Berlin.
Both issues were resolved at a meeting of the National Security Council on July 19th.
The President chose to reject Acheson f s recommendation against negotiations, asserting that the United States should take the lead in suggesting a negotiated settlement.
Such a move would gain a propaganda advantage, and would simultaneously soften the rather harsh tone of the President's upcoming television address on the subject of Berlin.
The President would dispatch additional troops to Germany, transit rights into West Berlin would be tested by sending re-enforcements to the Berlin garrison, increased draft calls and a limited activation of reserve units would be requested, and, if necessary, the President would not shrink from the use of nuclear weapons to defend Western interests in West Berlin.
It is essential to this analysis to enumerate Western interests in West Berlin, and to determine whether or not the Kennedy Administration 6 Sorensen, op. cit . , 590.
United States presence in West Berlin, United States access to West Berlin, and freedom of West Berliners to choose their g own political system.
Perhaps because the July 25th speech was geared specifically to American rights with respect to Berlin, the rights of German civilian traffic into and throughout Berlin were not stressed.
The only hint of change in emphasis in the Kennedy approach as compared to that of the Eisenhower-Dulles response to the Soviet initiative of November, 1958, was Kennedy’s stronger emphasis on the word West in West Berlin.
This factor is noteworthy, however, in view of the United States response to the building of the Wall, a response which argued that the Wall was not a cause for war since rights of the Western allies were not infringed upon.
As a policy issue, German civilian access to West Berlin did not appear again to any significant degree until Richard Nixon became President.
With the construction of the Wall underway (a move which caught 9 Washington by surprise) Kennedy tested Soviet intentions by dispatching fifteen hundred United States troops into Berlin via surface access routes.
To bolster sagging West Berlin morale, Kennedy sent Vice-President Johnson and General Lucius Clay to the city as his personal representatives, and called upon world public opinion to condemn the Wall; the President’s 8 Ibid . , 594.
However, that did not make Berlin any less dangerous as a potential for confrontation.
First, President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev both had an opportunity to get the measure of their opposite number’s tolerance level for swift shifts of balance in international power politics.
It is difficult to over-estimate the importance which this factor played in the decisions made during the Cuban missile crisis of October, 1962.
Second, the Berlin crisis must have added further to the conviction on the President’s part of the need for rapid communication equipment between the White House and the Kremlin.
Although the ""hot line"" was not installed until after the Cuban crisis, Theodore Sorensen makes it clear that discussions on such equipment had been in progress since the first 12 months of the Kennedy Administration.
A similar exchange occurred during 14 the heigh th of tension during the Cuban crisis of 1962.
If the Berlin crisis of 1958-1961 had spin-offs of positive value, it also produced some negative results from Washington’s point of view.
Perhaps the most disturbing of these debits was the attitude of the United States’ NATO partners regarding the President’s formula for settlement of the immediate crisis.
Kennedy had based his solution on a combination of military preparedness and negotiation.
None of the Alliance partners in Europe followed the American lead in conventional forces build-up to the extent which Washington considered adequate, and the issue of negotiations with the Russians presented a serious threat to the unanimity of the NATO voice.
The seeds of dissent within the Atlantic Alliance were present long before 1961, and the subsequent Cuban crisis of 1962 did more to polarize points of view within NATO than did Berlin* In summary, the Berlin crisis of 1958-1961 ushered in a watershed in American foreign policy.
The decisions made and the plans implemented during the latter phases of that crisis set the tone for the conduct of American affairs abroad for nearly a decade.
Prior to 1961, positions of power between the United States and the Soviet Union were frozen in a mold which allowed little or no room for maneuver, a condition which defied change without war.
Only once during the five-year period of the Johnson Administration did anything remotely approaching crisis proportions occur in Berlin.
From April until July, 1965, East German and Soviet military units conducted sporadic harassment of air corridor and Autobahn traffic between West Berlin and the Federal Republic.
However, Moscow’s treatment of the situation generally sought to minimize speculation that a general Berlin crisis was in the making, as illustrated by the Pravda comment that the measures taken were only meant to serve notice of protest 19 against meetings of the West German Bundestag in West Berlin.
The question of why Berlin became a sort of cold storage issue from 1963 until 1968 has two answers.
First, the modus vivendi worked out by Kennedy and Khrushchev as a result of the 1958-1961 crisis proved satisfactory even after the sudden changes in political leadership in both the United States and the Soviet Union.
Second, both the United States and the Soviet Union were forced to turn their attention to crises in the Far East, an occurrence contrary to the historic dynamics of both countries.
These few utterances by the President usually linked Berlin with the importance of NATO, the search for detente between East and West in Europe, and the solution of the German question.
The specific issues involved in each of these areas of American concern are in many ways quite separate.
As the time line following the 1961 Berlin crisis lengthened, the air of urgency concerning future crises in the city decreased and was reflected by dearth of presidential comment on the status of the city.
The dual trend — linking Berlin with the overall United States commitment to European security, and the decline in crisis atmosphere — is borne out in the following summary of President Johnson’s public remarks in the period 1963-1968.
In December, 1965, the Chancellor of the Federal Republic of Germany, Ludwig Erhard, visited the White House.
During the exchange of official greetings, toasts at a State Dinner, and in the final joint communique of the meeting, the President stressed the link between the freedom of Berlin, the resolution of the German question as a whole, the strength of NATO, and the need for a general detente in Eastern Europe.
Only on one occasion during that visit did the President speak directly to the Berlin issue.
At the State Dinner he asked and answered the question of America’s commitment to the freedom of West Berlin by saying that if America’s word was no good on Viet Nam, how could it be trusted with regard to Berlin.
His answer, of course, was that we would remain steadfast on both 15 20 fronts.
Both of these anniversaries, according to the President, were possible because of 21 the existence of a strong North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
On August 15 and 16, 1967, Chancellor Kurt Kiesinger visited Washington.
In all of the communications resulting from that meeting, mention of NATO was 22 much in evidence, but the Berlin topic did not appear once.
Since no major conference of Foreign Ministers or summit meeting of Heads of State convened to discuss the Berlin issue during the Johnson Administration, there is little doubt that both Johnson and the Soviet leadership were content to leave Berlin on a back burner at low heat for an unspecified length of time.
President Nixon and Berlin Scarcely more than one month after taking office, President Richard Nixon began a trip to Europe to emphasize America* s faith in the purposes and strengths of the Atlantic Alliance.
On February 27, 1969, President Nixson arrived at Templehof Air Force Base in West Berlin.
I 16 United States garrison in Berlin, he made special note of the fact that this was the first unit of American Armed Forces stationed abroad which he 23 had reviewed in his role as Commander In Chief.
Nixon also played on an old and crucial theme, the importance of the courage and tenacity of West Berliners in the maintenance of a free Berlin.
At the Charlottenburg Palace, for official welcoming ceremonies with city officials, Nixon stressed the solidarity of the American government with the aspirations of West Berliners to remain free from Communist domination.
At the huge Siemans factory, he issued a warning to any aggressors who might have plans for undoing the American policy of protecting West Berlin.
In the same speech, however, he stressed the point that the status quo in Berlin was not a desirable end in itself.
Finally, in a short departure speech at Tegel airport, Nixon repeated something which he had said in Bonn the day before his Berlin visit.
He 25 emphasized that West Berlin was an important part of West Germany.
See also The Bulletin a weekly survey of German affairs published by the Press and Information Office of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany, especially Volume 17, numbers 6, 7, and 8.
None of the points which President Nixon stressed were new additions to Western policy regarding Berlin.
However, the issue of Berlins political ties with the Federal Republic had not been addressed by an American President during the decade of the Sixties.
For Ulbricht f s regime, the political ties between Berlin and the Federal Republic had always been the most repugnant of the unsettled issues concerning the city.
Nixon f s announced resolve on that issue meant two things for the leadership in East Berlin.
First, the West was not going to brook continued harassment of Federal Republic political delegations traveling to and from Berlin.
Western occupation forces could not stop such harassment, but diplomatic pressure could and would be 27 applied on the Soviet Union to control Ulbricht.
This Presidential action reintroduced the issue of West German civilian transit rights to and from Berlin, an issue which had not been raised to such prominence since the period preceding the 1958-1961 crisis.
Second, the East Berlin regime would be forced to deal with Bonn on a political basis if there was to be any hope of a settlement of the Berlin problem.
For the Federal Republic, the President's messages carried the assurance that Bonn’s interests in Berlin would not be shuffled aside or held 25 The Bulletin , Ibid . , Volume 17, Number 8.
Volume 5, Number 10 . 18 as a bargaining tool if the Soviet Union decided to enter into negotiations on the status of Berlin at some future date.
When the Presidents several speeches were viewed as a package, a definite shift in policy emphasis — not content — could be discerned.
This shift dealt with the German question as a whole, and was reflective of changes which had occurred within the Federal Republic.
With the retirement of Konrad Adenauer, the original cold warrior of West Germany, from active political life, the Federal Republic began seeking detente with Eastern Europe.
The United States gave quiet approval to the shift in the Federal Republic's foreign policy.
No immediate gains were expected to result from the West German policy shift, and indeed, none occurred.
Willy Brandt, Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic during the early period of the Ostpolitik approach, frankly admitted that the West Germans had an awesome international public relations chore ahead of them if the new 28 policy were to succeed.
A move of this sort could have the effect of getting the East Germans started on the road to talks with Bonn, and consequently ease both the pressures on Berlin and the tension between East and West.
Certainly a conclusion of this sort is within the realm of possibility since President Nixon 1 s inaugural address, given only a month before the European junket, stressed the need for an era of negotiation instead of confrontation.
In the two years since the President visited the Federal Republic, the developments resulting from Ostpolitik have been breathtaking.
Initially, when the United States became actively involved in the wider ramifications of Ostpolitik (the opening of Four Power discussions on the future status of Berlin) , Washington gave hearty praise to the efforts of Willy Brandt.
Since March of 1970, however, the Administration has remained relatively quiet on its feelings concerning the rapidity of Ostpolitik developments.
Speculation from the quasi-private sector, however, has not been lacking.
The Ball reply correctly pointed out that the Soviet Union was intelligent enough to know that private citizens, regardless of stature, did not speak for the United States government.
Ball continued by denegrating Qstpolitik as reckless and too hasty; he preferred to wait and see what results came out of the Four Power talks on Berlin’s future status.
The reasons for this executive silence could have been many and varied.
Perhaps, as Arthur Goldberg might suggest, George Ball and his colleagues were voicing sentiments which the President agreed with.
Perhaps the Four Power talks on Berlin had reached a critical stage which required no rocking of the boat.
Perhaps the President, knowing that the Soviet Union does not consider the words of private citizens to be definitive statements of government policy, simply chose to ignore the Goldberg-Ball exchange.
While direct comment on the Ball-Goldberg exchange was not forthcoming from the White House, there were, during the same time period, indications that some reappraisal of United States support for Brandt’s Qstpolitik may be in the offing.
Presidential adviser Henry Kissinger expressed personal reserva30 tions about Brandt’s policy to visiting diplomats and newsmen.
When he left, however, the West German expressed confidence that everything was again in order.
What was said during the German envoy’s visit to the White House is, of course, not known.
However, the Administration’s recent massive efforts to squelch passage of the Mansfield troop reduction amendment may give some clue.
The thrust of the Nixon Administration’s argument against the Mansfield amendment was the danger inherent in a unilateral relaxation of vigalence vis-a-vis the still present Communist threat to Western Europe — and the West in general.
Troop reductions without similar moves by the Soviet Union would have meant several things.
First, military readiness within NATO would have been reduced to an intolerable level.
Second, one of the most effective bargaining chips in the search for East-West detente would have been lost.
Third, and most importantly, unilateral troop withdrawals would have dealt a severe blow to the credibility of America’s commitment to European security.
It is no wonder then that the Nixon Administration mounted such an overwhelming offensive against passage of the amendment, using quite purposefully a host of ’’Europe Firsters” to lobby the measure into defeat.
The appearance of such notables as Dean Acheson, Lucius Clay, John McCloy, and Goerge Ball must have been as much for the reassurance of jittery Europeans as for the actual lobbying task.
Thus, the German emissary may have been reminded that while Ostpolitik is essentially a unilateral move on the part of the Federal Republic, the ramifications of the policy impact a much larger geographical and political area than just that of West Germany.
One of those areas of impact is the inextricable relationship of American and West European security.
In the 22 same way that President Nixon attacked domestic threats to that relationship, it could be expected that he would work as hard for the continuance of that relationship when even the remotest hints of a crack in solidarity appeared on the other side of the Atlantic.
The Nixon Administration is apparently following the maxim — and urging Congress and its European allies to do likewise — of seeking detente, but not at a reckless pace which, to use George Ball’s phrase, confuses the 31 wish with the fact.
As of June, 1971, President Nixon is content to wait for Berlin negotiations to demonstrate whether detente is, in fact, a wish or a fact.
Western resolve to maintain a presence in the city has been the object of periodic probes by the Soviet Union and the German Democratic Republic.
This defensive posture has even been borne out in the terminology used to describe Berlin’s role within the framework of international power politics.
Phrases such as ""outpost of freedom, M ""glass window, 11 ""tripwire, 11 ""barometer of changing political pressure,"" and others reflect the fact that attempts to affect a change in the status of Berlin have meant programs of reaction vice initiative for the West.
In 1970, a shift occurred which balanced the old, but still valid, defensive posture with an element of offense.
This chapter will investigate the origins, development, and implications of these two causal factors.
As a political term, Ostpolitik did not gain currency until Willy Brandt became Foreign Minister of the Federal Republic of Germany in 1966.
The reason for Wes t Germany f s isolation from East European capitals during the period before Brandt became Foreign Minister was the Hallstein Doctrine, a creation of the heyday of the Cold War , which stated the Federal Republic’s intention to sever diplomatic ties with any state 2 that recognized the regime in East Germany.
In March, 1966, the Erhard government offered to enter negotiations with the Warsaw Pact countries on an agreement for the mutual renunciation of force in the conduct of international affairs.
That exchange of notes was the last on the subject of detente until the Grand Coalition of Christian Democrats and Social Democrats came to power in West Germany in December, 1966.
On December 13, 1966, the new Chancellor, Kurt Kiesinger, renewed the offer to negotiate on the renunciation of force agreement, and included in the statement an unprecedented offer to discuss the unresolved 4 problem of a divided Germany.
If one had to date the birth of the new era of Ostpolitik , it would have to be this offer to converse on the sacrosanct issue of the existence of two Germanies.
In the December 13 policy statement, the Federal Republic was not giving up its claim to be the only legitimate representative of the German people, but it demonstrated a clear willingness to bend, if not break, the Hallstein Doctrine.
The Warsaw Pact rejected the West German initiative, and, in the spring of 1967, the Eastern bloc proclaimed its own version of the Hallstein Doctrine.
This citation and other German press citings are taken from The German Tribune , a weekly review of the German press, Friedrich Reinecke Verlag GmbH., Hamburg, West Germany.
Recognizing that quantum jumps in a search for detente with Eastern Europe were unrealistic, Brandt, nevertheless, defended the need for a policy of reconciliation.
The voice of the electrorate seemed to support Brandt’s willingness to more actively pursue a relaxation of tensions with the East.
The new offer was identical to the one issued by Kiesinger in December, 1966.
Brandt, meeting with United States Secretary of State William Rogers less than a week before the talks with Moscow began, received strong encouragement to reach an agreement with the Soviets from Hess, Herbert, op. cit . , 6.
The Secretary of State also announced, while in Bonn, that the three Western powers who maintained occupation garrisons in Berlin would soon propose to the Soviet Union that negotiations be started 9 with the aim of improving the status of Berlin.
The statements of Brandt and the Western allies provided unmistakable evidence that the East would have to negotiate simultaneous solutions to the problems of Berlin’s future and European security.
In other words, the Soviet Union would not be able to realize a treaty with the Federal Republic without demonstrating good faith on the Berlin issue.
With the preliminary discussions completed, Egon Bahr, Federal Republic State Secretary, departed for Moscow where work began on the draft of a renunciation of force treaty on January 27, 1970.
Within six weeks, the Soviet Union also agreed to enter into negotiations with the United States, Great Britain, and France on the Berlin question.
While talks with the Soviet Union progressed through the spring of 1970, the Bonn and East Berlin governments held the first top-echelon discussions since the division of Germany.
Willy Brandt presented a twenty-point basis for discussion of a treaty to normalize relations with *o The Bulletin , Ibid . , Volume 17, Number 44.
The conditions set down by Bonn constituted a highly sophisticated formula for d<e facto recognition of the East German regime.
Willi Stoph, East German Premier, refused to consider the Bonn proposal and took an all-or-nothing stand on the issue of diplomatic recognition.
According to obervers in West Germany, the meetings proved that the German Democratic Republic still took its orders directly from the Kremlin; this conclusion was based on the quick trip by GDR leadership to Moscow on 12 the eve of the Kassel conference.
That was interpreted as meaning that the talks had come to an indefinite halt, an interpretation which proved to be correct.
While the talks between the two Germanies foundered and the Four Power talks demonstrated no breakthroughs, the negotiations in Moscow on a treaty of nonaggression also proceeded fitfully.
However, in August, 1970, the West Germans and the Russians reached a formula acceptable to both sides.
Amid great fanfare, the treaty was signed in Moscow by Chancellor Brandt and Soviet Prime Minister Alexei Kosygin on August 12.
During the course of negotiations, the Federal Republic advised the Soviets on four occasions that the Bundestag would not be asked to ratify the document until the Four Power talks on Berlin reached satisfactory conclusions on the future of the city.
The Russians had tried to dodge the issue, but did not call the talks to a 14 halt over the Federal Republic’s resolve.
Shortly after the treaty with Bonn was signed, the Warsaw Pact held a summit conference in Moscow.
Walter Ulbricht was in a panic over what could be interpreted by East Berlin as a sellout to Bonn by Moscow.
The Bonn-Warsaw treaty declared the acceptance by the Federal Republic of the inviolability of the Oder-Neisse Line, a topic which was not even considered negotiable in 16 Bonn during the Adenauer era.
The use of Berlin as a lever in the Polish treaty was significant since Poland was in no way responsible for the division of the city or the hardships of the West Berliners which resulted from that division.
Neither was Poland a participant in the Four Power talks concerning Berlin.
The implication was clear that Bonn (and the West in general) would muster support wherever it could be found within the Warsaw Pact to exact concessions from the East Berlin regime.
As of June, 1971, the situation vis-a-vis the Four Power talks and, consequently, the ratification of the treaties with Moscow and Warsaw has reached a point of apparent stagnation.
The Soviet Union still maintains that transit agreements across East German territory will have to be legitimized by a treaty between the Western powers and the German Democratic Republic.
The Soviet demand means that the West will be obliged to grant East Berlin diplomatic recognition.
The West appears to be prepared to go as far as to grant de facto recognition based on Brandt’s twenty-point proposal, but that is the limit of Western flexibility.
There is evidence to suggest that, in fact, the leverage has worked in reverse.
The East Germans have increased Autobahn slow-downs during the past eighteen months, and those who feel it most are the West Berliners.
West Berlin morale — that Fifth Power referred to by President Nixon in February, 1969 — has suffered accordingly.
There is a very real fear that Bonn may be willing to leave West Berlin to its own devices if the Soviets push hard enough for ratification of the Bonn-Moscow treaty.
This mood of resentment was demonstrated to Willy Brandt, the West Berlin mayor during the 1961 crisis, when, in the March, 1971 Berlin city elections, the Social Democrats (Brandt is the party’s leader) received only 50. percent of the votes cast.
This was a drop of over six percent since the elections of four years ago.
On the other hand, there is evidence to indicate that the leverage potential of Berlin is still real.
The Soviet Union has demonstrated that it is serious about wanting ratification of the treaty with Bonn.
Opposition to the treaty was evident in the Soviet Union, particularly in the military press, right up to the day of signing.
November 12, 1970, 3. 32 the Chinese Communist challenge to the advisability of the treat.
The speculation as to what that end may be covers a number of fronts, all or none of which may be correct.
In discussing the significance of the treaty, Brezhnev stressed the link between the agreement and a European 19 Security Conference.
The Soviet Union has been calling for such a conference for a long time, the results of which could be the eventual diso20 lution of NATO and the solidification of Soviet hegemony over Eastern 21 Europe.
There are additional potential benefits which Moscow could realize when the treaty is ratified.
Moscow would gain more latitude to deal with the Chinese and Middle East problems.
The Soviet economy, known to be suffering, could use the transfusion of German trade and technical expertise to quite the clamor for consumer goods.
The question of whether or not the Soviet Union is ready to make con cessions on Berlin to get ratification of the Bonn-Moscow agreement has yet to be answered.
If the Administration in Washington ordered sizeable reductions in troop strength in Europe as a part of President Nixon 1 s M realistic deterrence"" program, the Kremlin’s perception of the need for a security conference would pale, for it would have gotten all it could have 22 achieved at such a conference.
However, with the defeat of the Mansfield amendment, unilateral troop withdrawals have been precluded for the time being.
The search for East-West detente in Europe can only be described as incredibly complex.
However, when all is said and done, the geographical and political center of the search is in Berlin.
The fact that the Four Power talks have continued on a regular basis for more than a year indicates that both sides consider it to their advantage to maintain political contact even though a solution to the Berlin question may not occur within the foreseeable future.
There they sit, the Americans, the Russians, the British and French too, and the Germans, hating each other’s guts, playing poker with the Eastern policy as though they were gathered together in a back room saloon in the Wild West.
The stakes are high, the game — which no longer warrants the name — is risky.
West Berlin, half a city, is at stake and no one has all the aces in his hand.
ADDENDUM On September 3, 1971, the United States, France, Great Britain, and the Soviet Union signed an agreement designed to ease tensions in Berlin.
This agreement was the first instrument of diplomacy concerning the status of Berlin signed by the Four Powers since the agreement reached in 1949 which lifted the Soviet blockade of the city.
Transit traffic of civilians and goods across the German Democratic Republic between the Federal Republic of Germany and West Berlin is to be unimpeded and facilitated so as to take place in the most simple and expeditious manner and that it will receive preferential treatment.
Through travelers using individual vehicles are to be exempt from search or detention except for special procedures for suspected misuse of through transit.
The Western powers commit themselves in exercising their rights in West Berlin to maintain and develop the ties between those sectors and the Federal Republic of Germany and also to continue to regard West Berlin as not part of the Federal Republic and not governed by it.
Communication between West Berlin and areas of East Berlin and the German Democratic Republic will be improved.
The right of the three Western powers to represent the interests of West Berlin abroad are reaffirmed.
Within limits of security and in such a manner as not to prejudice the 35 rights of the Western powers, the Federal Republic of Germany may perform services for residents of West Berlin, and may represent the interests of West Berlin in international organizations and conferences.
Of these general principles, specific arrangements for implementation of the first three were to be worked out by representatives of the Federal Republic of Germany and the German Democratic Republic.
Negotiations of this type are in progress as of October, 1971, however no draft protocol has yet been presented for approval by the signatories of the basic agreement.
It is too early to forecast with any assurance the final outcome of this diplomatic endeavor.
The many things which hang on successful conclusion of an agreement on Berlin necessarily dictate a slow and careful negotiating process for both the East and the West.
It would not be surprising if the talks between representatives of the GDR take at least as long.
In one of his last published commentaries, the late Dean Acheson counseled caution against overly hasty celebration of a breakthrough in East-West relations.
The Berlin agreement is no gift; nevertheless, suspect those bearing it.
Johnstone, Paul H American Policy-Making Practices and the Origins of the United States Commitment to the West Berlin Enclave.
Planch, Charles R The Changing Status of German Reunification in Western Diplomacy , 1955-1966.
Published by The Federal Ministry for All-German Affairs of the Federal Republic of Germany.64.
The Bulletin , a weekly survey of German affairs, published by the Press and Information Office of the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Thes i $ M653 Hoessner ^^^6 93 Sq r I i n 1S «' Jun^^on, Thes i s M658 Moessner The Berlin question, I96I June 1971.
