A Referee B Combine A Amateur C Reveal B Directive D Encircle C Conspiracy D Odyssey 6.
A Fertile A Trickery B Corrupt B Rumor C Mild C Rubble D Bright D Shortcoming For questions 7 to 11, choose the 3.
Mr Emerson rebuffed his B Mistrustful coworker by refusing all C Earnest offers of assistance.
The Salvation Army has C Adaptable many services to help the D Forthright city’s indigent population.
It didn’t take long for the A Lavish malcontent factory workers B Gradual to voice their anger over the C Random new rules.
Quitting his job with no C Arrange prospects for new D Stretch employment left Joseph in a precarious position.
Although not a single Castro of an attack. missile was launched, the crisis is C There had been a considered by many to be the previous failed attack. closest man has come to a nuclear D The situation had been war. made public.
After the failed attempt in 1961 by Cuban exiles to invade Cuba, Fidel 2.
To help defend his country, Castro, an ally of the Soviet Union, asked A The standoff in 1962 Premier Nikita Khrushchev for over Soviet Missiles in military aid.
These missiles could easily B An agreement between reach American soil.
Kennedy and Premier In October of 1962, the United Nikita Khrushchev States discovered the Cuban missile ended the Cuban bases.
Kennedy met with government C The Cuban Missile officials and for seven days debated Crisis of 1962 the situation.
He decided to impose a D The world waited blockade around Cuba to prevent nervously as tensions further shipment from the Soviet built up between the Union to Cuba.
The situation was United States and the made public and the American Soviet Union. people waited tensely.
Kennedy agreed not to invade Cuba and to also remove US missiles from Turkey.
A The Soviet Union was A Kennedy Imposes a falling behind in the Blockade around Cuba arms race B USSR Agrees to B The world is a much Remove Missiles from safer place after end of Cuba the Cuban Missile C United States and the Soviet Crisis Union Secretly C President Kennedy Negotiate End to the was not an effective Missile Crisis leader in a time of D The World Waits crisis Nervously While D The Cuban Missile Tensions Rise Crisis was one of the Between Two United States’ most Countries tense situations 4.
C Inform the American B Cuba Defends Itself people with Soviet Nuclear D Support Cuban exiles Weapons in an invasion of Cuba C Cuban Exiles Fail in Attempt to Invade Cuba D Cuba and Soviet Union Are Allies Read the passage below and anyone. answer questions 7 to 11.
Therefore, neither the motorcycle nor A topic of debate among drivers is the car is more or less dangerous frequently whether a motorcycle is than the other is; it is the attitude of more dangerous that an automobile. their operators that creates the Most experienced drivers would danger, death, and dismemberment agree that while it is more resultant from accidents. exhilarating to ride a motorcycle than to drive an automobile, it is illogical to therefore conclude that this 7.
The critical A Riding a motorcycle concept to be understood here is not B Driving a car exhilaration, which is a given, but C Sledding downhill how the exhilaration comes about D Parachuting and is a cause of serious injury and death of motorcycle riders.
An example of motorcycle safe exhilaration is the excitement of B Motorcycles can be sledding downhill, which results in safe the sled rider feeling stimulated, C Cars are safer than refreshed, or elated. motorcycles D Exhilaration leads to Unsafe exhilaration, which is usually careless driving the consequence of reckless thrill seeking, is therefore a state of being over-stimulated, frightened, and 9.
Without an operator, both vehicles are metal entities, sitting in space, neither threatening nor harmful to 10.
Mr Vlasic needs to buy 2 C Exhilaration pens each for the 17 D The attitude of the students in his class.
D 45 At the end of the morning Dana has filled 3/20 of the envelopes and Megan has 8.
A bag contains 6 black cups of flour to bake 2 marbles and 4 white cakes.
B 5 inches C 6 inches A $12.60 D 7 inches B $11.50 C $10.70 D $10.50 12.
On the throw of a six-sided die, what is the probability that you will roll a number 15.
A –2 B 2 A A right angle 1 B An acute angle C −3 C An obtuse angle 2 D An exterior angle 1 D 3 4 11.
The scale used to measure near the fire and the lid how acidic or alkaline a loosens.
Jupiter is: A Pressure A A large crater B Temperature B A vast desert C Humidity C An area of very high D Wind speed temperature D A giant storm 14.
A Has never erupted A Primary producer B Is capable of erupting B Detrivore C Will never erupt again C Herbivore D Is currently erupting D Sunlight 11.
A Barometer A Crustaceans B Micrometer B Worms C Seismograph C Insects D Chronograph D Arachnids 16.
A A, B, C, and D B A, B, AB, and O C A, B, AB, and BA D AB, BC, CD, and DA Mechanical Comprehension 3.
The bar shown in the A Change the direction of diagram below pivots about a force point P Forces F1 and F2 B Reduce the effort are applied at the points needed to lift a heavy shown.
An effort of 2 lbs is A F1 exerts a greater applied on one side of the torque on the bar than fulcrum to lift a load of 8 lbs F2. on the other side of the B F2 exerts a greater fulcrum.
C For the same force, the needle applies greater A First class lever pressure on the paper B Second class lever D The needle is longer C Third class lever and applies force for a D Fourth class lever longer duration 6.
A Levers and wheel and axle A Stairs B A lever and an inclined B Parking ramp plane C Moving walkway C Fixed and moveable D Ladder pulleys D A pulley and a lever 12.
B Changes the direction of linear motion A Lever C Changes rotational B Inclined plane motion into linear C Wheel and axle motion D Screw D Reverses the direction of rotation 13.
A Magnify force B Store energy C Change direction of rotation D Change speed of movement 15.
A Pascal’s principle B Archimedes’ principle C Bernoulli’s principle D Boyle’s law 16.
A It is transmitted undiminished in all directions B It is reduced by the time it reaches the other parts C It increases as it moves through the fluid D It is not transmitted to any other part Electronics Information 5.
A circuit segment contains A Magnetic only two capacitors of equal B Nonmagnetic value, connected in parallel.
A Light A Radiant energy to B Sound electrical energy C Magnetism B Electrical energy to D Heat radiant energy C Mechanical energy to electrical energy 3.
D Electrical energy to mechanical energy A Capacitance B Resistance C Luminance 9.
C Mechanical energy to electrical energy A ULF D Electrical energy to B VLF mechanical energy C VHF D UHF 15.
B Gouge C Slip roll A The longer the handle, D Band saw the greater the force B The shorter the handle, the greater the force 6.
Kayla measures the length C Skew chisel of a piece of wood with a D Gouge tape measure.
A 39 feet 25 inches A Caliper B 3 feet 25 inches B Wrench C 3 feet 9.25 inches C Level D 3 feet 3.25 inches D Lathe 8.
A Pipe wrench B Adjustable-end wrench A Every one month or C Socket wrench 1,000 miles D Combination wrench B Every five months or 5,000 miles C According to the 9.
A The intake valve A Directional tires can’t B The clutch plate be rotated C The valve body B Side to side D The flywheel C Front to back, across D Front to back, same side 5.
A In the exhaust gas recirculation valve A To hold the axle to the B As part of the muffler wheel C In the water pump B To hold the rim to the D As part of a strut hub C To hold the axle in the transmission 6.
Engine coolant is typically down and up made from propylene B Amount of air in glycol.
A Cooling system B Emissions system C Electrical system D Air conditioning system Assembling Objects For each pair of labeled shapes in questions 1 to 8, choose the figure that shows the shapes connected correctly.
A B C D For each set of shapes in questions 9 to 16, choose the figure that shows the shapes assembled into an object.
A B C D ASVAB Extra Sample Test 1 Answer Key WK PC AR MK GS MC EI SI AI AO 1.
C C B B A A D ASVAB Extra Sample Test 1 with Rationales Word Knowledge 1.
A Amateur B Directive C Conspiracy D Odyssey Answer: C Conspiracy The word collusion has nearly the same meaning as the word conspiracy.
A Trickery B Rumor C Rubble D Shortcoming Answer: D Shortcoming The word foible has nearly the same meaning as the word shortcoming.
A Revolting B Mistrustful C Earnest D Confident Answer: A Revolting The word repugnant has nearly the same meaning as the word revolting.
A Rowdy B Hateful C Adaptable D Forthright Answer: C Adaptable The word malleable has nearly the same meaning as the word adaptable.
They both mean capable of being shaped or formed; capable of being altered or influenced.
A Referee B Combine C Reveal D Encircle Answer: B Combine The word coalesce has nearly the same meaning as the word combine.
A Fertile B Corrupt C Mild D Bright Answer: D Bright The word luminous has nearly the same meaning as the word bright.
For questions 7 to 11, choose the word that has nearly the same meaning as the underlined word.
A Snubbed The word rebuffed has nearly the same meaning as the word snubbed.
The Salvation Army has many services to help the city’s indigent population.
B Needy The word indigent has nearly the same meaning as the word needy.
It was many years before church members could put the bitter schism behind them and move forward together.
It didn’t take long for the malcontent factory workers to voice their anger over the new rules.
D Dissatisfied The word malcontent has nearly the same meaning as the word dissatisfied.
Quitting his job with no prospects for new employment left Joseph in a precarious position.
B Risky The word precarious has nearly the same meaning as the word risky.
A Raid B Retreat C Species D Pattern Answer: B Retreat The word foray is most opposite in meaning to the word retreat.
A Enraged B Famous C Devilish D Original Answer: D Original The word trite is most opposite in meaning to the word original.
A Lavish B Gradual C Random D Coarse Answer: B Gradual The word precipitous is most opposite in meaning to the word gradual.
A Submit B Risk C Arrange D Stretch Answer: A Submit The word subjugate is most opposite in meaning to the word submit.
A Goodness B Ancestry C Length D Support Answer: C Length The word brevity is most opposite in meaning to the word length.
Paragraph Comprehension Read the passage below and answer questions 1 to 6.
Although not a single missile was launched, the crisis is considered by many to be the closest man has come to a nuclear war.
After the failed attempt in 1961 by Cuban exiles to invade Cuba, Fidel Castro, Cuba’s leader, was certain of another attack by the United States.
To help defend his country, Castro, an ally of the Soviet Union, asked Premier Nikita Khrushchev for military aid.
In October of 1962, the United States discovered the Cuban missile bases.
President John F Kennedy met with government officials and for seven days debated the situation.
He decided to impose a blockade around Cuba to prevent further shipment from the Soviet Union to Cuba.
Kennedy agreed not to invade Cuba and to also remove United States missiles from Turkey.
Choice A and D are actions that take place after Castro believed the United States might invade.
Choice C is the reason or cause for Castro’s belief that the United States might attack.
C United States and the Soviet Union Secretly Negotiate End to the Missile Crisis Choices A, B, and D are details within the passage.
A Remove missiles from Turkey B Impose a blockade around Cuba C Inform the American people D Support Cuban exiles in an invasion of Cuba Answer: B Impose a blockade around Cuba Choices A, C, and D are details within the passage but they are not Kennedy’s first action.
Choice B is the first action Kennedy took after hearing of the missiles in Cuba.
Choice B is not the correct answer because the passage does not imply or state the condition of the world after the crisis.
Choice C is incorrect because the evidence in the passage suggests that he was, in fact, an effective leader during the crisis.
The passage states that this incident was the closest the world has come to a nuclear attack.
B Cuba Defends Itself with Soviet Nuclear Weapons Choices A, C, and D are details within the passage.
A topic of debate among drivers is frequently whether a motorcycle is more dangerous that an automobile.
Most experienced drivers would agree that while it is more exhilarating to ride a motorcycle than to drive an automobile, it is illogical to therefore conclude that this exhilaration leads to careless driving and, therefore, more accidents, deaths, and injuries to motorcycle riders than car drivers.
The critical concept to be understood here is not exhilaration, which is a given, but how the exhilaration comes about and is a cause of serious injury and death of motorcycle riders.
An example of safe exhilaration is the excitement of sledding downhill, which results in the sled rider feeling stimulated, refreshed, or elated.
Unsafe exhilaration, which is usually the consequence of reckless thrill seeking, is therefore a state of being over-stimulated, frightened, and depressed by terror.
The answer is that the two forms of exhilaration are the consequences not of the motorcycle or the automobile, per se, but of the operation of the respective vehicles.
Without an operator, both vehicles are metal entities, sitting in space, neither threatening nor harmful to anyone.
Therefore, neither the motorcycle nor the car is more or less dangerous than the other is; it is the attitude of their operators that creates the danger, death, and dismemberment resultant from accidents.
A Riding a motorcycle B Driving a car C Sledding downhill D Parachuting Answer: C Sledding downhill Choice C is the example given by the author in the second paragraph.
A It is unsafe to ride a motorcycle B Motorcycles can be safe C Cars are safer than motorcycles D Exhilaration leads to careless driving Answer: B Motorcycles can be safe Choice A and C are incorrect.
The author states that neither the motorcycle nor the car determine safety, rather it is the driver.
The author states that it is illogical to conclude that exhilaration leads to careless driving.
The author states that it is the attitude of the operator that creates the danger.
Therefore, both the car and the motorcycle can be safe when the operator is driving with a safe attitude.
The author presents a logical answer to the question of which is safer, the car or the motorcycle.
A Driving B Reckless thrill seeking C Over stimulation D Elation Answer: B Reckless thrill seeking Choice A is incorrect.
Since the pens come in packs of 6, Mr Vlasic must buy at least 6 packs in order to have enough pens for all his students.
B Brandon; $6.25 To find out who earns more and by how much, find out each person’s hourly wage.
At the end of the morning Dana has filled 3/20 of the envelopes and Megan has filled 1/4 of them.
A school garden had been divided into 7/8 square meter plots for students.
C 1/3 To find the probability, divide the number of acceptable outcomes by the total number of possible outcomes.
So the probability of rolling a number less than 3 is 2/6 which reduces to 1/3.
D 5/9 Since Sally has taken out a black marble, the bag now contains 5 black marbles and 4 white marbles.
D $12.00 Since the cost of the yarn is given in yards, first convert the length of yarn Rosita bought into yards.
C 12 To find the average age, add the ages of all the children and divide by the number of children.
A A right angle B An acute angle C An obtuse angle D An exterior angle Answer: B An acute angle Angles smaller than 90 degrees are called acute angles.
A Has no equal sides B Has two equal angles C Has no acute angles D Has two obtuse angles Answer: B Has two equal angles An isosceles triangle, by definition, has two equal sides and two equal angles.
A 20 cm B 40 cm C 60 cm D 80 cm Answer: C 60 cm Since all three sides of an equilateral triangle are equal, its perimeter is three times its side.
A pH scale B Celsius scale C Richter scale D dB scale Answer: A pH scale The pH scale goes from 0 to 14.
B Concrete Concrete is a mixture of cement, water, sand, and crushed rock.
Baking soda is sodium bicarbonate, table salt is sodium chloride, and water is a compound of hydrogen and oxygen.
A Calcium B Carbon C Chlorine D Chromium Answer: B Carbon C is the chemical symbol for carbon, an element that has millions of known compounds.
A Reflection of light B Interference of light C Diffraction of light D Dispersion of light Answer: D Dispersion of light Dispersion is the separation of white light into its constituent colors.
A rainbow is formed because light of each color bends at a slightly different angle as it passes through a raindrop.
A The heated metal lid expands less than the glass jar B The heated glass jar contracts while the metal lid expands C The heated metal lid expands more than the glass jar D The heated glass jar expands while the metal lid contracts Answer: C The heated metal lid expands more than the glass jar The metal lid has a higher coefficient of thermal expansion than glass.
Since the velocity change is 60 mph in 5 seconds, the average rate of change is 12 mph per second.
A Great Bear constellation B Little Bear constellation C Orion constellation D Andromeda constellation Answer: A Great bear constellation The seven stars forming the big dipper are the brightest stars of the constellation named the Great Bear or Ursa Major.
A From which no radiation can escape B That does not contain any matter C That is extremely cold D That contains no energy Answer: A From which no radiation can escape A black hole is created when a supergiant star implodes.
A A large crater B A vast desert C An area of very high temperature D A giant storm Answer: D A giant storm The great red spot on Jupiter is a high pressure storm that people have been observing for hundreds of years.
A Has never erupted B Is capable of erupting C Will never erupt again D Is currently erupting Answer: B Is capable of erupting The word dormant means sleeping.
A dormant volcano is currently inactive but may have erupted in the past and is capable of erupting again.
A Barometer B Micrometer C Seismograph D Chronograph Answer: C Seismograph A seismograph is an instrument that is used to detect seismic or earthquake waves.
A A type of cold front B A type of warm front C A warm front overrun by a cold front D A cold front overrun by a warm front Answer: C A warm front overrun by a cold front An occluded front is a front formed when a cold front has caught up to a warm front and has intermingled, usually by sliding under the warmer air.
A Pressure B Temperature C Humidity D Wind speed Answer: A Pressure Weather maps often show lines connecting points of equal atmospheric pressure.
D Sunlight The abiotic components of an ecosystem are the non-living components such as sunlight, water, and soil.
Arthropods, such as spiders and shellfish, have jointed legs, segmented bodies, and a hard outer shell or skin.
A A, B, C, and D B A, B, AB, and O C A, B, AB, and BA D AB, BC, CD, and DA Answer: B A, B, AB, and O People with blood group A have A antigens on the surface of their red blood cells and B antigens in their blood plasma.
People with blood group B have B antigens on the surface of their red blood cells and A antigens in their blood plasma.
People with blood group AB have both A and B antigens on the surface of their red blood cells.
People with blood group O have both A and B antigens in their blood plasma.
The bar shown in the diagram below pivots about point P Forces F1 and F2 are applied at the points shown.
Since both forces are equal, the one further away from the pivot point, F2, exerts a greater torque.
C For the same force, the needle applies greater pressure on the paper Pressure is the force exerted on unit area of a surface.
So the same force applied on a smaller area results in greater pressure.
A Change the direction of a force B Reduce the effort needed to lift a heavy load C Transfer a force to a different location D Reduce the amount of energy needed to perform a task Answer: D Reduce the amount of energy needed to perform a task Machines help us do work more easily by reducing effort needed, by changing its direction or transferring a force to a different place.
An effort of 2 lbs is applied on one side of the fulcrum to lift a load of 8 lbs on the other side of the fulcrum.
A Levers and wheel and axle B A lever and an inclined plane C Fixed and moveable pulleys D A pulley and a lever Answer: C Fixed and moveable pulleys A block and tackle combines two or more pulleys into a system where one block of pulleys is fixed while the other remains moveable.
A Lever A swinging door is a second class lever with the fulcrum at the hinge at one end and the effort applied at the other end.
A Spur, bevel, worm, rack and pinion B Spur, bevel, worm, crust C Screw, bevel, worm, rack and pinion D Spur, screw, worm, rack and pinion Answer: A Spur, bevel, worm, rack and pinion A gear is a wheel with teeth on it.
These teeth can mesh with teeth on other gears so that when one gear moves, the other one moves as well.
The four basic types of gears are spur gears, bevel gears, worm gears, and rack and pinion gears.
C Moving walkway Even though stairs are not shaped like a smooth incline, they use a slope to make it easier for people to climb upwards.
Parking ramps and ladders also use angled surfaces to make it easier to move up.
It converts the rotational motion of the pinion into a linear motion of the rack.
A Magnify force B Store energy C Change direction of rotation D Change speed of movement Answer: B Store energy You can compress or extend a spring to store energy in it.
A Pascal’s principle B Archimedes’ principle C Bernoulli’s principle D Boyle’s law Answer: C Bernoulli’s principle According to Bernoulli’s principle, where the velocity of a fluid is high, the pressure is low and vice versa.
Since the upper surface of the airplane wing is more curved, air must flow faster and the pressure is lower above the wing than below the wing.
A It is transmitted undiminished in all directions B It is reduced by the time it reaches the other parts C It increases as it moves through the fluid D It is not transmitted to any other part Answer: A It is transmitted undiminished in all directions According to Pascal’s principle, when pressure is applied to a confined fluid it is transmitted undiminished in all directions.
When you press the bottom of a toothpaste tube, the pressure is transmitted to the top and the toothpaste comes out.
A circuit segment contains only two capacitors of equal value, connected in parallel.
A Light B Sound C Magnetism D Heat Answer: A Light The speed of electricity is almost as fast as the speed of light.
A Magnetic B Nonmagnetic C Conductive D Nonconductive Answer: D Nonconductive Dielectric material is nonconductive material, typically used in capacitors.
A Radiant energy to electrical energy B Electrical energy to radiant energy C Mechanical energy to electrical energy D Electrical energy to mechanical energy Answer: D Electrical energy to mechanical energy Motors are used to convert electrical energy to mechanical energy, for example, the turning of the wheels on a car.
A Frequency-dependent voltage sources B Frequency-dependent resistors C Frequency-independent voltage sources D Frequency-independent resistors Answer: B Frequency-dependent resistors In an AC circuit, inductive reactance goes up as frequency goes up and inductive reactance goes down as frequency goes down.
D DPDT DPDT is an acronym for double-pole, double-throw, also known as a two-way switch.
A Resistance B Reactance C Impedance D Inductance Answer: B Reactance Reactance can be capacitive or inductive.
A Radiant energy to electrical energy B Electrical energy to radiant energy C Mechanical energy to electrical energy D Electrical energy to mechanical energy Answer: A Radiant energy to electrical energy A solar cell converts light to electricity.
D Iron Of the four metals listed, iron is the worst electrical conductor; silver is the best.
A 1 A half-wave rectifier is usually made with one diode and one resistor.
Most hammers feature a large head area, which adds mass to the tool to aid in the delivery of a forceful impact, and a long handle that works as a force multiplier.
A The longer the handle, the greater the force The longer the handle, the greater the force multiplier.
D 3 feet 3.25 inches There are 12 inches in 1 foot., so begin by dividing 39 by 12 to convert from inches to feet.
B Cross slot The Phillips screw is an evolved form of the cross slot screw.
It is designed to cam the screwdriver out of the screw when the screw stalls, preventing damage to the screw head caused by overdriving.
A Lathe B Gouge C Slip roll D Band saw Answer: A Lathe A lathe is a machine that rotates a piece of material and shapes it.
A Butt chisel B Corner chisel C Skew chisel D Gouge Answer: C Skew chisel A skew chisel has an angled cutting blade that is used for finishing work.
A Caliper B Wrench C Level D Lathe Answer: B Wrench A spanner is another name for a wrench.
It is a tool used to provide mechanical advantage while applying torque.
B Adjustable-end wrench Adjustable-end wrenches are commonly called Crescent wrenches because they were initially developed by the Crescent Tool and Horseshoe Company.
A Screwdrivers B Chisels C Sledges D Wrenches Answer: D Wrenches Hand wrenches that are used to torque heavy bolts or bolts that are seized often have very long handles or attachable handles known as breaker bars.
D Divider caliper In metalworking, divider calipers are used to measure distance and scribe metal surfaces by scratching them.
A Polishing B Removing paint C Applying paint D Applying sealant Answer: A Polishing A crocus cloth can be used for extra-fine polishing.
It is similar to sand paper but uses an applied polishing or lapping compound in place of bonded abrading particles.
C According to the manufacturer’s recommendations While three months or 30,000 miles was the old standard, changes in manufacture, oil design , and heavy use all determine how often oil should be changed.
B Measures the amount of air going into the engine The mass air flow sensor lets the car’s computer know how much air the engine is taking in so it can adjust the fuel and timing.
A Engine B Transmission C Radiator D Differential Answer: A Engine The harmonic balancer is mounted on the end of the crank shaft.
It reduces vibration in the engine and serves as a drive pulley for belts.
C The valve body The valve body controls the clutches in the transmission by channeling pressurized fluid through a series of valves.
D As part of a strut The dampener spring absorbs the impact of bumps in the road.
A Positive current B Negative current C Grounded circuits D High voltage Answer: A Positive current In most automotive applications, red wires are connected to the positive side of the battery, and black wires are connected to the negative side of the battery.
D Front to back, same side Directional tires have tread which is designed to rotate in only one direction, so they cannot be moved from the right to the left.
B To hold the rim to the hub The lugs are the threaded rods on which the wheel is mounted.
A Difference in volume between the piston down and up B Amount of air in different sized tires C Difference between the engine compression at high and low rpm D Difference between the engine compression at high and low speed Answer: A Difference in volume between the piston down and up Compression takes place in the engine as the piston rises and squeezes the air/fuel mixture.
A Cooling system B Emissions system C Electrical system D Air conditioning system Answer: D Air conditioning system Chilled refrigerant runs through the evaporator where air is blown over it to cool it for the car’s interior.
Assembling Objects For each pair of labeled shapes in questions 1 to 8, choose the figure that shows the shapes connected correctly.
A For each set of shapes in questions 9 to 16, choose the figure that shows the shapes assembled into an object.
