Castro could killed Kennedy too.The most impressive is the reason to keep it in the shade for more than 42 years: politics.Read this transcript""Alexander Haig, then a military adviser to President Johnson, went on camera to say that Lyndon Johnson believed Cuba was responsible, but he believed that if the evidence came out of a Castro link to the Kennedy murder, it would turn the country to the right politically, and keep the Democrats out of power for years to come.
By Roger Aronoff | February 2, 2006Shortly after Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on November 22, 1963, a Cuban connection was investigated.
Compelling new evidence of a Cuban Communist role in the assassination of former president John F Kennedy has come to light, but has received little attention in the United States media.It comes at a time when there has been renewed interest in the attempted assassination of Pope John Paul II and the alleged Soviet role behind that.Mehmet Ali Agca, who attempted to assassinate Pope John Paul II, was released from jail in Istanbul, Turkey, after nearly 25 years in prison.
Most of the reports labeled him as being from the far-right, because for a time he was a member of a militant nationalist group in Turkey.
At best, the reports have said that because of Ali Agca's changing stories, we still don't know who was behind the attempted assassination.But at his trial, the Italian prosecutors made the case that he was in fact carrying out an operation by the Bulgarian secret service.
If the Bulgarian secret service was involved, it was clearly on behalf of the Soviet Union and its intelligence service, the KGB.Accuracy in Media commented here and here on evidence that was later presented on the CBS 60 Minutes program, making a strong case that the Soviets were ultimately behind the assassination attempt.
The Soviets saw the Polish-born Pope as a threat to the survival of the Soviet empire, and they were right.In the Kennedy matter, the big news comes from a German TV documentary that claims that the Cuban government was behind the assassination of former president John F Kennedy by Lee Harvey Oswald.
The film is called ""Rendezvous With Death,"" by award winning director Wilfried Huissman.
It took five years to make, and reports suggest that it makes a compelling case.Among those talking on camera is Oscar Marino, a former Cuban intelligence agent.
He says that the Cubans wanted Kennedy dead because he had opposed the Cuban revolution, and had tried to have Castro assassinated.
Marino told Huissman that he knew for certain that the Cuban secret service G2 had carried out and financed the operation, though he wouldn't say if Castro had directly ordered it.
But under Castro's brutal dictatorship, which has endured for nearly half a century, it is not conceivable that this would have happened without his blessing.
Oswald had lived there for three years after deserting from the United States military.
He was allowed to return to the United States and bring his wife with him.
He continued to call himself a Communist, and demonstrated on behalf of Cuba.
And as a Marine, he had been sharpshooter, thus capable of hitting the intended target from the Texas Schoolbook Depository, where he went to work.
He said that Oswald traveled to Mexico City in September 1963 where he met up with Cuban agents who paid him $6,500 to carry out the assassination.Shortly after Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas on November 22, 1963, a Cuban connection was investigated.
An FBI agent by the name of Laurence Keenan was sent to Mexico City, but he was recalled after only three days.
Alexander Haig, then a military adviser to President Johnson, went on camera to say that LBJ believed Cuba was responsible, but he believed that if the evidence came out of a Castro link to the Kennedy murder, it would turn the country to the right politically, and keep the Democrats out of power for years to come.
In this country there were stories in Newsmax.com, The Washington Times, and Miami Herald.com.
A newly released film that explores JFK's death is claiming that his accused assassin Lee Harvey Oswald was directed and paid to kill the president by Cuba's Castro government.A German documentary film entitled ""Rendezvous with Death ---why Kennedy had to die"" will be shown on German television on Friday.
Journalist Wilfried Huismann, the filmmaker, says Kennedy's killer, Lee Harvey Oswald, traveled to Mexico City a few weeks before the assassination and met agents from Cuba's G-2 intelligence service.Huismann told Germany's Deutsche Welle radio, ""We settled the question of why in three years of research on this documentary in Mexico, USA and Cuba.
He was a political fanatic and allowed himself to be used by the Cuban intelligence services to kill John F Kennedy,"" said Huismann.
Several have said since the Kennedy assassination that Cuban intelligence officials contacted Oswald after he was alerted by the Soviets intelligence agency the KGB in 1962.
He returned to the United States after living in the Soviet Union for several years.
After Kennedy's death on Nov., 1963,"" Huismann continued, "" Lyndon B Johnson found out that the United States had a secret, illegal murder program focused on Fidel Castro.
And as a conservative pragmatist, he decided within a few hours, in agreement with Robert Kennedy, to drop the whole thing and to ban FBI and CIA officials from pursuing the trail leading to Cuba,"" said Huismann.
Former Secretary of State Alexander Haig says in the film that President Johnson believed Cuba was to blame and feared a pronounced swing to the right if the truth were known that would keep the Democrats out of power for a long time.
Before he left office in 1969, President Johnson had told ABC News commentator Howard K Smith, ""Kennedy was out to get Castro but Castro got him.
We missed a moment in history,"" Keenan said.Lee Harvey Oswald, an ex-Marine sharpshooter who worked in a book depository building that overlooked the assassination site.
Oswald had a Russian wife, called himself a Communist and agitated on behalf of Castro's Cuba.The film was five years in the making and will be shown on Germany's main ARD public TV station.
It was funded by a series of German public broadcasters as well as Japan's NHK television network.Huismann concluded, ""It's history.
The Soviet Union removed those missiles even though in later years several people contended that many of those missiles were left behind.Shortly after Kennedy's death, President Johnson appointed a commission headed by United States Supreme Court Justice Earl Warren to investigate the assassination.
One of the commission members was then House Republican Leader and later President Gerald R Ford.The Warren report concluded that Oswald for Kennedy's the assassination.
The commission could not find any persuasive evidence of a conspiracy, either domestic or foreign involving any other persons, groups, or countries.
It noted that three empty shells were found in the sixth floor sniper's nest in the book depository, and the rifle was found with one live cartridge left in its chamber on the sixth floor.The commission released its report in 1964.
Upon its release all commission files were sealed away from public view until 2039 by executive order of President Johnson.
Cuban secret service organized JFK's murder A Cuban secret service agent claims in a German film that his colleagues chose Lee Harvey Oswald to assassinate President John F Kennedy in 1963.
BY HUGH WILLIAMSONFinancial Times BERLIN Hoping to scoop the world on one of America's supreme historical puzzles, Germany's leading television broadcaster has claimed in a documentary film that it was the Cuban secret service that organized the assassination of President John F Kennedy.
The 90-minute film, Rendezvous with Death, features an interview with Oscar Marino, a former agent of the Cuban G2 secret service, who says he knew before the assassination in November 1963 that Lee Harvey Oswald -Kennedy's killer -had been picked by his colleagues to do the job.
Marino claims that Oswald, a Communist who lived in the Soviet Union for three years, was identified to Cuba by the Russian KGB secret service.
A Cuban involvement is one of the dozens of conspiracy theories that have long surrounded the JFK assassination.
Huismann, who worked on the project with Gus Russo, the Baltimore-based author of a book on Fidel Castro, told the Financial Times his exclusive interview with Marino provided ''decisive new evidence'' beyond the dozens of existing inquiries, books and films on the subject.
He admitted many Americans were ''very skeptical'' that he had solved the Kennedy assassination puzzle, but argued that his research focus on Mexico City -which Oswald visited two months before the assassination in Dallas -was his breakthrough.
He interviewed Marino in the city, Huismann said, and gained exclusive access to parts of the country's secret service archive.
Marino knew before the killing that Oswald had been recruited in Mexico City in September 1963 to do the killing, according to the filmmaker.
The G2 decided to have Kennedy killed because it believed the United States government planned to kill Castro, according to the film.
Another key witness in the film is Lawrence Keenan, a retired FBI agent, who was sent to Mexico after the assassination to investigate Oswald's activities and says he was withdrawn after only a short time.
This belatedly made up for the failure of CBS to give this story the attention it deserved when it first surfaced in November-December 1982.
Three Bulgarians were arrested in Italy after Ali Agca, the Turk who shot the Pope, claimed that the Bulgarian Special Services was behind the plot.
They made the plans, furnished the gun, took him to Saint Peter's Square, promised to help him escape and paid him three million German marks.
Ali Agca talked after he had been in prison for eighteen months and no effort had been made to free him.
Dan Rather reacted in a radio broadcast in which he said that if true, this would be the story of the decade.
But a week later, when Italy made official statements that included calling the Bulgarian actions ""an act of war,"" the CBS Evening News aired only a 35-second report.
Terrorism expert Claire Sterling quoted that statement on ""Nightline,"" the only publicity that it got in our national media at that time.
Most media were skittish about covering this story, perhaps because Yuri Andropov, who ran the KGB when the Pope was shot, had just become president of the Soviet Union.
It was reported that intelligence officials remained unconvinced by allegations in Italy that Bulgaria was behind the plot.
Having exposed the involvement of the Bulgarians, Ali Agca was the most important witness at their trial.
The case was solid, but at the trial Ali Agca claimed to be Jesus Christ reincarnated.
In our next commentary we will tell how ""60 Minutes"" found the explanation for Ali Agca's bizarre behavior and validated the Bulgarian-KGB role in the plot to kill the Pope.
We reported that ""60 Minutes II"" had recently obtained new information that explains why, in 1985, Agca sabotaged the trial of three Bulgarians who were his co-conspirators.
Agca, the key witness in the trial, discredited himself, terminating the trial by claiming to be Jesus Christ reincarnated.
It claimed that the KGB was behind the plot to kill the Pope and that there was a KGB colonel who could confirm this.
In the letter, Agca explained that was why he proclaimed himself to be Jesus Christ.
He said that before the trial, a Bulgarian lawyer named Stefan Markov came to question him in prison.
He decided to feign insanity, and he began to claim that he was Jesus Christ reincarnated.
He made that claim at the trial, and the prosecutors saw that they had lost their key witness.
They halted the trial and the three Bulgarian agents were freed and sent back to Bulgaria.
He had many hours of conversations with Agca when he was imprisoned in Italy.
He was convinced that the KGB was involved in the assassination attempt and that the Bulgarians were acting as their agents.
He said that the KGB and the Bulgarian Special Services were not involved in the plot to kill the Pope.
But ""60 Minutes"" learned that during breaks Markov could have given Agca a message in Turkish that the Italian magistrate would not have understood.
Markov insisted that Agca had lied about the three Bulgarians who were put on trial, but Agca had shown that he knew a lot about them.
He described the apartment of Sergei Antonov, the top agent, very accurately.
Imposimato said he brought the two men together, and Agca confronted Antonov with so many details that Antonov could not explain that he became very angry.
The ""60 Minutes"" segment, in explaining why Agca sabotaged the trial of the Bulgarians who directed his attack on the Pope, made an important contribution to history.
A Nexis search could not find a single story reporting that contribution in the print or electronic media.
