RICHARD MULLER LT COL KRISTI LOWENTHAL DISCLAIMER The conclusions and opinions expressed in this document are those of the author.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR Major Justin Chandler was a 2003 graduate of the USAF Academy, where he majored in management.
His 14-year career on active duty with the Air Force has taken him to a variety of assignments and places, including Colorado, Arizona, Texas, Arkansas, North Carolina, New Jersey, Alabama, Africa, Europe, and Asia.
IV ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to acknowledge several people without whose support and help I would never have gotten off the ground with this study.
I would like to thank the expert research staff at the John F Kennedy Library and Museum.
John F Kennedy, containing both the transcripts and important contextual information spanning Kennedy’s presidency.
The corporation selected the eventual Columbia Point waterfront location in 1975 and completed construction in October of 1979.
And at the same time he knew that he was almost essential, that he had to be there.
I need to know when problems arise, I’m going to have somebody who’s going to tell me the unvarnished truth, no matter what he thinks, and Bobby will do that.
Personally, 40 By the end of this meeting, the President was less sure that the blockade option was the best course of action.
Harper 8s Row, Publishers, 1971), 120. 51 understand not only their adversary’s actions but also provide context for the United States’ response.
That afternoon news arrived that the OAS had passed the United States resolution with only yes votes and two abstentions.
That morning at approximately 6:00 A.M. in Washington D.C., United States naval ships intercepted the Soviet tanker Bucharest.
The other way is, I would think, a combination of an air strike and probably invasion, which means that we would have to carry out both of those with the prospect that they [the missiles] might be fired.
Preparation continued with a general feeling among most of the EXCOMM that the crisis was approaching an inevitable military confrontation.
Based on Robert Kennedy’s account, it appears he was with the President when the translated letter from the State Department was received.
We agree to remove from Cuba those means which you regard as offensive means; we agree to carry this out and make a pledge in the United Nations Your representatives will make a declaration to the effect that the U.S.A., on its part, considering the uneasiness and anxiety of the Soviet State, will remove its similar means from Turkey.
With frustration mounting in the room, Robert Kennedy began to assert himself more than at any other point during the EXCOMM meetings.
In Chairman Khrushchev's first memoir Khrushchev Remembers he describes the Attorney General as “looking] exhausted.
If letters of this type are needed—go to State Dept You have my word on this & that is sufficient Take back your letter—Reconsider it & if you feel it is necessary to write letters then we will also write one which you cannot enjoy Also if you should publish any document indicating a deal then it is off 8s also if done afterwards will further affect the unclear relationship 64 Dobrynin provided additional information about the contents of the confidential memorandum during the Moscow Conference in 1989.
In fact, Castro learned the news on the 28 th of October from a phone call from Carlos Franqui, the editor of the Cuban newspaper Revolucidn.
According to McNamara one of the RF-lOls sent to capture photographs of the IL-28 airfield, “appears to have been fired on.
The President directed that if one of our planes was hit, we would not announce this fact.
The President requested that such information be withheld at least until after elections as if the information got into the press, a new and more violent Cuban issue would be injected into the campaign and this would seriously affect his independence of action.
It was Robert Kennedy who oversaw the Executive Committee, stopped the air-strike madness in its tracks, wrote the reply to the Khrushchev letter, conducted the secret negotiations with Dobrynin.
Keefer, Edward C., Charles S Sampson, Louis J Smith, and David S Patterson.
