Hint He did not order the Navy to do anything Send submarines to the Soviet harbor for a covert attack Set up a naval 'quarantine' around Cuba Annihilate the Soviet ships that were entering the Cuban territory to prevent more missiles from entering the harbor NEXT> 4.
Hint Nikita Khrushchev Aleksej Kossygin Nikolaj Bulganin Mikhail Gorbachev NEXT> 6.
Hint The Berlin Wall Bay of Pigs Invasion Soviet Union declares war on the United States World War II NEXT> 8.
Hint Launch a strategic war between the two nations Start World War III Demilitarize all of their offensive weaponry Demanding the removal of United States missiles in Turkey in exchange for Soviet missiles in Cuba NEXT> 9.
The final agreement was that both countries agreed to dismantle their arms totally, and stay away from each other's continents.
In 1963, the Soviet Union and the United States signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
The United States of America became aware of this in 1962 and the fact that the Soviet Union was taking active steps to place missiles in Cuba a clear threat to the United States.
In October 1962, a United States U-2 reconnaissance spy plane that was flown by Richard Heyser discovered that the Soviets were building underground sites in Cuba for the potential launch of offensive missiles against the United States.
Kennedy became aware in October of 1962, and ordered the United States Navy to set up a partial naval blockade around Cuba to prevent the delivery of nuclear weapons to the country.
Kennedy announced to the world that he was setting the quarantine up until the missiles from Cuba were removed.
A full-scale nuclear war between the two superpowers would have been a possible outcome if Soviet ships had challenged the United States actions.
During this era, the United States would not allow any naval vessel reach within 12 nautical miles of the North and South American coastline which includes the islands as well.
He was in charge of launching plans to place missiles on the Cuban territory.
The United States missiles in Turkey threatened the Soviet Union, which made the Soviet Union set up missiles in Cuba.
This was because both countries wanted to set up missiles that were closer to each other, so that it could strike within a few minutes if there was to be a nuclear strike.
During this era, the Bay of Pigs Invasion by CIA-backed Cuban exiles in 1961 caused the Soviets to place missiles on the Cuban territory.
Cuba was a strong ally to the Soviet Union, and was against the covert operation the United States had done to oust the Cuban Premier, Fidel Castro.
Demanding the removal of United States missiles in Turkey in exchange for Soviet missiles in Cuba On October 27, Khrushchev proposed removing Soviet missiles and personnel if the United States would guarantee not to invade Cuba.
On that same day, a U-2 spy plane was shot down, and Kennedy received another proposal from Khrushchev demanding the removal of United States missiles in Turkey in exchange for Soviet missiles in Cuba. .push; The final agreement was that both countries agreed to dismantle their arms totally, and stay away from each other's continents.
Author Geg_Geg555 This quiz was reviewed by FunTrivia editor bloomsby before going online.
