Half a century later the missile base is still there, in the middle of the marshy Everglades, but the missiles are long gone.
Now, to mark the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis, students at a Miami aviation school are restoring one of the original Nike Hercules missiles once tipped with a nuclear warhead and aimed at Cuba.
The United States and Cuba remain ideological foes to this day, and Florida is home to tens of thousands of Cubans who fled the island after Fidel Castro's 1959 revolution, but tensions have cooled down considerably as memories fade.
The students realize the decommissioned missile was once part of a historic event but confess to knowing little about one of the momentous episodes of the Cold War.
The 41-foot surface-to-air Nike Hercules missile was previously stored in a United States army depot in Alabama, covered in dust and spider webs.
A flatbed truck hauled it down Interstate-95 to the school next to Miami International Airport.
For the past two months, students have been working to restore the 5-ton missile to near-original condition; sanding wings, replacing sheet metal and repainting the United States Army markings.
Its final destination is Everglades National Park, where it will be installed at an abandoned Nike missile base.
The 13-day missile crisis began on Oct., 1962, when then-President John F Kennedy first learned the Soviet Union was installing missiles in Cuba, barely 90 miles off the Florida coast.
After secret negotiations between Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, the United States agreed not to invade Cuba if the Soviet Union withdrew its missiles from the island.
Samuel Robles, 16, said he didn't know a lot about the incident but ""heard something about Che Guevara on the History Channel,"" referring to the Argentine-born revolutionary icon who fought in the 1959 revolution.
Military use of the Everglades site ended in 1979 and the facility, known as HM69 Nike Missile Base, was turned over to the National Park Service, which offers visitor tours in the winter months.
Because the site lies within a national park, the base is almost unchanged since its closure, including the three missile ""barns,"" a missile assembly building, barracks and a guard dog kennel.
During the Cold War the United States was dotted with Nike sites — named after the Greek goddess of victory — strategically located near cities as part of a national air defense system.
Most have disappeared or been converted into other public uses, including an immigration detention facility in Florida, a golf course in Illinois and an elementary school in Kansas.
Click Here to comment on this article Share US In October 1962, as fears of mushroom clouds and radioactive fallout gripped the United States in the midst of the Cuban missile crisis, a battery of anti-ballistic missiles near Miami stood as the nation's first line of defense against nuclear attack.
