At about 2m., Batista, his family, and closest associates, board a plane at Camp Columbia,and leave the island.
Fidel Castro, Commander of the Rebel Army, replaces Miró Cardonas as Prime Minister of the Revolutionary Government.
Major Jesus Sosa Blanco is executed at the ancient moat of La Cabaña Fortress.
In Havana, 2 members of Rolando Masferrer's private army are captured after a shootout in which 2 policemen and a civilian are wounded.
Castro announces that general elections will be held in Cuba in 2 years.
The Cuban government nationalizes the Cuban Telephone Compnay, an affiliate of ITT, and reduces telephone rates.
Five men are arrested for a conspiracy to kill Premier Fidel Castro; Roberto Corral Miramon , Roberto Lopez Paz , Roberto Perez Merens, Jose Sosa Mojena and Andres Arango Chacon.
Prosecuting attorney Lieutenant José Antonio Suarez asserts that Nye received $100,000 from the ousted Batista regime.
Alan Robert Nye is convicted of a plot to kill Premier Fidel Castro and sentenced to death.
The sentence is suspended on the condition that Mr Nye leave Cuba within forty-eight hours April 13.
In Havana, after a public trial that lasts 7 hours, Alan Robert Nye is convicted in a plot to assassinate Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro.
Castro signs Agrarian Reform Act, which expropriates over 1,000 acres of farmlands and forbids foreign land ownership.
In Cairo, Che Guevara makes the first official contact with the Soviet Union.
President Urrutia resigns, and Osvaldo Dorticós Torrado becomes Cuba's 19th president.
Huber Matos, a leading figure in the revolutionary war, resigns his post as military commander of Camagüey province, along with 14 officers, because of the ""rising influence of communism"" in the revolution.
Huber Matos is sentenced to 20 years in prison for conspiracy and treason.
The visit results in a trade agreement in which the Soviet Union will purchase 5 million tons of sugar over a five-year period.
Radio Swan, an anti-Castro radio station created by the United States Central Intelligence Agency goes on the air as part of the Eisenhower-approved plan for covert operations.
In the U.S., the Frente Revlucionario Democrático is formed by Cuban exiles to oppose the government of Fidel Castro.
At the same time, U.S. companies, under pressure from the United States government, refuse to sell fuel to Cuba.
The Soviet Union announces that it will purchase the 700,000 tons of sugar cut by the United States July 23.
In a cable from Havana to Washington, the United States embassy reports that ""during the past three months the popular support of the Castro regime has dropped markedly.
In the first 2 years of the revolution, Cuba loses more than 50% of its doctors and teachers.
At the UN Security Council, Cuba charges that the United States is preparing an invasion.
In a speech, Castro demands that United States embassy staff be reduced to 11, the same number as Cuba's embassy in Washington.
The Communists were right to be distrustful becaue we of the Sierra, leaders of the guerrillas, were still full of petty-bourgeois prejudices and defects, despite Marxist reading.
The ideas were not clear to us,though we wanted with al or strength to destroy tyranny and privileges.
President of Ecuador, Josh Maria Velasco Ibarra, announces United States demands that his country break off diplomatic relations with Cuba as a condition to the approval of various loans.
Cuban soldiers arrest CIA agent Carlos Antonio Rodriquez Cabo, aka El Gallego.
The alleged attack violates the Neutrality Act which forbids the launching of any military expedition from U.S. territory against a nation with which the United States is not at war.
José Miro Cardona, issues a statement that asserts, ""We are not, nor could we be, counterrevolutionaries.
Another explosion at the store El Encanto destroys the 7-story building.
A total of 8 B-26 bombers attack airfields at Ciudad Libertad , San Antonio de los Baños and Santiago de Cuba.
After three days of fighting the invading force is defeated by the Cuban army.
Sorí Marin and Rogelio Gonzalez, CIA agents captured a few days before the Bay of Pigs invasion, are executed.
Goodwin goes on to write a memo to President Kennedy describing the content of their meeting on August 22.
He had been charged with violating U.S. neutrality laws by financing a 27-man invasion of Cuba.
President Kennedy creates an inter-agency team to plan actions against Cuba.
Alexis Johnson, from the Defense Department Roswell Gilpatric and from the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Lyman Lemnitzer.
Also included were General Maxwell Taylor and Robert Kennedy, with Secretary of State Dean Rusk and Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara as occasional participants.
An assortment of United States naval vessels (including aircraft carriers) gather about the Cuban coastine.
Any impulse toward widespread revolt is inhibited by the fear which the apparatus inspires, and also by the lack of dynamic leadership and of any expectation of liberation within the foreseeable future.
The 23 members of the expedition are not arrested, and no charges are brought against them.
Discredit and isolate the regime; Harass the economy; Intensify intelligence collection; plit regime leadership and relations with Bloc; Assist Cuban exile groups and Latin American governments to take actions; Be prepared to exploit a revolt.
Martin to U Alexis Johnson (Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs) outlines a 2-track course of covert action against Cuba.
James Donovan (who negotiated the release of Bay of Pigs prisoners) conducts secret talks with Fidel Castro on behalf of the Kennedy administration.
In Washington, members of Alpha 66 hold a press conference to take credit for yesterday's attack on the Soviet ship Lvov.
The plan renews support for exile attacks on selected Cuban targets which include transportation facilities, power plants, fuel production and storage operations.
According to former Press Secretary Pierre Salinger, ""If Kennedy had lived I am confident that he would have negotiated that agreement and dropped the embargo because he was upset with the way the Soviet Union was playing a strong role in Cuba and Latin America "" November 22.
Using Soviet-supplied equipment, Cuba becomes the first nation in the Western Hemisphere to jam radio broadcasts.
The first apparent target being the anti-Castro stations in the United States 1964 January 7.
Look magazine runs a prelude to the book The Invisible Government by David Wise and Thomas B Ross, which reveals that Miami's Zenith Technical Enterprises, Inc., is a cover for a CIA operation.
At the time, this was the largest CIA station in the world after Langley.
In The Closest of Enemies, author Wayne Smith writes, ""I was bothered by the hardness of our demands.
United States President Lyndon B Johnson signs into law the Cuban Adjustment Act, which exempts Cuban immigrants from general U.S. migration laws.
Rolando Masferrer Rojas and 67 others are arrested in Marathon, Florida, for an alleged plot to invade Haiti and then Cuba.
Che Guevara is killed in Bolivia by U.S.-trained rangers in the village of Vallegrande.
It is asseted that had the microfaction succeeded, ""it would have subordinated Cuban sovereignty"" to the Soviets.
In Miami, 2 businesses who regularly ship packages to Cuba are bombed before dawn.
According to a survey in Granma, Cuba's official newspaper, more than 75% of Cuban women have chosen not to enter the workforce.
The Boeing 727, with 80 passengers and a 6-person crew, lands in Havana's José Martí Airport at 10:21m.
The first contingent of the Venceremos Brigade, a group of voluteer workers from the U.S., arrives in Cuba to work on the sugar harvest.
By this time, more than 85 percent of Cuban trade is with the USSR or Eastern Block countries.
In Miami, a few hundred Cuban exiles gather to dedicate a monument to the 10-year anniversary of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
In Puerto Rico, on the 80th anniversary of Albizu Campos' birth, 80,000 people march through San Juan demanding independence.
Cuba joins the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance , an economic organization of the Soviet Union, East European socialist countries, and Mongolia.
At the United Nations, Cuba requests that in light of adopted resolution 1541 that the UN declare that Puerto Rico has a right to self-determination.
Eastern Airlines flight 8894 lands at Miami International Airport at 11:55 A.M. with the last 84 passengers of the Cuban airlift.
The 13th Congress of the Cuban Labor Confederation ties wages to productivity in an effort to improve efficiency.
The Committees for the defense of the Revolution celebrates its 13th year.
OMEGA 7, an anti-Castro paramilitary group is founded in the United States by Eduardo Arocena.
Their most visible “operation” takes place on September 21, 1976, with the car-bomb assassination of Chilean Ambassador Orlando Letelier.
Maurice A Ferré, Mayor of Miami, asks Attorney General Edward H Levi for federal help to combat ""violence in the Cuban exile community that the police regard as politically motivated.
Mayor Ferré sites the assassination of Luciano Nieves, and the bombings of TV station WKID in Dania, among other incidents.
Mayor Ferré estimates that the actual terrorists number less than 2-dozen.
The United States announces that it will allow foreign subsidiaries of United States companies to sell products in Cuba, and that it will no longer penalize other nations for trade with Cuba.
In Miami, Rolando Masferrer Rojas is killed by a bomb planted in his car.
Pinar del Rio, La Habana, City of La Habana, Matanzas, Cienfuegos, Villa Clara, Santi Spiritus, Ciego de Avila, Camagüey, Las Tunas, Granma, Holguín, Santiago de Cuba, and Guantánamo.
In Washington, Chilean Ambassador Orlando Letelier and Ronnie Moffitt are murdered with a car bomb.
The murders are later attributed to José Dionisio Suarez Esquivel, who is pardoned in 2001.
The new president serves as head of state, head of government, and commander in chief of the Armed Forces. 600,000 women work outside the home.
In San Juan, Carlos Muñoz Varela is murdered by members of Command Zero, an offshoot of Omega 7.
Varela managed the Viajes Varadero Travel Agency which organized trips to Cuba and supported the establishing of dialogue between the two governments.
At a meeting of the sixth sumit of the Nonaligned Movement in Havana, Castro is elected chair of the movement and serves until 1982.
In Union City, Eulalio José Negrin is murdered in front of his 12-year-old son by Omega 7 member Pedro Remon.
In competitive sports, Cuban women comprise 17 percent of participants.
