Imagine how frustrating that game gets when your opponent takes all of his ships off the grid without telling you.
That’s pretty much how the United States military felt on October 24th, 1962 as their naval blockade on Cuba goes into effect.
Yesterday, the Soviet top brass met for the first time to discuss the crisis.
They decided to not provoke the United States openly by sailing through the blockade line, but still keep their nuclear missiles on Cuba, and run the line with four foxtrot class, nuclear armed submarines.
American President John F Kennedy spent the entire day dealing with the details of how to get the blockade in place politically and how to enforce it militarily.
He was worried about political fallout for having acted so late, and Attorney General Robert Kennedy was pessimistic about the effect of the blockade.
The question that I’ve heard raised rather extensively is why this was not uncovered sooner, when there were some reports about it, to why we didn’t know about it, and therefore why a blockade of some kind was not instituted earlier.
And so that this is the second question, what we are doing now is, in fact, closing the barn door after the horse is gone.
And those questions that will be raised… Well that ties into Senator Keating’s frequent statements.
He made a statement two days ago that it was being built there, pads, which would be ready for fire at the United States in six months.
Now it seems to me that somebody in a responsible position ought to take up this question.
I don’t think that it’s realized how quickly these mobile bases can be set up and how quickly they can be moved.
So that I’m just wondering now what is the judgment—the question is getting this point over, in view of the next 24 hours.
At 2 PM Greenwich time, so 10AM in Washington DC, October 24th, 1962, the blockade of Cuba goes into effect.
The President and EXCOMM, the national security committee dealing with the crisis, are now huddled up in the White House monitoring developments.
One concern is what to do about submarines, if they are caught breaking the blockade.
We have depth charges that have such a small charge that they can be dropped and they can actually hit the submarine, without damaging the submarine.
The message that Alex is talking about states that, when our forces come upon an unidentified submarine we will ask it to come to the surface for inspection by transmitting the following signals, using a depth charge of this type and also using certain sonar signals which they may not be able to accept and interpret.
Therefore, it is the depth charge that is the warning notice and the instruction to surface.
This is a very dangerous operation and could easily end up either sinking the submarine or provoking a responsea nuclear response.
Later in the day Robert Kennedy will write down that; “these few minutes were the time of greatest worry by the President.
They debate the danger of the proposed ant-submarine actions until CIA Director McCone interrupts the conversation.
It says that we’ve just received information through ONI that all six Soviet ships currently identified in Cuban waters—and I don’t know what that means—have either stopped, or reversed course.
It’s the ships heading towards the blockade that are being referred to.
Now, a lot has been made over the years of this being the moment when the United States and USSR stood “eyeball to eyeball and the other fellow just flinched,” as the Russian ships approach the line and seemingly turn around at the last moment.
The eyeball quote is attributed to Secretary of State Dean Rusk, who whispers it to National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy.
Apparently he does do this, but there was never an eyeball moment here the Russian ships with military equipment on board were already ordered to turn back or to stop 24 hours ago.
Rusk doesn’t know this though, and it’s interesting to see why Rusk doesn’t know this.
There’s an aircraft carrier group south of Cuba, Several submarines patrol the waters.
Dozens of planes and a bunch of smaller ships monitor the Russian cargo vessels.
We do know that they are opposed to the blockade and for a harder confrontation, especially US Air Force Chief of Staff General Curtis LeMay one of the recipients of the report that the blockade is seemingly being respected.
He directed the firebombing campaign on Japan in 1945 that killed some 500,000 civilians and left millions more homeless, so he is no stranger to offensive war.
In fact, they literally had to lock up the nukes to prevent him from using them, so he carpet bombed urban areas and dams, destroying agriculture and causing famine.
First of all, don’t forget those four Soviet nuclear armed submarines that are not turning around.
Second of all, there’s the issue of the Soviets removing their missiles from Cuba.
Khrushchev has penned a strongly worded letter that Kennedy is about to receive.
The letter doesn’t concede anything, though,, and doesn’t even acknowledge the existence of the missiles.
Meanwhile, the United States Navy has stepped up another action that will further escalate the situation.
So far CIA-operated U-2 high altitude planes have been furnishing photographic evidence of the missile build up, but it’s been a sore spot with EXCOMM since the start of the crisis that these photos are difficult to analyze, do not furnish proof that is understandable by a layman, and are not precise enough to identify how close the missiles are to being ready.
Until the crisis was made public, they refrained from low altitude recon flights, as this would first of all be really dangerous and second of all force things to become public right away.
But yesterday, Captain William Ecker and his wingman Lieutenant Bruce Wilhelmy made the first low altitude flights.
Now, this is real Top Gun style flight stunts we’re talking hereexcept they have no guns, only cameras on board.
They’re flying in RF-8 Crusaders, that’s the unarmed recon version of the F-8 Crusader, and to make really clear photos they have to fly really low, like I mean really, really low and to not get shot down, they have to fly fast… really really fast.
They take off from Jacksonville, Florida, and head for Cuba at their regular flight altitude.
As they scream over the site, Cuban and Russian soldiers scramble for their guns.
One picture even reveals a Cuban soldier tripping out of an outhouse with his trousers still around his knees.
The pilots snap their cameras, capturing crystal clear images of the site.
When they’re already out of range they see the smoke puffs of the anti-aircraft artillery behind them.
In total it takes them less than four minutes to fly over Cuba, but they’re not out of danger.
Here I've got the pictures, and if the airplane gets busted all to pieces, it wouldn't do anybody any good.
When he returns to base he’s not even allowed to leave his plane he’s ordered to fly straight to Washington.
There, to his astonishment he’s debriefed at the Pentagon directly by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Taylor and several of the other Chiefs.
He’s taken off his pressure suit, and underneath his uniform is wet with sweat.
Curtis LeMay is fuming at the Navy for having upstaged his Air Force, and later when the pilots are decorated for the action during a White House event, LeMay he will refuse to take part in the ceremony, remaining in his limousine pouting and chomping on his cigar.
In any case, President Kennedy and Ambassador to the UN Adlai Stevenson now have the photographic evidence they need to confront the Soviets.
But they also now know that several of the nuclear missiles ARE ready and can be fired at short notice.
Robert Kennedy was right. what we are doing now is, in fact, closing the barn door after the horse is gone.
The blockade hasn’t resolved anything and instead the world has taken yet another few steps towards nuclear war.
The United States Strategic Air Command is now taken to defense readiness level DEFCON 2, the final stage before imminent nuclear war.
If you missed our episode where the U-2 spy planes are explained you can find it here.
Don’t forget to subscribe and please support us at patreon.com or tg.tv so that we can make more awesome history.
