The State Department had gotten slightly ahead of the White House by mentioning the possibility of \""further action\"" by Washington and President John F Kennedy was irate.
He called State Department spokesman Lincoln White to reprimand him personally and to stress the need to coordinate and calibrate all public statements.
It stemmed from the possibility that the opposing sides could trigger a nuclear conflict that nobody wanted through miscommunication and freak accidents, which became increasingly likely at higher levels of military alert.
The same is almost certainly true of the present crisis with North Korea.
The nightmare of an accidental nuclear war was very much on Kennedy's mind during the \""13 days\"" when the world came closer than ever before, or since, to blowing itself up.
He had recently read a book by historian Barbara Tuchman, \""The Guns of August,\"" that described how a previous generation of statesmen had blundered into World War I, with nobody really understanding why.
Kennedy was determined to avoid a similar chain of unpredictable events involving atomic weapons.
For a student of the Cuban missile crisis, the fact that our current Twitter-happy commander in chief is surrounded by sensible, highly competent generals is only partly reassuring.
The missile crisis showed that there are some decisions that only a president can make.
There were times when JFK was in a minority of one in the Excomm, the committee set up to manage the crisis, in his willingness to compromise with Khrushchev.
Only the president had the overarching sense of history to consider the interests of future generations of Americans, and ultimately all of humanity.
As is no doubt the case today, the generals assured Kennedy in October 1962 that the United States enjoyed overwhelming nuclear superiority over its adversary and could easily wipe the Soviet Union off the map.
Classic game theory teaches us that you can gain an advantage over your opponent if you can convince him that you are madder than he is.
In the game of chicken, with two cars heading for a frontal collision, the driver who swerves out of the way first loses.
During the Cuban missile crisis, the \""crazy man\"" role was played to perfection by Castro, the only leading actor who was seriously prepared to risk a nuclear war.
Patria o muerte \""fatherland or death\"" was, after all, the slogan of the Cuban revolution.
Assuming the role of madman has always been part of the arsenal of the weak against the strong, whether in the case of Cuba or North Korea or the Islamic State.
Playing chicken is, however, a dangerous indulgence for the leader of a nuclear superpower.
During the 1962 crisis, the two \""rational\"" players Kennedy and Khrushchev ended up making common cause against the \""madman\"" Castro.
Despite everything that divided them, they had a sneaking sympathy for each other, an idea expressed most poignantly by Jackie Kennedy in a handwritten letter to the Soviet leader following her husband's assassination.
While big men know the needs for self-control and restraint, little men are sometimes moved more by fear and pride.
You are using an older browser that may impact your reading experience.
United States President John F Kennedy, right, confers with his brother Attorney General Robert F Kennedy at the White House in Washington, D.C., on Oct., 1962 during the buildup of military tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union that became Cuban missile crisis later that month.APShow MoreShow Less2of15President John F Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, center, in the White House, Oct., 1962.
At left is Soviet Ambassador to the United States Anatoly Dobrynin.Harvey Georges/APShow MoreShow Less3of15This photo, released by the United States Department of Defense, shows Soviet missile equipment being loaded at the Mariel naval port in Cuba on Nov., 1962.
Curtis LeMay, then Air Force chief of staff, center, meet with President John F Kennedy in the White House in Washington in this 1962 picture, to discuss U-2 spy plane flights over Cuba.
Now retired and living in Apalachicola, Fla., Heyser says he was relieved the crisis ended peacefully because he didn't want to go down in history as starting World War III.UNKNOWN/ASSOCIATED PRESSShow MoreShow Less5of15Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro replied to President Kennedy's naval blockade over Cuban radio and television, October 23, 1962.
This picture of Castro during his speech was copied from television on a monitor set at Key West, Florida.
ASSOCIATED PRESSShow MoreShow Less8of15 United States Secretary of State Dean Rusk smokes a cigarette as he listens intently to debate at an extra-ordinary session of the Organization of American States, to consider action against Cuba, supporting Pres.
William J Smith/APShow MoreShow Less9of15President John F Kennedy poses in his White House office with Gen.
The chiefs met with the president to review the present situation in Cuba and operation of the United States naval blockade.William J Smith/APShow MoreShow Less10of15This is a low level photograph made Oct., 1962 of the medium range ballistic missile site unde construction in the San Cristobal area of Cuba.
It was released by the Defense Department.Anonymous/ASSOCIATED PRESSShow MoreShow Less11of15 United States President John F Kennedy reports to the nation on the status of the Cuban crisis from Washington, D.C. on Nov., 1962.
He told radio and television listeners that Soviet missile bases ""are being destroyed"" and that United States air surveillance would continue until effective international inspection is arranged.
APShow MoreShow Less12of15President John F Kennedy tells the American people that the United States is setting up a naval blockade against Cuba, during a television and radio address, Oct., 1962, from the White House.
Bill Allen/APShow MoreShow Less13of15President John F Kennedy leaves St.
Stephen's Roman Catholic Church after attending services in Washington, Oct., 1962, shortly after the announcement from Moscow that Premier Khrushchev ordered Soviet rocket bases in Cuba dismantled and rockets returned to Russia.John Rous/APShow MoreShow Less14of15Crewman aboard the Soviet Freighter Vogoles, carrying what appeared to be missile launchers out of Cuba, peer through binoculars as they watch a private plane carrying AP reporters as the plane circled the ship on Nov., 1962.
The ship's afterdeck was believed to be loaded with shrouded missile apparatus.
Studying the 1962 nuclear showdown for my book ""One Minute to Midnight,"" I concluded that the real risk of war arose not from the conscious designs of Kennedy, Nikita Khrushchev or even Fidel Castro.
Electoral College reform is the least Congress owes usFor a student of the Cuban missile crisis, the fact that our current Twitter-happy commander in chief is surrounded by sensible, highly competent generals is only partly reassuring.
Given the explosive rhetoric of North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, it is understandable that President Trump should be tempted to respond in kind.
SHARE YOUR OPINION Here's how to submit letters and op-eds to the Chronicle Playing chicken is, however, a dangerous indulgence for the leader of a nuclear superpower.
As Trump girds for a possible nuclear confrontation with North Korea, we can only hope that he will prove to be a big man rather than a little one.
Hunting feral hogs with helicopters and machine guns is a fast and effective way to combat the state's pig problem.
