Write your Centre number, candidate number and name on all the work you hand in.
Do not use staples, paper clips, highlighters, glue or correction fluid.
The number of marks is given in brackets at the end of each question or part question.
Study the Background Information and the sources carefully, and then answer all the questions.
Background Information Historians have long disagreed about whether the South had any chance of winning the Civil War.
Some point towards the overwhelming strength of the North, but others argue that the Confederacy could have won and only had itself to blame for its defeat.
SOURCE A In numbers the Confederacy seemed no match for the United States.
Since southerners were unwilling to put guns in the hands of slaves, the Confederate army could draw upon little more than a million men to fill its ranks.
The North also had more than twice as many miles of railroad tracks as the South and twice as many horses, donkeys and mules.
On the other hand, the Confederacy had certain advantages over the Union.
Southerners were defending their homeland and their whole way of life was at risk.
There were 22 million people in the North compared with only 9 million in the South.
The Confederacy hoped to compensate for its lack of basic materials by trading with Europe, especially Britain.
But from the start of the war the North ruled the seas and was able to impose an increasingly effective blockade.
However, in 1861 most Southerners, and most European observers, were confident that the Confederacy would triumph.
Even if the Northern armies occupied Confederate territory they would have difficulty holding down a resentful population and maintaining supply lines.
Southerners hoped that Northern public opinion might question high casualties.
Frequently a cabinet meeting would last four or five hours without deciding anything; while the desk of every chief of a Department was covered with papers demanding his attention.
Stephen Mallory, a member of the Confederate government, writing about Jefferson Davis, President of the Confederacy.
SOURCE F Despite the criticisms of him, Davis gave the Confederacy a sense of identity and purpose.
He might be cold and reserved but without him the Rebellion would crumble to pieces in a day.
My brother officers have been too kind to report it and so far the troops have been too generous to report it.
Everything, therefore, points to the advantage of having a new commander.
I know he will have as gallant and brave an army as ever existed to support his efforts.
It seems incredible that human power could bring about such a change in so brief a time.
Then we were at the height of our success – today we face absolute ruin.
You may use any of the sources to help you answer the questions, in addition to those sources which you are told to use.
In answering the questions you should use your own knowledge of the topic to help you interpret and evaluate the sources.
Background Information In 1962 the Soviet Union started to build missile sites in Cuba from which nuclear warheads could be launched at America.
In October an American U-2 spy plane photographed the sites being constructed.
President Kennedy demanded that the sites be dismantled, but Khrushchev refused.
For thirteen days the world held its breath while the two superpowers faced each other.
For some people at the time this crisis was simply a personal trial of strength between President Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev, whilst for others it had a wider significance.
He thought that anyone who was so young and inexperienced as to get into that mess could be beaten; and anyone who got into it and didn’t see it through had no guts.
If he thinks I’m inexperienced and have no guts, until we remove those ideas we won’t get anywhere with him.
Kennedy speaking to a reporter in 1961 shortly after a meeting with Khrushchev.
I just don’t see any other solution except direct military action right now.
A blockade would be considered by a lot of our friends and neutrals as being a pretty weak response to this.
General Le May, Chief of Staff of the American Air Force, speaking in a meeting of President Kennedy’s advisers on 19 October 1962.
Unknown to everybody present, the discussions were recorded by the President.
SOURCE E Even after it was all over the President made no statement attempting to take credit for himself or for his administration for what had occurred.
He instructed his staff that no interview should be given, no statement made, which would claim any kind of victory.
He respected Khrushchev for properly deciding what was in his own country’s interests and in the interests of mankind.
If it was a triumph, it was a triumph for the next generation and not for any particular government or people.
We were sure the Americans would never agree to the existence of Castro’s Cuba.
They feared, and we hoped, that a Socialist Cuba might become a magnet that would attract other Latin American countries to socialism.
We had to find an effective deterrent to American interference in the Caribbean.
The Cuban Crisis was a triumph of Soviet foreign policy and a personal triumph in my own career.
Today Cuba exists as an independent socialist country right in front of America.
We behaved with dignity and forced the United States to demobilise and to recognise Cuba.
It predicts that Kennedy and Khrushchev will end up in hell after destroying the world.
SOURCE H In the final analysis our most basic link is the fact that we all inhabit this planet.
In answering the questions you should use your knowledge of the topic to help you interpret and evaluate the sources.
Option A Source A © John Garraty; Story of America; Holt, Rinehart & Winston; 1991.
Source B © Alan Farmer; The American Civil War 1861–65; Hodder Murray; 2002.
Source E © Alan Farmer; The American Civil War 1861–65; Hodder Murray; 2002.
Source F © Alan Farmer; The American Civil War 1861–65; Hodder Murray; 2002.
Option B Source A © B O’Callaghan; A History of the Twentieth Century; Longman; 1987.
Permission to reproduce items where third-party owned material protected by copyright is included has been sought and cleared where possible.
Every reasonable effort has been made by the publisher to trace copyright holders, but if any items requiring clearance have unwittingly been included, the publisher will be pleased to make amends at the earliest possible opportunity.
