KEYS*On April 17, 1961, 1,200 American-supported Cuban exiles landed at Cuba's Bay of Pigs.
President Kennedy was against the direct intervention of the overthrow of Castro, so he did not provide sufficient support for the exiles.
In October 1962, it was discovered that the Soviets were secretly installing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy ordered a naval ""quarantine"" of Cuba and demanded immediate removal of the weapons.
On October 28, Khrushchev agreed to a compromise in which he would pull the missiles out of Cuba.
The Americans also agreed to end the quarantine and not invade the island.
Civil rights marchers were repelled by police with attack dogs and high-pressure water hoses.
In shock, President Kennedy delivered a speech to the nation on June 11, 1963 in which he dedicated himself to finding a solution to the racial problems.
Kennedy's pushed his ""New Frontier"" plans, which included trying to fix unemployment and inflation and keeping wages high for workers.
Kennedy proposed the Peace Corps, an army of idealistic and mostly youthful volunteers to bring American skills to underdeveloped countries.
Southern Democrats and Republicans despised the president's New Frontier plan.
Kennedy had campaigned on the theme of revitalizing the economy after the recessions of the Eisenhower years.
In 1962, he negotiated a noninflationary wage agreement with the steel industry.
When the steel industry announced significant price increases, promoting inflation, President Kennedy lambasted the steel industry's executives.
In August 1961, the Soviets began to construct the Berlin Wall, which was designed to stop the large population drain from East Germany to West Germany through Berlin.
Kennedy secured passage of the Trade Expansion Act in 1962, authorizing tariff cuts of up to 50% to promote trade between America and the Common Market countries.
The doctrine of ""flexible response"" lowered the level at which diplomacy would give way to troops.
In 1961, Kennedy increased the number of ""military advisors"" in South Vietnam to protect Diem from the communists.
In November 1963, after being fed up with United States economic aid being embezzled by Diem, the Kennedy encouraged a successful coup and killed Diem.
On April 17, 1961, 1,200 American-supported Cuban exiles landed at Cuba's Bay of Pigs.
Continued American attempt to overthrow Castro caused Castro to further support the Soviets.
For a week, Americans waited while Soviet ships approached the patrol line established by the United States Navy off the island of Cuba.
In late 1963, a pact prohibiting trial nuclear explosions in the atmosphere was signed.
