The general consensus amongst historians that have studied Khrushchev and the Cold War is that the Cuban Missile crisis and the way that it was handled by the Soviet Premier was the final straw for the Soviet elite.
It is generally seen as the ultimate reason as to why Khrushchev was removed from power just two years later.
Indeed, Usitalo and Whisenhunt argue that Khrushchev “provoked the most dangerous crises of the cold war in Berlin and Cuba.
Additionally, these two historians also argue that the way that Khrushchev handled the crisis was done in the complete opposite way in which other soviet leaders would have and thus this cost him his premiership.
The Cuban Missile crisis was thus the final straw for the leadership and was what tipped them over the edge leading to his removal from power.
This connotes the discontent at his policies and ideas and this comes to the surface in the crisisthe final straw for them and they thus remove him from power.
This lack of common sense and initiative to consult Castro was a vital lapse in judgement.
The effect that this had on his premiership is that he has shown to his fellow countrymen that he is clumsy and reckless in decision making, and thus not fit to hold office.
The crisis is a classic example of Khrushchev making a poor decision in a high stake’s situation.
The outcome of the crisis led to “Khrushchev’s last two years in power were a time of not so quiet desperation.
After the collapse of his Cuban adventure, he tried to address other foreign problems the solutions to which had eluded him, but without the positive momentum that a Cuban triumph would have produced.
This demonstrates that Khrushchev himself probably knew that time was running out to revive his career.
These viewpoints from the above historians heavily imply that the Soviet elite were growing extremely tired of the humiliation that Khrushchev brought the USSR on the world stage.
On top of economic and food problems and the complications he brought to the USSR with the twentieth party congress speech.
This is because his removal led to the appointment of Leonid Brezhnev, who only Stalin had a longer reign than, a completely different style of leader that the United States and the rest of the world had to deal with.
This new leader would change the direction of the cold war away from the direction in which Khrushchev was taking it.
From the time of troubles to the collapse of the Soviet Union, ,241 Steven A Usitalo and William Benton Whisenhunt, Russian and Soviet History: From the time of troubles to the collapse of the Soviet Union, ,243 Paul Du Quenoy, The role of foreign affairs in the fall of Nikita Khrushchev in October 1964, ,338 Martin McCauley, The Khrushchev Era 1953-1964, ,71 William Taubman, Khrushchev: The man and his era, , 581.
