This thirteen-day confrontation’s major occurrences will be analyzed by the rational actor model and how the leaders John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev made rational decisions that led to the avoidance of nuclear annihilation.
In addition to the rational actor model, the organization process model and the politics model will be presented for further comparison between the process in which major decisions are made.
This operation was the unsuccessful attempt of Cuban exiles trained by CIA operatives in order to invade southern Cuba in an effort to remove Fidel Castro, the Cuban leader.
The missile gap was a term used in order to scare the U.S because the U.S.S.R highlighted some of their technological achievements regarding nuclear missiles.
However, it was proved by the CIA that the U.S still maintained a significantly greater number of missiles than that of the Soviet Union.
In July 1962, the Soviet Union placed nuclear weapons in Cuba secretly because the U.S had placed nuclear weapons in Turkey in 1961.
At once, the United States sent an ultimatum to the U.S.S.R to withdraw their weapons or they will wage war against them.
The United States later chose a naval blockade to send a threat to Cuba and depict their preparation to attack.
The U.S.S.R had eventually backed down and removed their missiles from Cuba in the condition that the United States removed their missiles from Turkey.
The United States discovered the presence of Soviet missile silos in Cuba, capable of launching nuclear-tipped weaponry that could target much of the Eastern United States.
President John F Kennedy, under pressure from his advisors chose to order a naval “quarantine” of Cuba.
The then president, John F Kennedy, decided to ban trade with any item with Cuba except for non-subsidized food and medicine.
And then a year later ban financial transaction with United States citizens to Cuban citizens.
It was basically an embargo that surprisingly still stands to this day.
The USA and the USSR never really got on after WW2 ended, it was always a competition to see who the greatest superpower was.
Humanity had survived through two devastating World Wars, the Great Depression and many other revolutionary events.
Moreover, humanity witnessed firsthand what science was able to achieve in the military sphere and how much destruction could possibly follow.
The fourteen days that the United States government and the Russian government interacted emphasized the seriousness and the intense rivalry between the two super powers.
In addition to demanding… 2003 Words 9 Pages Powerful Essays Read More Popular Essays It Is Often Said That Literature Is a Social Commentary.
