Although a great many scholars have studied this crisis, no consensus exists on the reasons why the crisis was actually so dangerous.
Khrushchev, to fire the first shot in a conventional military engagement later escalated into nuclear war.
Another school of thought has emphasized the risk of accidental or inadvertent war, growing out an unauthorized behavior or technical failures with explosive potential under crisis conditions.
In this study I revisit the October 1962 superpower crisis, in order to gain additional perspective on the relationship between organizational decision making and crisis outcomes.
This exercise is partly an historical 'counterfactual' or 'what i f excursion, using recently declassified documents and simulated exchange calculations, from which I hope to draw three principal benefits.
First, the study may shed some additional light on why Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev was willing to take such a dangerous gamble.
Second, our counterfactual crisis suggests that the risk of a deliberate, miscalculated escalation might have been just as important as the risk of inadvertent war.
Third, the balance of command and control vulnerability might have mattered more to crisis-ridden United States leaders than the balance of strategic nuclear forces.
If so, it helps to explain the apparent reluctance of American leaders to employ highly coercive forms of nuclear brinkmanship.
PUBLISHED BY FRANK CASS, LONDON 12 THE JOURNAL OF SLAVIC MILITARY STUDIES missile deployments are noted.
Next, we introduce some recently declassified documents pertinent to the status of the United States strategic nuclear command and control system of the late 1950s and early 1960s.
A simulated nuclear exchange if war had broken out in October 1962 is then used to measure how much difference, if any, United States command vulnerability might have made, from the perspective of America's leaders.
The findings suggest that the expectations of command organizations about their own vulnerability are especially significant during organizational change from a less to a more centralized approach to decision making.
The Strategic Setting When President John F Kennedy went on the air on 22 October 1962 to announce a clandestine Soviet buildup of offensive missiles in Cuba, the stage had been set for the most significant confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
Among those areas of disagreement, the Soviet ability to exploit nuclear diplomacy for coercive political purposes was perceived as dangerous by United States leaders.
The successful launch of the Soviet earth satellite Sputnik in 1957 and the Soviets' first intercontinental ballistic missile test flight in the same year set off within Washington policymaking circles a raucous debate which continued from the Eisenhower into the Kennedy administration.
The US intelligence community expected that the Soviets would build and deploy by the early 1960s an ICBM force second to none, and one potentially capable of placing into vulnerability much of the American strategic bomber force.
Kennedy campaigned in 1960 on the assumption that trends in defense spending and force modernization favored the Soviet Union.
His administration immediately upon election undertook a comprehensive evaluation of national defense policy.
One result of that assessment was a commitment to an across-the-board increase in strategic nuclear capabilities, placing special emphasis on increased numbers of landbased and sea-launched strategic missiles.
The United States also, in the early years of the Kennedy administration, flirted with the adoption of a version of counterforce or damage limitation strategy.
This strategy called for a capability to disarm the Soviet Union's remaining nuclear arsenal, even after absorbing a Soviet first strike, in order to impose on the adversary war termination on United States terms.
Both the capabilities called for in the strategy and the bargaining aspects of it discomfited critics, and the strategy was later abandoned by Secretary of COMMAND, CONTROL AND CUBAN MISSILES 13 Defense Robert S McNamara as a declaratory strategy.
On the other hand, American capabilities relative to Soviet ones provided the option for damage limitation by means of counterforce second strike, throughout the early and mid-1960s.
By 1961 Washington had photographic and other intelligence which revealed conclusively that Khrushchev's nuclear ambitions had overreached his nuclear capabilities.
Washington decided to go public with its assessment that the Soviet position was inferior in kind, and not just in degree, to the American.
In October 1961 Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, in a speech cleared by the President and Defense Secretary, announced that the United States had in fact achieved a significant lead in the numbers and survivability of its nuclear forces, compared to Soviet forces.
The US deterrent, according to Gilpatric, could destroy in retaliation a larger target base than the Soviets could attack in a first strike against the continental United States.
In short, America had a second strike capability and the Soviet Union did not.
The alarms that this speech must have sent through the Kremlin can only be imagined by historians.
The United States announcement was designed to deter Khrushchev's nuclear coercive diplomacy, especially renewed pressure against Berlin.
The fact of a United States lead in numbers of strategic nuclear weapons could not have come as a complete surprise to Soviet intelligence.
What was probably most unsettling to Soviet planners was the recognition that the Americans, to express such confidence in their nuclear superiority, must have obtained very accurate intelligence about the actual locations of Soviet missile and bomber bases.
This meant that a counterforce, damagelimiting second strike, or a first nuclear strike launched preemptively in the expectation of imminent Soviet attack, was a feasible option for Washington seen from the Soviet perspective.
If the United States maintained this nuclear predominance, it could theoretically have enforced on Moscow strategic compellence, a more active and more dangerous form of nuclear threat.
Deterrence is the prevention of an act that has not taken place by influencing the cost-benefit calculus of the actor.
Because it emphasizes the prevention of actions or decisions not yet taken, deterrence is status quo oriented with regard to the existing policy.
Complicating matters further was the need to avoid inadvertent escalation or nuclear war, for the obvious reasons, or Soviet counterescalation outside the Caribbean, for example, in Berlin, or against US Jupiter intermediate-range ballistic missiles which had been deployed to Turkey.
The Kennedy administration version of a damage limiting, counterforce strategy in the early 1960s was part of a larger military-strategic compass.
Kennedy planners rejected the logic of Eisenhower's massive retaliation in favor of flexible response, at both nuclear and conventional levels.
The nuclear version would allow for the conduct and termination of limited wars, including limited strategic wars.
The conventional aspect would raise the nuclear threshold in Europe by equipping NATO with more substantial conventional defense forces.
The non-nuclear aspect of Kennedy strategy also sought to make clearer the firebreak between conventional and unconventional warfare, and to strengthen United States capabilities to assist other states threatened by communist-support insurgencies.
Therefore, Soviet threat assessors in the early 1960s faced a more complicated picture of their opponent not only with regard to strategic nuclear forces, but also with regard to the other attributes of American forces and capabilities.
Khrushchev's Motives for Deployment The reasons for Khrushchev's decision to attempt to deploy Soviet medium and intermediate range missiles into Cuba are even now only speculative.
There is also the possibility, alluded to by Khrushchev and given some confirmation by Soviet participants in subsequent superpower crises, that the communist leader sought to pose a threat of prompt nuclear destruction close to American borders, comparable to that posed by United States Jupiter IRBMs deployed in Turkey.
Few American scholars have taken Khrushchev's own explanations for the missile deployment decision at face value.
Without an unimpeachable version of Khrushchev's own testimony, all the explanations can be met with counterarguments.
Khrushchev's own rationales are of special interest here, not only because the Soviet leader offers them, but also on account of their direct relevancy for the problem of deterrence.
Khrushchev's first rationale, that Soviet nuclear weapons would deter any invasion of Cuba, cannot be dismissed entirely as a possible motive for his actions.
Kennedy had tried to dislodge Castro by military invasion, and might try again.
United States forces exercised frequently in Caribbean waters and under auspices obviously not dissimilar from an American invasion of Cuba.
Although administration officials have stated that President Kennedy had taken no decision in favor of any additional attempts to invade Cuba, Cuban leaders might reasonably have inferred hostile intent.
Contingency plans for invasion and air attack had been prepared and tested during repeated Caribbean muscle flexing, and elaborate destabilization programs directed by United States intelligence against Castro's regime were in progress.
The problem with this explanation from a deterrence standpoint is that it offers an inappropriate, and unnecessarily provocative, cure for the problem as the Soviet leadership is alleged to have perceived it.
If, as Khrushchev claims in his memoirs, his primary motive for the deployments was to deter any future invasion of Cuba, then two other approaches commend themselves better than strategic nuclear weapons.
First, the Soviets could have signed an explicit security and defense guaranty agreement with Cuba.
Second, the Soviets could have been less secretive about the size of their conventional force deployments, allowing Washington to infer that no invasion of Cuba could take place without significant casualties.
Khrushchev felt that missiles, once in place, were a more secure deterrent and no more provocative than a major, acknowledged deployment of Soviet general-purpose forces.
As the Russian leader 16 THE JOURNAL OF SLAVIC MILITARY STUDIES explained his reasoning, once the missiles had been deployed, a new logic of deterrence would be imposed on the Americans.
The disproportionate costs to the United States of any Cuban invasion which failed to eliminate fewer than all of the Soviet missiles would stay the Americans' hand at an acceptable cost.
My thinking went like this: if we installed the missiles secretly and then if the United States discovered the missiles were there after they were already poised and ready to strike, the Americans would think twice before trying to liquidate our installations by military means.
I knew that the United States could knock out some of our installations, but not all of them.
The assumption by Khrushchev that he could present Washington with a fait accompli, once the missiles had become operational, was tied to optimistic thinking about secretly accomplishing the deployments in Cuba.
Therefore, he assumed a successful covert deployment despite the abundance of surveillance and other intelligence agencies available to Washington in its Caribbean backyard.
On the other hand, it is also possible that Khrushchev's military and intelligence advisors were actually optimistic about avoiding untimely discovery.
Nonetheless, the United States discovery, against Khrushchev's hopes, of the offensive missiles in Cuba does not invalidate the defense of Cuba, by nuclear deterrence, as a motive.
If one accepts Khrushchev's wishful assumption that the entire original contingent of medium-range ballistic missiles and IRBMs would arrive in Cuba and be made operational prior to discovery, the implausibility of placing bets on nuclear as opposed to conventional deterrence is less apparent.
Khrushchev's second rationale for deploying the missiles, the desire to 'equalize' the strategic nuclear balance of power, has found Western expert audiences more receptive.
Some administration officials at the time of the crisis, especially the relatively more hawkish members of Kennedy's ExComm Cuban crisis advisory group, felt that the nuclear balance of power must have mattered to Khrushchev.
I think it mattered a great deal to the Soviets, and I thought it properly mattered a great deal to the Soviets.
Another member of the ExComm, Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon (with previous experience in nuclear diplomacy on behalf of the US government) concurred in Nitze's judgment that the strategic balance mattered a great deal.
At the Cambridge, Massachusetts conference between Soviet and American experts in 1987, Sergei Mikoyan contended that the main objective of the Soviet deployments was the defense of Castro's regime by deterring another invasion, but Mikoyan added that repairing an adverse strategic balance was an important secondary consideration.
On the other hand, Soviets Fyodor Burlatsky and Georgi Shaknazarov argued at the same conference that Khrushchev's main objective was indeed to redress the strategic nuclear imbalance.
His conclusions were that the Cuban deployments were of major significance for several reasons.
The most important reason, according to Garthoff, was the additional first-strike counterforce capability provided by MRBMs and IRBMs against United States soft ICBM silos and airfields.
With the completion of the 'present base complex' late in 1962, Soviet effective first-strike potential against targets in the continental United States would be increased by over 40 per cent.
RAND Corporation Soviet expert Arnold Horelick, at the 1987 Hawk's Cay Cuban missile crisis conference supported Garthoff's assessment that the relative balance of 18 THE JOURNAL OF SLAVIC MILITARY STUDIES strategic nuclear power was important.
Arguing that the essential calculation in the military balance was prompt ICBM capability.
Horelick suggested that the Soviet leadership 'simply thought it unacceptable that the United States should have a first-strike capability, especially after we became aware of our superiority and let them know it' .20 Although these facts and arguments might have seemed convincing to some crisis participants and academic analysts, other important administration policymakers, including ExComm participants, argued against the significance of the strategic nuclear balance for resolving the Cuban missile crisis.
If you go to nuclear war, and the other side retaliates, and only a few maybe even only one bomb gets through to destroy an American city, you the one who just initiated the nuclear war -will have had to shoulder the responsibility for the worst catastrophe in the history of this country.
But this means that all those fancy nuclear weapons are militarily useless.
McNamara did not deny that nuclear weapons had political utility, but he regarded this political utility as two sided.
Those weapons could certainly be used for political coercion, but the other side might respond to nuclear diplomacy in unexpected ways, raising the risks of accidental or inadvertent war.
The former Defense Secretary indicated that, during the crisis, he worried far more about inadvertent escalation and war than he did about a deliberate Soviet first strike.
As for his perception of Khrushchev's options subsequent to successful missile deployments in Cuba, McNamara argued that it would have made no difference in his calculations.
Among the objectives of the Kennedy administration was the revision of preexisting war plans in order to provide additional, and more limited, nuclear options, as part of a transition from massive retaliation to flexible response.
McNamara's dismissal of the SIOP as pertinent to the crisis reflected not only his doubts that any nuclear exchange could have been fought to United States advantage.
It also implied that, given an actual war with the Soviet Union, the control of events could not COMMAND, CONTROL AND CUBAN MISSILES 19 be managed with sufficient certainty to convert limited options on paper into limited options in fact.
American leaders might have had good reasons for these doubts about the controllability of even the early stages of any conflict, as explained in the next section.
Among academic doubters of the argument for equalizing the strategic nuclear balance of power as the primary motive for Khrushchev's behavior, Adam Ulam and Richard Ned Lebow offer representative skepticism.
As Ulam reconstructs Khrushchev's possible thinking, the Soviet leader saw the Cuban missiles as a bold stroke which would simultaneously resolve several outstanding problems.
It would show Khrushchev's domestic critics and the Chinese that he was a stalwart defender of socialism against imperialism.
Khrushchev would reveal the missile deployments in a dramatic way, offering to bargain them away for suitable concessions.
Among these concessions would be American guarantees against any nuclear-armed West Germany and United States collaboration with Moscow in preventing the Chinese from going nuclear.
Lebow rejects Ulam's model of Khrushchev's motives and other analyses which attempt to explain the Soviet leader's deployment decision by the use of rational decision models.
Lebow's alternative explanation for Khrushchev's behavior is based on his research in comparative historical crises, especially 'brinkmanship' crises in which one state challenges the commitment of another in the expectation that the second state will yield.
Lebow found that most brinkmanship challenges were undertaken without good evidence that the challenged state lacked the resolve to defend its commitments.
Lebow does not necessarily reject the hypothesis that Khrushchev's deployment decision was motivated by a perceived strategic inferiority or a felt need to do something about it.
His arguments suggest that Khrushchev faced strong pressures which allowed him to convince himself, against 20 THE JOURNAL OF SLAVIC MILITARY STUDIES evidence that United States leaders would have regarded as convincing, of the need for his dramatic Cuban adventurism.
The first, third and fourth of these permissive conditions for brinkmanship challenges certainly existed in the Soviet Union, and perhaps therefore in Khrushchev's set of cognitive and motivational biases, at the time.
The critiques by Ulam and Lebow, among others, argue about the logic of Khrushchev's strategy from the standpoint of its support for Soviet policy objectives.
As Graham Allison's work on the Cuban crisis has suggested, other levels of analysis, including the standard operating procedures and routine behaviors of military organizations, must be addressed in order to obtain a complete explanation for superpower crisis behavior.
If we consider the expectations of military organizations about command and control vulnerability and the influence of those expectations on crisis behaviors in the early 1960s, additional insight about an otherwise inexplicable Soviet decision might be forthcoming.
The Soviet Decision Revisited Although a great deal of attention has been given to the Soviet decision at the politico-military level , the military-technical aspects of Soviet decision making in 1962 have received less apparent scrutiny.
United States studies have simply dismissed the possibility that Soviet military planners might have sought 'workarounds' for their strategic invulnerability, and that these workabouts could have given hope, however misplaced, to a reborn nuclear assertiveness by the Politburo.
Without hard evidence from the Russian archives about the actual Soviet war plans in 1961, a conjectural approximation of planners' thinking might offer one aspect not previously explored.
If the United States command and control system was the focal point of Soviet plans for coping with interim strategic inferiority, the Cuban deployments might have a rationale.
The rationale would not seek to overturn the military balance in the short run nor to make nuclear war winnable, but to provide for the Soviet leadership in extremis an improved option for a strategic surprise attack.
Recently declassified Pentagon studies give some perspective on the kinds of assessment that Soviet military planners, faced in 1961 with the public exposure of Khrushchev's nuclear coercive diplomacy as based on COMMAND, CONTROL AND CUBAN MISSILES 21 fiction, might have undertaken.
When these recently declassified documents are combined with force exchange models using reconstructed data bases for 1962 Soviet and United States forces, they suggest that the Cuban deployments as an interim fix of Soviet nuclear inferiority were neither irrational in the policy sense nor illogical from a military-technical or operational perspective.
Although no options could have spared the Soviet Union from nuclear destruction in a war with the United States, perceived American vulnerability to a Soviet surprise attack might have been increased, and Russian vulnerability reduced, by measures including Cuban missile deployments.
Soviet military planners who might have sought or welcomed as option for stylized attacks on the United States nuclear command and control system would neither have had to expect nuclear war nor to anticipate an acceptable outcome from it.
The assumption supporting our exploration is simply that nuclear command and control organizations, as do other organizations, seek to reduce the amount of uncertainty in their environments.
One way for organizations to do this is by providing themselves with additional options in the interest of their own survival or growth.
Military command and control systems, naturally conscious of their own vulnerability to even a few nuclear detonations, would be attracted by organizational ethos and professional expertise to the problem of command suppression of the opponent.
We have evidence that superpower Cold War military planners and political leaders were interested in command suppression options and feared the vulnerability of their command and control systems, perhaps even more than the susceptibility of their forces to preemptive attack.
These options for attacking leaders and national command centers in United States war plans were treated, during the latter 1970s and early to mid-1980s, as 'withholds' during the early stages of a nuclear attack.
The interest of the Soviet political and military leadership in the problem of command vulnerability, theirs and that of potential adversaries, is copiously documented.
There is little evidence in Soviet military writing of interest in using the capability for command destruction as a coercive bargaining instrument once war had begun.
In any instance, according to the lecture notes on the 'principles and content of military strategy' in the 1970s, the 'major targets' of the strategic nuclear strike are 'intercontinental rocket positions, nuclear weapons depots, air and naval bases, the state control system, military command posts, military production centers, individual major installations, and other targets of military and economic significance'.42 American experts acknowledge that there is a great deal of room for argument about the reasons for Soviet interest in command suppression.
Some saw it as a mirror image of Politburo fears for their own political survival in the face of wartime domestic upheavals.
Others viewed the targeting of nuclear command and control as a logical outgrowth of interest in suppressing enemy first strike or retaliatory capability.
Regardless, US experts seemed to concur that, as one noted in 1985, 'Soviet strategists have historically treated attacks on command structure with utmost seriousness.
In September 1960 the Weapons Systems Evaluation Group of the United States Department of Defense, charged with a comprehensive assessment of its own strategic weapons systems, issued Enclosure C on national command and control procedures and vulnerabilities, two months ahead of the main body of its report.
Enclosure C details the status of United States nuclear command and control as it was seen by experts in 1960, looking over the horizon to a future which might include ballistic missile attacks on vital United States targets.
Enclosure C assumed that the Soviets, in carrying out any nuclear strikes against the continental US, would dedicate some against national political and joint military command structures, control systems for strategic nuclear delivery forces, and against those communications which supported the command structures and control systems.
According to this 1960 assessment, America's existing national command system, in the context of the anticipated threat of 1964-67 was highly vulnerable to destruction or incapacitation which would at best disrupt planned retaliation and, at worst, might preclude a politically meaningful response.
We now know that the anticipated Soviet ICBM threat of 1964-67 did not materialize as rapidly as United States pessimists had anticipated in the late 1950s.
But the WSEG-50 study's conclusions about national command vulnerability were also pertinent to the effects of lesser, but still damaging, Soviet attacks, including some attacks of which early 1960s Soviet forces might be capable.
The study noted that the national political and joint military command structure 'is highly vulnerable and could not be counted upon to complete its minimal essential retaliatory functions if attacked'.46 The report was quite specific about how many Soviet weapons it might take to deprive the United States national command authorities of effective control . over retaliatory forces.
Presidential; Secretary of Defense/Joint Chiefs of Staff; and, nuclear-capable commanders in chief and the command posts of their designated successors.
Of these 14, only six were not collocated with important strategic-delivery system target complexes, and two of those six were collocated with each other.
Undoubtedly in case of attack some United States forces would survive to retaliate, even under the worst assumptions.
Surviving commanders, in the absence of other instructions from authorized Presidential successors and in de facto control of nuclear forces, would fire back.
This met the standard of assessment for the United States strategy of the 1950s, but it would not do for the new standards being applied by the Kennedy administration to nuclear war planning.
Kennedy flexible response strategy called for the ability to apply force in less than total amounts and for the involvement of political leaders during war in nuclear force operations.
That these criteria were not necessary in war plans of the 1950s was evident in the decisions to harden neither the North American Air Defense Command warning and assessment center in Cheyenne Mountain, Colorado nor the underground command post for SAC headquarters at Offutt Air Force Base in Omaha, Nebraska.
The likelihood that even clumsy attacks against the United States command and control system would significantly disrupt centralized control over retaliation was high in the early 1960s.
Since some planners saw advance predelegation of nuclear command authority as a solution to command vulnerability, WSEG-50 addressed the option of predelegation in its report.
The report noted that the President might reasonably desire to make advance COMMAND, CONTROL AND CUBAN MISSILES 25 delegation of his authority in the singular case of an all-out Soviet nuclear attack 51 In this circumstance, the President might be assumed to want a 'reflex retaliatory response' by all parts of the retaliatory force.
On the other hand, in less than holocaust situations, a leader who had given advance predelegation to subordinates might want to change those instructions under newly obtaining conditions.
Even if subordinate commanders with predelegated authority were to survive initial attacks, they would in all likelihood lack the means to determine what was happening.
The probability that the nuclear capable CINCs and their command apparatus would be disabled was sufficiently high that, under present circumstances of surprise attack, 'the most that would be likely to be launched against the Soviets would be a delayed, uncoordinated and ragged response of reduced size.
Of course, the Soviet system may have been as vulnerable, or more vulnerable, than the American one.
We have little reliable knowledge about 26 THE JOURNAL OF SLAVIC MILITARY STUDIES the status of Soviet command, control and communications pertinent to nuclear crisis management for the early 1960s.
For example, it was an article of faith among American scholars, and among many in the US intelligence community, that the Soviet strategic nuclear forces had never been alerted at the same time that American forces had.
Recently scholars have learned that, despite lack of detection by United States intelligence, Soviet leaders did alert at least some components of their nuclear forces in 1960, 1962, 1968 and in 1973.60 The WSEG-50 study is important for the insight it gives into United States defense experts and officials' perceptions of their own vulnerabilities, apart from their or Moscow's perceptions of Soviet vulnerabilities.
Whether the Russians suspected that United States command and control vulnerability was as serious as WSEG-50 analysts had indicated is not known.
The drawing up of a list of notional targets is not equivalent to a war plan; Soviet military decisionmakers, like their United States counterparts, would also have to have some criteria for assigning weapons to targets and for setting target damage expectancies.
The political aspects of NCA targeting decisions are complex even if a state does not intend to use command targeting as a bargaining chip.
The prompt destruction of enemy national-level command and control without the simultaneous destruction of major force elements leaves disconnected nuclear hydras in place to execute unacceptable retaliatory strikes against the attacker's society.
The flailing tail of the scorpion may also strike back at the enemy's command and control system with particular relish.
Another recently declassified and formerly Top Secret Pentagon study raises some additional points about the political economy of Soviet command attack options in the early 1960s.
This study, US-USSR Strategic Arms Competition, 1945-1972, was commissioned by the Historical Office, Office of the Secretary of Defense.
Discussing Soviet policy in the early 1960s, this report acknowledges, as other scholars have, that Soviet forces deployed to Cuba made little apparent military sense.
Despite improved Soviet-counterforce capabilities resulting from Cuban missile deployments, it remained the case that neither a first nor a second strike could preclude unacceptable, and asymmetrical, retaliatory damage to the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev's actions seemed to lack an apparent strategic rationale, either from the perspective of counterforce and damage limiting strategy or from the standpoint of unacceptable countervalue losses.
Another possible motive for Khrushchev's apparent military irrationality, according to the study, may have been military assessments in COMMAND, CONTROL AND CUBAN MISSILES 27 Moscow which suggested greatly improved outcomes, compared to previous estimates, from a command-destruction strategy aimed at US strategic nuclear forces.
The indications are admittedly speculative, and they fall into two basic categories.
First, Soviet planners might have deduced from their 1961 nuclear test series that electromagnetic pulse effects could be exploited to render ineffective the command and control system for American retaliatory forces.
Second, adjustments to Soviet SS-7 missile programs that began in the summer and fall of 1962 included the testing of a new SS-7 reentry vehicle with lower beta and increased yield.
These reentry vehicle attributes would, if accurately described by United States intelligence, mean reduced accuracy and greater EMP propagation compared to other SS-7 force loadings.
EMP is a tricky business, and much less was known about it in the early 1960s, compared to now.
The possibility of EMP-enhanced attacks on command systems was more feasible than the appeal of EMP as the makeweight of any successful first strike.
Soviet missile deployments to Cuba can therefore be viewed from two perspectives.
From the second perspective, America's military command structure becomes the primary focus of attack and EMP calculations are taken into account in attack design.
By 30 Oct. nuclear warheads had been placed on 9 missiles at Vandenberg AFB Base, California, and CINCSAC Gen.
Thomas Power reported that, of 36 available AFSC missiles, 25 had been generated within ten days.
However, the number of reliable missiles cannot be inferred directly from these Emergency Combat Capability numbers, since numerous problems interfered with efforts to rush missiles into operational capability.
In addition, crews taking control of these first operational Minuteman ICBMs were not fully evaluated or certified for the task.
If we assume that scenario we can ask, under different conditions of command and control vulnerability, about the outcomes of a superpower nuclear exchange.
Assume for the sake of discussion that completed Soviet deployments of MRBMs and IRBMs to Cuba in December 1962 were employed to round out the components of a first strike force.
The United States 'rides out' the attack and then strikes back with missiles, followed by bombers.
In this first model, no degradation of the United States command and control system is assumed.
When degradation of the United States command and control system as part of a Soviet first strike is assumed, using the same sequence of attack and response at similar superpower alert levels, results significantly differ.
Two exchanges were simulated in which the Soviet first strike caused significant degradation in the opposing command and control.
In the first of these two cases, a degradation in performance of 50 per cent was assumed as a result of stylized command attacks.
The assumption of a 50 per cent loss in United States responsive capability creates a much more equal situation.
Of course, this still leaves the United States with a considerable postattack advantage, of two to one compared to warheads used by the Soviets against American targets.
The disparity remains very much in the Americans^ favor, although the asymmetry weakens as command destruction increases.
If we assume a 75 per cent degradation in performance as a result of attacks on the United States command system, the outcomes move close to postattack parity.
The great disparity between superpower prewar bomber forces still leaves Washington with a slight advantage, but the degradation in performance due to attacks on the command system eliminates most of the disparity based on force sizes alone.
The results of this analysis do not mean that Khrushchev had, or thought he had, a recipe for successful nuclear war fighting or war winning in.autumn 1962 even with his completed Cuban missile deployments.
His own testimony makes clear that he expected to use those deployments for coercive bargaining purposes, not to actually strike at America with nuclear weapons.
The coercive utility of Cuban-based nuclear weapons to existing Soviet forces were of three kinds.
First, missiles located in Cuba might be of special help in deterring attacks against Cuba.
Second, missiles in Cuba presented to Kennedy a threat analogous, in Khrushchev's mind, to that posed by United States missiles in Turkey.
Third, the missiles in Cuba were designed to help resolve a problem of extended, not basic, deterrence.
The Soviet ability to deter a nuclear attack on the Soviet homeland was not in doubt.
Nor was Washington's capability to deter a Soviet first strike in question, especially after the administrators went public with its proclaimed nuclear superiority in October 1961.
American presidents required nuclear deterrence to bolster the credibility of its guarantees to defend Berlin, and the Soviet leadership judged that they needed nuclear deterrence against a possible future United States invasion of Cuba.
That the Soviets might have had a stronger command attack option in the autumn of 1962, stronger than either United States policymakers or subsequent analysts have appreciated, is a finding consistent with the thrust of the academic literature on more mature nuclear forces and command systems.
Decisionmakers who felt that a necessary and sufficient condition for deterrence viability was provided by survivable retaliatory forces were too optimistic.
The United States strategic nuclear command and control system was far more vulnerable, from the 1960s through the 1980s, than the retaliatory forces which it was designed to support.
And those who did regard the crisis as dangerous might have miscast the kind of danger that existed.
This sense of danger was certainly felt by Washington decisionmakers and has subsequently been testified to, in their writings about the crisis.
It is unarguably the case that the shared sense of danger for the superpower leaders, that they might lose control over events, was a major impetus for resolving the crisis when, and how, it was terminated.
The existence of leaders' fear of loss of control, however, is insufficient evidence for the argument that the risks of inadvertent war or escalation outran those of deliberate use of force.
There are two different contexts in which the manipulation of risk, within the context of nuclear or other crisis management, can take place.
The first context is that a risk with a known and bounded range of outcomes is used by one side to test the resolve of the other.
Games of Chicken or Potlatch illustrate dangerous and amusing variations of this kind of competition.
Another kind of competition in risk taking differs from this simple test of resolve.
In the more complicated kind of risk manipulation, the universe of potential outcome is more unstructured.
Because the range of outcomes is less predictable, the ability of leaders to order preferred outcomes, or to attach probabilities to desired outcomes, is reduced in comparison to the bounded-outcomes case.
One reason why bipolar systems may be more manageable and more stable than multipolar systems are, at least according to some theorists, is that bipolar systems reduce the cognitive complexity of leaders' assessments by offering them a more structured array of potential outcomes.
A two-sided crisis or war cannot usually be complicated by third parties unless those parties have sufficient military power and political influence for a seat at the great power table.
The Soviet Union, for example, dealt with Castro as a nonentity from the time of Kennedy's 22 October address to the nation until the upward spiral of the crisis ended in Khrushchev's decisive concession of 28 October.
The United States similarly, resisted the temptation to deal with Castro as the putative host or owner of the missiles and insisted upon treating them as Soviet missiles, under the presumably unilateral control of Moscow.
The preceding point is related to the kind of manipulation of risk in which leaders were engaged and the influence of that factor on the probability of successful crisis management.
The bipolar character of superpower confrontation over Cuba contributed to a bounded universe of possible outcomes.
During the crisis Khrushchev tried to escape from the closed universe of alternatives, by seeking a way to avoid capitulating to Kennedy's demands while proceeding to complete missile deployments and by making missiles operationally ready to fire.
However, the Russian leader was unable to open alternatives which were both acceptable to the administration and left at least some Soviet missiles in Cuba permanently.
The situation prior to United States photographic discovery of the missiles was more unstructured, and dangerously so.
Yet the United States President and his administration had unwittingly sent mixed signals to Khrushchev, not about their resolve in general but about policy with regard to Soviet offensive weapons deployments in Cuba, specifically.
Washington, having one year prior to the crisis boisterously asserted its nuclear superiority, failed between October 1961 and October 1962 to make clear the precise limits beyond which Soviet involvement in Cuban defense could not go.
Once the existence of Soviet medium-range missiles in Cuba had been unambiguously confirmed, the ambiguity of American commitments suddenly melted down in Kennedy's anger at Khrushchev's deception.
The Kennedy approach to crisis management was henceforth outcomebounded instead of outcome-enhanced, and the President's insistence on this helped to clarify his and Khrushchev's stakes.
Earlier we argued that bounded-outcome competition in risk taking challenges the cognitive COMMAND, CONTROL AND CUBAN MISSILES 39 limits of decision makers less than unbounded.
Our 'counterfactual' history showed that Khrushchev might have been persuaded by optimistic calculations that his nuclear diplomacy had the support of a feasible, although risky, national command attack option.
If so, this would not necessarily have made him more reluctant to remove the missiles without the simultaneous threat posed to him by United States conventional superiority in the local theater of operations.
A side with an inferior position in usable military power may not be able to bolster its nuclear coercive diplomacy because it has no option for manipulating risks to its advantage.
The outcomes of nuclear war are too unfathomable, and outcomes below that level are all one sidedly defeats.
It follows that the Soviet position in Cuba was weak, even if buttressed by a theoretical command attack capability, because of the softness of its conventional force underbelly.
Although risks of inadvertent war and escalation were certainly present during the crisis, the preceding argument suggests, against some influential academic opinion, that they were not the dominating risks.
The crisis warmup was outcome-unbounded, but the crisis itself was very outcomebounded.
Therefore the risk was more of advertent war or deliberate attack, undertaken in a desperate decision to seek relative advantage before the other side's attack.
Soviet leaders feared an American conventional attack on Cuba, and the administration feared that Soviet pressure on Berlin might follow such an attack.
Such a chain of events would be not entirely foreseeable, but the decisions setting the events in motion would not therefore qualify as accidental or inadvertent war.
The behavior of Kennedy and Khrushchev during the crisis was actually, albeit intuitively, quite responsive to the risk of inadvertent escalation or outbreak of war.
The Soviets swallowed any temptation for escalation after a stray United States U-2 reconnaissance plane overflew their airspace at the height of the crisis.
The administration backed off from a previous ExComm decision 40 THE JOURNAL OF SLAVIC MILITARY STUDIES after the U-2 shootdown of Major Anderson and did not strike immediately the offending surface-to-air missile sites.
If you have not lost command of yourself and realize clearly what this could lead to, then, Mr President, you and I should not now pull on the ends of the rope in which you have tied the knot of war, because the harder you and I pull, the tighter the knot will become.
The difference between a deliberate but mistaken, in view of consequences, decision for war, on one hand, and an unexpected loss of control over events, on the other, is very significant in this context.
Although both kinds of decisions, miscalculated escalation or loss of control, can be judged as irrational in some contexts, they present different kinds of irrationality.
An ambitious coercive diplomacy which turns unexpectedly into war, as did the diplomacies of the great powers in July 1914 is the result of deliberate, if mistaken, intelligence estimates about enemy capabilities or intentions.
A loss of control over events implies that organizations carrying out standard operating procedures or standing orders generate inappropriate responses, from the perspective of the policymaker, who failed fully to understand the implications of these procedures or orders.
For example, Kennedy's ExComm being unaware that U-2 flights near Soviet airspace had not been cancelled could have, but thankfully did not, result in combat between superpower aircraft.
The difference between miscalculated escalation and loss of control is apparent in the different decision logics which guided Khrushchev's policy decision to put missiles into Cuba, versus his assumption that those deployments could be concealed successfully from United States intelligence.
Khrushchev's deployment decision is a case of miscalculated escalation, deliberately undertaken and based on a misestimate of the consequences.
The Soviet leader's expectation that the deployments could be concealed resulted from his willingness to accept military estimates based on an answer to the wrong question.
The right question was whether the Americans, highly sensitized to the risks of Soviet offensive missile deployments and intensely searching for any evidence to that effect, could be deceived.
The wrong question was whether suitable camouflage for the missile sites was available in Cuba which would preclude serendipitous discovery before Khrushchev sprung his diplomatic trap.
Nuclear Crisis and Command Vulnerability If we ask what lessons might be learned from the Cold War that would be applicable to the new international order, one implication from our findings is rather ominous.
From a strictly counterforce perspective, one might choose to develop an argument that nuclear proliferation is not inconsistent with crisis or arms race stability.
Third World regional adversaries with survivable nuclear forces might dissuade one another from preemptive or preventive war.
The challenge of command and control is more qualitative and procedural than the problem of deploying enough survivable delivery vehicles and warheads.
Command vulnerability is not only, or perhaps not mainly, vulnerability to the physical destruction of bunkers, warning sensors and command post aircraft.
It is also, and perhaps mostly, the disruption of stable expectations and organizational routines by an event which falls outside the range of preprogrammed cases with which the organizational memory has been made familiar, by experience or by simulation.
For example, military commanders who fear that less than a dozen warheads might stun the national command headquarters in New Delhi or in Islamabad might assume predelegated authority for preemptive attack.
Had Saddam Hussein had available even crude nuclear weapons for delivery by short-range ballistic missiles in January 1991, his most 'efficient' target set might not have been United States and allied forces, but the command and control systems of his enemies in Saudi Arabia.
Israel's enemies, possessed of nuclear weapons in smaller quantities than Israel's presumed holdings, and spurred by fears of Israeli nuclear escalation to avoid conventional military defeat, might choose to 'use' rather than to 'lose' those weapons against Israel's political and military control system.
Khrushchev could not have redeemed his exposed position without retreating in the face of overwhelming United States military power.
But that power played only a partial role in resolving the crisis, and, ironically, the Soviet lag in nuclear strategic power helped to cause the crisis.
The Soviets in 1962 might have designed around the United States force superiority with a better deterrent than the Americans, or they, knew they had.
This is consolation for neither 42 THE JOURNAL OF SLAVIC MILITARY STUDIES hawkish nor dovish analysts.
The conclusion that Khrushchev had no military option which could jeopardize the carrying out of a controlled US retaliation may not be unassailable.
On the other hand, doves may have to acknowledge that the major risks in October 1962 were not only of loss of control, but also of miscalculated escalation, knowingly but erroneously chosen.
Conclusion Rational strategy models emphasize the objectives of leaders and planners for value maximization.
Value simplification dictates to the organization that, above all else, it must survive and persist in some viable form.
The organizational drive for negative entropy means, for politico-military command and control systems, that they must survive to retaliate from the dead, if necessary.
It is but a short step to the realization that the opponent's potential vulnerability may be the mirror image of one's own.
The possible availability of a command attack option for Moscow in 1962, on the other hand, is itself relevant to other and broader concerns about strategy and crisis management.
If American command and control was about as vulnerable or nearly so in October 1962 as expert assessments claimed it to be as of 1960, then essential parity in vulnerability, apart from city destruction, existed at an early stage in the superpower missile race.
In addition, the Cuban command and control situation may suggest that crisis management organizations are in an especially vulnerable and sensitive mode when they are in transition from a loosely coupled to a tightly coupled relationship among component parts.
The United States nuclear command and control system in the late Eisenhower and early Kennedy years underwent just such a transition from loose to tight coupling.
APPENDIX 1 United States AND SOVIET STRATEGIC NUCLEAR FORCES, 1962 The author was obligated to consult a variety of sources on United States and Soviet strategic nuclear weapons in autumn, 1962.
The sources did not always agree, and interpolation was necessary to deduce a usable compromise.
Thomas B Cochran, COMMAND, CONTROL AND CUBAN MISSILES 43 William M Arkin, Robert S Norris and Jeffrey I Sands, Nuclear Weapons Databook, Vol.
Bomber force loadings proved especially problematical, since a variety of bomb yields could be assigned to each aircraft in the United States or Soviet inventories, depending on their assigned missions within a given operational plan.
Categorical estimates were used for classes of bombers and the logical per bomber loadings were assumed in each case.
NOTES I am very much in debt to Scott Sagan for reviewing an earlier version of this article and helping to tighten the argument.
I also thank Stan Norris, Natural Resources Defense Council and William Arkin, Greenpeace, for suggested references.
McDonald, Director, Freedom of Information and Security Review, Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense/Public Affairs and of his staff, especially Ms Blanche Davis, was in-formative and indispensable.
None of these persons bears any responsibility for arguments, facts or opinions in this study.
Implications, Reconsiderations, Provocations 107, and the use of counterfactuals by Sagan in his study.
Miscalculated escalation is the deliberate taking of a decision to increase the scope or intensity of fighting in the erroneous expectation that the other side will back down.
Gilpatric spoke to the Business Council in Hot Springs, Virginia on 21 Oct.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk gave a televised interview the next morning which reaffirmed that Gilpatric was not speaking only for himself.
Khrushchev's own explanations appear in Strobe Talbott , Khrushchev Remembers )488-505.
Therefore, the explanation that Khrushchev sought a missile trade from the outset is not developed or critiqued in detail here.
Its significance appears more compelling as an option considered by the United States leadership at a late stage of the crisis, should other approaches short of war prove to be unsuccessful in resolving the confrontation.
While most of these weapons had been spotted by United States intelligence, many were incorrectly assumed to be intended for use by the Cuban armed forces.
The issue here is whether a psychological or organizational model provides the most parsimonious explanation for Khrushchev's misplaced optimism about nondiscovery.
I am grateful to Scott Sagan for calling this issue to my attention; he is not responsible for the discussion here.
Interview with Paul Nitze, 6 May 1987, in Blight and Welch, On the Brink 150.
Mikoyan served as personal secretary to his father, Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan and worked closely with his father during the crisis.
Garthoff's commentary on this document notes that the estimated increase of 40 per cent in first strike potential was based on then current National Intelligence Estimates of 75 Soviet operational ICBMs.
United States intelligence subsequently revised this estimate to 44; thus, the incremental improvement in Soviet first strike potential resulting from the Cuban MRBM and IRBM deployments was much greater than originally thought, and perhaps double the initial estimates.
President Kennedy may have reserved judgment about McNamara's contention that the missiles in Cuba did not affect the strategic nuclear balance.
You may say it doesn't make any difference if you get blown up by an ICBM flying from the Soviet Union or one that was 90 miles away.
Security 10/1 repr. in Sean M LynnJones, Steven E Miller and Stephen Van Evera, Nuclear Diplomacy and Crisis Management 304.
I am grateful to Peter Roman, Duquesne Univ. for suggesting this point.
This represent McNamara's recall of his feelings many years after the event and is not tantamount to contemporary evidence of his doubts at the time.
Cognitive biases important in deterrent situations include leaders' overconfidence in their decision making abilities, their inability to see value trade-offs, and their tendency to assimilate new information to preexisting beliefs.
Sokolovskii trans. with analysis and, annotation by H Dinerstein, L Goure and T Wolfe 405.
Ponturo, The Evolution of United States Strategic Command and Control and Warning, 1945-1972 239.
In all likelihood, predelegation was still in effect when Eisenhower left office.
WSEG had access to a great deal of information about the technical attributes of strategic weapons systems, but information about operational details (e.g. about airborne alerts) was more closely held within the Air Force.
The arrangement for predelegation provides some additional perspective on SAC CINC Gen.
I am grateful to Peter Roman, Duquesne Univ. for the opportunity to read a draft MS on Eisenhower strategic-force planning and with information pertinent to the predelegation issue.
Built in 1957, SAC's underground command post at Offutt was about 30ft underground and could have been destroyed by a small nuclear weapon.
The decision to move NORAD, formerly in above-ground cinder blocks at Colorado Springs, to a more secure location was made in the late 1950s.
When NORAD was moved inside Cheyenne Mountain in the mid-1960s, it was not built to withstand a direct nuclear attack on the facility.
BMEWS radars had no capability to detect missile launches from the south, since attacks from this direction by ballistic missiles had not been anticipated.
This system was vulnerable to misidentification of United States ICBM test launches, satellite tracks or mistimed simulations as actual attacks.
For some references to military writings of this period related to command and control, see Cimbala passim.
The 1960 United States alert was ordered by Eisenhower's Sec. of Defense, Thomas S Gates, during the Paris summit as a precautionary test measure.
The other instances occurred during the Cuban missile crisis, the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia and the Arab-Israeli War of 1973.
Soviet intelligence would not necessarily have had to deduce information about EMP from their own tests; they might have inferred a great deal about its properties and potential significance from their knowledge of United States tests.
Some American experts consulted by the author for this study doubted that the Soviets could have learned very much about EMP from the tests conducted in 1961 due to the technical parameters of those Soviet tests.
A 34-month nuclear test moratorium was observed by both countries from Nov.58 to Sept.61.
The test series included both endoatmospheric and exoatmospheric large yield tests.
The most exhaustive documentation of this appears in Blair, Strategic Command and Control passim.
According to Khrushchev, 'Castro suggested that in order to prevent our nuclear missiles from being destroyed, we should launch a preemptive strike against the United States.
Admittedly, some of these distinctions were drawn, and warnings given, subsequent to Khrushchev's actual decision taking, which occurred during spring 1962.
These distinctions and warnings subsequent to the Soviet decision taking cannot fairly be charged against the Kennedy administration's ledger of ambiguous signals.
Military Planners projected that by D + 10, United States casualties might reach 18,500.
United States officials also worried that counterforce superiority would do little to keep American population losses at 'acceptable levels', even in the case of a United States preemption.
The Soviet command and control system included a capability for postattack retaliation even if the command system were subjected to comprehensive destruction.
The situation with respect to United States command vulnerability, according to at least one expert assessment, provided little confidence in prospective wartime performance well into the 1970s.
As the authors note, programs to improve command, control and communications undertaken during the 1960s benefited peacetime United States strategic COMMAND, CONTROL AND CUBAN MISSILES 49 forces, but as of the early 1970s wartime performance and continuing control remained uncertain.
United States strategic forces of the early 1970s, although not completely incapacitated by an attack on their command structure, would rapidly have lost any capability for central coordination and direction.
