One day in particular, Oct., 1962 was arguably the single most dangerous moment in human history, with the United States and the Soviet Union on the verge of unleashing upon each other thermonuclear Armageddon.
Perino’s candid admission is often depicted as a funny, self-deprecating anecdote.
I think such a pivotal event, and the lessons it taught us, should not be forgotten.
One Minute to Midnight , One Hell of a Gamble and Essence of Decision stand prominently in my personal library.
As the world marks half a century since the Cuban missile crisis, some fine new volumes have been published.
I want to highlight four below, each presenting new angles on this perilous event.
If you don’t know how Operation Anadyr, Operation Mongoose, the Berlin Crises and the Bay of Pigs Invasion relate to the Cuban missile crisis, this is the book for you.
It has an eight-page long, no-nonsense summary of the causes, course, and consequences of the crisis.
This is followed by almost two hundred pages of entries on key people, institutions and concepts.
A detailed chronology starts with the Monroe Doctrine in 1823 and ends with Castro’s resignation in 2008.
Many have argued that the Crisis, far from being Kennedy’s “finest hour,” was the result of his own miscalculations.
The book also blames the willingness of Cubans to become a nuclear outpost for the Soviet Union on Kennedy’s disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion and the subsequent efforts to assassinate Castro through Operation Mongoose.
The Kennedy administration’s decision to limit surveillance flights over Cuba for five weeks in the late summer and early fall of 1962, dubbed by JFK’s detractors as the “photo gap,” allowed Soviets to sneak the nuclear weapons into the island.
The authors claim that even once the crisis began, a failure of United States intelligence, due to Washington’s self-deception as much as to Moscow’s duplicity, almost resulted in a catastrophe.
Had the terms under which the crisis was settled been clearly understood by the public at the time, the authors claimed, a different interpretation of who had swerved in this nuclear game of chicken would have resulted.
This “remarkable window into Kennedy’s presidency” is possible thanks to President Kennedy himself, who — possibly with a memoir in mind — serendipitously had begun to secretly tape his presidency.
Yet more important for Coleman’s goal, Kennedy kept the tapes rolling in the following months, a decision that affords us now a fly-on-the-wall perspective, with more “nuance and objectivity,” of how intense Kennedy’s battles with the press after the crisis were, and how intimately involved he was in these struggles.
The “Missile” Crisis as seen from Cuba, by Tomas Diez Acosta , is an account of the crisis from the perspective of Castro’s Cuba: It serves as a sort of antidote to Robert Kennedy’s hagiographic account of the event, Thirteen Days.
The latter is written from a self-serving perspective flattering to those in the Oval Office, with the transparent objective of using it in Kennedy’s own presidential campaign in 1968.
The former is written by one who participated in the mobilization of Cuban forces as a 16 year old and then spent his life as part of Cuba’s military.
Unapologetically aligned with Castro’s rhetoric, the book has to be read, just as any other, with a healthy pinch of salt.
But it represents an opportunity to understand how the events were presented to — and even today are understood by — a large swath of the Cuban population.
This in itself is a useful reminder that, in complex geopolitical situations, truth is often a relative term, events are interpreted differently by different players, and history is written with different ink in different places.
After reading and thinking about the Cuban missile crisis, I can’t help but feel that Kennedy, Khrushchev and Castro were victims of their own ideologies.
In one of my favorite films of all time, Errol Morris’s “The Fog of War,” Robert McNamara speaks about the lessons he has derived from his life.
Every time I hear that, I think of Nietzsche’s famous aphorism, warning those that fight monsters to make sure they not become monsters themselves, and warning that if we gaze for long into an abyss, the abyss will also gaze back into us.
