The Cuban missile crisis brought the world to the edge of a nuclear precipice.
Yet I can predict that some influential voices, as we approach the anniversary date of the Cuban crisis this October, will present it in a rather different light, downplaying the danger that it might have got so catastrophically out of hand and stressing the rationality of the decisions taken by John Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev, the two superpower leaders of the time, in leading the world back from the brink.
There is something in this argument but it tends to lead to the false proposition that because nuclear war did not happen in the Cuban crisis, it could not have happened.
There is another reason why some Western politicians and academics give the Cuban crisis the benefit of the doubt, denying how close we came to annihilation.
Attempting to redress the strategic balance between the Soviet Union and the United States – that the Soviet Union was far weaker in terms of nuclear missiles and their deployment – Khrushchev sought to deploy medium-range missiles secretly on the island of its new ally Cuba.
The argument that Khrushchev was really trying to defend revolutionary Cuba from the United States is weak and has been dismissed by Fidel Castro himself who would have preferred a simple Soviet-Cuban defence treaty to guarantee his security.
When the United States discovered the ruse, before the missile deployment was complete, Kennedy decided that they would have to be removed.
Fortunately for us, he rejected calls from the United States military – and some civilian hawks – for immediate military action.
Fortunately too, Khrushchev realised that he had blundered and signalled his desire for a compromise by refusing – unlike the United States – to put his strategic forces on war alert.
After a tense thirteen days of crisis, he agreed to withdraw the missiles, under some form of inspection, while Kennedy guaranteed not to invade Cuba in the future and to withdraw United States missiles from Turkey where they were aimed against Soviet targets.
But it was a closely run affair, with the danger that miscalculation or accident might precipitate nuclear war at any moment.
Nor did the United States realise that Soviet submarines in the area carried nuclear weapons; when one of them was harassed by an American plane, the commander had to be dissuaded by fellow-officers from launching a missile.
By the end of the crisis the United States had nearly 2,000 launchers capable of delivering over 7,000 megatons ready for combat.
The resolution of the Cuban crisis did produce a new US-Soviet understanding for a while, which led to the conclusion of the partial Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty of 1963.
But the chance of a real breakthrough faded after the assassination of Kennedy and the removal of Khrushchev – in large part because of his “adventurist” gamble in Cuba.
Moscow’s determination to catch up with the United States would lead both sides to redouble the nuclear arms race in the late 1970s and ‘80s.
First, we should ask why the Cold War was still so intense, a decade and a half after it began, in spite of the death of Stalin and attempts at a thaw in the mid-1950s.
Significant opportunities for a breakthrough between Washington and Moscow were missed; these have only begun to be the subject of research in recent years.
Nuclear weapons are supremely dangerous, the Cold War which justified their possession in conventional deterrence theory is long over, and yet the established nuclear powers have made no serious effort to move towards a nuclear-free world, while more countries have entered the club.
Banning the bomb should not just be a nostalgic slogan of the 1960s but a top priority for disarmament negotiations today.
John Gittings worked at The Guardian for twenty years as assistant foreign editor and chief foreign leader-writer.
I suspect that the United States pursued a competitive strategy over detente until Nixon because of the the institutional memory of Stalin and Soviet foreign policymainly distrust.
Premising nuclear weapons as the chief means of bankrupting the U.S.S.R. appears to have coalesced under Carter and matured under Reagan.
The main reason that the United States is not an empire is because formal imperial rule is no Comments are closed.
