Some of the most important information may be found in the tapes made of the meetings of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council (the “ExComm”) during the missile crisis-tapes notable for their candor, as they were made without the knowledge of any of the participants save President John F Kennedy and possibly his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy.
In those, we see the Administration’s initial reactions to the discovery of Soviet mediumand intermediaterange ballistic missiles secretly being installed in Cuba, and the earliest formulations of possible American responses.
McGeorge Bundy, who was Special Assistant for National Security, has recently transcribed the tapes of the meetings on October 27, just prior to the resolution of the crisis.
Here we see the members of the ExComm trying to find a way to bring the crisis to a favorable conclusion in the face of conflicting signals from the Soviet Union and an escalating military situation in Cuba.
The body of literature devoted to the Cuban missile crisis is already enorNonetheless, revelations from this transcript and from new research The authors gratefullyacknowledge the help of McGeorge Bundy and Marc Trachtenberg, whose remarks were extremely valuable in the preparation of this essay.
Explaining the Cuban Missile International Security, Winter 1987/88 0 1987 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Many believe that all of the relevant lessons have already been learned from the missile ~ r i s i s But . ~ the received wisdom is being challenged by information newly available from conferences, interviews, and correspondence, and from previously classified transcripts, cables, memos, and reports.
We are only now getting facts crucial to understanding the Cuban missile crisis.
This essay directs attention to surprising and important revelations in the record of the ExComm meetings of October 27.
Consequently, this document is unlikely to eliminate all controversy surrounding the events of October 27, 1962, but it ought to go a long way toward grounding the controversies empirically.
The literature on crisis management is voluminous, but several works stand out.
The remainder of the essay sets forth a brief outline of the events of the Cuban missile crisis, and then notes important issues that are illuminated, sometimes in quite surprising ways, by the transcript.
These include cases where a significant conventional understanding or a controversial hypothesis about the crisis is strongly confirmed or is contradicted by new information.
We direct the reader’s attention to telling portions of the transcript and provide information from other sources that aids understanding.
Background to the Meetings of October 27 On October 15, 1962, photographs from the previous day’s reconnaissance flight revealed the presence of Soviet SS-4 and SS-5 missiles in Cuba, precipitating an intense crisis that lasted until October 28.
The President announced the discovery of the Soviet deployment in a televised speech at 7:OOm. on October 22.
Soon after, he announced the imposition of a limited quarantine on shipments of military hardware to the island of Cuba, with the unanimous backing of the Organization of American States.
The likely maximum yield of the SS-5’s warhead was reported to be in the range of 3-5 Mt.
The SS-4 medium-range ballistic missile was reported to have a range of 1,020 nmi-capable of reaching Savannah, Georgia, New Orleans, or the Panama Canal-with a CEP of 1 to 1. nmi and a yield between 25 kt and 2 Mt.
Both were liquid-fueled missiles, and each launcher was expected to have one reload.
The SS-5 sites were being built at Guanajay and Remedios, the SS-4s at San Cristobal and Sagua la Grande.
There was evidently some confusion in the ExComm as to what “operational” meant, discussed more fully below.
Soviet ships carrying suspect cargo did not challenge the quarantine, and Soviet conventional and nuclear forces were never placed on a comparable alert, but work on the missile sites in Cuba continued at what appeared to be an accelerated pace.
The Administration’s goal in the crisis was to secure a Soviet commitment, first to halt work on the missile bases and then to withdraw their nuclearcapable systems from Cuba.
A number of formal and informal channels of communication were open between Moscow and Washington throughout the public phase of the crisis , but by Friday, October 26, none of them seemed to be bringing the Administration any closer to its objectives.
Some figured mainly in the battle over public opinion, such as the public exchange of letters between Kennedy, Khrushchev and Bertrand Russell on October 24 and 25, which contained no real basis for a negotiated s o l ~ t i o n Others, .~ such as Khrushchev’s unusual meeting in Moscow on October 24 with American businessman William Knox, provided no tangible 5.
The Cuban missile crisis is the only time American nuclear forces have been placed on DefCon 2.
At a recent conference of scholars and former ExComm members at Hawk’s Cay, Florida, it was revealed by Raymond Garthoff that the Commander-in-Chief of SAC, General Thomas Power, sent out the DefCon 2 alert in the clear, rather than in code, as would have been standard procedure.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara learned of this only at the Hawks Cay meeting.
British philosopher and activist Bertrand Russell had written an open letter to both Khrushchev and Kennedy appealing for a peaceful settlement.
Khrushchev’s reply included a vague proposal for a summit, but Kennedy was unwilling to commit to premature negotiations.
Via Knox, for example, Khrushchev communicated to Kennedy that the missiles in Cuba were under strict Soviet control.
The first concrete proposal for a negotiated solution came from Secretary-General U Thant, who publicly suggested on October 24 that the Soviet Union voluntarily suspend arms shi6ments to Cuba for a period of two to three weeks, and that the United States at the same time voluntarily suspend the quarantine, to provide time to resolve the dispute through neg~tiation.
O Although the United Nations proved unable to secure a standstill, it did serve the vital function of providing Khrushchev with a face-saving way of ordering his ships to stop short of the quarantine line-something the President’s quarantine proclamation failed to d0.l’ But perhaps the most important com8.
Whether Khrushchev was correct about his control over the weapons in Cuba remains unclear, as is the issue of what he meant to communicate by this statement.
This could hardly have been reassuring to a President who in June had just ordered permissive action links -mechanical or electronic locksinstalled on his own nuclear weapons to ensure that they would be fired only on his orders.
In this case, though they probably could have been fired without orders from Moscow, they could hardly have done any meaningful damage.
Khrushchev may merely have been taking responsibility for military activities in Cuba, signalling that the relevant weapons were in Soviet rather than Cuban hands, thereby preventing the crisis from devolving into a U.S.-Cuban confrontation which might have led more easily to an American invasion.
On this view, Khrushchev was in a backhanded way using Knox as a channel for communicating a deterrent threat.
The Soviets called the quarantine proclamation a flagrant violation of international law.
Consequently, Khrushchev would have had difficulty justifying orders that Soviet ships respect the quarantine without appearing weak to hard-liners in Moscow, to the Cubans, and to his more vociferous critics, such as the Chinese.
However, on October 25, U Thant publicly asked Khrushchev to order his ships to stay clear of the quarantine line so as not to prejudice negotiations.
International Security 12:3 10 I munication was the correspondence between the two leaders.
Then the necessity for the presence of our military specialists in Cuba will be 0 b ~ i a t e d . l ~ That same day, ABC news correspondent John Scali was approached by Alexander Fomin, an official at the Soviet Embassy.
Before a reply could be made to Khrushchev’s first letter, a second came through, this one apparently the work of a committee.
Let us reach an understanding on what time you and we need to put this into effect.I5 12.
Robert Kennedy notes that there were almost daily communications between President Kennedy and Khrushchev.
These missiles were owned by Turkey, though the United States had custody of their warheads.
The linkage with the Jupiters in Khrushchev’s second letter clearly signalled a hardening of the Soviet bargaining position.
An American U-2 on a routine air sampling mission strayed into Soviet air space over Siberia.
A U-2 piloted by Major Rudolf Anderson, whose reconnaissance flight on October 14 had discovered the Soviet missiles in the first place, was shot down by a surface-to-air missile over Cuba.
This was the situation when the ExComm convened in the Cabinet Room that afternoon, and these are the events President Kennedy and his advisors are seen grappling with in the transcript.
In the course of the meeting, it was decided that the United States should reply to Khrushchev’s letter of October 26, accepting its ”proposal” as refined by Alexander Fomin, while ignoring Khrushchev’s second letter altogether.
This ”Trollope Ploy,” as it became known (named for the Victorian novelist Anthony Trollope, many of whose young heroines characteristically were eager to see in an ambiguous gesture a full-fledged proposal of marriage) was contained in a letter delivered to Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin by the President’s brother, though the choice of messenger was not made by the full ExComm and is consequently not discussed in the transcript.
At 7:45m., Robert Kennedy met with Dobrynin and offered a public guarantee against the invasion of Cuba in return for a Soviet withdrawal of all offensive weapons from Cuba.
At the same time, he communicated a vague threat of military action against Cuba in the event of a failure to comply.
When pressed about the Jupiter trade, Robert Kennedy reportedly gave private assurances that missiles in Turkey would shortly be withdrawn, but refused to consummate a public deal to that effect.
Robert Kennedy reported that he told Dobrynin, “we had to have a commitment by tomorrow that those bases would be removed.
He should understand that if they did not remove those bases, we would remove them.” bid., 108.
The balance of this essay explains why they are of particular interest to historians and students of the crisis, and points to new interpretations suggested by the transcript and other relevant information.
The President is in a grave situation,' Robert Kennedy said, 'and he does not know how to get out of it.
That is why the President is appealing directly to Chairman Khrushchev for his help in liquidating the conflict.
It is highly unlikely that Robert Kennedy said any such thing, but it is not unlikely that the appearance of exhaustion and agitation, whether genuine or feigned, proved useful in securing Soviet acceptance of his terms.
Cuban soldiers apparently surrounded the missile sites, and Soviets took up defensive positions, though nothing further seems to have happened.
The President wished to announce the end of the quarantine in a speech on November 20, and he would not do so until the bombers had gone.
To prod the Soviets along, a meSsBg@ww sent to NATO warning of possible military action against the bombers, apparently on the understanding that this would leak to the Soviets.
On November 19, Castro gaveOn Nov-r a,the President announced that the bombers would be withdrawn, ended the quaranhrte, and cancelled the DefCon 2 alert.
Some members of the Administration seem to have been expecting the Soviets to demand a trade for some time, and Khrushchev's second letter placed the United States in an awkward position.
There was indeed a compelling superficial symmetry between the Soviet deployment in Cuba and the presence of American nuclear weapons in Turkey, and it was a symmetry that did not go ~nn0ticed.l~ United Nations Ambassador Adlai Stevenson had suggested early on that a trade be considered as a lever for a negotiated withdrawal of Soviet missiles,2oand Walter Lippmann had argued for the trade on symmetry grounds in a widely-read column in the Washington Post just two days earlier.
In fact, President Kennedy and his advisors had the trade option in the back of their minds throughout, and at various times some expressed the view that the trade might be necessary.
One important asymmetry, however, was that the Jupiters were in Turkey under a treaty of mutual defense, whereas no such treaty obligation existed between Cuba and the Soviet Union.
On October 24, Dean Rusk had cabled Paris and Ankara with a request for an assessment of its likely political repercussions within NATO and on U S.Turkish relations,24and he was informed in return that they would be very grave indeed.
The Turks have already made abundantly clear that they do not want to be compared with the Cubans, used as a pawn, or shorn of the Jupiters which have always been to them a proud symbol of their ability to strike back if they are hit.
Hasty surfacing of long-held United States military evaluations of the obsolescence of the Jupiters would be ineffective in meeting these strongly held views.
The Jupiters are not important as a military-strategic asset-but then, neither is Berlin.
Yet both have elemental significance as symbols of the integrity of the Alliance and especially of our commitment to stand by the interests of each of its members.
The Turks themselves went so far as to issue a statement on October 27 rejecting the Soviet trade proposal in no uncertain terms.
Those who have retrospectively told the story of the missile crisis consistently avoid the implication that the trade option was ever under serious consideration.
Domestically, the trade might indeed have been widely received as a major diplomatic defeat, particularly in view of President Kennedy’s initial tough stance.
Recognizing these costs, the Administration had all along attempted to stress the asymmetries in the Turkish and Cuban deployments and had urged its officials to avoid the parallels in their public comments.
Yet as the transcript reveals, the President was in fact inclined to trade the Turkish missiles if he had to.
Perhaps concerned about the risks of escalation associated with an air strike, the risks of inadvertence illustrated only that day by the stray U-2 over Siberia, and hence the possibility of a major unintended conflict, he seems indeed to have been strongly inclined to avoid military action or a prolongation of the crisis.
Thus the popular view that the Administration considered the trade unacceptable is powerfully contradicted by the tone and content of the President’s statements in the meetings of October 27.
It was clear to me that President Kennedy would not let the Jupiters in Turkey become an obstacle to the removal of the missile sites in Cuba because the Jupiters were coming out in any event.
Mr Cordier was to put that statement in the hands of U Thant only after further signal from us.
International Security 12:3 16 I President Kennedy, Andrew Cordier and I were the only ones who knew of this particular step.
By preparing this option-and by keeping it secret from the rest of the ExComm-the President seems to have signalled his willingness to suffer the political costs of a trade rather than the incalculable costs of armed conflict, should events force him to choose between the The fact that he failed to gain a consensus on this point in the ExComm itself helps explain why he appears to have bypassed the ExComm in making crucial decisions thereafter.
Not only was the ExComm never informed of the Cordier maneuver, but some significant members of the ExComm-such as Maxwell Taylor33 and Paul NitzeX-were never informed that the President's brother Robert met with Dobrynin that evening to execute the Trollope Ploy.
When Rusk testifies that ""the Jupiters were coming out in any event,"" he implies that a decision to withdraw them had already been made.
But the transcript does not suggest that this is generally understood by the members of the ExComm, none of whom makes any reference to such a decision.
Indeed, the diplomatic problem posed by the trade, which leads to lengthy discussions of awkward ad hoc responses, would not have been so intractable if such a decision already existed.Rusk himself notes that Polaris submarines would not have been available until 1963, and indicates that he, the 31.
The suggestions that the President suffered from an unnecessarily belligerent ""crisis mentality,"" that he was systematically leading the discussions towards military action, or that he was risking a major conflict with the Soviet Union for domestic political reasons, are clearly contradicted by the content of this transcript.
This is a fascinating example of his willingness to think aloud and to lead discussion in new and creative directions without undue defensiveness.
The circumstantial evidence would seem to indicate that while the missiles may have been ”coming out in any event,” there may have been little more than a vague conditional intention to remove them at a later date.
It is possible, therefore, that Robert Kennedy was wrong when he reportedly told Ambassador Dobrynin that ”President Kennedy had been anxious to remove those missiles from Turkey and Italy for a long period of time.
At the President’s insistence, Secretary Rusk had raised the question with the representatives of Turkey following a NATO meeting in the spring of 1962.
In the summer of 1962, when Rusk was in Europe, President Kennedy raised the question again.
He was told by the State Department that they felt it unwise to press the matter with Turkey.
He wanted the missiles removed even if it would cause political problems for our govern36.
The committee considered these missiles to be both obsolete and vulnerable.
I remember that we joked about which way the missiles would fly if they were fired.
I also remember being told that a tourist driving an automobile along a public highway with a .22 caliber rifle could knock holes in the skins of these missiles.
In any event, President Kennedy asked me to take up with the Turkish government the matter of withdrawing these missiles.
On May 1, 1961, I attended a meeting of the Foreign Ministers of CENTO held in Ankara.
The United States was not a signatory of CENTO, but the Secretary of State usually attended as an observer.
After dinner I had a walk in the garden with Mr Selim Sarper, the Foreign Minister of Turkey, and took up with him the matter of withdrawing the Jupiters from Turkey.
Second, he said that it would be very damaging to the morale of Turkey if the Jupiters were to be withdrawn before Polaris submarines became available in the Mediterranean but these submarines would not become available until the spring of 1963.
Note the possible disparity between Rusk’s and Kennedy’s recollections.
If they are speaking of the same meeting, Rusk recalls it being a CENTO meeting in the spring of 1961, and Kennedy a NATO meeting in the spring of 1962.
The State Department representatives discussed it again with the Turks and, finding they still objected, did not pursue the matter.
The President believed he was President and that, his wishes having been made clear, they would be followed and the missiles removed.
Now he learned that the failure to follow up on this matter had permitted the same obsolete Turkish missiles to become hostages to the Soviet Union.
Rusk says simply, “It is generally supposed that at the time of the Cuban missile crisis President Kennedy was angry when he discovered that the Jupiters had not been removed from Turkey.
The orthodox understanding of the trade option is undeniably challenged by the transcript, other documents, and Rusks testimony.
It is clear that the full story of the technical status of the Jupiters has yet to surface.
But the more important and more surprising finding is that the story of what the President intended to do with them must now be revised.
It appears that he was prepared to trade them for the Soviet missiles in Cuba if the alternative were military action.
UNDERSTANDING THE SOVIETS President Kennedy’s expectation that the Soviets would prove to be tough bargainers and insist on the Jupiter trade has already been noted, and was of course proven wrong by events.
The pessimism evident in the transcript is reflected in later accounts.
Barton Bemstein’s argument that President Kennedy neither ordered the withdrawal of the Jupiters nor was surprised that they had not been dismantled thus appears to be confirmed.
The genesis of the Trollope Ploy is an interesting feature of the transcript, which shows that Robert Kennedy's account oversimplifies and distorts its origin.
It is clear that the idea entered the discussion gradually and was embraced by several members, and that Llewellyn Thompson's argument finally persuaded a reluctant President to accept it.
THE IMPORTANCE OF THE U-2 SHOOT-DOWN Many former ExComm members who recall hearing the news that Major Anderson's U-2 was shot down over Cuba have reported it as a turning point.
Anderson was the first and, so far as is known, the only casualty of the crisis.
The Soviets, as an unidentified speaker says in the transcript, had fired the first shot.
There was the realization that the Soviet Union and Cuba were preparing to do battle.
There is brief discussion of whether the Soviets intended this to be a political signal, whether Cubans or Soviets had fired the shot, and whether it indicated a new tone of belligerence.
The transcript thus reinforces the view that the President’s mind was already moving in the direction of a quick, peaceful settlement.
If an air strike or invasion had been the options he favored, then the difficult issues posed by the shoot-down-Soviet and Cuban anti-air capabilities, the question of Moscow’s control over the weapons in Cuba, and the problems of inadvertent escalation-surely should have attracted and held his immediate attention.
If President Kennedy were thinking in terms of a prolonged, tightened quarantine, then the urgency of maintaining air surveillance in a SAM environment growing more deadly by the day should have led him to direct the discussion towards the details of various military measures needed to protect reconnaissance aircraft.
Writing prior to the release of this transcript and on the basis of recollections from the participants, we recently wrote that at the height of the crisis, 46.
This view seems to be inconsistent with McNamara’s present insistence on the importance of avoiding potentially escalatory uses of force.
Bob and I were reminiscing last night about the night of Saturday the 27th.
We had just dispatched Bobby Kennedy to Dobrynin, expecting the so-called ""ultimatum"" to be rejected.
The only word which can describe the meeting that night is ""rancorous""-we did show the effects of stress and fatigue, and the air strike was gaining strength and its proponents were becoming more and more vigorous.
The President was under tremendous pressure at this point, and I think it's highly speculative to say that the President would ""never"" have gone ahead with the air strike.
The hawks demonstrated increasing ferocity and more unity as time wore on.
I didn't believe the President would consent to an air strike on the missile bases in Cuba, but I was scared to death that Nitze, Dillon and Taylor would wear the President down.
Yet it is remarkable how little evidence of this can be found in the transcript of October 27.
While the transcript periodically indicates both laughter and low voices, nowhere does it indicate shouting or lost tempers.
Similarly unexpected is the silence of those who have become known as the hawks.
Dillon, McCone, Nitze and Taylor all speak relatively infrequently and are seldom engaged in conversation by those who dominate the discussion-the President, Robert Kennedy, McNamara, Bundy, Thompson and Rusk.
Though McNamara and Dillon recently recalled that by October 27 there was a clear majority in the ExComm in favor of military action,51it is unclear from this transcript just who could have composed such a majority.
Few if any remarks from any ExComm members indicate enthusiasm for significant military action against Cuba.
One cannot fail to notice that, in contrast to these transcripts, the October 16 meetings appeared more hawkish 48.
Infernational Security 12:3 22I all around.On the basis of the evidence we have thus far, it strongly appears that by October 27 the hawks were losing ground, rather than gaining it.
STRESS, FATIGUE, A N D BREAKDOWN Much attention has been paid recently to the problem of decision-making under fatigue and stress, particularly in major crises.
Research has indicated that up to a certain point, stress can have a beneficial effect on performance, but that prolonged, intense stress can result in dysfunction or breakdown, with ominous implications for sound decision-making and the risks of war.
It is commonly thought that the members of the ExComm were suffering from stress and fatigue by October 27.
So also is Robert Kennedy, whom Dobrynin apparently thought was on the verge of collapse.
Of course, it is impossible, merely from reading a transcription, to determine with certainty whether any of the ExComm members were impaired by stress or fatigue.
But this evidence strongly suggests that they were not, and confirms the views of those who recall the stress and fatigue being real but manageable.
SMALL GROUP A N D BUREAUCRATIC POLITICS Irving Janis has identified small-group politics, or ”groupthink”, as a powerful influence on collective deci~ion-making.
The resulting decisions may be hastily considered and subject to inadequate criticism.
Janis argues that the Kennedy Administration suffered greatly from groupthink in the Bay of Pigs fiasco, but that the President successfully avoided it in the Cuban missile crisis by organizing deliberations in such a way as to institutionalize the exhaustive consideration of the options and the objections to each of them, and by absenting himself periodically from the ExComm meetings.
The transcript of October 27 confirms Janis’s view that the pernicious effects of groupthink were avoided in this case.
Another well-established thesis is that bureaucratic politics can distort the rationality of a decision-making process.Whereas a unitary rational actor might choose a value-maximizing course of action as the result of a careful exploration of the costs and benefits of the alternatives, groups of people representing diverse bureaucratic interests tend to produce a decision based upon the results of a political contest.
An alternative, admittedly controversial, theory is that groupthink did operate on the hawks.
It is apparent from interviews that Dillon, Nitze and Taylor either did not completely speak their minds to the President, or have been deceived by their present memories of how they felt at the time.
Of course, it is ironic that the generally successful avoidance of groupthink in this case, though masterful, may have become moot by October 27.
If the President were making key decisions with one or two of his closest advisors and consciously excluding the ExComm from them, little if anything depended on the avoidance of groupthink in the Cabinet Room.
International Security 12:3 24 I your contribution to the decision-making process will depend upon your parochial point of view and the interests of the organization you represent.
The transcript does not indicate that bureaucratic politics played a significant role in the ExComm’s deliberations.Taylor, the only military man present, does not argue a hawkish line throughout, nor is his participation as active as one might have expected given the fact that the organization he represented had a very great deal at stake in the choice of action.
McNamara, the Secretary of Defense, obviously felt free to dissent from the military’s preferred course of action throughout the crisis.
Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General, and Douglas Dillon, Secretary of the Treasury, express wideranging views throughout the crisis unfettered by concern for their respective bureaucratic interests.
Rusk and Ball from the State Department do not appear unduly parochial in their approach, although they exhibit greater sensitivity to the diplomatic dimensions of the issues.
The various positions taken might better be accounted for by,g., the distribution of responsibility,62the personal histories of the participant^,^^ and their understandings of the adversary.
THE IMPORTANCE OF DOMESTIC POLITICS It has been suggested that President Kennedy’s course of action was heavily influenced by his concern for his political welfare and that of his party.
It has been suggested that bureaucratic politics should in any case be expected to play a greater role in the implementation than in the formulation of a decision, especially in a crisis.
The evidence in the transcript appears consistent with this suggestion.
Dean Rusk and Robert McNamara interviews with Blight and Welch, May 18,1987, Athens, GA; and May 21, 1987, Washington, D.C. respectively.
This transcript does not, however, support the claim that President Kennedy based his decisions on domestic political considerations.
It is revealing that in the discussion of the political costs of the Jupiter trade, for example, he discusses at length the potential disruption of NATO and of relations with the Turks, but domestic political repercussions not at all.
Though this does not cast doubt on the theory of political risk aversion per se, it appears that Kennedy’s own political health was not his primary concern in this crisis.
At several points in the discussion, it is possible to discern a real sense of urgency.
The President and several of his advisors appear to have felt strongly that the crisis had to be resolved quickly.
One might have expected concern over the operational status of the Soviet missiles in Cuba to have generated the urgency, as it did in the very first ExComm meetings.As 65.
McNamara says in the transcript of the 11:50m. meeting on October 16, “Before I comment on either the unknowns or outlining some military alternatives, there are two propositions I would suggest that we ought to accept as, uh, foundations for our further thinking.
International Security 12:3 26 1 noted above, by October 19 the Central Intelligence Agency had reported that two of the SS-4 sites were ”operational,” though the presence of warheads was never confirmed.
This terminology, according to CIA Deputy Director of Intelligence Ray Cline, angered the President throughout the crisis, presumably because it seemed vague and evasive.
Although the presence of warheads in Cuba was neither confirmed nor disproved, there was intelligence that warheads were on the way.The ExComm may have felt strongly that the crisis had to be resolved soon, without waiting to know for certain that warheads were present.n Various other possibilities may help explain the sense of urgency.
The presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba was increasingly becoming a feature of the status quo, making their removal more difficult p~litically.
Of course, we didn’t know that there were no warheads in Cuba, we merely never confirmed that there were.
It is worth noting that McGeorge Bundy does not recall ever being briefed on shipments of warheads from the Soviet Union to Cuba, casting some doubt on the hypothesis that this was responsible for the sense of urgency.
The risks of inadvertence were mounting, as evidenced by the U-2 events.
The troops and planes that had been rushed to Florida were being maintained at a high level of readiness, and their logistical support, though impressive for a peacetime operation, might not have been sufficient to prevent an eventual deterioration in their effectiveness.
Finally, anxiety, uncertainty, and the press of normal business might all have pressured the President and his advisors to resolve the crisis quickly.
All of these are possibilities which singly or in concert might account for the urgency.
The transcript, however, does not yield many conclusions as to which played a role and to what extent.
President Kennedy seemed willing to trade Jupiter missiles to avoid an armed strike against Soviet missiles.
The latter was somewhat more likely, if only because at some point it might have become necessary to protect reconnaissance missions while a negotiated settlement was being sought.
In the transcript, we see evidence of willingness by hawks and doves alike to undertake strikes against SAM sites.
Yet the decision is to postpone a response to the U-2 shoot-down, giving President Kennedy time to try the Trollope Ploy first.
Of course, it is possible that President Kennedy would have gone to war if for some reason the Soviets rejected the Jupiter trade.
But this was highly unlikely given the fact that Khrushchev’s letter proposing the trade had been publicly released.
Another possibility is that the Soviets might have dragged their heels on a negotiated settlement, forcing the President to take action 75.
International Security 22:3 28 I against Cuban SAMs to protect his reconnaissance aircraft in the meantime.
A third possibility is that the situation might have gotten out of control.
An inadvertent clash of Soviet and American forces, or a desperate act by a desperate adversary, might have given the President no choice but to resort to arms.
Nowhere do we see any contingency planning for the steps that would have been taken at any stage in an armed conflict, nor do we see any discussion of what would be done to contain and arrest war with the Soviet We see no discussion of whether the Single Integrated Operations Plan would have been used.n One may conclude, therefore, that the President and his key advisors had a high degree of confidence that the crisis could be resolved without a serious superpower clash.
Indeed, the President had done a great deal to ensure that war could be avoided.
HISTORY AND RECOLLECTION Throughout the foregoing tour of issues, we have mentioned discrepancies between the testimony of the transcript and the recollections of the participants in the years after the missile crisis.
While the occasional difference in nuance or lapse of memory should be expected, the frequency of stark contradictions and reversals of opinion is surprising.
There is nothing useful to be gained simply by catching former policy-makers in error.
But the point is worth noting simply because our understandings of the event have for so long depended so heavily on recollections alone.
When apparent contradictions arise, it becomes increasingly important to try to understand why they do so and how we are to interpret the disparities.
Though the transcript shows McNamara thinking in a vague way about how to limit a U.S.Soviet war, it also suggests that he did not believe he had an acceptable answer to the problem.
This is fully consistent with the recollections of the principals at Hawk’s Cay and in previously noted interviews.
None recalls any meaningful discussion of military contingencies in the event of a Soviet response to an American air strike, an inadvertent escalation, or a use of nuclear weapons.
Only the hawks-Dillon, Nitze, and Taylor--express confidence that there would have been no Soviet military response, largely because of the United States’ massive superiority in strategic nuclear weapons.
Afterword The Administration which emerged from the Cuban missile crisis was in many ways more confident than the one we see agonizing in the transcript of October 27.
But it was also an Administration that had learned a great deal about itself, about its adversary, and about international politics.
Largely for good, sometimes for ill, we have seen the experience of the missile crisis shaping Soviet and American policy ever since.
One would like to able to say that the Cuban missile crisis, which has exerted such a powerful influence on the conduct of superpower relations, is accurately understood.
The transcript, as we note, seems to raise as many questions as it answers.
