As the years go by, more and more historians take a very investigative approach and come to the conclusion that the actions taken in that two weeks were a political move.
With the first theory, it is typically believed that the Soviets never planned on actually firing the missiles and with the second, the firing of missiles was a very real possibility.
David Horowitz was one of the first to write on the subject in his 1965 book, The Free World Colossus.
Horowitz explains, just three years after the debacle that the reason why President Kennedy had to act was because the political balance of the globe was in jeopardy.
After examining the other possible reasons for action and concern he stated, “thus, it seems it was a political balance of power that was actually in danger of being upset, and this political balance was a question of appearances—prestige, presumably—the 1 David Horowitz, The Free World Colossus . political consequences of what would appear in the eyes of the world and domestic critics of the Kennedy Administration to be a Soviet act of defiance…”2 In other words, the United States couldn’t be shown as weak and vulnerable.
If they wanted to bomb the U.S., they were just as likely to do it from their own country—the fact that they placed missiles 90 miles away from the American shores really didn’t make a difference in the likelihood of them using them.
In contrast with Horowitz, Irving Bernstein focuses more on the possibility that the Soviet Union would have used the bombs against the United States.
He considers the peaceful end of the Crisis a “triumph” for the United States and for Kennedy.
Both Horowitz and Bernstein present their beliefs very quickly and precisely, whereas some other historian writers delve deeper into their actual thought processes.
In it, he lengthens the President’s thought process into looking at what his decision would mean for the long-term future.
Amidst two very cut and dry ideas of what the missiles meant in Cuba, this theory broadens the context of the times.
The book goes more into analyzing the actual action that the United States took against the Soviets and the Cubans, but the basis for all of the actions comes back to why any action was so necessary at all and why the missiles were in Cuba.
Throughout the book, Allison hints that the missile placement and the actions the world leaders took were all done for political gains in the eyes of the world.
In it, he takes a look at the photo gap that delayed the discovery by the United States of the missiles in Cuba.
Over time, the reasoning behind why Khrushchev put the missiles in Cuba went back and forth, literally.
It is clear to see that as the years go on, and more information becomes available to the public, historians become more critical and analytical of both the event and the leaders involved.
As evident with Barrett’s book, more and more theories have surfaced as to what really happened during that week.
