Users may download and/or print one copy of any article in LSE Research Online to facilitate their private study or for non-commercial research.
You may not engage in further distribution of the material or use it for any profit-making activities or any commercial gain.
This document is the author’s final accepted version of the journal article.
There may be differences between this version and the published version.
You are advised to consult the publisher’s version if you wish to cite from it.
A Study in Non-Linguistic Symbolic Interaction Alex Gillespie Abstract The article uses Goffman’s distinction between expressions ‘given’ and ‘given off’ to advance the study of how nuclear bombs and military maneuvers are used to create meaning.
The analysis reveals that actions do indeed sometimes speak louder than words.
Moreover, who is being spoken to is often a semi-visible thirdparty, such as world opinion.
The analysis identifies a novel process of ‘staging the other’, that is, when one side tries to create a situation which will force the other side to act in a way which will create a negative impression on world opinion.
In so far as the staging is not perceived by the audience and the target does indeed make themselves look bad, then staging is a particularly powerful form of impression management.
A Study in Non-Linguistic Symbolic Interaction On October 30th 1961, the USSR, led by Nikita Khrushchev, detonated the largest and most powerful nuclear bomb in history over an uninhabited region within the Arctic Circle.
But we are not going to explode it, because even if we did so at the most remote site, we might knock out all our windows.
We are therefore going to hold off for the time being and not set the bomb off.
But may God grant, as they used to say, that we are never called upon to explode these bombs over anybody’s territory.
The explosion was a communicative dramatization of power , which succeeded in creating an impression of awe and fear around the globe.
The present manuscript examines posturing with nuclear weapons as a form of communication.
Linell has convincingly argued that there is a ‘written language bias,’ that communication, even spoken communication, is studied from a written point of view.
People do things with words , but, people also communicate by doing things.
However, like the work on non-verbal communication, much of this literature remains at the inter-personal level.
One notable exception to ‘the language bias,’ beyond symbolic interactionist research, is the work by Schelling.
Schelling has observed that although nuclear weapons have not been used in violence since 1945 they have been very communicative in international relations.
Equally, in the context of a limited war fought by superpowers Schelling argued that there are lots of instances of arms control, not maintained by signatures, but, maintained by actions and self-interests.
For example, a good reason for not bombing the enemy’s civilians is to prevent them from bombing one’s own civilians.
The present article utilizes a symbolic interactionist approach to advance our understanding of non-linguistic communication at the inter-group level.
The analysis underscores the importance of non-linguistic communication and also introduces the concept of ‘staging the other,’ which occurs when one party tries to create a situation which will force the action of the other party in relation to world opinion.
Impression Management George Herbert Mead proposed that communication, or symbolic activity, begins with the response of a second organism.
If the actions of the first organism are of consequence for the second organism, the second organism learns to ‘read’ observed actions as indexing future actions.
The first involves verbal symbols or their substitutes which he uses admittedly and solely to convey the information that he and others are known to attach to these symbols.
The second involves a wide range of action that others can treat as symptomatic of the actor, the expectation being that the action was performed for reasons other than the information conveyed in this way.
A guest exclaiming “your cooking is wonderful” is ‘giving’ an expression.
But, knowing that words are cheap, the host is likely to pay more attention to the eagerness and gusto with which the guest eats.
The scenario is complicated by the fact that the guest is likely to be aware of the communicative significance of their eating behavior, and thus may ‘give off’ expressions of eagerness and gusto.
This definition includes both intentional and unintentional communication.
While it is somewhat unfashionable to consider intended meaning , I suggest that despite being risky, it does have analytic value.
Specifically it acknowledges the plurality of the social world and allows us to conceptualize misunderstandings.
An unintended impression is meaning created in the mind of the other which the source did not intend.
Unintended impressions relate to the actors’ “blindspot” and thus the “surplus” meaning or “excess” meaning that any expression creates in its audience.
The second concept, staging the other, is a novel contribution that expands the notion of impression management.
Thus the traditional view of impression management as occurring within a dyadic relationship is giving way to a triadic model, and the concept of ‘staging the other’ contributes to this development.
Staging the other entails using actions or utterances to create a constraining situation for the other that forces them to act in such a way as to create a negative impression on a third party.
Impression management concepts were developed to study inter-personal interactions, and the following analysis uses them to analyze an inter-group interaction.
These levels are not equivalent; in face-to-face interaction individuals can be conceptualized as individually responsible for the impressions they seek to create, but in an inter-group interaction, there are many layers of impression management.
They comprise departments with disparate interests and histories, and within the departments, there are individuals, again with differential histories and interests.
Nevertheless, as the following analysis aims to demonstrate, even though inter-national impression management has many layers of impression management, it is nonetheless impression management.
First, the channels of linguistic communication between the White House and the Kremlin were very slow.
During the Crisis messages were sent via ambassadors and could take a day or more.
The discussions are mainly between the members of ExComm, but they also include the President’s discussions with ExComm and other relevant people, such as Intelligence Officials, Ambassadors, past Presidents, members of Congress and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
First, Anatoly Dobrynin’s report to Khrushchev of his meeting with Robert Kennedy is used because it provides the best available account of this critical meeting.
Second, Khrushchev’s Memoirs are used in the analysis to provide some limited and speculative insight into Soviet thinking during the Crisis.
This material is included in an attempt to study the communication The analysis is a case study , and as such issues of sampling, frequency and representativeness are of limited importance.
The focus is on what actually occurred in this particular instance of nuclear brinkmanship.
The analytic procedure entailed using the concepts and assumptions outlined above as interpretative tools to make visible impression management dynamics within the Crisis.
The validity of the analysis, however, cannot be determined on the basis of methodological procedure , rather it must be determined by the results of the analysis in relation to alternative interpretations.
The main finding, that ExComm were trying to force the Soviets to make moves which would create a negative impression in world opinion, emerged out of the analysis.
The validity of the analysis rests, in part, on the fact that all the data is public and accordingly it is fully open to refutation or re-interpretation.
President Kennedy and his advisors were surprised to learn, in mid-October 1962, that Soviet nuclear missiles were being installed in Cuba.
ExComm knew that the USA had nuclear superiority, and, of course, missiles in Cuba did something to redress this imbalance.
However, it was seen to be very risky and the USSR had alternatives they were developing, such as inter-continental missiles and nuclear submarines.
After all Khrushchev demonstrated a sense of caution over Laos, Berlin, he’s been cautious It’s just as if we suddenly began to put a major number of MRBMs [Medium Range Ballistic Missiles] in Turkey.
Kennedy urges his advisors to ‘read’ the Soviet’s intentions, and future actions, from their military maneuver.
Kennedy, attempting to understand the Soviet point of view, imagines a reversal of positions , asking, under what conditions the USA would do something similar.
It turns out that the USA did do something similar; they put MRBMs in Turkey, Italy and the UK when they believed they were weak.
One thing Mr Khrushchev may have in mind is that he knows that we have substantial nuclear superiority, but he also knows that we don’t really live under fear of his nuclear weapons to the extent that he has to live under fear of ours Khrushchev may feel that it’s important for us to learn about living under medium-range missiles, and he’s doing that to sort of balance that political, psychological flank.
The maneuver, Rusk suggests, may be an attempt to make the fewer Soviet missiles make a bigger impression upon the American populace.
West Berlin was controlled by the Allies, and the Soviet administration was concerned that it was spreading capitalist influence.
If they could provoke us into taking the first overt action, then the world would be confused and they would have what they would consider to be justification for making a move.
Military representatives in ExComm viewed the Crisis as an opportunity for a military solution that would remove Fidel Castro from power.
According to this interpenetration, the missiles, rather than being defensive or even offensive, were actually meant to ‘invite’ an invasion.
The USSR, Wheeler argued, was not interested in a costly and logistically complex conflict in the Caribbean.
Rather, the maneuver was a projection of Soviet strength towards Latin America in an attempt to support movements towards socialism.
Thus the missiles were meant to be communicative, and they were not even addressing the USA, but rather third parties in Latin America.
Khrushchev’s Letters President Kennedy’s response was to issue a public condemnation, demand that the missiles be removed, and order a naval blockade of Cuba.
They were calculated to use utterance backed up with action to create an impression of resolve.
As the Crisis neared its peak, on the 26th of October, President Kennedy received a private letter from Chairman Khrushchev.
Having outlined their joint predicament, Khrushchev offered Kennedy a deal.
He offered to withdraw the missiles from Cuba in exchange for a guarantee that the USA would not interfere in the sovereignty of Cuba.
However, before ExComm had a chance to fully consider the offer, a second letter arrived.
On the morning of 27th October, known as ‘Black Saturday’ , a second letter from Khrushchev was released to the media containing a more hardline message.
In addition to requesting a guarantee not to interfere with Cuba, Khrushchev also requested that the USA remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey.
I understand your concern for the security of the United States You want to relieve your country from danger and this is understandable.
But how can we, the Soviet Union and our government, assess your actions which, in effect, mean that you have surrounded the Soviet Union with military bases Your rockets are stationed in Britain and in Italy and pointed at us.
You say that it worries you because it lies at a distance of 90 miles across the sea from the shores of the United States.
Both of Khrushchev’s letters were, in Goffman’s sense, expressions given.
However, while the first was sent privately the second was released to the mass media.
The second letter begins with Khrushchev accepting Kennedy’s concern with the security of the USA, and on the same principle, argues that Cuba and indeed any country must be allowed to have the same concern.
While it does involve appeals to collectively held norms it does not simply label the USA as being unfair, rather, it stages Kennedy.
It creates a situation within which Kennedy’s own actions will determine whether, in the eyes of the world, the USA has double standards.
Escalation The explicit meaning of each of Khrushchev’s letters is quite clear.
However, because the two letters offer different deals, the unintended impression made is quite different from the explicit meaning.
ExComm get more meaning out of the letters than is contained in either letter; what is communicating is the discrepancy between the letters.
Schelling argues that freedom is a weakness in bargaining because it makes concession possible.
In contrast, demonstrable lack of freedom is strength in bargaining, because it forces the other to make the concession.
The question here for ExComm is whether Khrushchev still has any freedom to maneuver.
While ExComm were discussing the two letters, they received news that a U-2 surveillance plane had been shot down over Cuba resulting in the death of the pilot.
During the course of the discussion it is confirmed that the shooting was done by a Russian SAM site.
This fact leads to the suggestion that the shooting was “not any accident” , but a deliberate communication from the Kremlin designed to add emphasis to Khrushchev’s second hardline letter.
There is no evidence that the Soviet SAM site was ordered to shoot down the U-2 spy plane.
Expressions Given Off The State Department had been asked to look into the implications of removing the Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
The missiles had serious upkeep costs and added little strategic advantage given the advent of Polaris missiles which could be launched from submarines.
The problem is that appearing weak might not only undermine the reputation of the USA, but it might embolden Khrushchev.
Accordingly, ExComm consider courses of action that would communicate a strength, resolve and restraint.
One popular option is to destroy the SAM site which was accused of shooting down the U-2 plane.
You just ask yourself what made the greatest impression on you today, whether it was his letter last night, or whether it was his letter this morning, or whether it was that U-2 boy going down.
The U-2 boy Vice President Johnson: That’s exactly right; that’s what did it.
That’s when everybody started to change, and that is what’s going to make an impression upon him Shooting, Johnson argues, speaks louder than words.
In these decisions, the communicative function of actions rises above their practical significance.
That the response is swift is as important as the nature of the response itself because the act of responding is as communicative as the nature of the response.
According to Goffman people engage in impression management aims to control the conduct of others.
ExComm are trying to create an impression of strength, restraint and resolve so as to encourage the USSR to back down and maintain an international reputation of being reasonable.
Such is the communicative logic of brinkmanship that if they were to signal that they would not step up to the brink, then the Soviets would gain the upper hand, confidently pushing their own interests until the USA backed down.
The impression of strength and resolve is meant to encourage the Soviet Union to back down.
Khrushchev’s second letter publicly questioned the right of the USA to demand a level of security that it would not allow to others.
Khrushchev was staging the USA, setting up Kennedy to create a negative impression on world opinion.
If the President accepts the deal offered in the second letter, then the USA would have to publicly accept the idea that Turkey and Cuba are equivalent, and thus the disarmament of Cuba would become tied to the disarmament of Turkey.
ExComm feared that such a trade would appear weak, and open the door for similar arguments to be made about the United States nuclear missiles in Italy and Britain.
But rejecting the deal would make it look like the USA was demanding a level of security that it was not prepared to offer other nations.
Moreover, if the USA took the nuclear missiles out of Cuba by force, as Kennedy’s military advisors recommended, then the USSR would have justification for moving into Berlin and/or Turkey.
It is a moment when distal third parties comprising the abstract notion of ‘world opinion’ manifest in the White House discussions and arguably change the course of history.
ExComm want world opinion on their side; but to get it they are being forced to act in accordance with Khrushchev’s wishes.
In retaliation President Kennedy suggests a counter-staging, to make the USSR appear unreasonable.
Kennedy suggests making the seemingly reasonable request that the USSR stops work on the missile bases before any negotiation of a resolution.
However, because the missiles in Cuba are useless until they are armed, Kennedy believes that Khrushchev will not stop working on the bases.
Thus Kennedy’s suggestion is to put the USSR in a situation where they themselves create a negative impression on world opinion.
A second suggestion for dealing with Khrushchev’s maneuver comes from McNamara, Secretary for Defense.
And one way to avoid it is to defuse the Turkish missiles before we attack Cuba.
McNamara is proposing to stage a situation within which the USSR has no reasonable grounds for invading Turkey.
This plan pins Khrushchev publicly to his own logic of the equivalence between Cuba and Turkey.
The third suggestion for responding to Khrushchev’s staging comes from Thompson.
Thompson’s idea hinges upon the realization that Khrushchev’s first letter was private while his second one was public.
Then you’ve got the rest of the world’s focus back on Cuban and Latin American and the fact that we’re prepared not to invade.
And this makes it, I think, much tougher for him Releasing the first, private, letter to the media would shift world attention to the first letter, such that in the public sphere the second hardline letter would be eclipsed by the first letter.
It would stage a situation where the USSR had to refuse agreement to the proposal of the first letter, and insist upon a hardline stance which would undermine the reasonableness of the Soviet position.
Khrushchev’s public second letter had created a stage for Kennedy to appear hypocritical; Kennedy and his advisors plot how to create a stage for Khrushchev to appear unreasonable.
Such subtle communicative moves make denigrating the other seem very crude.
But, if either side can make the other denigrate themselves through forcing an action which creates a negative impression, then a very subtle act of communication has been achieved.
Robert Kennedy, the President’s brother and Attorney General, met with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet Ambassador in Washington.
The deal agreed was that President Kennedy would guarantee the sovereignty of Cuba in exchange for the USSR withdrawing its missiles.
President Kennedy made a public acceptance of the deal offered in the first letter, and Chairman Khrushchev gave orders to remove the missiles from Cuba.
This message was only known to a small group of the President’s advisors.
The message was that the USA would remove its missiles from Turkey, but, only on condition that this second aspect of the deal could never be written down or made public.
Thus, in effect, Robert Kennedy, on behalf of the President, offered to agree to Khrushchev’s second hardline letter.
Shortly after the Crisis, the USA did remove its nuclear missiles from Turkey.
The secrecy of this deal was because of President Kennedy, as an individual, seeking to avoid negative impressions in the minds of his advisors or electorate.
On the morning of the 28th, before receiving Dobrynin’s report, Khrushchev was confronted with two bits of news.
First, that the U-2 spy plane had been shot down, which Khrushchev assumed to be the work of Cuban forces.
In actuality Castro’s letter requested a nuclear strike if there was an invasion of Cuba.
No doubt, Castro in his letter and those who shot down the U-2 plane were trying to embolden Khrushchev.
That Khrushchev, on the basis of Dobrynin’s report, was able to get the nuclear missiles out of Turkey was due to the fortunate timing of events.
Discussion The present analysis has pushed the boundary on what is usually considered communication.
The field of political communication, in contrast, has been at the forefront of recognizing the communicative significance of action.
As Goffman observed, words are easily manipulated, but perhaps more importantly words are cheap.
Cheap talk is good for exchanging private information if the participants have reason to trust one another.
For example, Khrushchev’s deployment of missiles in Cuba was of limited practical benefit, and is best understood when one considers the communicative significance of the deployment for socialist groups in Latin America.
Equally, ExComm’s insistence that the nuclear missiles in Turkey could not be traded, despite the fact that they were obsolete and expensive to upkeep, is best understood by considering ExComm’s desire to create the impression of being resolute and strong.
The analysis goes beyond existing literature by distinguishing different impression management processes operating at various stages in the Crisis.
The other may ‘read’ certain actions or gestures as communicative unbeknownst to the actor.
The communicative significance for ExComm of receiving discrepant letters from Khrushchev was quite distinct from the explicit meanings given by Khrushchev in either letter.
Equally, the effect of Castro’s request to eliminate the enemy on Khrushchev was the opposite of emboldening him; it made him back down.
Goffman described the move to ‘expressions given off’ as part of an arms race.
Staging, like basic self-presentation, is an attempt to influence the conduct of others.
However, the first step in staging the other is not primarily communicative, rather it is to create a situation upon which the other will act in such a way as to create the impression desired by the stager in the minds of a third party.
For example, Kennedy’s request that Khrushchev stop assembling the nuclear missiles in Cuba, was a clear act of staging because he assumed that Khrushchev would not stop the assembly and thus it was an attempt to make Khrushchev make himself appear unreasonable.
Staging is more complex than denigration or stigmatization (Garfinkel 1956, Goffman 1963) where the other is directly named and shamed.
Staging the other entails creating a situation in which the other shame themselves in the eyes of a third party.
Staging is powerful because audiences tend to underestimate situational determinants of behavior , and thus the staging is likely to be invisible, which in turn, makes the impression created all the more potent.
Staging the other disrupts common sense notions of communication because it entails a deliberate effort to make the other make an unintentional impression in the mind of a third party.
Conceptualizing such non-linguistic communication dynamics necessitates starting with Mead’s key insight, namely, that the meaning of a gesture begins with the response of the other.
Pp.–78 in Political Psychology and Foreign Policy, edited by Eric Singer and Valerie Hudson.
Pp.4–74 in Mutualities in Dialogue, edited by Ivana Marková, Carl F Graumann and Klaus Foppa.
Nisbett, Richard E, Craig Caputo, Patricia Legant and Jeanne Marecek.73.
