The United States government says it has evidence that a much smaller adversary may have acquired nuclear weapons.
A debate ensues in the press and the Congress -and even among the allies -about the appropriate course to take.Several officials recommend that the president launch a pre-emptive strike, as a hedge against waiting until the West becomes vulnerable to nuclear blackmail, and install a government more sympathetic to American positions and interests.
Others propose solutions short of an attack and invasion led by the United States, focusing narrowly on removing the threatening weapons.
But we have been here before, exactly 40 years ago, in October 1962, during the Cuban missile crisis.
Historical events are, to a degree, unique, and so historical analogies, like biblical references, often can be used inappropriately.
Yet prior experience remains our best guide in anticipating the future.
Evidence we recently unearthed about the Cuban mind-set in the missile crisis bears an eerie resemblance to what may be the evolving Iraqi psychology now.During the 1962 crisis, American and Soviet officials, despite their adversarial relationship, shared a common view about Cuba.
Both believed the Cuban leaders were irrational, even suicidally irrational, toward the end of the crisis.
In the eyes of Washington and Moscow, Cuba seemed to be thwarting a peaceful resolution of a nuclear confrontation merely to protest small insults to its sovereignty.Similarly, the Iraqis appear to be hellbent on a military confrontation with the United States in order to acquire weapons of mass destruction.
So while conditions, leaders, and geography may change, human psychology may not.
President John F Kennedy guessed shortly afterward that the chances were as high as one in two.
And the superpowers acquired a new appreciation of the danger of nuclear weapons, which led to improved communications between them and to arms-control accords.
Frightened by their close encounter with nuclear disaster and aware of their good fortune in pulling back from the brink, the superpowers began to take steps to try to prevent a recurrence.But the superpowers' experience of the missile crisis bore little resemblance to that of the Cubans.
Guevara was far from alone in his characterization of the crisis, one that is at such odds with the received wisdom in the United States and much of the rest of the world.
One might surmise that Guevara's ""sadness"" derived from his disappointment that the United States had not been destroyed in the course of the confrontation.
An Argentine revolutionary and a central figure in the Cuban leadership at the time, Guevara would be killed in 1967 in Bolivia, on a mission to spark revolution throughout Latin America against United States dominance of the hemisphere.
But the real source of sadness, as we recount in our new book on Cuba and the crisis, was that Cuban leaders felt the superpower agreement left them even more vulnerable than before.The small country had made itself a strategic target by accepting the Soviet missiles.
The Cubans then saw the Soviets acquiesce to virtually every American demand for withdrawing weapons without seriously acknowledging Cuba's perception of the threat it faced.
Cuban leaders put no stock in the United States pledge not to invade the island, a promise they believed was thoroughly hollow.
They fully expected that they would once again need to defend themselves against the United States, especially because American aggression would be encouraged by the Soviet Union's seeming lack of will to defend its Caribbean partner.Cuba informed the United Nations that it would not permit on-site inspections of the missiles' removal, because that would violate Cuban sovereignty.
Castro stipulated that missile inspections could occur only on a reciprocal basis, as might be expected for equally sovereign countries, with the United States permitting a United Nations team to verify the closure of American facilities from which Cuban exiles were still launching terrorist attacks.
Others attribute it to the Cuban leaders' relative youth and inexperience, which made them irresponsible, trigger-happy, and dangerous.
Many have concluded that we should be grateful that the Americans and Soviets found a way to work around the Cubans, by ignoring their demands and excluding them from the negotiations.In contrast, we have concluded that the Cubans were not crazed zealots.
Castro went on to say that the attack would be either a limited air strike, aimed at the missile sites, or an all-out attempt to destroy the Cuban revolution, via extensive air strikes, followed by a land-and-sea invasion and occupation of the island.
But Castro reasoned that the United States knew there were tactical nuclear missiles on the island that were likely to be fired at the invaders, and so it would launch an invasion only if it also was prepared to wage nuclear war.We know now that Kennedy was not aware that there were tactical nuclear warheads on the island, and he was not even sure the ballistic-missile warheads had arrived.
American policy makers were basing their decisions on very limited information.
Like the Soviets, the Americans did not recognize Cuba as a full-fledged player in the crisis, because it was not a superpower.
Worse, Cuba's bravado seemed to be the stance of madmen.To the Cubans, the superpowers appeared at best arrogant and possibly delusional.
Castro could not fathom why the Soviets refused to stand firm on at least one Cuban demand, that the United States agree to negotiate directly with Cuba.
He could not imagine that Kennedy would rationally launch an invasion -and, in effect, a nuclear war -if he could avoid that outcome simply by talking to his Caribbean neighbor.
Castro expected an American attack not only would kill many Cubans, but also would destroy Cuba as an independent, sovereign nation.
Two stand out.First, recognize that there will be unintended consequences of our actions.
If the United States had attacked Cuba in 1962, it would not have expected, nor would it have sought, a nuclear war.
But it probably would have started one anyway, according to what is now known.
Human beings are fallible, and when they endeavor to manage military operations involving weapons of mass destruction, a mistake can result in utter catastrophe, with little or no chance of ""learning"" from the mistake.Second, talk directly to Iraq, in a way that recognizes Saddam Hussein's need to salvage some political honor.
It was not Kennedy's vaunted toughness and inflexibility that enabled us to survive the 1962 missile crisis.
He sought options that would allow Khrushchev to claim that he had not capitulated totally.
Our tendency when dealing with a non-superpower state is to disparage its needs and attempt to intimidate it.
That is how Kennedy dealt with Cuba in 1962, and that is how the United States is dealing with Iraq today.
It was less dangerous to act like that in 1962, because Cuba did not control the missiles.
Today, Iraq probably does have access to weapons of mass destruction.So one lesson we can learn by looking at Cuba's experience during the 1962 missile crisis is that our approach to weaker powers is fraught with danger and is not likely to achieve the results we seek.
The United States tends to expect a weaker power will cower when the superpower roars, but in fact American efforts to intimidate are more likely to produce the opposite effect.
Intimidation emboldens the small power, and however irrational the resulting behavior may seem to us, a weaker power may resort to unimaginable acts as a last line of defense.
But we believe a key similarity between them has received too little attention from those advocating pre-emptive action against Baghdad.
The inability of the United States to empathize with those who feel the threat of annihilation -people who may be willing to fight to the last man, woman, and child and even to use unthinkable weapons -increases the likelihood that such weapons will be used, with all the horror and uncertainty that would follow.We now know that the hawks advising Kennedy in October 1962 were dead wrong to recommend attacking Cuba with what they believed would be an ""acceptable"" cost and risk.
Based on our reading of Cuba's mind-set 40 years ago, we believe it is worth considering that the hawks might also be wrong about Saddam Hussein and Iraq today.
It just may be that the events of October 1962 constitute, if not a crisis for all seasons, at least a cautionary tale with disturbing relevance to the season that is upon us.
This article was first published in the Chronicle of Higher Education and is reprinted with permission of the authors.
