No parts of the publication may be reproduced without written permission from the publisher.
She has authored several basal social studies textbooks for students at all levels.
She has also written texts for students with special needs that are used in schools, adult literacy, and citizenship classes.
In addition to her writing, she consults with state departments of education on the development of standards-based social studies assessments.
She is active in California Council for the Social Studies and serves on the Board of Directors of the National Council for the Social Studies.
In both her professional and volunteer activities, she is guided by two passions.
The first is engaging students in the social studies curriculum by creating compelling, accessible textbooks.
The second is to ensure that all students have opportunities to develop the knowledge, skills, and habits of the heart that they will need to be effective citizens in a complex world.
Louis, 1953 Amelia Earhart, on her flight and women, 1932 Carrie Chapman Catt, on women in politics, 1920 Jeanette Rankin, on war Margaret Sanger, on poverty and women's rights Alice Paul, on equality Louis Armstrong, on jazz Duke Ellington, on his music Langston Hughes, ""The Negro Speaks of Rivers,"" 1920 F Scott Fitzgerald, Tender Is the Night, 1933 Sinclair Lewis, Main Street, 1920 Zelda Fitzgerald, ""Eulogy on the Flapper,"" 1922 Edna St.
The earliest era was a time of founding and settlement, of testing and conflict, when Americans established high ideals and fought over their meaning.
This era also saw that nation divide over the issue of slavery— a conflict that was settled only by a civil war.
Throughout this period, Americans struggled with the ideals first set forth in the Declaration of Independence.
Introduction More than 200,000 people gathered at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C., on a hot August day in 1963.
There they heard Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. give one of the most powerful speeches in United States history.
His “I have a dream"" speech was a watershed event of the civil rights movement.
King underscored the historical connection between the civil rights movement and President Abraham Lincoln’s efforts to end slavery.
In 1863, at the height of the Civil War, Lincoln had signed the Emancipation Proclamation, freeing slaves in Confederate states.
The words of the Gettysburg Address are carved on a wall of the Lincoln Memorial.
Now is the time to rise from the dark and desolate valley of segregation to the sunlit path of racial justice. — Martin Luther King Jr., “I have a dream"" speech, 1963 By beginning his speech with a reference to the past.
If we can dream of a better tomorrow, it lies in our power to shape the history to come.
FOUR SCORE AND SEVEN YEARS AGO OUR FATHERS BROUGHT FORTH ON THIS CONTINENT A NEW NATION CONCEIVED IN LIBERTY AND DEDICATED TO THE PROPOSITION THAT ALL MEN ARE CREATED Abraham Lincoln, the 16th president of the United States, remains one of the most honored leaders in American history.
Lincoln is best remembered for holding the nation together through the Civil War and helping end slavery.
The Past and the Stories We Tell About It The term history can mean several related things.
In this way, just about anyone can be a historian, or someone who reconstructs and retells stories of the past.
History is also an academic, or scholarly, discipline — like economics, physics, or mathematics— and is taught and studied in schools.
Its main focus, however, is on the writing, or reconstruction, of history and on how historians do their work.
History Begins with a Question or Problem Historians begin their work with a question they hope to answer or a problem they wish to solve.
This material becomes the evidence the historian uses to reconstruct the past.
Evidence is information that can be used to prove a statement or support a conclusion.
Or it might be an artifact— a human-made object— such as a tool, a weapon, or part of a building.
Evidence can also be found in photographs, recorded music, and old movies.
And, of course, it can be found in books, magazines, and newspapers, as well as in interviews with experts or historical figures.
There are two basic types of sources on which historians typically rely when writing history.
A primary source is a document or other record of past events created by people who were present during those events or during that period.
An eyewitness account, such as a Civil War soldier’s diary, is an example of a primary source.
Today it is read as a historical novel and a primary source of that time.
Photographs are visual primary sources that show what life was like in the past.
Historians Select and Weigh Evidence AH historical evidence, whether primary or secondary, must be critically evaluated.
Historians carefully examine each source for the creator’s point of view, perspective, or outlook on events.
This outlook may be shaped by many factors, such as the person’s age, gender, religion, occupation, or political views.
For example, a historian would expect that a southern plantation owner in the 1850s would have had a point of view different from that of a northern factory worker.
Sometimes a source contains information or conclusions that reflect a distinct point of view.
This is not necessarily a bad thing, but historians are careful to look for signs of bias when analyzing evidence.
In general, bias is any factor that might distort or color a person’s observations.
Bias takes many forms, ranging from a simple friendship or preference for someone to an unfair dislike of a person or group.
Historians Reconstruct and Interpret the Past Once their evidence is selected and evaluated, historians begin to reconstruct what happened.
They often begin by establishing a chronology, or sequence of events in time.
Once historians are certain of the correct order of events, they are better able to make connections among those events.
They can also begin to look for long-range changes and trends that may have developed over many years or even decades.
For example, in considering whether the Civil War was inevitable, a historian would examine the events leading up to the war.
He or she would also look for points at which war might have been averted.
Magazine covers and television shows can reveal a lot about the cultural values of the years in which they were created.
Everyday artifacts, like John Lennon's eyeglasses, help connect us to the lives of historic figures.
General histories like this book help readers develop a broad view of the past When writing history, historians do not focus only on facts or chronologies.
If they did, history books would be little more than a chronicle, or a simple listing, of what happened year by year.
The more challenging part of a historian's task is to interpret the past— to weave together the evidence and produce a story that helps readers understand and draw meaning from history.
The process of finding the meaning or significance of historical events is called historical interpretation.
By interpreting history, historians add their analysis of events to the facts they have judged to be true.
They consider not only what happened, but also how and why it happened and what effect it had on the people involved.
At the same time, historians try to ensure that their interpretations are faithful to the facts of history and are supported by the evidence.
History Is Never Finished History is not science, and it cannot be rigorously tested and proved.
Because historians have their own distinct backgrounds and points of view, their historical interpretations will often differ.
They publish their work with the understanding that it will be reviewed, and often criticized, by other historians.
In fact, some people describe history as an ongoing argument about the past.
Differences of opinion about how to interpret the past make the academic study of history interesting and vital.
This public debate also makes it possible for mistakes made by one historian to be corrected by later historians.
As historian Frederick Jackson Turner once wrote, “Each age tries to form its own conception of the past.
In other words, our understanding of the past is always being shaped by what we, in the present day, bring to it.
Historical interpreters bring history to life at living museums, such as Colonial Williamsburg.
Specialized histories, such as this book, provide in-depth information about a specific subject.
When Pulitzer Prize-winning historian David McCullough set out to write a biography of John Adams, he gathered evidence from a variety of primary and secondary sources.
He also examined artifacts and visited places frequented by Adams during his lifetime.
The result was a compelling biography of one of our nation's least-well-known founders.
In writing his biography of Adams, McCullough built on the works of earlier historians.
Historic maps show what Boston was like when Adams practiced law there.
Artifacts like Adams's writing desk help historians re-create scenes from the past.
In his later years, Adams used this desk to keep in touch with friends likeThomas Jefferson.
Primary sources, including the thousands of letters exchanged between Adams and his wife, Abigail, reveal intimate details of their life together.
Historic sites associated with Adams, such as his birthplace and childhood home in Quincy, Massachusetts, show how he and his family lived.
The parade also celebrates Italian culture and the many contributions of Italian Americans to the United States.
Historical Interpretations of Christopher Columbus As historians write history, they analyze and interpret sources.
Because they bring different approaches to their work, they often interpret the past in different ways.
Consider the following interpretations of one of the best-known figures in our history— Christopher Columbus.
Few historians would disagree that his four voyages to the Americas set in motion events that would change the world.
But historians do differ in how they view Columbus and his legacy, or impact on future generations.
Columbus as Mythic Hero Nineteenth-century author Washington Irving spent years in Spain researching the life of Columbus.
Irving was one of the first American writers to focus on subjects and themes of American life.
His four-volume biography of Columbus portrayed the explorer as an American icon, painting him in heroic terms.
His conduct was characterized by the grandeur of his views and the magnanimity of his spirit.
Columbus as Master Mariner Writing more than a century after Irving, historian Samuel Eliot Morison portrayed Columbus as a real person with both strengths and flaws.
Morison, a naval historian, focused on Columbus’s skills as a mariner, or sailor and navigator.
He had his faults and his defects, but they were largely the defects of the qualities that made him great— his indomitable will, his superb faith in God and in his own mission as the Christ-bearer to lands beyond the seas, his stubborn persistence despite neglect, poverty and discouragement.
But there was no flaw, no dark side to the most outstanding ... of all his qualities— his seamanship.
As a master mariner and navigator, Columbus was supreme in his generation.
Columbus as Overrated Hero Writer and environmentalist Kirkpatrick Sale is far more critical of Columbus.
Sale portrays Columbus as a ruthless fortune hunter who set in motion the destruction of native peoples and the American landscape that continues to this day.
For all his navigational skill, about which the salty types make such a fuss, and all his fortuitous headings , about which they are largely silent.
Almost every time Colon went wrong it was because he had refused to bend to the inevitabilities of tide and wind and reef or, more arrogantly still, had not bothered to learn about them; the very same reckless courage that led him across the ocean in the first place, and saw him through storm and tumult to return, lay behind his numerous misfortunes. — Kirkpatrick Sale, The Conquest of Paradise \ 1990 In recent years, Columbus Day parades have sparked protests, such as this one in Denver, Colorado.
The protestors' sign links Columbus with severe mistreatment of native peoples.
Different Interpretations Serving Different Purposes You may be wondering how three writers could produce such different interpretations of the same subject.
The answer lies, in part, in each one’s purpose in writing about Columbus and his legacy.
Irving was an author and essayist looking for a heroic story that would appeal to American readers in the 1800s.
His colorful biography of Columbus was filled with dramatic episodes, with many based more on myth than on reliable sources.
A sailor himself, Morison was impressed by Columbus’s seafaring skills.
He acknowledged that Columbus was not a saint but portrayed him as a master seaman who, through persistence, daring, and courage, changed the course of history.
He wanted to show how Columbus’s legacy looked from the point of view of its victims— Native Americans and Africans brought as slaves to the Americas.
From Sale’s perspective, Columbus, and those who followed him across the Atlantic, set in motion a dark history of exploitation and environmental destruction that has been ignored for far too long.
The facts of Columbus’s life and legacy have not changed in all this time.
Studying history can develop the critical-thinking skills that will help you make good decisions when you vote.
Not only was Ford making history by putting Americans into cars they could afford, but he also discovered that learning about the past was fun.
Ultimately, he used much of his fortune to create a collection of historic buildings and everyday objects from his era.
For the more than 1 million people who visit the Henry Ford Museum and Greenfield Village in Dearborn, Michigan, each year, history is anything but bunk.
As visitors wander through Greenfield Village, they can imagine what life was like more than a century ago.
Re-creations of Thomas Edison’s workshop and the Wright brothers' bicycle shop bring visitors face to face with the excitement and frustration of inventing a light bulb or an airplane.
By touring the automobile collection, visitors learn how this machine has changed our world.
Just as Ford had hoped, seeing the past his way is highly entertaining.
History Helps Us Develop Empathy for Others Studying history can help us develop empathy for others.
Empathy is the ability to imagine oneself in another's place and to understand that person’s feelings, desires, ideas, and actions.
Empathy also enables one to “walk in other people’s shoes”— to feel “with” them or “as one” with them.
History makes us aware of problems, sorrows Joys, and hardships faced by people in other times and places.
As that awareness grows, we have a better chance of understanding our own experiences— both good and bad.
We also become more skilled at empathizing with people whose lives are different from our own.
As we mature, empathy becomes a useful guide in our relations with other people.
The process of investigating what happened long ago involves analyzing evidence and making judgments about what sources are credible.
It also requires evaluating different points of view about what is important and why.
These are all essential critical-thinking skills, not just in the history classroom but also in life.
You will need to exercise these skills whenever you make an important decision about your own future.
These skills will also help you make more informed decisions about public issues as a citizen and voter.
History is full of examples of failed peoples and nations, and the study of history can reveal what they did —or did not do— that contributed to their doom.
The more we learn today about the errors of the past, the better chance we have of avoiding them in the future.
For decades, screenwriters and moviemakers have mined history for good stories and brought them to life on screen.
Even movies that do not seem particularly historical are often based in part on historical events or settings.
Knowing about the history behind these stories can increase your enjoyment of such films.
At a deeper level, figuring out the what and why of historical events is a lot like solving a puzzle or a mystery.
And the more of the mystery of history you solve, the more alive the past will become for you.
As Henry Ford discovered when he set out to create a history museum, learning about the past can be fun.
It can also help you develop empathy by introducing you to a wide range of human experiences.
In this history classroom, students are learning what it was like to be an immigrant trying to enter the United States through Ellis Island around 1900.
They try to make their accounts faithful to historical facts and events, as they understand them, while also interpreting those events.
Evidence Historians gather facts and information about people and events in history.
A selection of this information becomes the evidence on which they base their historical accounts.
Primary sources Historians use primary sources, including written documents, photographs, films, and other records created by people who took part in historical events.
Secondary sources Historians use secondary sources, such as written documents and other information created by people who were not involved in the historical events in question.
Point of view Historians consider the points of view and the biases of the people who created their sources.
Historical interpretation While recounting the facts of history, historians also interpret the evidence.
Historians often differ in their interpretations of history, which can lead to lively debates over historical issues.
Why study history The study of history can help people develop greater empathy for others, become better thinkers, and avoid repeating the mistakes of the past.
Introduction On a June day in 1776, Thomas Jefferson set to work in a rented room in Philadelphia.
The Second Continental Congress had appointed a five-man committee to draft this declaration of independence.
At 33, Jefferson was one of the committee’s youngest and least experienced members, but his training in law and political philosophy had prepared him for the task.
He picked up his pen and began to write words that would change the world.
Had he been working at home, Jefferson might have turned to his large library for inspiration.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.— That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed. —Thomas Jefferson, Declaration of Independence, 1776 In these two sentences, Jefferson set forth a vision of a new nation based on ideals.
An ideal is a principle or standard of perfection that we are always trying to achieve.
In the years leading up to the Declaration, the ideals that Jefferson mentioned had been written about and discussed by many colonists.
Since that time, Americans have sometimes fought for and sometimes ignored these ideals.
Yet, throughout the years, Jefferson’s words have continued to provide a vision of what it means to be an American.
In this chapter, you will read about our nation’s founding ideals, how they were defined in 1776, and how they are still being debated today.
In many ways Thomas Jefferson, shown here with his fellow committee members Benjamin Franklin and John Adams, was an odd choice to write the Declaration of Independence.
Not only was Jefferson young and inexperienced, he was also a slaveholder.
For all his fine words about liberty and equality, Jefferson proved unwilling to apply his ""self-evident"" truths to the men and women he held in bondage.
This photograph shows a woman, some 70 years later, still marching for the right to vote.
For much of our history, African Americans were treated as less than equal to whites.
No one knew that better than these Memphis sanitation workers when they went on strike in 1968.
Their signs reminded the nation that each person in our society should be treated with equal respect.
When Jefferson wrote these words, this “truth'’ was anything but self-evident, or obvious.
Throughout history, almost all societies had been divided into unequal groups, castes, or social classes.
Depending on the place and time, the divisions were described in different terms — patricians and plebeians, lords and serfs, nobles and commoners, masters and slaves.
But wherever one looked, some people had far more wealth and power than others.
Equality, or the ideal situation in which all people are treated the same way and valued equally, was the exception, not the rule.
Defining Equality in 1776 For many Americans of Jefferson’s time, the ideal of equality was based on the Christian belief that all people are equal in God’s eyes.
In 1776, there was no equality for the half million slaves who labored in the colonies.
Nor was there equality for women, who were viewed as inferior to men in terms of their ability to participate in society.
Debating Equality Today Over time, Americans have made great progress in expanding equality.
In 1920, a constitutional amendment guaranteed all American women the right to vote.
Many laws today ensure equal treatment of all citizens, regardless of age, gender, physical ability, national background, and race.
Yet some people— both past and present— have argued that achieving equal rights does not necessarily mean achieving equality.
Americans will not achieve equality, they argue, until we address differences in wealth, education, and power.
This “equality of condition” extends to all aspects of life, including living standards, job opportunities, and medical care.
These and other questions about equality are likely to be hotly debated for years to come.
The idea that people have certain rights would have seemed self-evident to most Americans in Jefferson’s day.
Rights are powers or privileges granted to people either by an agreement among themselves or by law.
These rights, such as the right to a trial by jury or to be taxed only with their consent, had slowly been established over hundreds of years.
The colonists believed, with some justice, that having these rights set them apart from other peoples in the world.
He had in mind rights so basic and so essential to being human that no government should take them away.
Such rights were not, in his view, limited to the privileges won by the English people.
This universal definition of rights was strongly influenced by the English philosopher John Locke.
Writing a century earlier, Locke had argued that all people earned certain natural rights simply by being born.
Locke identified these natural rights as the rights to life, liberty, and property.
Locke further argued that the main purpose of governments was to preserve these rights.
When a government failed in this duty, citizens had the right to overthrow it.
Debating Rights Today The debate over what rights our government should preserve began more than two centuries ago, with the writing of the United States Constitution and the Bill of Rights, and continues to this day.
The Constitution specifies many basic rights, including the right to vote, to speak freely, to choose one’s faith, and to receive fair treatment and equal justice under the law.
However, some people argue that the government should also protect certain economic and social rights, such as the right to health care or to a clean environment.
This celebration of the Bill of Rights was painted by Polish American artist Arthur Szyk in 1949.
It includes a number of Revolutionary War-era symbols, such as flags, Minutemen, and America's national bird, the bald eagle.
Liberty “That among these are Life ; Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness ” By the time Jefferson was writing the Declaration, the colonists had been at war with Britain for more than a year— a war waged in the name of liberty, or freedom.
Defining Liberty in 1776 Liberty meant different things to different colonists.
For many, liberty meant political freedom, or the right to take part in public affairs.
It also meant civil liberty, or protection from the power of government to interfere in one’s life.
On the thorny issue of slavery in a land of liberty, there was no consensus.
Every year, millions visit the Liberty Bell in Philadelphia's Independence National Historic Park.
Badly cracked and battered, the bell is now silent But it remains a beloved symbol of freedom.
Debating Liberty Today If asked to define liberty today, most Americans would probably say it is the freedom to make choices about who we are, what we believe, and how we live.
For people to have complete freedom, there must be no restrictions on how they think, speak, or act.
They must be aware of what their choices are and have the power to decide among those choices.
We are not, for example, free to ignore laws or to recklessly endanger others.
For example, most of us support freedom of speech, especially when it applies to speech we agree with.
They showed how a poor boy might achieve the American dream of success through hard work, courage, and concern for others.
The kings and potentates, the powers and principalities of this world have thought of including “happiness” among the rights of a people . . . except for a select and fortunate few.
Something curious happened to John Locke’s definition of natural rights in Jefferson’s hands.
The destiny that Jefferson imagined was one of endless opportunity, or the chance for people to pursue their hopes and dreams.
Defining Opportunity in 1776 The idea that America was a land of opportunity was as old as the colonies themselves.
Though Jamestown did not live up to that promise, opportunity was the great lure that drew colonists across the Atlantic to pursue new lives in a new land.
Debating Opportunity Today More than two centuries after the Declaration of Independence was penned, the ideal of opportunity still draws newcomers to our shores.
For others, opportunity means the chance to reunite families, get an education, or live in peace.
For all Americans, the ideal of opportunity raises important questions.
Defining and Debating America's Founding Ideals 19 The right to vote is so basic to a democracy that most Americans today think little about it.
For much of our history, however, that right was denied to women and most African Americans.
The stars on the official American flag symbolize the 50 states that make up our country.
The faces on this painting symbolize the many peoples who have come together to create a democratic society in the United States.
In these few words, Jefferson described the basis of a democracy— a system of government founded on the simple principle that the power to rule comes from the consent of the governed.
In a democracy, the people have the power to choose their leaders and shape the laws that govern them.
Defining Democracy in 1776 The colonists were familiar with the workings of democracy.
In town meetings or colonial assemblies, colonists had learned to work together to solve common problems.
In colonial times, only white, adult, property-owning men were allowed to vote or hold office.
This narrow definition of voters did not sit well with many Americans, even then.
Debating Democracy Today The debate over who should speak for the governed was long and heated.
It took women more than a century of tenacious struggle to gain voting rights.
Today, the right to vote is universal for all American citizens over the age of 18.
Having gained the right to vote, however, many people today do not use it.
In Pursuit of America's Ideals “Ideals are like stars,” observed Carl Schurz, a German American politician in the late 1800s.
In this book, the ideals found in the Declaration of Independence will serve as your guiding stars.
You will come upon these ideals again and again— sometimes as points of pride, sometimes as prods to progress, and sometimes as sources of sorrow.
Ideals represent the very highest standards, and human beings are far too complex to achieve such perfection.
Although Jefferson believed passionately in the Declaration’s ideals, he was a slaveholder.
Equality and liberty stopped at the borders of his Virginia plantation.
Jefferson’s pursuit of happiness depended on depriving the people who labored for him as slaves the right to pursue happiness of their own.
Soon after the Continental Congress approved the Declaration of Independence, it appointed a committee to design an official seal for the United States.
One side shows an American eagle holding symbols of peace and war, with the eagle facing toward peace.
The other shows an unfinished pyramid, symbolizing strength and endurance.
Perhaps another reason for the unfinished pyramid was to show that a nation built on ideals is a work in progress.
As long as our founding ideals endure, the United States will always be striving to meet them.
The front of the Great Seal features a bald eagle and a shield with 13 red and white stripes, representing the original 13 states.
The story of their struggles lies at the heart of our nation's history and who we are as Americans.
During the past two centuries, our definition of equality has broadened to include women and minority groups.
But we are still debating the role of government in promoting equality today.
Just what these rights should be has been the subject of never-ending debates.
Liberty One of the rights mentioned in the Declaration is liberty —the right to speak, act, think, and live freely.
Defining the proper limits to liberty is an unending challenge to a free people.
It also raises difficult questions about what government should do to promote equal opportunities for all Americans.
They were lured by visions of riches— gold, silver, gems— and the promise of adventure.
Four months later, the travel-weary settlers finally sailed into Chesapeake Bay on the eastern coast of North America.
The settlers chose a site on the James River, which they named for their king, where they established Jamestown, the first permanent English colony in North America.
By the first winter, more than half the settlers had died of sickness and starvation.
The hoped-for “land of opportunity” had turned out to be a land of daunting challenges.
Yet the infant colony survived, due in large part to Smith’s leadership and the help of local Indians, who brought the settlers food.
The story of Jamestown’s struggle for survival illustrates how geography can affect human events.
The North American continent, with its abundant resources, held out the promise of opportunity to all who migrated to its shores.
But at the same time, as the Jamestown colonists discovered, this new land also presented those who came with countless obstacles to overcome.
In this chapter, you will start to see how geography has helped shape the course of American history, from the arrival of the first Americans to the present day.
Today, the original site of Jamestown sits no longer on a peninsula, but on an island.
The site was cut off from the mainland by tidal currents of the James River.
Physical Features of the United States The Mississippi River is a major north-south transportation route.
Ships that travel along it carry farm products, raw materials, and factory goods, among other products.
For centuries, the Rocky Mountains, with their tall peaks and rugged passes, blocked eastwest movement across the continent.
Although today the Great Plains support agricultural activity, early pioneers would not have believed it possible.
Americans did not significantly develop or inhabit the Great Plains until railroads were extended across the country in the late 1800 The United States today measures more than 3 million square miles in area.
The country includes almost all types of landforms, from mountains and valleys to plains and plateaus.
It also has many bodies of water, from enormous lakes and major rivers to tidewater marshes and swampy bayous.
Since humans first arrived, these physical features have influenced patterns of migration and settlement.
Blessings and Barriers The land and its resources have attracted people and helped shape their ways of life.
America’s earliest people came to the continent tens of thousands of years ago by following animals they hunted.
Their descendants spread across the continent and developed ways of life suited to the land’s varied environments.
Some groups also shaped their environment to meet their needs— for example, by using fire to keep cleared areas of forest open.
Like these early Indians, settlers from Europe found that the nation’s physical features influenced where and how they lived.
In the 1500s, the Spanish began settling the Southwest and Southeast in search of gold.
Starting in the 1600s, English colonists adapted to the land and its climate as they began their new lives in North America.
For example, the Southeast’s broad coastal plain, with its plentiful rainfall and warm temperature, was ideal for farms.
By contrast, the Northeast’s natural harbors developed into centers of trade and commerce.
Because water was the fastest way to transport goods and people in the nation’s early days, cities sprang up along internal waterways— such as New Orleans on the Mississippi River and Chicago on Lake Michigan.
Although the land has lured people for thousands of years, it has also posed challenges.
For example, the Appalachian Mountains in the East, the Rocky Mountains in the West, and the deserts in the Southwest have been natural barriers to travel and settlement.
Harsh climate conditions, poor soil, and lack of water have made living difficult or even impossible in some areas of the country.
As you study American history, look for the effect the land has had on the nation’s development.
Colonists set up logging operations to provide wood for shipbuilding, home construction, and furniture making.
American forests today still provide lumber for these purposes, as well as for export to other countries.
Natural Resources of the United States The abundance of natural resources in the United States has long made it a land of opportunity.
Soil, forests, wildlife, and minerals have provided the basis for economic activity since the ancient peoples migrated to North America from Asia.
Others developed economies based on woodland game, marine mammals, or fish from rivers or oceans.
Still others relied on the land itself, clearing trees and diverting waterways to farm the land.
Treasure hunters from as far away as China and Europe raced to the gold fields in hopes of striking it rich.
As a result of this population boom, California became the 31st state in 1850.
Farming Dazzled by stories of gold in Mexico and silver in Peru, the Jamestown colonists expected to find these precious metals in Virginia too.
They reluctantly turned to farming, growing crops for both subsistence and export.
The first colonists’ inability to find these precious minerals had a profound effect on the historical development of the United States.
One historian argued, One of the greatest factors in making land in North America so important was that settlers along the Atlantic Coast failed to find sources of quick mineral riches; consequently they turned to the slower processes of agriculture to gain livelihoods.
Farming, from the beginning, became the main way of American frontier life. —Thomas D Clark, Frontier America, 1969 By frontier, Clark was referring to the land still unknown to, and undeveloped by, the colonists.
Once colonists began to prosper by farming, the lure of western farmland drew explorers and then settlers across the Appalachians to the fertile interior plains.
Even today, commercial agriculture in this part of the United States produces a significant portion of the world’s crops.
New England’s rocky soil and cold winters limited farming to a small scale.
Instead, New Englanders built their economy on the resources of the forest and sea.
They exported dried fish and whale oil and used their abundant timber to build fishing boats and merchant ships.
This successful shipbuilding industry, as well as the area’s sheltered harbors, made New England the center of trade with other countries.
Though Virginia did not have the precious metals the colonists had hoped for, other parts of the country did contain mineral resources.
As the United States expanded across the continent in the 1800s, settlers found copper, lead, gold, silver, nickel, and zinc far beneath the soil.
These minerals became a source of wealth, as well as the raw materials for American factories to produce an astonishing array of goods.
Today, every state has an active mining industry, even tiny Rhode Island and tropical Hawaii.
The energy resources of the United States have played a critical role in the country’s economic development.
Large reserves of fossil fuels, such as coal, oil, and natural gas, helped the United States become an industrial giant in the 1800s.
These fuels continue to provide energy for industry and transportation.
Today about 6. percent of the country’s electric power is generated by waterpower in hydroelectric dams.
Energy resources will continue to play a vital part in the nation’s future.
Oil prospectors erected derricks to hold the equipment to drill oil wells.
Economic Activity of the United States Today / 130*W Setting the Geographic Stage 27 St.
Louis, Missouri, owed its early growth to its location near the confluence of the Mississippi and Missouri rivers.
Louis served as the gateway to the West for explorers, fur traders, and settlers.
From Farms to Cities In 1790, the United States held its first census, or official count of its population.
Of that total, only about 5 percent— roughly 195,000— lived in towns or cities that had more than 2,500 people.
This seemed just right to Thomas Jefferson, whose ideal was a nation of independent farmers.
Growth of Cities Despite Jefferson's high opinion of farmers, the United States would not remain a strictly rural nation.
Colonial cities like Boston and Philadelphia began as trading centers at transportation crossroads.
As they grew, they became centers of wealth, attracting skilled artisans, professional people, and workers from near and far.
As American settlers moved west, cities developed across the landscape.
Physical features influenced where cities sprouted, and ease of access was one key to the birth of cities.
Louis, Missouri, for example, developed at the juncture of the Mississippi and the Missouri rivers.
Its location made it a logical place for the exchange and shipment of farm products, raw materials, and finished products.
In the 1800s, improvements to transportation— such as roads, canals, steamships, and railroads— linked cities to the outside world and contributed to their expansion.
In the late 1800s, better transportation encouraged the concentration of industries in cities.
These new industries, fueled by abundant natural resources, increased the population of cities.
The economic opportunity in cities drew migrants from small towns and farms, as well as large numbers of immigrants from other countries.
Urban centers of population and industry led to the growth of wealth and political power.
Such centers also support arts and culture, technological innovations, and the exchange of ideas.
Angelinos, as the locals are called, depend on a complex network of highways to get around their spreadout city.
The commerce and industry that these city populations generate contribute significantly to the status of the United States as one of the world’s economic giants.
Chicago, Illinois, has responded to population growth by building up as well as out.
Hundreds of thousands of people stream into this area on weekdays to work and shop.
Population density is a measure of the number of people who live in a given unit of area.
In the United States, metropolitan areas, or large cities and their neighboring cities and towns, are areas with a population of 2,500 or more.
Regions and American History The United States is made up of 50 separate states, each with its own government.
The divisions between states are political boundaries— governmentdefined borders with exact locations.
Yet when Americans think about their country, they also divide it into unofficial regions.
A region is a geographic area defined by one or more characteristics that set it apart from other areas.
A region may be as large as a continent or as small as a city neighborhood characterized by a distinct economic activity, style of home, food or culture, or ethnic group.
Regional Identity A quick glance over the American landscape today reveals remarkable similarities.
From coast to coast, you see the same restaurants, stores, highways, movies, and television programs.
A closer look, however, reveals that each region of the country has its own identity.
Physical features, climate, and natural resources have shaped each region’s economy and settlement patterns.
Arid and semiarid regions, for instance, tend to be thinly settled, because they lack adequate water for farming and industry.
The traditions and culture of the people living in a region give it its own particular flavor.
For example, each region has its own characteristic foods, such as spicy burritos in the Southwest and clam chowder in the Northeast.
Each region also has its own speech patterns, building styles, and festivals, to name but a few elements of regional identity.
A region’s geographic, economic, and cultural factors also shape its needs and wants.
As a result, people within a region often share similar points of view and pursue similar political goals.
For example, people in an agricultural region often want to protect the interests of farmers, while those in a manufacturing region tend to look out for the interests of their industries.
For one thing, regional differences have shaped American history and culture in significant ways.
People who share regional goals, concerns, and a common way of life can develop strong loyalties.
The most dramatic example of this type of division was the American Civil War. which erupted over regional economic and political differences between North and South.
Long after the war was over, regional loyalty remained strong among many Southerners.
Regions also give us a useful way to study the history of a country as large and diverse as the United States.
Although regional differences may cause tension, our diversity as a nation is one of our greatest strengths.
Our democracy has benefited from the diverse backgrounds and concerns of people in different regions.
As you study American history, pay attention to how each region developed.
Look for ways that its interaction with other regions influenced the course of national events.
New England I I Northeast: The Mid-Atlantic I I Southeast I I Midwest I I Southwest I I Rocky Mountains I I Pacific Southwest Rocky Mountains Southeast Setting the Geographic Stage 31 Continents of the World Today 3.
The United States and the World Geography has played a significant role in how Americans interact with the rest of the world.
More than 3,000 miles of Atlantic Ocean separate the United States from Europe.
In the nation’s early years, it took weeks or even months for news to travel across these seas.
As a result, to most Americans, what happened beyond their own country’s shores was of little interest.
Territorial Expansion President Washington wanted no part of political intrigues abroad.
However, he foresaw that the new nation would have to interact with the world beyond its borders in other ways.
In order to grow, the United States, at various times, negotiated with other countries for more territory.
In 1803, the United States purchased enough land from France to double the country’s size.
Within several decades, it had acquired Florida from Spain and the Oregon Territory from Great Britain.
The Hawaiian Islands became United States territory three decades later.
The original 13 states had their birth in the American Revolution against Great Britain.
Winning a war with Mexico in the mid19th century added Texas and the American Southwest to the United States.
With the addition of this land, the United States spanned the continent of North America, from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific.
I Foreign Trade Despite the country’s isolated location between these two oceans, Americans have always engaged in international commerce.
Even the original 32 Chapter 3 colonists traded products across the Atlantic.
The first settlers at Jamestown eventually built their economy around shipping tobacco to England for sale.
By 1750, the colonies were producing a variety of cash crops for sale overseas.
As the country industrialized during the 1800s, foreign trade also expanded.
Agricultural products still led United States exports, but manufactured goods and natural resources, such as iron ore, were shipped abroad for sale too.
Americans were also buying a wide array of imported goods, from Chinese tea to English teapots.
During the 1900s, the United States developed trade relationships with countries around the world.
By the second half of the 20th century, globalization— the process by which cultures, economies, and politics of nations around the world become integrated— had taken hold.
Today, the United States is a leader of the global economy and maintains trade relationships with most other countries of the world.
Indeed, everyone in this country is descended, however distantly, from someone from another land.
Thus, our links to the outside world are familial and cultural, as well as commercial.
The opportunities offered by the land and its resources— in addition to the ideals of equality, rights, liberty, and democracy— continue to draw people to our shores.
As you study American history, look at the role of the United States in its interactions with the world.
The land's size, landforms, natural resources, and location have all influenced the nation's historical, cultural, and economic development.
Physical features Almost every type of landform and body of water exists in the United States.
Others have proved to be suitable locations for settlement, offering a variety of economic opportunities.
Natural resources The lands of the United States offer an abundance of natural resources, which have helped the country establish and sustain itself.
Resources such as fertile soil, forests, minerals, and fossil fuels have shaped the economies and cultures of the United States.
Regions Different parts of the United States have developed their own regional identities.
At times, regional differences have threatened national unity, but they have also enriched American life and culture.
World leader The Atlantic and Pacific oceans could have isolated the United States from events elsewhere in the world.
However, interactions with other nations, through territorial expansion, immigration, and globalization, have helped make the United States a world leader.
They had traveled from England to join the colony already established in Virginia.
However, storms had blown their ship off course, carrying them hundreds of miles north to Cape Cod.
About one third of the passengers were English Protestant Separatists who had come seeking religious freedom.
Fearing persecution because they had formed their own church, they had fled to Holland.
Other Mayflower passengers were simply seeking the opportunity to own land in America.
According to Separatist leader William Bradford, some of these “strangers” became rebellious as the ship neared Cape Cod.
They said no one “had the power to command them” as they were no longer bound by Virginia laws.
Fearing that a revolt could destroy the colony before it began, the Separatist leaders drew up an agreement known as the Mayflower Compact.
This was the first written framework for self-government in what is now the United States.
The Mayflower passengers established Plymouth Colony, the second English foothold in North America, after Jamestown.
Bradford, who became Plymouth's governor, described the Separatists as pilgrims, or people on a religious journey, which is how they are known today.
Over the next century and a half, thousands of people would follow them across the Atlantic.
For many, though not for all, this settlement would offer liberty, opportunity, and the chance for a new life.
In this painting, colonists step ashore at Plymouth after disembarking from the Mayflower.
They brought few possessions with them and would have to find or create almost everything they needed to survive.
Exciting all fucli as be well affected to farther the (a me. printed far SamviiMacm* *,and»reiobcfol<hc Jus Shop in Hauls Chtirclvyard,at (lie Stgnc of the Bul-bcad.
Limited Liberty, Opportunity, and Equality The planting of colonies on the Atlantic shore triggered great changes.
It brought together people from three continents— North America, Europe, and Africa— in ways that none of them were prepared for.
For many, it opened up a bright new age of liberty, equality, and opportunity.
Land and Liberty The 13 colonies that eventually became the United States were founded in different ways and for different reasons.
Some colonies, such as Pennsylvania, were founded by individual proprietors, or owners, who received large land grants from the king.
The New England colonies were started by English Protestants called Puritans because they wanted to purify the Church of England.
They wanted to create “a city upon a hill,” a more perfect society based on their religious beliefs.
Georgia began as a home for the poor and for criminals found guilty of not paying their debts.
Like the Jamestown settlement, almost all of the colonies faced hardships in the beginning.
By 1700, however, most were thriving, although not always in ways that their founders had hoped.
Most proprietors had expected to transplant the society they knew in England.
In English society, a small upper class held most of the wealth and power, while the lower classes did most of the work but had few of the rights and received few of the rewards.
John Smith, a leader of the Jamestown settlement, observed that “no man will go from to have less freedom"" in America.
Land ownership increased economic opportunity and enabled colonists to escape a life of rigid inequality.
Historian Eric Foner notes, “Land, English settlers believed, was the basis of liberty.
The colonists' access to land, however, also meant a loss of liberty for American Indians and enslaved Africans.
American Indians Suffer from Colonization The land that drew colonists to America was, of course, already occupied.
At first, relations between native peoples and colonists were mutually beneficial.
American Indians taught colonists to cultivate native crops like corn, tomatoes, potatoes, and tobacco.
They introduced colonists to useful inventions like canoes and snowshoes.
In return, American Indians acquired goods from the colonists, such as iron tools, metal pots, guns, and woven cloth.
But the Europeans also unwittingly brought diseases that wiped out entire tribes and left others severely weakened.
In addition, settlers eventually stripped eastern tribes of most of their land through purchase, wars, and unfair treaties.
The loss of land deprived Indians of control over resources they needed to maintain their way of life.
Only a few colonial leaders, notably William Penn, founder of Pennsylvania, treated them fairly and paid them for their land.
Freedom for Some, Slavery for Others Land was the main source of wealth in the American colonies.
Many colonists bought small plots of land of their own rather than working for others.
At first, some landowners met their labor needs through contracts with indentured servants.
These were poor English settlers who voluntarily gave up their freedom for three to seven years in exchange for passage to America.
In 1619, a Dutch ship captain sold 20 captive Africans to colonists in Virginia.
For the next several decades, small numbers of Africans were brought to the colonies.
A few were even treated as indentured servants, working to earn their freedom.
Gradually landowners came to depend more and more on slaves to meet their labor needs.
Eventually every colony legalized slavery, but most slaves toiled on plantations in the southern colonies.
These were huge farms that required a large labor force to grow cash crops— crops sold for profit.
Although slavery in the colonies began for economic reasons, it became firmly rooted in racism.
Laws established slavery as a lifetime condition, unless an owner granted freedom, and also defined children bom of enslaved women as slaves.
Although some African Americans escaped the bonds of slavery, freedom did not bring equality.
In the first half of the 1700s, the number of slaves brought to the English colonies rose from 5,000 to 45,000 a year.
As these graphs indicate, the percentage of Africans in the colonial population greatly increased during this period.
Fundamental Orders Charter of Rhode Mayflower Compact Served as training of Connecticut : Island and Providence : First written grounds for democratic First written constitution Plantations : framework for selfgovernment in North America self-government in the colonies Gave religious freedom to people of all faiths The Middle Colonies The rich soil of the Middle Colonies provided the foundation for an economy based on farming and livestock raising.
Zenger trial : Ethnic diversity: Showed Resolutions of the Showed that a colony Established the right that peoples from many Germantown Mennonites could thrive with many of freedom of the ethnic groups could live : First public protest religious sects press in the colonies together as equals against slavery in the colonies The Southern Colonies The warm, wet climate of the Southern Colonies made this region ideal for growing cash crops such as tobacco, rice, and indigo.
It guaranteed the rule of law and ensured that people could not be taxed without their consent.
It helped establish the principle of basic rights for the English people.
Colonial Rights and the Growth of Self-Government In 1744, a doctor touring the colonies wrote of dining at a tavern with a very mixed company of different nations and religions.
Being a Narrative of a Journey from May to September 1744 For all the differences observed by the doctor, these people shared a deep attachment to their rights and freedoms.
The ""Rights of Englishmen"" For the majority of colonists, the idea that people were entitled to certain rights and freedoms was rooted in English history.
They traced that idea back to the signing of the Magna Carta, or Great Charter, in 1215.
Some of these rights established a system of justice based on due process of law.
Under such a system, a government cannot deprive a person of life, liberty, or property except according to rules established by law.
Furthermore, the king agreed to make no special demands for money without the consent of his barons.
This provision later led to the establishment of a legislature, a group of people chosen to make laws.
The Magna Carta also laid the foundation for the principle that people cannot be taxed except by their representatives in a legislature.
Most importantly, the agreement made it clear that the monarch was not above the law.
In contrast, rulers elsewhere typically had unlimited power over their people.
Over time, the “rights of Englishmen” were expanded, but not without conflict.
One such conflict was a bitter struggle between King James II and Parliament for control of the English government.
In 1688, the king was forced to flee England after a bloodless change of power called the Glorious Revolution.
The throne was offered to a Dutch prince, William of Orange, husband of Princess Mary of England.
Parliament then enacted the English Bill of Rights, which further limited the power of the monarch.
Passed in 1689, this act confirmed that the power to tax rested only with Parliament.
The act set forth individual rights, including the right to have a trial by jury and to petition the government for redress of wrongs.
The Right to Self-Government English colonists brought these ideas about good government with them to America.
Separated from England by 3,000 miles of ocean, they needed to make laws suited to life in the colonies.
At New England town meetings, for example, townspeople got together to discuss local issues and solve problems by themselves.
Such meetings helped lay the early foundations for self-government in the colonies.
The colonial legislatures were hardly models of democracy, for only white, male landowners could elect representatives.
In many colonies, a person had to own a certain amount of property in order to vote.
These assemblies also affirmed the principle that the colonists could not be taxed except by their elected representatives in the legislatures.
For the colonists, self-government was local, with each colony operating independently of the others.
In fact, the colonies were reluctant to work together even to face a common threat.
In 1754, after war broke out in the Ohio Valley over rival French and British claims to land, Benjamin Franklin drafted the Albany Plan of Union.
It proposed a confederation, or alliance, of the colonies for their own defense.
The idea was as old as ancient Greece, and Franklin could also point to an alliance of six American Indian tribes known as the Iroquois League.
Tribal representatives met as a Grand Council to make laws, settle disputes, and plan military strategy.
However, Franklin’s plan for a colonial Grand Council with the powers to tax and raise an army was quickly rejected.
Parliament saw a colonial confederation as a potential threat to its authority, and the colonies were unwilling to pursue the matter.
Seeking Freedom of Religion Although colonists shared a belief in their right to self-government, they were divided by religion.
In the early 1600s, the governments of most countries saw religious diversity as a danger.
The Puritans were not the only people who came to America to escape harassment in England for their unorthodox beliefs.
Religious persecution also led to the founding of Maryland as a haven for Catholics and Pennsylvania as a refuge for Quakers.
Some colonies, such as New Jersey and Pennsylvania, had more religious diversity than others.
Experience with religious persecution did not, however, lead to tolerance.
Although the Puritans sought religious freedom for themselves, they refused to grant it to those who did not share their beliefs.
Williams went on to found the colony of Rhode Island, where he welcomed colonists of all faiths.
He firmly believed that freedom of religion, which he called “liberty of conscience,” was compatible with law and order.
I affirm, that all the liberty of conscience, that ever I pleaded for, turns on these two hinges— that none of the Papists, Protestants, Jews, or Turks be forced to come to the ship’s prayers or worship, nor compelled from their own particular prayers or worship, if they practice any.
I further add that I never denied, that notwithstanding this liberty, the commander of this ship ought to command the ship’s course, yea, and also command that justice, peace, and sobriety be kept and practiced, both among the seamen and all the passengers. —Roger Williams, Letter to the Town of Providence, 1655 This drawing by Benjamin Franklin is considered the first political cartoon in American history.
In it, Franklin compares the colonies' lack of unity to a snake cut into pieces.
He drew the cartoon to promote the Albany Plan of Union, but the plan failed to win support Like Roger Williams, Anne Hutchinson was banished from Massachusetts for her religious views.
Her belief that people did not need the Puritan church to worship God angered church leaders.
The Colonial Roots of America's Founding Ideals 43 Elsewhere, religious prejudice was slow to fade.
In 1649, the proprietor of Maryland tried to end quarreling between Catholics and Protestants by enacting the Act of Religious Toleration.
This law declared that no Christian could be in any way “troubled"" because of practicing his or her religion.
Indeed, Jews suffered from prejudice in most colonies and generally did not have the right to vote or hold office.
The Zenger Trial Governments on both sides of the Atlantic also feared freedom of expression.
Even though colonies had their own legislatures, they were also subject to rule by governors appointed by the king.
Following English practice for royal officials, these governors did not support freedom of expression.
In the colonies, newspaper publishers who criticized governors risked being jailed.
At the trial, the judge instructed the jury to consider only whether Zenger had published the damaging remarks without regard to their truthfulness.
The verdict in the 1735 Zenger trial helped promote the idea that the press should have the freedom to print the truth, and that this freedom is a right that should be protected.
His eloquent lawyer, Andrew Hamilton, got him acquitted and, in the process, established a precedent for freedom of the press.
The Great Awakening The Zenger trial took place during a period of religious revival known as the Great Awakening.
Beginning in the 1730s, traveling preachers toured the colonies, attracting huge crowds to their emotional gatherings.
As historian Curtis Nettels observed in 1963, The Great Awakening popularized the idea that the truth was to be found by each person in the Bible— not in man-made laws, sermons, or creeds.
Authorities who violated the divine law did not merit respect . . . here were the seeds of revolution.
Although the Great Awakening was concerned mainly with spiritual matters, it had a broader impact, as Nettels suggests.
As the colonists became more comfortable thinking freely about religious matters, they would also begin to think and speak more freely about political matters.
Many colonists were swept up by religious fervor during the Great Awakening.
Preachers like George Whitefield, shown here, gave emotional sermons and encouraged people to seek God on their own terms.
This movement also led people to think for themselves and helped undermine political authority.
The development of colonial economies and governments showed that the ideals on which the United States would be founded had begun to take root.
Land and liberty Many settlers were attracted to the colonies by the opportunity to acquire land.
Those who could acquire enough land could enjoy the rewards of their labor and gained the right to vote.
American Indians Opportunity for colonists came at a high cost for Indians.
They lost their land and suffered from diseases brought from Europe by the colonists.
The Rights of Englishmen English colonists were deeply attached to their rights as Englishmen.
These rights were rooted in the Magna Carta and the English Bill of Rights.
Self-government Beginning with the Virginia House of Burgesses, each colony established its own government with an elected legislature.
Rejection of the Albany Plan of Union showed that each colony cherished running its own affairs.
Freedom of religion Many religious groups, such as Puritans, Quakers, Catholics, and Jews, came in search of religious freedom.
The Maryland Act of Religious Toleration recognized the need to accept religious differences.
Freedom of expression and thought The Zenger trial was a victory for freedom of the press in the colonies.
The Great Awakening encouraged people to question authority and think for themselves.
The 4,000-pound statue stood in Bowling Green, a public park near the southern tip of Manhattan.
Over the next few years, the statue dominated the green, symbolizing loyalty to the king.
The reading of the Declaration spelled doom for the King George statue.
They cut off the king’s head and set it aside, planning to impale it on a spike later.
In the midst of all the chaos, someone stole the head; to this day, it has never been found.
Many of the remaining lumps of lead were melted down to make bullets to fire at British soldiers.
By 1776, most colonists belonged to one of three groups, based on their views of British rule.
One group was the Loyalists, who staunchly supported the British government.
A second group was the Patriots, who opposed British rule and believed the colonists should separate from Britain immediately and by any means necessary.
The Moderates were unhappy with aspects of British rule, but they were cautious about the possible effects of severing ties with Britain.
A peaceful solution was a tall order, though, given the growing antagonism between Britain and the colonies.
He was only 22 when he came to the throne and lacked many of the qualities of a good leader.
The Road to Revolution Colonists protested the passage of the Stamp Act in 1765.
To organize protests against the law, colonial leaders formed the Sons of Liberty, a group dedicated to resisting British rule.
The toppling of the King George statue came on the eve of the American Revolution.
But there had been discontent in the colonies for more than two decades.
Some problems dated back to a war that took place in North America from 1754 to 1763.
That war was part of a worldwide struggle between France and Britain for territory and power.
Because many American Indians fought on the side of France, colonists called it the French and Indian War.
Britain won the war, but that victory set it on a collision course with its 13 American colonies.
Britain Imposes New Regulations and Taxes Britain now had to control a much larger empire in North America and wanted to prevent further conflict with the tribes who had been France’s allies.
Therefore, Parliament passed the Proclamation of 1763, which declared that colonists could not settle west of the Appalachian Mountains.
To help keep peace on the western frontier, Britain built a long chain of forts and sent more troops.
It thought the colonies should help pay for this protection, but the colonists believed they could defend themselves.
They also mistrusted having a large British army in their midst during peacetime.
Nevertheless, Parliament decided to raise revenue from the colonies to pay for the troops.
At the time, citizens in Britain paid heavier taxes than they did in the colonies, and Parliament thought the colonists should pay their share.
In 1764, it passed the Sugar Act, which placed customs duties on sugar and other non-British imports.
In the past, such sales taxes were designed to regulate trade and encourage colonists to buy British goods.
The Sugar Act was the first tax by Parliament that was enforced by Britain.
Colonial protests were limited, though, because the law mainly affected merchants in New England and the Middle Colonies.
In 1765, however, Parliament caused an uproar throughout the colonies by taking a new step to raise revenue.
It passed the Stamp Act, which required colonists to buy a stamp for every piece of paper they used.
Stamp taxes were already common in Britain, but this was the first stamp tax that Parliament levied on the colonists.
Furthermore, unlike the Sugar Act, the Stamp Act affected a wide range of people throughout the colonies.
The colonists argued that as British citizens they could be directly taxed only by their elected representatives.
They were represented in the colonial legislatures but not in Parliament.
They recognized that Parliament could regulate trade, but they saw its direct taxes as tyranny, or unjust use of government power.
After months of colonial unrest, Parliament repealed the Stamp Act in 1766.
At the same time, however, it passed the Declaratory Act reaffirming its right to govern the colonies.
Over the next several years, it imposed new taxes and regulations, causing colonial resentment to rise.
While each colony had a royal governor, it also had its own legislature, laws, and taxes.
Although the colonists were subject to British laws, they often ignored the inconvenient ones.
During this long period, they had come to believe that they had the ability and right to manage their own affairs.
In 1767, Parliament passed the Townshend Acts, a set of customs duties on British glass, lead, paints, paper, and tea.
Since the colonists had admitted Britain’s right to regulate trade, Parliament thought they had little reason to protest.
However, these duties were intended to raise revenue, so the colonists saw them as direct taxes in disguise.
Samuel Adams of Boston was one of the key leaders who rallied colonists to defy the British.
This was a peaceful protest in which people refused to buy or use British goods.
By boycotting British goods, the colonists hoped to influence British merchants to put pressure on Parliament to change its policies.
On March 5, 1770, a group of residents confronted British soldiers on the street.
A fight broke out, and the soldiers opened fire, killing five colonists.
Paul Revere, a local silversmith, made an engraving that showed soldiers firing at peaceful, unarmed citizens.
Prints were distributed throughout the colonies, and the event became known as the Boston Massacre.
On the same day as the Boston Massacre, Parliament repealed most of the Townshend duties, partly in response to colonial boycotts.
The repeal of most of the Townshend duties appeased many colonists, so tensions died down.
Adams tried to keep the spirit of protest alive, however, by organizing groups of letter writers — known as committees of correspondence— to spread news about British actions to towns throughout Massachusetts.
Eventually, committees of correspondence formed in every one of the colonies.
The British government produced tax stamps like this one for the American colonies in 1765 and 1766.
The Boston Massacre of March 5, 1770, began with a street fight and ended with the deaths of five colonists.
The incident was sparked by public anger over the Townshend Acts and other British policies.
In 1773, Parliament unintentionally sparked new protests by passing the Tea Act, which gave the British East India Company the sole right to sell tea in the colonies.
The act was intended to help the struggling company, but angry colonists saw this complete control of the tea trade as a threat to colonial merchants.
Committees of correspondence spread the word to boycott the company’s tea.
Some colonists took stronger action by destroying tea shipments, most famously in Boston.
On the night of December 16, men dressed as Mohawk Indians boarded three British tea ships in Boston Harbor.
They broke open the tea chests and threw about 90,000 pounds of tea into the water.
In 1774, Parliament passed a series of laws so harsh that the colonists called them the Intolerable Acts.
These laws closed Boston Harbor, shut down the civilian courts, and placed Massachusetts under firm British control.
Many men and women throughout the colonies began to think of themselves firmly as Patriots working together to oppose British rule.
The Administration of Justice Act said that a British soldier arrested for murder in the colonies would be sent to England for trial.
Knowing that they would not face justice in the colonies, British troops felt freer to abuse the colonists.
These were groups of men, mostly local farmers and laborers, who volunteered to be soldiers during emergencies.
In New England, the militias called themselves Minutemen because they claimed that they could be ready to fight in 60 seconds.
On the evening of April 18, 1775, the Minutemen were called into action.
In the early morning, they reached the village of Lexington, where 70 to 80 Minutemen were waiting for them.
The British then unleashed a volley of bullets, killing 8 colonists and wounding 10.
The British continued six miles to Concord, where they ran into several hundred Minutemen.
In a short battle at Concord's North Bridge, the colonists routed the British and sent them fleeing back to Boston.
Within days, militia troops by the thousands were camped around Boston, daring the British to fight again.
The Quartering Act required colonists to feed and house British troops in their homes.
No one's property was safe from an invasion by the despised British troops.
The Massachusetts Government Act put the colony under the control of an appointed governor.
Colonists lost the right to govern themselves. — mm Americans Revolt 51 George Grenville served as British prime minister from 1763 to 1765.
Four Perspectives on the Colonial Rebellion The battles at Lexington and Concord signaled that the colonies had rebelled against Britain.
The three main groups— Loyalists, Patriots, and Moderates— had different views about relations with Britain.
The British Government The king and Parliament were united in their belief that the British government had the right to control the American colonies.
They believed that all citizens of Britain, no matter where they lived, were represented by Parliament and had a duty to obey British law and pay British taxes.
The nation has run herself into an immense debt to give them their protection; and now, when they are called upon to contribute a small share toward the public expense, an expense arising from themselves, they renounce your authority. —George Grenville, from a speech in 1766 The Loyalists Loyalists wanted to remain subjects of the British Empire.
This group included religious leaders, wealthy landowners, and government workers.
Some Loyalists were motivated by strong beliefs, such as the view that the king’s power came from God and that Britain was treating the colonies fairly.
Others were motivated by self-interest, fearing the loss of property or government jobs if a rebellion succeeded.
What may be the consequences of another form we cannot pronounce with certainty; but this we know, that it is a road we have not travelled, and may be worse than it is described. — William Smith, Anglican minister, 1776 52 Chapter 5 ■ The Moderates Moderates may have disagreed with British policy, but they were not openly rebellious.
Perhaps they lived too far away from the conflicts to feel the impact or were too busy with everyday tasks to get involved in politics.
For example, Quakers did not wish to fight because of their religious beliefs.
In general, Moderates sought peaceful solutions to the problems between Britain and the colonies.
But every such measure does not dissolve the obligation between the governors and the governed.
It is the duty of the governed to endeavor to rectify the mistake, and to appease the passion. —John Dickinson, lawyer and colonial delegate, 1767 The Patriots Patriots were those who had come to believe that the colonies must free themselves from British rule, through armed struggle if necessary.
Some were lawyers who thought the colonies should have more say in making their own laws.
Others were working people who believed independence would improve their economic condition.
We are invaded with fleets and Armies, our commerce not only obstructed, but totally ruined, the courts of Justice shut, many driven out from the Metropolis , thousands reduced to want, or dependent upon the charity of their neighbors for a daily supply of food, all the Horrors of a civil war threatening us on one hand, and the chains of Slavery ready forged for us on the other. —Abigail Adams, from a letter written in 1774 John Dickinson, a Moderate, tried to mend relations with Britain.
Abigail Adams, wife of Boston lawyer John Adams, was a Patriot and an astute political thinker.
Declaring Independence As the conflict between Britain and the colonies escalated, colonial leaders came together in Philadelphia to discuss options.
The first meeting of this Continental Congress, in 1774, had recommended boycotts and other actions to protest the Intolerable Acts.
At the Second Continental Congress, held in 1775 after the battles at Lexington and Concord, delegates decided to form a new Continental Army.
As a commanding general, they chose George Washington, a leading officer in the Virginia militia.
Colonists Extend an Olive Branch While the Second Continental Congress was in session, the war around Boston continued.
To some colonists, the high British casualties were proof that the British were not invincible.
In July 1775, it sent a petition to King George III affirming loyalty to him, asking for help in addressing their grievances, and expressing hope for a peaceful settlement.
This letter came to be called the Olive Branch Petition because olive branches symbolize peace.
However, the king refused to receive the petition, having heard the news of Bunker Hill.
Thomas Paine Writes Common Sense Not all colonists supported the Olive Branch Petition.
To some, it made no sense to ask for peace while colonists in New England were being killed.
This was certainly the opinion of Thomas Paine, a recent immigrant from Britain.
Early in 1776, Paine published Common Sense , a 47-page pamphlet that made a fervent case for independence.
He argued that British rule had only brought harm to the colonies, declaring that colonial trade had suffered under British control and that the colonies had been dragged into Britain’s conflicts with other European countries.
Paine’s persuasive words fired up the colonists and hastened the movement toward independence.
In his revolutionary pamphlet Common Sense , Thomas Paine made the case for independence.
Those ideas stemmed from the Enlightenment, an intellectual movement of the 1600s and 1700s that greatly influenced the colonies.
Enlightenment thinkers stressed the value of science and reason, not only for studying the natural world, but also for improving human society and government.
Actually, there was no formal presentation or signing ceremony, Trumbull's purpose was to memorialize the members of Congress.
The writings of English philosopher John Locke particularly influenced Patriot thinking.
Locke believed that people enjoyed natural rights to life, liberty, and property.
Furthermore, he said that governments and citizens are bound by a social contract.
People agree to obey their government if it respects their natural rights.
If the government fails to do so, people have the right to overthrow it.
The Colonies Declare Independence As their meeting continued in Philadelphia, many members of the Second Continental Congress had these Enlightenment ideas in mind.
On June 7, 1776, Richard Henry Lee of Virginia introduced a resolution proposing independence for the colonies.
The Lee Resolution led to formation of a committee to draft a declaration of independence.
A gifted writer, Jefferson was also a strong believer in natural rights.
The Declaration of Independence reflects this thinking when it lists “life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness” as “unalienable rights” that governments were created to protect.
The Declaration of Independence also states that governments should derive their powers from the consent of the governed, that is, from the people.
It asserts that people have the right to alter or abolish a government when it becomes ""destructive” of their rights.
To illustrate how destructive Britain’s rule had been, the Declaration includes a long list of abuses by the king and his government over the years.
On July 2, Congress voted for independence by passing the Lee Resolution.
In effect, they were signing a formal declaration of war against Britain.
Americans Revolt 55 George Washington and his troops crossed the icy Delaware River on December 25, 1776.
Fighting for Independence At the war’s start, the Patriots’ prospects were not promising.
Britain had a professional, well-trained army of about 40,000 soldiers.
It also employed 30,000 German mercenaries, professional soldiers for hire.
The Continental Army, on the other hand, was constantly short of soldiers.
Many of them would fight for a while and then go home to take care of their farms and families.
The Americans Get Off to a Shaky Start In the summer of 1776, it looked as if Britain might force a quick end to the war.
Washington’s army tried to hold them off, but the outnumbered, inexperienced Americans were no match for the British professionals.
Instead, he planned a surprise attack on German mercenaries wintering in Trenton, New Jersey.
Late on December 25, about 4,000 Americans crossed the ice-choked Delaware River to march on Trenton.
A week later, the Americans defeated a British force at Princeton, New Jersey.
Indeed, the two victories gave Americans hope that the cause of liberty was not dead.
He fought a defensive war by trying to wear out the British rather than soundly defeat th^m.
Burgoyne’s troops were supposed to join up there with a second British column of about 2,000 men sent to Albany from the west.
The army’s route crossed rugged terrain, and the heavily laden troops had to chop down trees, build bridges, and lay out log roads through swamps.
When the British reached Saratoga Springs 30 miles north of Albany, militia troops were there to meet them.
This decisive American victory in the Battle of Saratoga was a major turning point in the revolution.
The defeat of Burgoyne encouraged France to enter the war against Britain.
Washington's Army Winters at Valley Forge In the winter of 1777-78, the British still occupied Philadelphia.
Washington and his army made camp at nearby Valley Forge, Pennsylvania.
During that harsh winter, about one fourth of Washington’s troops— 2,500 men— died from disease and exposure.
Still, Washington held his ragtag army together and continued to train them for battle.
The War Shifts to the South Having stalled in the North, the British turned to the South.
In December 1778, they captured the key port of Savannah, Georgia, and gained control over the Carolinas.
Wherever they went, the British were harried by American troops fighting in a style that later came to be called guerrilla warfare.
Such fighting features small, mobile groups of soldiers who attack swiftly and then shrink back into the landscape.
The South, with its tangle of deep woods and swampy terrain, was perfect for guerrilla warfare.
The most successful of these fighters was Francis Marion, known as the Swamp Fox.
His band of guerrillas frustrated the British by attacking without warning and quickly fading back into the swamps.
Lord Charles Cornwallis, the British commander, brought his troops to Yorktown, Virginia.
They worked in the military camps and ran the farms while their husbands, fathers, and brothers fought.
Here, the wife of American general Philip Schuyler and her children and slaves burn the family wheat fields to deny food to the advancing British army.
In total, more than 16,000 troops surrounded the 8,000-man British army.
The War Ends Yorktown was the last battle of the war, but it took Britain several months to accept defeat.
Peace talks began in Paris in 1782, and in September 1783, American and British representatives signed the Treaty of Paris, ending the war.
It also gave up its claims to all lands between the Atlantic coast and the Mississippi River, from Canada south to Florida.
At least 6,500 Americans were killed in combat, while another 10,000 died from disease.
Even so, most Americans savored their victory and looked forward to healing the nation’s wounds.
As a first step, they would struggle with the practical issues of forming a government based on the consent of the governed.
This painting by John Trumbull, commissioned by Congress in 1817, shows the British surrender at Yorktown.
At the center is American general Benjamin Lincoln leading the British troops.
During the revolution, American forces wore down and defeated the larger and more experienced British army.
The Stamp Act After the French and Indian War, Britain passed the Stamp Act to raise revenue in the colonies.
Differing loyalties Patriots like Samuel Adams resisted all efforts by the British to exert more control over the colonies.
Moderates had mixed feelings but hoped the differences with Britain could be settled peacefully.
Lexington and Concord Tensions between colonists and British troops in Massachusetts led to armed conflict in Lexington and Concord.
Declaration of Independence On July 4, 1776, the Continental Congress approved the Declaration of Independence.
Saratoga The Continental Army suffered defeats in the early days of the war.
Two years later, Britain recognized American independence in the Treaty of Paris.
Introduction In 1782, an army officer wrote a letter to George Washington.
In it, he expressed his hope, shared by many of his fellow officers, that the independent American states would be joined into “a kingdom with Washington as the head/' The general was appalled.
He had spent years in bloody battle working to sever ties with a monarchy.
In the minds of many, that was not what they had under the Articles of Confederation, the nation’s first constitution.
Troops who wanted Washington to be king were suffering from Congress’s inability to meet the army’s basic needs.
Over the next few years, many Americans believed that things were going from bad to worse for the new nation.
In 1786, a group of rebellious farmers who could not pay their debts shut down several courthouses in Massachusetts.
Some Americans saw this as a sign that the nation was sliding into anarchy.
That was the question facing delegates called to a special convention in Philadelphia in 1787.
This Constitutional Convention took place in the room on the facing page, in a building now known as Independence Hall.
Presiding over the convention was none other than George Washington, the man who would not be king.
Cincinnatus was a legendary Roman patriot, a citizen-farmer who turned soldier and leader in a time of crisis, just as Washington did.
Married women were denied the vote because by law their property belonged to their husbands.
Thousands of women voted in New Jersey between 1776 and 1807 — before the law was changed to restrict the vote to white men.
A Confederation of States In 1776, the Declaration of Independence had asserted that the colonies were independent states.
Even as the war got underway, the legislatures of the 13 states began to write their own constitutions.
Within a year, almost all of them had new plans of government reflecting the principles in the Declaration of Independence.
However, it was not until almost the end of the war that the states agreed to form a loose confederation.
Comparing State Constitutions The state constitutions were similar in many ways.
Each state constitution separated the powers of government into executive, legislative, and judicial branches.
However, the state constitutions were far from being completely democratic.
They typically limited voting rights to white men who paid taxes or owned a certain amount of property.
Only New Jersey gave voting rights to women and African Americans who owned property.
None of the original 13 states' constitutions outlawed slavery, and all states south of Pennsylvania denied slaves equal rights as human beings.
Decisions in Forming a National Government While the states were writing their constitutions, the Continental Congress was trying to decide how the nation as a whole should be governed.
When Congress first met in 1774 to resolve disputes with Britain, it had no authority over the colonial legislatures.
Even when directing the war effort, it had no authority over the states, often begging them for soldiers and supplies.
Therefore, many members of Congress wanted to form a national government, one that had powers to govern the states.
After being controlled by Britain for so long, Americans were not inclined to hand over power to another central government— even one they elected.
When Congress drafted the nation's first constitution in 1777, it knew that many Americans feared a powerful national government.
For that reason, the proposed Articles of Confederation created a framework for a loose confederation of states.
Any power not specifically given to Congress was reserved for the states.
Only Congress could declare war, negotiate with foreign countries, and establish a postal system.
But it had no power to impose taxes, which explains why the Continental Army was so starved of funds.
In addition, the Articles did not set up an executive branch to carry out the laws or a judicial branch to settle legal questions.
But even with the war still raging, some states were hesitant to approve a plan of government that would give Congress any control over their affairs.
It took three and a half years for ratification of the Articles by all 13 states.
Congress recorded some notable achievements under the Articles of Confederation.
Perhaps its most important success was the creation of policies for the settlement of western lands.
In the Treaty of Paris ending the Revolutionary War, Britain gave up control of a region known as the Northwest Territory.
No government had yet been established for this large territory that stretched from the Appalachian Mountains west to the Ohio and Mississippi rivers.
The Land Ordinance of 1785 set up a system for surveying and dividing land in the new territory.
After being surveyed, the land was to be divided into 36-square-mile townships.
Each township would be divided into 36 numbered sections of 1 square mile each.
Each section would then be divided for sale to settlers and land dealers.
In 1787, Congress passed the Northwest Ordinance to specify how these western lands would be governed.
This ordinance declared that the region would be divided into three to five territories.
When a territory had 5,000 free adult men, those men could elect a legislature.
When the population reached 60,000 free inhabitants, the legislature could write a constitution and form a government.
A number of the ordinance’s provisions reflected the principle of equality.
Each new state would have equal standing with the original states, and its people would enjoy the same freedoms and rights.
Furthermore, slavery would be banned in any state formed from the region.
The Northwest Ordinance set up a system that became a general guide for admission of future states.
For that reason alone, it is considered the most important law passed during the period of confederation.
Under the Articles of Confederation, Congress set two key land policies for the Northwest Territory.
The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 set rules for the formation of new states.
Within a half century of its passage, enough people had settled in the Northwest Territory to create five new states.
Northwest Territory and Land Ordinance Survey System, 1785 Superior CANADA Wisconsin 1848 LOUISIANA NORTHV 'EST TERR TOR' Indiana llinois 1816^, 1818 Seven Ranges, First Survey, 1785 s Each section is 1 mile by 1 mile, or 1 square mile.
Soon bills of different colors, shapes, and values were being traded from state to state.
Although Congress under the Articles of Confederation had notable successes, many Americans saw problems with the confederation.
Most of these problems stemmed from the fact that the Articles gave so much authority to the states and so little to Congress.
Trouble with Foreign Countries Congress’s weaknesses were recognized not only at home but also abroad.
The lack of central authority made relations with foreign countries more difficult.
For example, one British official said it would be better to negotiate with each state than to do business with Congress.
When Congress tried to reach a trade agreement with Britain in 1785, Britain refused because it knew the states wouldn’t agree to be bound by the accord.
Many foreign countries also questioned the nation’s financial stability.
The United States had accumulated a huge war debt, mostly to foreign lenders.
The Articles directed the state legislatures to pay taxes to the national treasury based on the value of each state’s land.
Britain restricted American trade by closing some of its ports to American vessels.
These actions hurt the American economy, which depended heavily on the British market.
Meanwhile, the United States had little success boosting trade with other countries.
In the Treaty of Paris, Britain had agreed to withdraw troops from the Northwest Territory.
Once it saw how weak Congress was, however, it refused to pull them out.
Britain and Spain supplied arms to American Indians and urged them to attack settlers.
Having disbanded the Continental Army after the war, Congress had no military force to counteract this threat.
Quarrels Between the States There were troubles between the states, too.
As foreign trade declined, the economy relied more on interstate commerce, trade between states.
But states often treated each other like separate countries by imposing tariffs, or import taxes, on each other’s goods.
Congress had authority to settle tariff disputes between the states, but the states often ignored its decisions.
The Articles allowed Congress to issue currency, but the states were still allowed to print their own paper money.
Because there was no uniform currency, people had little faith in the money.
In some cases, it was worth little more than the paper it was printed on.
Gold and silver coins were readily accepted as payment, but they were in short supply.
The lack of confidence in paper money made interstate commerce and travel even more difficult.
The combination of high debt, weak currency, and falling trade caused the country to slide into an economic depression.
This drastic decline, marked by business failures and unemployment, caused discontent to spread throughout the country.
Shays, at top right, is shown with his followers as they shut down a Massachusetts courthouse.
Because Congress did not have the funds to help Massachusetts, the state had to put down the rebellion by itself.
Discontent Fuels Shays' Rebellion in Massachusetts Farmers were among those who suffered most from the economic depression.
Falling crop prices and the loss of foreign markets left many farmers with crippling debts they could not repay.
Some had their property auctioned off by local courts for nonpayment of debts and taxes.
Others were sent to debtors’ prison when they could not pay their debts.
In the summer of 1786, armed and angry farmers occupied a courthouse to prevent the court from doing business.
In the following weeks, these rebels took over other Massachusetts courts, hoping to prevent trials and imprisonment of debtors.
This uprising, known as Shays* Rebellion after its main leader, Daniel Shays, quickly mushroomed.
In September 1786, Shays led hundreds of farmers to occupy the courthouse in Springfield, Massachusetts.
A few months later, he led about 1 ,200 farmers to try to seize a weapons stockpile in the same city.
This time, the Massachusetts militia stopped them, and the rebellion collapsed.
To face the threat of Shays’ Rebellion, Massachusetts had needed funds to hire and supply a larger militia.
Instead, private donations from wealthy people had helped the state militia put down the revolt.
In the aftermath of Shays’ Rebellion, rich businesspeople and landowners were particularly worried about Congress’s weakness.
Many Americans were not so pessimistic but did agree that the government should be strengthened.
A Call for a Constitutional Convention While Shays’ Rebellion was erupting in Massachusetts, delegates were gathering at a convention in Annapolis, Maryland.
This formal assembly was called to fix trade problems between the states.
They drafted a request that all states send representatives to a constitutional convention to be held in Philadelphia in May 1787.
The purpose would be to revise the Articles of Confederation to create a stronger, more effective system of government.
The Constitutional Convention Delegates to the Constitutional Convention of 1787 met at the Pennsylvania State House, in Philadelphia, to write the Constitution.
Although the weather was brutally hot that summer, the windows of the meeting hall were nailed shut to keep the proceedings a secret.
This is the same building in which the Declaration of Independence was adopted in 1776.
Delegates from every state but Rhode Island gathered in the room where the Declaration of Independence had been signed 1 1 years before.
Congress had instructed them to revise, not replace, the Articles of Confederation.
However, many delegates were already convinced that a new constitution was needed.
Through months of debate, the delegates would work out this plan of government and then set it forth in a document called the Constitution of the United States.
A Distinguished Group of Delegates The 55 delegates were the cream of American political life.
Among them were former soldiers, governors, members of Congress, and men who had drafted state constitutions.
The delegates represented a wide range of personalities and experience, and many were eloquent speakers.
The wisdom and amicable wit of this writer, inventor, and diplomat enlivened the proceedings.
George Washington, hero of the Revolution, lent dignity to the gathering.
Alexander Hamilton, his former military aide, brought intellectual brilliance.
Other delegates, like Roger Sherman of Connecticut, contributed law and business experience.
James Madison of Virginia was perhaps the most profound political thinker and the best prepared of all the delegates.
Thomas Jefferson and John Adams were serving as representatives of the United States in Europe.
Other leaders, like Samuel Adams, were not there because they opposed efforts to strengthen the national government.
Indeed, many Americans remained fearful of giving a central government too much power.
The Ideas Behind the Constitution No one had a greater role than Madison.
The delegates' political views were strongly influenced by Enlightenment thinkers.
English philosopher John Locke’s ideas about natural rights and the social contract helped shape the Declaration of Independence.
The delegates also looked to the ideas of the Baron de Montesquieu, another Enlightenment thinker.
He favored a three-part government with separation of powers between executive, legislative, and judicial branches.
These branches would work together in a system of checks and balances, each branch limiting the power of the others.
This would prevent tyranny by keeping each branch from seizing excessive power.
Day after day, through a long, sweltering summer, they would debate, argue, write, revise, and debate some more.
His own view was effective speaker and an political theory and history, states would have greater that the government should advocate for a strong central he took a leading role in representation in the House, represent the wealthy and government He favored dividdebates and in planning the but each state would have be led by a strong president ing society into classes as a framework.
He pushed for a two senators regardless of population. elected for life. means to determine representation in Congress. strong central government.
State Delegates Every state but Rhode Island sent representatives to the Constitutional Convention.
Of the 55 delegates, 9 left early for personal reasons, and 4 walked out in protest.
Delaware Connecticut North Carolina Pennsylvania Richard Bassett Oliver Ellsworth* William Blount George Clymer Gunning Bedford Jr.
Thomas Jenifer William L Pierce* John Rutledge ^Delegate did not sign the Constitution.
Creating the Constitution 67 George Washington sat in this chair while presiding over the Constitutional Convention.
During the heated debates, Benjamin Franklin sometimes wondered whether the sun decorating the chair was rising or setting on the nation.
The Convention Begins with a Plan from Virginia The first thing the delegates did was to elect George Washington as presiding officer.
The delegates needed to speak freely and frankly, and they could not do so if the public were watching.
So despite the intense summer heat, they shut the windows, drew the drapes, and posted a sentry outside.
The Virginia delegates wanted to establish a strong national government and promptly proposed a plan.
The Virginia Plan, written mainly by James Madison, was clearly meant to replace the Articles, not revise them.
It called for a national government with three branches, just as Montesquieu had described.
The legislative branch would make laws, the executive branch would carry out the laws, and the judicial branch would interpret the laws.
Under the Virginia Plan, the new government would have a bicameral legislature, a lawmaking body made up of two houses.
In contrast, the Articles of Confederation had established Congress as a unicameral, or one-house, legislature.
The Virginia Plan proposed that representation in the two houses of Congress should be based on the population of each state.
This would give the more populous states more delegates, and therefore more influence, than states with smaller populations.
New Jersey Introduces a Rival Plan For about two weeks, the delegates discussed the Virginia Plan.
Moreover, smaller states did not like their representation in Congress being limited by population.
On June 13, William Paterson of New Jersey introduced an alternative to the Virginia Plan.
The New Jersey Plan proposed a series of amendments to the Articles of Confederation.
It called for a less powerful national government with a unicameral Congress in which all states had equal representation.
But after several days of debate, the convention voted to reject this proposal and return to discussion of the Virginia Plan.
Discontent, Debate, and the Great Compromise For the next month, the delegates debated the Virginia Plan point by point.
They continued to argue about the critical issue of representation in the legislature.
Debate grew so heated that delegates from some states threatened to leave the convention.
Finally, Roger Sherman of Connecticut came forward with a compromise designed to satisfy all sides.
His plan called for a bicameral legislature with a different form of representation in each house.
In the House of Representatives, states would have representation based on their populations.
Sherman's plan, known as the Great Compromise, resolved the thorny issue of representation in Congress.
Those from northern and southern states differed strongly on questions of slavery and commerce.
A number of northern states wanted to include a provision for abolishing slavery.
But most southerners opposed ending a system of labor on which their agricultural economy depended.
Since most slaves lived in the South, southern states wanted slaves to be counted in determining representation in the House of Representatives.
Yet they did not want them counted when determining each state’s share of taxes to support the national government.
In contrast, the northern states wanted slaves to be counted for taxation but not when determining representation.
For representation in the House, every five slaves would be counted as equal to three whites.
The Three-Fifths Compromise settled the dispute, but the contradiction between the ideals of the Declaration of Independence and the practice of slavery would haunt the country in the decades to come.
Southerners worried that Congress might outlaw the slave trade and place heavy taxes on southern exports of crops such as cotton and tobacco.
Congress would have the power to regulate foreign and interstate commerce, but it could not tax exports and it could not outlaw the slave trade until 1808.
Creating the Executive Branch Another major issue concerned the formation of the executive branch.
Others were concerned that giving power to a single leader might lead to monarchy or tyranny.
Some delegates thought Congress should do it, while others favored popular elections.
They finally decided to set up a special body called the Electoral College.
This body would be made up of electors from each state who would cast votes to elect the president and vice president.
Each state would have as many electors as the number of senators and representatives it sent to Congress.
On September 17, 1787, after months of hard work, the Constitution was signed by 39 of the 42 delegates present.
The Constitutional Convention was over, but the Constitution still needed to be ratified by the states.
Now each state would decide whether this plan of government was indeed “more perfect” and thus worthy of becoming the law of the land.
A few delegates left the convention early in protest, and three of those present refused to sign.
Nevertheless, most delegates seemed to believe that they had achieved a historic result.
One float featured a ship honoring Alexander Hamilton, whose eloquence played a key role in securing a narrow victory.
To go into effect, the plan of government would need to be approved by 9 out of the 13 states.
Ratification would take place at state conventions, but it was by no means assured.
Many Americans were concerned that the Constitution gave too much power to the national government.
As a result, supporters of the Constitution would have to work hard to win its ratification.
Federalists and Anti-Federalists The people who supported the Constitution called themselves Federalists.
They favored a federal government— a strong central government that shared power with the states.
Those who preferred a loose association of states with a weaker central government were called AntiFederalists.
The battle between Federalists and Anti-Federalists would be played out in the press, in state legislatures, and at the state ratifying conventions.
Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay led the Federalist campaign.
Using the pen name “Publius,” they wrote a series of 85 essays designed to win support for the Constitution.
Some historians have called their publication one of the most powerful public relations campaigns in history.
On the issue of central power, for example, Madison explained how the system of checks and balances would ensure that no one branch of government would have control over the other two.
The Call for a Bill of Rights By January 1788, Delaware, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey had ratified the Constitution.
Anti-Federalists in Massachusetts complained that the Constitution did not adequately protect individual rights and freedoms against encroachment by the national government.
They argued that it should be altered to include such rights as the freedoms of speech, religion, and the press.
They also wanted guarantees that every citizen would have such rights as the right to trial by jury and protection against unreasonable seizure of property.
The lack of such guarantees became a sticking point in many states as the ratification process wore on.
A number of other states ratified the Constitution with the same understanding.
With James Madison leading the way, the first Congress of the new government framed the proposed amendments.
Madison himself believed that individual rights were already protected by the Constitution, making the amendments unnecessary.
On December 15, 1791 , enough states had ratified 10 amendments to make them part of the Constitution.
Over the course of the nation’s history, 17 more amendments have been added to the Constitution.
Today the Constitution is the oldest written framework of national government in use anywhere in the world.
Forged over the course of a few months in the summer of 1787, the Constitution of the United States has more than stood the test of time.
However, many Americans thought this arrangement did not satisfy the need for a strong central authority.
Delegates from the various states came together to write a new constitution that would provide the basis for a durable and balanced government.
The Articles of Confederation The nation’s first constitution established a governing framework that gave the states more power than the national government.
This lack of central authority contributed to various problems, including a poor economy and weak national defense.
The Northwest Ordinance This land policy established rules for the creation of governments in the Northwest Territory and the eventual admission of western states.
The Constitution of the United States Frustrated by weaknesses of the confederation, delegates met in Philadelphia in 1787 for the Constitutional Convention.
Instead of revising the Articles, they wrote a new constitution that established a national government with three branches.
The Electoral College After much debate, the delegates decided that a single executive, a president, should lead the executive branch.
A body called the Electoral College, made up of electors from each state, would elect the president and vice president.
Ratification After the Constitution was completed in September 1787, it was sent to the states for ratification.
During the debate over ratification, supporters agreed to add amendments to guarantee basic freedoms.
With this assurance, the Constitution was ratified in 1788 and became law.
The first 10 amendments, known as the Bill of Rights, were ratified in 1791.
The leaders of the Senate and the House of Representatives represented the legislative branch.
These leaders were attending a ceremony to celebrate the unveiling of some newly restored historical documents.
The documents had been carefully preserved with the latest tools and technology.
They rested on cushions of handmade paper and were encased in frames of titanium and aluminum.
They were further protected by sapphire windows, traveling light beams, and precisely positioned mirrors set up to detect any changes that could harm the documents.
President George W Bush said, “The courage of America’s first leaders gave us the Declaration.
When the president spoke of “the supreme law of this land ” he was referring to the Constitution.
The Constitution has weathered the centuries because it is a flexible, “living document” that can be interpreted and amended to meet changing needs.
An archivist at the ceremony noted why more than a million people a year come to see the Charters of Freedom.
A Strong Yet Balanced Government The Preamble to the Constitution sets certain broad goals for the government.
This includes providing funds for public works, such as this bridge in Boston.
Franklin’s words were prophetic, but they also sounded a note of caution.
While our constitutional government has survived for more than two centuries, there is no guarantee that it will continue to endure.
Its survival depends on our upholding the principles of the Constitution.
The framers of the Constitution worked hard to set up a political system that would last.
They wanted a government that was strong enough to govern, but not so strong that it endangered citizens’ freedoms.
They also wanted ordinary Americans to understand and support the Constitution.
The first part, the Preamble, describes the purpose of the document and the government it creates.
The second part, the articles, establishes how the government is structured and how the Constitution can be changed through amendments.
The third part, the amendments, includes the Bill of Rights and other changes to the Constitution.
The Preamble Establishes the Purposes of the Government A preamble is an introduction explaining the purpose of a document, typically a legal document.
The power to form the government did not come from an existing government, or the states, or a supreme being.
The next phrase, “in Order to form a more perfect Union ” shows the framers’ determination to improve upon the government established under the Articles of Confederation.
They wanted the union of states to become stronger so that the states would work together, rather than fight among themselves.
The framers wanted to “establish justice” by creating a government that would establish and carry out fair laws that applied equally to all people.
In this phrase, “domestic” refers to the internal affairs of the nation.
By insuring domestic tranquility, the framers hoped to establish a country of peace and order.
They also wanted the government to “provide for the common defense ” the protection of the country as a whole against foreign enemies.
The framers wanted the United States to have a society and an economy in which people could thrive and prosper.
The framers knew that achieving these goals required a strong central government.
However, they recognized that the Constitution must also limit that government’s powers.
Dividing the government into three branches sets up a strong central government, yet also distributes power.
The system of checks and balances ensures that no branch becomes too powerful.
For example, the president can veto a bill, but the bill can still become law if a two-thirds majority of Congress votes to override the veto.
In this example, the executive branch checks the power of the legislative branch, which then checks the power of the executive branch.
To give another example, when the Supreme Court rejects a law as unconstitutional, it is checking the power of the legislative and executive branches.
For example, the president’s nominations of Supreme Court justices are subject to the Senate’s approval. v Through the system of checks and balances.
Congress has the power to impeach and convict the president, vice president, and any civilian official of the United States.
To impeach an official is to charge that person with an offense committed while in office.
If the Senate votes by a two-thirds majority to convict, the official is removed from office.
The Constitution does not only divide power among the three branches of the national, or federal, government.
As you will see, it also divides power between the federal government and state governments.
Provisions for checks and balances are a key feature of the Constitution.
Checks and balances help prevent any one branch of government from wielding too much power.
Constitutional Checks and Balances Legislative Checks on Executive Branch Can override presidential vetoes, approve or reject presidential appointments and treaties, and impeach and try the president.
Executive Checks on Legislative Branch Can approve or veto bills, call special sessions of Congress, and recommend legislation.
Executive Executive Checks on Judicial Branch Can nominates Supreme Court justices and federal judges.
Judicial Checks on Executive Branch Can declare treaties and executive acts unconstitutional.
Appointments are for life, and judges are free from executive control Legislative Checks on Judicial Branch Can approve or reject nomination of federal judges, create lower courts, and remove judges through impeachment.
Judicial Checks on Legislative Branch Can declare laws unconstitutional.
Legislative Judicial An Enduring Plan of Government 75 73 The Legislative Branch Makes the Laws The framers wanted to establish a fair way to make laws and to ensure that lawmakers are accountable to the people.
Therefore, Article I of the Constitution defines the basic structure, procedures, and powers of Congress.
The Structure of Congress To balance the powers of small and large states, the framers set up Congress as a bicameral, or two chamber, legislature.
The membership of the Senate is based on equal representation of the states.
Every 10 years, a census determines how that number is apportioned by state.
As of the 2000 census, the most populous state, California, had 53 districts.
The people of each district elect one House representative, who serves a two-year term.
How Congress Does Its Job The main function of Congress is to make laws.
If the House and Senate pass a bill, it goes to the president, who has 10 days to sign or veto it.
Congress can override a veto with a two-thirds majority vote in each house.
For example, Congress can coin and regulate money, collect taxes, maintain an army and navy, declare war, pay government debts, and regulate foreign trade.
In addition, it may “make all laws which shall be necessary and proper” to carry out such powers.
This clause has been called the elastic clause because it gives Congress flexibility to fulfill its duties.
In 1791 , for example, Congress created a national bank to help collect taxes, pay debts, and regulate trade.
Some people, however, think that Congress sometimes “stretches” its powers too far.
How a Bill Becomes a Law Bill Introduced in the House Introduction A bill is introduced in the House or Senate and then assigned to a committee.
Bill Introduced in the Senate ► Committee Action in the House ► Committee Action At committee hearings, the bill is either passed or held back.
Committee Action in the Senate ► ► Floor Action in the House Floor Action On the floor of the House or Senate, the bill is debated, amended, and voted on by the full membership.
Floor Action in the Senate ► ► Conference Committee If the House and Senate pass different versions of the hill, a committee of members from both houses works out a compromise bill and returns it to both houses for another vote.
Both houses must pass the same versions of the bill before it can be sent on to the president.
Congress can override a veto by a two-thirds majority vote in each house.
Qualifications: • 25 years old • 30 years old • Citizen for 7 years • Citizen for 9 years Powers: Powers: • Proposes tax laws • Approves presidential appointments • Can impeach the president • Ratifies treaties • Conducts trial of the president / after impeachment House of Representatives and Senate Together • Propose and pass laws • Declare war • Override the president's veto with a two-thirds vote • Propose amendments to the Constitution with a two-thirds vote An Enduring Plan of Government 77 The Granger Collection.
The Executive Branch Enforces the Laws Article II describes the election, powers, and duties of the president.
As chief executive, the president is the head of the largest branch of the federal government.
Secretary of War Henry Knox, Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton, Secretary of State Thomas Jefferson, and Attorney General Edmund Randolph.
The Constitution does not mention a cabinet, but Washington set the precedent by using his secretaries as advisors.
Here, President George W Bush meets with his cabinet and other close advisors.
Powers of the Chief Executive In addition to enforcing laws, the president proposes legislation, including the annual federal budget.
As commander in chief, the president is head of the military and has considerable authority in war.
The president also oversees foreign relations, a power that includes making treaties and appointing ambassadors with the Senate's consent.
The president's judicial powers include appointing Supreme Court justices, again with Senate approval, and granting pardons to people who have broken federal laws.
The Role of Other Executive Officials, Departments, and Agencies Many other officials help carry out executive duties.
The vice president, the White House staff, and other close advisors help the president make key policy decisions.
The president also gets advice from the cabinet, a group that consists mainly of the heads of executive departments that enforce the laws.
These department heads, such as the secretary of state and attorney general, are appointed by the president and approved by the Senate.
Their number has risen from four in George Washington’s first cabinet to 15 today.
Cabinet members advise the president on policy matters relating to their departments.
For example, the secretary of state gives advice on foreign affairs, and the secretary of labor advises on polices relating to the workplace.
Some other executive departments are those of defense, education, agriculture, transportation, and energy.
One of the newest is the Department of Homeland Security, created to prevent terrorism and respond to natural disasters.
Within each executive department are agencies that address different issues.
For example, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention , the Food and Drug Administration , and the National Institutes of Health are three agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services.
Other semi-go vemmental agencies, such as the United States Postal Service, provide specific services.
This was the first time the Supreme Court had held an act of Congress to be unconstitutional.
Article III establishes the Supreme Court and gives Congress authority to set up “inferior ” or lower, federal courts.
The Supreme Court and lower federal courts make up the federal judiciary, or federal court system.
The Federal Judiciary The federal courts have been called “the guardians of the Constitution” because they judge whether laws and actions conform to constitutional principles.
However, a court may address a legal issue only if a relevant case comes before it.
Most legal disputes involve state and local laws and are addressed in the state court systems.
The federal court system hears cases involving issues that are not limited to one state, such as violations of the United States Constitution or federal laws.
Other examples are cases in which the United States, a state, or a foreign nation is a named party.
Most federal cases are first heard in the lower courts, starting with a United States district court.
That court’s decision can be appealed to a United States court of appeals.
The Supreme Court may also choose to hear an appeal of a state supreme court decision involving a state or local law.
Such cases usually raise an important constitutional issue affecting the nation as a whole.
Higher courts agree to hear an appeal only when they believe that a lower court may have incorrectly applied the law.
Instead, an appeals court reviews a case based on court records and oral arguments from attorneys and then makes its decision.
The Supreme Court The United States Supreme Court is the highest court in the land.
Like other federal judges, they are appointed for life, and their salaries cannot be lowered.
The framers wanted to ensure an independent judiciary —a system in which judges cannot be removed or have their salaries reduced for making unpopular decisions.
Its decisions are final and binding on lower federal courts and on state courts.
Its rulings become precedents, court decisions used as guides in deciding similar cases.
State courts, lower federal courts, and the Supreme Court itself are guided by precedents set by Supreme Court decisions.
The Power of Judicial Review A key authority exercised by the Supreme Court is judicial review, the power to review an action of the legislative or executive branch and declare it unconstitutional.
This power stems from an 1803 Court case, Marbury Madison , in which the Court overturned an act of Congress.
Chief Justice John Marshall ruled that Congress, in passing the law, had acted outside the bounds of its constitutional power.
Some argue that the Court should take an active role in making policy by overturning laws, whereas others urge restraint.
A System of Divided Powers Printing money is one of the delegated powers of the national government Every day, the Bureau of Engraving and Printing prints 35 million banknotes, with a total value of about $635 million.
As you have seen, the Constitution defines different powers for the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of the federal government.
The Constitution also establishes the principle of federalism, the division of power between the federal and state governments.
Both the federal and state governments have some exclusive powers of their own, while sharing others.
The Powers of the National Government Article I, Section 8, lists the powers granted to Congress and therefore to the national government.
Among these delegated powers are the powers to borrow money, coin money, raise an army and navy, declare war, make treaties, establish post offices, and protect patents and copyrights.
The elastic clause enables Congress to make laws necessary to carry out these and other delegated powers.
Some of the delegated powers are given to the national government alone and specifically denied to the states.
The framers wanted to avoid the monetary confusion that existed under the Articles of Confederation, when many states produced their own currency.
Also, it is appropriate that only the national government can declare war or make treaties with other nations.
Another example is the power to regulate trade with other nations and between the states.
Congress helps to create a national market with few internal barriers to trade and finance.
The Powers of the States The Constitution is much less specific about state powers.
In fact, the only power specifically granted to the states, in Article V, is the power to ratify amendments.
On the other hand, Article I specifies those powers that are denied to the states, including taxing imports or exports without the consent of Congress, coining money, and making treaties.
During the ratification debates, many Americans expressed concern that the lack of delegated state powers in the Constitution might leave the federal government with too much power.
In other words, any power not expressly granted to the national government would remain with the states and the people.
Reserved powers include those that are appropriately handled at the state or local level.
Providing police and fire protection, establishing schools, and regulating businesses within the state are all reserved powers.
So are issuing marriage and driver’s licenses, conducting elections, and establishing local governments.
Article IV says that states must give ""full Faith and Credit” to the laws and decisions of other states.
This means that states, for the most part, must accept the legal documents and actions of other states.
For example, they must allow a child bom in another state to attend their public schools.
These are called concurrent powers because the federal government and the state governments can independently exercise them at the same time.
Both build roads, establish courts, borrow money, make and enforce laws, and spend money for the general welfare.
Their overlapping responsibilities often require the state and federal governments to work together.
Congress sets the date for national elections, and the states register voters and run the elections.
The states count the ballots, and Congress organizes the Electoral College vote.
Federal and state officials also coordinate efforts to provide such services as law enforcement and disaster relief.
The sharing of power can also create conflict between the federal and state governments.
The Constitution provides the general framework for concurrent powers, but it does not spell out every one of them.
Through the years, the system of shared powers has evolved through new laws, amendments to the Constitution, and court decisions.
Since this clause affirms that the Constitution and federal laws are the supreme law of the land, it is often called the supremacy clause.
The supremacy clause establishes that federal law must be followed in cases involving a conflict between federal and state law.
A state’s constitution, laws, and judicial decisions cannot conflict with the United States Constitution or with the laws and treaties of the United States.
Law enforcement is an example of a concurrent power shared by the states and the federal government State police often work with federal officers to investigate crimes and handle emergencies.
The establishment of local governments is a reserved power granted to the states by the Constitution.
These residents of Vermont are holding a town meeting to discuss local issues.
An Enduring Plan of Government 83 77 Amending the Constitution The framers knew that the Constitution would have to change over time to remain relevant and useful to succeeding generations.
As Thomas Jefferson wrote, the Constitution “belongs to the living and not to the dead/’ Changing the Constitution Even before the Constitution was ratified, there were calls for amendments, especially in the form of a bill of rights.
The framers wanted to keep the government long lasting and stable, though, so they made changing the Constitution difficult.
Congress can propose an amendment with a two-thirds vote in each house.
Alternatively, two thirds of state legislatures can ask Congress to call a national convention to draft an amendment.
Either way, an amendment must have the approval of three fourths of the states to become part of the Constitution.
The Bill of Rights When ratifying the Constitution in 1788, five states included a list of amendments they wanted added to the document.
Many other states and individuals also agreed that certain amendments were necessary.
The main demand was for the explicit protection of individual liberties and freedoms.
The new Congress listened to the concerns of the states and the people.
Many people consider the First Amendment to be the most important amendment in the Bill of Rights.
All the successful amendments but one — the Twenty-first — were proposed in Congress and ratified by state legislatures.
This method was used for all but the Twenty-first Amendment 84 Chapter 7 The next three amendments are designed to protect citizens from abuses of power by the federal government.
Debate continues over whether this right was meant to apply to individuals or to members of a state militia.
The Third Amendment states that homeowners cannot be forced to provide room and board to members of the military in times of peace.
The Fourth Amendment guards against unreasonable searches, seizures of property, and arrests.
The next four amendments lay out rights and protections for people who are accused of crimes or are involved in other legal disputes.
It says that people cannot be held for committing a crime unless they are properly indicted, or charged.
Finally, it says that the government cannot take private property without paying a fair price for it.
The Sixth Amendment guarantees the right to a speedy and fair trial in criminal cases.
The Seventh Amendment ensures the right to trial by jury in certain types of federal civil cases, those involving disputes between people or businesses.
The Eighth Amendment prohibits cruel and unusual punishments and forbids courts to impose excessive bail or fines.
The Ninth Amendment says that the people have other rights in addition to those listed, and that those rights must not be violated.
The Tenth Amendment says that powers not delegated to the federal government belong to the states or to the people.
On August 28, 1963, more than 200,000 people took part in the March on Washington.
They were exercising their First Amendment rights to assemble and speak freely.
This protest brought pressure on the government to pass civil rights legislation.
Further Amendments Thousands of additional amendments have been proposed over the years, but only 17 have been ratified, bringing the total number of amendments to 27.
One amendment— the Eighteenth, which banned the making and selling of alcohol — was ratified and then later repealed by the Twenty-first Amendment.
Four of the additional amendments— the Twelfth, Seventeenth, Twentieth, and Twenty-second— concern the election and terms of office of public officials.
Many of the other amendments stem from efforts to expand civil rights and the right to vote.
The Fourteenth Amendment confers citizenship on all persons bom or naturalized in the United States, thereby barring states from denying citizenship to blacks.
The Fifteenth Amendment states that race, color, and previous condition of servitude cannot be used to deny voting rights.
The Nineteenth Amendment says that gender cannot be used to deny the vote.
Over the years, various constitutional amendments have expanded citizens' voting rights.
In the early years, “We the People"" did not include all members of American society.
Today there are many ways for all citizens to have a say in government.
By electing our local, state, and national representatives and leaders, “we the people"" have a say in government.
When “we the people"" vote, we are using the principle of majority rule to make decisions.
In our early history, with very few exceptions, only white property-owning males could vote.
Today “we the people"" includes all citizens, regardless of race, culture, or gender.
The diversity of voters now makes the government much more representative of the people.
One of the main roles of political parties is to nominate candidates for public offices.
Presidential candidates are chosen at national party conventions attended by delegations from each state.
Here you see Barack Obama, who was a candidate for the United States Senate from Illinois, addressing the 2004 Democratic National Convention.
One party, led by Thomas Jefferson, wanted to give the states more power, help small farmers, and reduce the size of the federal government.
The other, led by Alexander Hamilton, favored a strong federal government that could help businesses.
Over the years, the names and beliefs of political parties have changed, but typically two parties have been dominant.
Since the mid1800s, the two parties have been the Republican and Democratic parties.
Today they largely control American politics, especially at the state and national levels.
Even those who consider themselves “independents"" often show loyalty to one of the two parties.
A candidate has a better chance of winning an election if he or she is member of one of the two major political parties, rather than a small third party.
The two-party system is so dominant that it plays a significant role in shaping public policy.
Americans also participate in the political process through marches, protests, and other group actions.
These demonstrators are calling for immigrant rights in Washington, D.C., in 2006.
They campaign for candidates they support or run for office themselves.
They write and promote ballot measures, which are proposed laws or amendments initiated and voted on by the public, not the legislature.
Some people join special interest groups to make their feelings known to the government.
Special interest groups are organizations whose members share a specific interest or concern and want to influence policymaking.
Groups like the American Medical Association , the National Wildlife Federation , the National Rifle Association , and the American Civil Liberties Union spend a lot of time and money lobbying the government on behalf of their causes.
Special interest groups like the Gray Panthers try to influence government policy.
The “supreme Law of the Land” The Constitution is the supreme legal document of the United States.
Three branches of government The first three articles establish the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government.
A system of checks and balances ensures that powers are distributed among the branches.
The legislative branch The main function of this branch of government is to enact laws.
Congress consists of two houses, the Senate and the House of Representatives.
The elastic clause of the Constitution gives Congress the flexibility it needs to carry out its duties.
The executive branch The main task of this branch is to enforce the laws.
This branch also includes many other executive officials, departments, and agencies.
The judicial branch The federal judiciary is made up of the Supreme Court and many lower courts across the country.
The power of judicial review allows the Supreme Court to judge whether acts of Congress are constitutional.
Federalism The Constitution establishes a federal system that balances national and state powers, but it grants controlling authority to the national government in its supremacy clause.
The amendment process As a “living document,” the Constitution can be amended.
Political participation Citizens can participate in government in many ways.
They can vote, join political parties, run for office, and exert political influence through public meetings, interest groups, and other means.
Captain Meriwether Lewis and Lieutenant William Clark, arrived in the frontier outpost of St.
The two men were on a mission from President Thomas Jefferson to explore western rivers for a route to the Pacific Ocean.
On the way, they were to collect information about the Louisiana Territory, a huge expanse of land the United States had just purchased from France.
The town's residents were mainly French settlers who lived by farming, fur trapping, and trading along the river.
Traders would dock their boats by the river’s edge and travel the grid of dirt roads that led away from the river.
Louis in 1803 thought much about what Lewis and Clark's arrival would mean for the little town.
However, by opening the West to settlement, Lewis and Clark’s expedition brought big changes to St.
Its ideal location near the junction of the Mississippi and Missouri rivers made St.
Along the waterfront, wharves and brick warehouses replaced the sandy beach where small boats once landed.
Louis now had prosperous merchants and bankers who rubbed shoulders with farmers and workers.
Between 1840 and 1860, a wave of immigration from Germany and Ireland reshaped the ethnic mix of the city.
Louis, Missouri, in 1804 and returned two years later, having traveled overland to the Pacific Ocean and back.
Along the way, a French fur trapper and his wife, Sacajawea, joined the expedition.
Sacajawea, a captive Shoshone Indian, made this epic journey carrying her young son on her back.
When the expedition reached her people, she proved invaluable as a translator.
As settlers pushed west across the Appalachians, lack of good transportation became a growing problem.
Many western farmers relied on the Mississippi River to ship their crops to Eastern cities.
The First Years of the New Nation In 1790, the United States was beginning its new life as a nation.
That year, the government took its first national census and learned that the country had nearly 4 million people.
Most Americans were still clustered along the eastern seaboard, but some hardy pioneers had begun to move inland.
The Country Expands Beyond Its Colonial Borders In these early years, the United States was predominantly a rural nation.
Many settlers were migrating west across the Appalachian Mountains into the area known as the Northwest Territory.
This territory would later become the states of Ohio, Indiana, Illinois, Michigan, and Wisconsin.
Settlers were also moving into the area of present-day Mississippi and Alabama.
By the early 1800s, American settlements were scattered across a large territory, from the Atlantic Ocean in the east to the Mississippi River in the west.
Agriculture Is the Center of the Nation's Economy In states old and new, farming was the nation’s most important economic activity.
Most Americans farmed on small plots, producing food for themselves and their families.
If they produced a surplus, they might sell it in nearby towns or cities.
In urban areas, artisans produced manufactured goods by hand in small workshops.
In the Northeast, there were a few small textile mills that spun cotton by machine, but large factories did not yet exist.
Lack of good transportation kept most states and regions remote from each other.
Moving people or goods across great distances was expensive and difficult.
The few roads linking towns and cities were deeply rutted in dry weather and treacherous swamps in wet weather.
George Washington Gives Shape to the Office of President When George Washington took the oath of office as the nation’s first president in 1789, he faced a delicate task.
On the other hand, he had to reassure those “fellowcitizens” who feared a strong president could mean the return of a monarchy.
President Washington had no road map, other than the Constitution, to guide 92 Chapter 8 him.
The first test of Washington’s authority as president came in 1791 , when Congress passed a tax on whiskey to raise money.
Western farmers, who turned their grain into whiskey for sale, were outraged.
Angry farmers in western Pennsylvania rose up in rebellion, attacking tax collectors and setting buildings on fire.
Washington saw the Whiskey Rebellion as a threat to the federal government’s authority.
In 1794, President Washington sent a militia force across the Appalachians to stamp out the protests.
In doing so, he made it clear that the federal government would enforce its laws.
One of Washington’s first official actions was to sign Congress’s Federal Judiciary Act into law.
This act created the federal court system, with its district and circuit courts, that we still live under today.
Washington also created the first cabinet, or group of department heads that meets to advise the president.
These differences led to the creation of the country’s first political parties, the Federalists and the Democratic-Republicans.
The Federalists believed that a powerful government was needed to keep order among the states.
They had little faith in the wisdom of the average citizen and thought that a capable, educated elite should run the country.
The party believed that states had the right to judge whether Congress was overstepping its constitutional powers, a view known as the states' rights theory.
The Democratic-Republicans had great confidence in the ability of ordinary people to make good decisions.
They also believed that political power should lie with the majority of voters rather than with a wealthy elite.
Once Washington left office, however, debates between the two parties grew increasingly acrimonious.
During the campaign, partisan feelings ran so high, some worried the new nation might self-destruct.
Nevertheless, the 1800 election took place without serious disturbance.
Thomas Jefferson won the presidency, and power shifted peacefully from one party to the other.
The country had survived a major political test. <C o NV In the early 1800 most Americans lived on farms.
Thomas Jefferson and his DemocraticRepublicans believed that ordinary farmers formed the backbone of American society and its democratic way of life.
Federalists put more faith in educated city dwellers to run the new nation's political affairs.
Changes in a Young Nation 93 During the mid-1800s, many settlers migrated west.
According to this idea, Americans had a God-given right and duty to expand across the continent.
They paddled up the Missouri River and into the unexplored world of the American West, crossing vast plains and snowcapped mountains.
They encountered American Indian tribes and learned about their ways of life.
The news of their expedition thrilled Americans and helped promote western settlement.
Acquiring the West Much of the area that Lewis and Clark explored was part of the Louisiana Purchase.
In 1803, Jefferson had bought the Louisiana Territory from France for $15 million, which was a large sum of money at the time.
The Louisiana Purchase Treaty pushed the western boundary of the United Sates from the Mississippi River to the distant Rocky Mountains, at a cost of about four cents an acre.
Others protested that the purchase was unconstitutional, because the Constitution did not give the president the power to buy foreign territory.
But Jefferson could not pass up an opportunity to double the size of the United Sates.
The Louisiana Purchase furthered his vision of an ""empire for liberty” stretching from sea to sea.
Good farmland in the settled, eastern part of the country was becoming less plentiful.
As a result, more and more people were moving west in search of cheap land.
Many also believed expansion would make the country safer by reducing the threat of foreign invasion from the west.
The idea of a larger, more powerful country also appealed to the American sense of nationalism.
This combination of nationalism and expansionism gave rise in the 1840s to a belief known as manifest destiny.
The term means ""obvious fate,” and it seemed obvious to many Americans that the United States was meant to spread 94 Chapter 8 its founding ideals and democratic way of life across the continent and beyond.
In 1845, Texas joined the Union as a state, after first gaining independence from Mexico.
The United States and Great Britain signed a treaty in 1846 giving the United States control over about half of Oregon Country.
That same year, the United States went to war with Mexico over a border dispute in Texas.
At the end of the Mexican War, the United States gained most of the American Southwest in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
The Gadsden Purchase of 1853, which added a portion of present-day southern Arizona and New Mexico, completed the nation’s continental expansion at that time.
Settlers Find Opportunity and Liberty in the West As the United States expanded, American settlers moved into the newly acquired territories.
Some traveled by wagon along the Santa Fe Trail, which was an old trade route from the Missouri River to Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Many more headed west on the Oregon Trail, which stretched from Independence, Missouri, to Portland, Oregon.
The journey along the Oregon Trail, across the Great Plains and the Rocky Mountains, took many months and cost countless settlers their lives.
Those who made it found fertile farmlands in the green valleys of Oregon.
One group that made the journey west in the 1 840s was made up of the Mormons.
This religious group traveled over the Oregon Trail to Utah to escape persecution.
They settled on the desert lands surrounding Great Salt Lake and created a thriving, prosperous community.
United States Territorial Acquisitions, 1803-1853 Between 1803 and 1853, the continental United States doubled in size.
In this 1841 image of Davy Crockett, the West is portrayed as a wild, untamed frontier.
Crockett, a trail guide and former congressman from Tennessee, embodied the traits of strength and independence that many Americans valued.
These qualities were considered essential for life in the American West.
American Indians Face a Forced Westward Migration Although westward expansion provided new opportunities for settlers, it spelled tragedy for many American Indians.
As the United States added new territories, it also brought many Indian homelands within its national borders.
Settlers who coveted these lands agitated for the removal of tribes to less desirable areas.
In 1830, Congress passed the Indian Removal Act to clear Indians from lands east of the Mississippi River.
The plan was to move the tribes west to Indian Territory, which later became the state of Oklahoma.
Although most tribes reluctantly went along with removal, some resisted.
The Cherokees attempted a legal defense, claiming they were protected from removal by earlier treaties.
When Georgia refused to recognize the treaty rights, the Cherokees appealed to the Supreme Court.
Other tribes, such as the Seminoles of Florida and the Sauk and Fox Indians of Wisconsin Territory, turned to armed resistance.
On the journey to Indian Territory, about 4,000 of the more than 17,000 Cherokees died from starvation, disease, and harsh winter weather.
The Country Develops Sectional Identities As the United States expanded, the three main sections of the country— North, South, and West— began to develop distinct identities.
These identities were influenced by the different geographic characteristics of each section and by the people who settled there.
The North included the states that stretched from Pennsylvania north to New England and from the Atlantic to the Appalachians.
In New England, cold winters and poor soil led many people to turn to commerce, shipbuilding, and fishing for a living.
However, by the mid1800s, some northerners were leaving their farms to work in the growing number of mills and factories.
The South stretched from the Chesapeake Bay south to Florida and west to the Mississippi River.
With the South’s mild climate and rich soil, agriculture was the dominant occupation through the mid-1800s.
Although most southerners were small farmers, plantation agriculture was becoming more and more important.
Plantation owners relied on slave labor to cultivate cash crops, such as cotton and tobacco.
In the early 1800s, the West meant the lands between the Appalachians and the Mississippi River.
By the 1840s, however, the West meant the area west of the Mississippi.
Early settlement of the West was motivated by farmers’ desire for cheap, fertile land.
Americans, as well as immigrants from many countries, crossed the continent in search of new opportunities in the West.
As they mixed with Indians and Mexicans already living there, new patterns of life emerged.
Political Changes in an Emerging Democracy From 1790 to 1830, there was an expansion of democracy in the United States.
Bom into poverty in the Carolina backcountry, Jackson managed to prosper as a planter, buying land and slaves.
He went on to become a judge, a United States senator, and a military hero.
Despite his wealth and fame, Jackson maintained a common, man-of-the-people image.
This image and a new spirit of democracy in the country helped sweep Jackson to the presidency in 1828.
Democracy for the Common Man— But Not Woman Jackson owed his victory in part to an expansion of suffrage, or voting rights.
By 1828, most states had dropped the requirement that voting citizens must own property.
The number of popular votes increased from around 350,000 in 1824 to some 1 ,155,000 the year Jackson was elected president.
Although these changes marked an expansion of democracy, many Americans were still denied this most basic political right.
In many states, secret paper ballots were replacing the more public voice-vote system.
This change encouraged people to vote without fear of intimidation at the polls.
By 1832, open national conventions had replaced private party meetings, called caucuses, to nominate candidates for president and vice president.
Political parties made politics more democratic by involving more people in election campaigns.
By the 1820s, parties were using newspapers, campaign songs, and get-out-the-vote rallies to drum up interest in voting.
The percentage of eligible voters who actually went to the polls increased sharply as campaigns became more interesting.
While running for president in 1828, Andrew Jackson pioneered the use of political rallies and other lively campaign events to reach voters.
The celebration became a near riot as supporters poured into the White House.
Jackson Loses, Then Wins, the Presidency Jackson first ran for president in 1824.
That year, four candidates ran for president, all of them claiming to be DemocraticRepublicans.
Each candidate represented the interests of a different section of the country.
Jackson managed to attract enough voters in all sections to win the popular vote.
However, he did not have enough votes in the Electoral College to win the presidency.
In accordance with the Constitution, the election went to the House of Representatives, which chose John Quincy Adams to be president.
Democrats claimed to speak for ordinary farmers and workers, rather than for the wealthy and privileged few.
This new party supported a decentralized government and states’ rights.
The Alien and Sedition Acts were signed into law by President John Adams, father of John Quincy Adams, in 1798 as the country prepared for war with France.
The National Republicans represented business, shipping, and banking interests in the Northeast.
This party favored a strong central government that would fund internal improvements, such as roads and canals, to grow the economy.
Southerners feared that they would be taxed in the form of high tariffs to pay for these improvements.
They also worried that a stronger federal government might be tempted to interfere with slavery.
Both parties tried to win voters by avoiding sectional issues and flinging nasty charges at one another.
When the mudslinging was over, Jackson’s “common man” appeal won him a landslide victory.
At his inauguration, Jackson threw open the White House doors to his followers.
They tromped through the residence with muddy boots and spilled punch on the furniture.
Once in office, Jackson rewarded his loyal supporters with government jobs.
Those who lost their jobs to make way for Jackson supporters denounced this practice as a spoils system.
Jackson, however, defended “rotation in office’’ as a democratic reform.
Government jobs, he argued, were not the property of an elite few but should be open to all.
Defining the Limits of State and Federal Powers A key issue facing the young republic was the balance between state and federal power.
This issue first came up in 1798, when Congress passed two controversial laws known as the Alien and Sedition Acts.
Believing the laws to be unconstitutional, Thomas Jefferson and James Madison penned protests known as the Virginia and Kentucky resolutions.
The resolutions called on states to nullify, or declare void, any federal law that violates the Constitution.
This principle of nullification would become a flash point in a later battle over states’ rights.
Meanwhile, the Supreme Court under Chief Justice John Marshall made a number of rulings that affirmed federal power.
The first ruling came in 1819 in McCulloch Maryland , which arose when Maryland tried to tax the Baltimore branch of the Bank of the United States, a national bank created by an act of Congress.
Under the Supremacy Clause, no state had the right to destroy or in any way nullify what Congress had enacted.
In Gibbons Ogden, the Supreme Court reaffirmed the power of Congress to regulate interstate commerce.
The issue of stales’ rights reached a boiling point in 1832, when South Carolina tried to nullify two federal tariff laws.
South Carolina relied on imports of cheap manufactured goods, and tariffs raised the prices on these goods.
As the nullification crisis heated up, state leaders threatened to withdraw from the Union if the tariff laws were enforced.
President Jackson stood his ground, preparing to use force if necessary.
The crisis passed, but the tension between states’ rights and federal power did not go away.
Economic Changes in a Developing Nation In 1789, a young Englishman named Samuel Slater came to the United States looking for opportunity.
Instead, he came to set up a cotton-spinning mill using the latest technology.
While working in an English textile mill, Slater had memorized the designs for machines that spun cotton fiber into thread.
Soon after arriving in the United States, he built a mill in Rhode Island and was on his way to fame and fortune.
Slater’s mill marked the beginning of industrialization in the United States.
Industrialization is the move from producing goods by hand to producing them by machine.
Other inventors in the United States were working on new machines that would spur industrialization.
One of the most successful of these inventors was a New Englander named Eli Whitney.
While visiting a Georgia plantation in 1793, Whitney observed how slaves spent hours cleaning the seeds from cotton.
Within days, he/ had invented the cotton gin, a machine that could clean 50 pounds of cotton in the time it took to clean one pound by hand.
Whitney’s cotton gin revolutionized cotton production, making cotton the nation's leading cash crop.
Until then, many had expected slavery to die out in the South, as it had in the North.
Instead, as cotton production increased, so did the demand for slave labor.
Until then, musket parts were made by hand, and each part was slightly different.
Whitney showed how muskets could be put together using identical parts that could be made in quantity and interchanged from one gun to another.
Whitney’s system made musket manufacturing much faster and paved the way for the mass production of goods.
In the 1830s, new machines increased productivity— the rate at which goods can be produced— in agriculture.
John Deere invented the steel-tipped plow, which drastically reduced the labor required to plow a field.
Around the same time, Cyrus McCormick created a mechanical reaper that could harvest grain much faster than traditional methods with less labor.
In response, farmers began to focus on cash crops, using the money they made to buy the expensive new machines and other goods they needed.
Cotton production soared with the introduction of the cotton gin in 1793.
Because cotton planters relied on slave labor, the slave system also became deeply entrenched.
In the early 1800s, textile factories began to sprout up in New England.
These factories used machines and methods of mass production to manufacture large quantities of goods.
Many of the early employees in textile mills were young women who left unpaid work on farms to earn money in the factories.
The Factory System Changes How People Work New technology brought new ways of working.
Boston merchant Francis Cabot Lowell, father of the factory system, opened his first cotton mill in 1814.
Lowell’s factory used a series of machines, housed in one building, that turned raw cotton into finished cloth.
Many of these “mill girls” were happy to leave their unpaid farm work for a factory job with wages Changes in a Young Nation 99 The new factory system was a far cry from the old system of handmade goods produced at home or in small workshops for local use.
Factories churned out large quantities of goods for consumption across the country.
The mass production of goods helped bring about a change from a traditional to a market economy.
In a market economy, people buy and sell goods for money, rather than producing them for themselves.
Americans with cash in their pockets had more goods to choose from when they shopped.
However, many factory workers had to work for low wages in unsafe, unhealthy conditions to produce these goods.
Henry Schenck Tanner created this map of the eastern United States around 1830.
The map shows both railroad lines and canals, as well as state boundaries.
Railroad construction was just beginning, but many canals had already been built across the country.
Connecting the Country The growth of the market economy sparked a transportation revolution.
In the early 1800s, good roads were hard to find anywhere in the United States.
By the mid1800s, however, American engineers had built all-weather roads that had stone surfaces and proper drainage.
The most ambitious project was the National Road, which stretched across the Appalachians from Maryland to the Mississippi River.
On this road, a trip from Maryland to Illinois that once took weeks could be completed in days.
Traveling by river was cheaper than building roads, but traveling upstream was a problem.
In 1807, Robert Fulton attached a steam engine to two huge paddle wheels mounted on a raft.
In 1817, when construction of the Erie Canal began, most canals were 2 or 3 miles long.
The success of the Erie Canal prompted dozens of other canal projects throughout the country.
Inspired by steamboats, engineers built steam-powered locomotives that hauled freight and passenger cars along railroad lines, even in winter when rivers and canals froze.
By the mid1800s, thousands of miles of track stretched across the nation.
Social Changes in the Young Republic The first half of the 19th century was a time of great change in American life.
The country was expanding, the economy was growing, and the political system was becoming more democratic.
Many continued to suffer from poverty, limited opportunity, and a lack of rights.
As a result, various reform movements arose to tackle problems in American society.
The Second Great Awakening Inspires Reformers The reform efforts of the early 1800s found inspiration in a religious revival known as the Second Great Awakening.
Preachers traveled from town to town, holding revival meetings and calling on people to embrace the Christian faith.
These preachers urged people to turn from the sins of their selfish lives and receive God’s love and forgiveness.
They taught that Christians could transform society by working for justice.
This optimism and outpouring of religious fervor helped fuel the reform movements of the early 1800s.
Among the inmates were mentally ill women who had not committed any crime.
Dix made a two-year study of other jails and found the same inhumane conditions.
Children, debtors, and the mentally ill were all treated like hardened criminals.
Her reform efforts brought substantial change in the penal system and in mental health care across the United States.
Horace Mann, an early American educator, believed that free, public education would strengthen democracy and help young people escape poverty.
Another reform effort fueled by the Second Great Awakening was the temperance movement.
Many reformers blamed crime, poverty, and mental illness on alcohol abuse.
The American Temperance Union attracted more than a million members within a year of its formation.
Christian revival meetings, like the one shown here, were popular in the early 1800s.
At these emotional events, people confessed their sins and asked for God's forgiveness.
The revival of Christian faith was an important impetus for social reform movements.
Opposition to slavery had existed since the first Africans were brought to Virginia in the early 1600s.
Congress banned the importation of slaves in 1808, and opponents of slavery hoped slavery would eventually just die out.
Instead, the rise in cotton production that followed the invention of the cotton gin fueled a dramatic expansion of slavery.
In the early 1800s, free African Americans in the North formed several antislavery societies.
Their efforts got a big boost from the religious fervor at revival meetings.
They also helped people see that slavery went against such ideals as liberty and equality, which lay at the heart of American democracy.
Although some antislavery reformers believed slavery should be ended gradually, others called for immediate abolition, or the end of slavery, everywhere.
Abolitionists gave speeches, wrote pamphlets, and lobbied government officials in an effort to end slavery.
The abolitionist movement gained power and public attention in the 1830s through a newspaper called The Liberator, published by William Lloyd Garrison.
Garrison advocated not only an immediate end to slavery but also full equality for African Americans, a radical idea at the time.
Another important abolitionist was Frederick Douglass, a former slave whose autobiography recounted his own struggle for freedom.
Douglass's personal story and his dynamic stage presence made him a powerful spokesman for abolition.
As the abolition movement grew, supporters of slavery— both northern and southern — went on the attack.
Mobs attacked abolitionists, burned their homes, and destroyed their printing presses.
In spite of these attacks, abolitionists continued their work, making slavery the most crucial issue of their time.
Women Demand Equal Rights A number of abolitionist leaders also joined the growing movement for women’s rights.
They were denied many of the rights and privileges given to men, including the right to vote and to control their own money or property.
Most women were expected to stay at home and not try to “better” themselves by pursuing an education or a career.
There they drafted a statement called the Declaration of Sentiments, which was based on the Declaration of Independence.
The statement went on to list various acts of tyranny by men against women.
At the time, women were denied many basic rights, including the right to vote.
Many men, and some women, believed that women already enjoyed political rights through their husbands and should stay focused on home and family.
In the years after the Seneca Falls Convention, reformers like Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B Anthony continued to struggle for women’s rights.
Getting the right to vote would take much longer, but eventually, in 1920, that barrier to women’s rights would also fall.
During this time, the nation expanded from 13 states along the Atlantic coast to a huge nation that spanned a continent.
Manifest destiny Inspired by the belief that their nation was destined to expand, Americans acquired vast western lands and began a movement to settle these new territories.
Indian Removal Act As settlers moved westward, they pushed Indians out of their homelands and forced their removal to lands set aside as Indian Territory in present-day Oklahoma.
Jacksonian democracy As voting rights expanded, the United States became more democratic.
In 1828, Andrew Jackson was elected president as the champion of the common man.
Marshall Court In the ongoing struggle between states’ rights and federal power, the Marshall Court made key decisions that strengthened the federal government’s power.
Factory system New machines and ways of organizing work in factories made production more efficient and changed the way Americans worked.
Second Great Awakening A major religious revival movement inspired reform movements in many areas of American life, including prison reform, temperance, public education, and the abolition of slavery.
Charles Sumner spent his life working for equal rights for African Americans.
It was one of the first public schools erected for educating Washington's black community.
Today the school is a museum, with a permanent exhibit on one of Sumner's friends — fellow abolitionist Frederick Douglass.
Introduction On May 22, 1856, Senator Charles Sumner of Massachusetts was savagely beaten on the floor of the Senate.
Sumner was an ardent abolitionist, and in his speech, he had blasted fellow senators for passing a law that would allow slavery in Kansas Territory.
Sumner sneered at Butler for his proslavery beliefs and his tendency to drool when he spoke.
Many senators found Sumner’s speech offensive, and Southerners were outraged.
Two days later, Preston Brooks, Butler’s nephew and a member of the House, approached Sumner, who was seated at his desk.
Declaring Sumner’s speech a “libel on South Carolina and Mr Butler,’’ Brooks began to beat Sumner over the head with his gold-tipped cane.
Brooks eventually broke his cane, but not before he had left Sumner bloody and unconscious on the Senate floor.
Sumner survived the attack, but it was three years before he recovered from his injuries and returned to the Senate.
The incident underscored the country’s deep divisions over the issue of slavery.
Southerners praised Brooks for defending the South and his family’s honor.
Many Southerners sent Brooks new canes to replace the one he had broken on Sumner’s head.
They saw it as another example of the same Southern brutality that was responsible for slavery.
Many in the North who had previously rejected the antislavery movement as too radical now found themselves more sympathetic to limiting slavery— and more hostile toward the South.
Sectional Differences Divide the Union The Ohio River meanders for nearly 1 ,000 miles from its origins in western Pennsylvania to the Mississippi River, at Cairo, Illinois.
It served as the main route for westward migration into the old Northwest Territory.
The Northwest Ordinance of 1787 declared that all lands north of the Ohio would be free of slaves, leaving slavery allowable in lands to the south.
This law helped make the creation of new western states easier for a time.
As the country expanded, sectional differences over slavery increasingly divided the country.
The Missouri Compromise In the early 1800s, Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois applied for statehood.
Because they were all north of the Ohio River, they entered the Union as free states.
During the same period, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Alabama— all south of the Ohioentered as slave states.
By 1819, the number of slave states and free states was balanced at 1 1 each.
That meant neither North nor South had a controlling majority in the Senate.
But that year, Missouri, which lay to the west of the Ohio River, applied for admission as a slave state.
If admitted, Missouri would tip the balance of power in the Senate toward the South.
Northerners in Congress protested that most of Missouri lay north of the point where the Ohio River met the Mississippi.
They also worried that making Missouri a slave state might turn the rest of Louisiana Territory toward slavery.
When the Senate took up the matter again in 1820, however, things had changed.
This opened the way for a deal known as the Missouri Compromise, which was sponsored by Speaker of the House Henry Clay.
Under the terms of the compromise, Missouri would enter the Union as a slave state and Maine as a free state, preserving the balance of power in the Senate.
The Missouri Compromise broke the deadlock in the Senate, but it pleased no one.
Southerners disliked the ban on slavery in much of the Louisiana Territory.
If the Union must be dissolved, slavery is precisely the question on which it ought to break.
The North and the South The dispute between North and South over Missouri was more than a battle over slavery.
Sectionalism, or a strong attachment to regional interests, had become a major issue in American politics.
By midcentury, the North was becoming increasingly urban, as people migrated from farms to cities in search of economic opportunities.
In the Northeast, between 1800 and 1860, the percentage of the population living in cities grew from 9 to 35 percent.
Waves of immigration, mostly from Ireland and Germany, helped swell populations.
Most of the population lived on small farms or large plantations scattered across the countryside.
The largest Southern city, New Orleans, had a population of only 169,000 people.
But it also allowed the buying and selling of human beings, as shown here, to continue in half of the states.
As a result, the number of enslaved African Americans more than doubled after 1820, reaching almost 4 million by 1860.
Although agriculture was still a significant part of the North's economy, workshops, factories, and mills also churned out large amounts of manufactured goods.
Most of the immigrants entering the country in the 1 840s and 1 850s settled in the North because that was where the jobs were.
A growing network of canals and railroad lines in the North helped carry the products of mills and factories to customers.
By 1860, more than 20,000 miles of rail lines crisscrossed the northern half of the country.
These lines connected the cities and factories of the Northeast with the farming regions of the Midwest.
In contrast, the South invested much less in transportation and had only half as many rail lines.
Its economy continued to be based on the export of agricultural products.
Rice, com, and cotton all grew well in the South, with cotton being the most important of the three crops.
Some white Southerners owned large plantations worked by large numbers of slaves.
Still, plantation agriculture and slave labor formed the basis of the Southern economy.
Without slavery, the plantation system would collapse, causing great economic harm to the South.
For that reason, most Southerners saw abolitionism as a threat to their economy and way of life.
This map reveals differences in the economies of the North and South in 1860.
Although farming was still the main activity in both regions, trade and industry were growing rapidly in the North.
In contrast, the economy of the South was dependent on the export of rice, tobacco, and cotton.
Clay was one of the country's leading statesmen, spending much of his political career trying to mend sectional differences.
Now, 30 years later, North and South were once again on the brink of dividing the Union over the issue of slavery.
The elderly Clay was tired and ill, but he would make one last effort to hold the country together.
The Growing Divide over Slavery In both the North and the South, people had mixed views on slavery.
They did, however, object to extending slavery into new territories and states, an opinion known as the Free-Soil position.
Until that happened, many stood ready to help slaves liberate themselves.
They did so by establishing a network of secret escape routes and safe houses for runaways that became known as the Underground Railroad.
An escaped slave-turnedabolitionist named Harriet Tubman was the best-known “conductor"" on the Underground Railroad.
Tubman risked her life many times by returning to the South to guide slaves to freedom in the North.
In the South, moderates saw slavery as a necessary evil that would eventually die out as more and more slaves were freed.
Southern radicals, however, held that slaves were property and that limiting the expansion of slavery into new territories deprived Southerners of their property rights.
Territorial expansion became the flash point in the ongoing debate over slavery.
Just how divided the country was became clear in 1846, when President James K Polk asked Congress for money to negotiate with Mexico for the acquisition of California.
David Wilmot, a representative from Pennsylvania, attached an amendment to the funding bill known as the Wilmot Proviso.
The amendment would have banned slavery from any territory that the United States might acquire.
The Wilmot Proviso passed several times in the House, which had a majority from the North.
Its passage was blocked, however, in the Senate, where the South had more senators— and thus, more power.
The debate over the expansion of slavery was renewed after the United States acquired vast lands in the Southwest in its war with Mexico.
Moderates in both the North and the South proposed settling these new territories on the basis of popular sovereignty, or rule by the people.
This meant allowing voters in the territories to decide whether to permit slavery.
But popular sovereignty did not address the problem of keeping a balance of power in Congress if and when these territories became states.
This problem came front and center when California applied for admission to the Union as a free state in 1849.
California's entry as a free state would tip the balance of power toward the North.
Congress was deadlocked again, and some Southerners spoke of withdrawing from the Union.
Born into slavery, Harriet Tubman escaped to Philadelphia in 1849 via the Underground Railroad.
She made her first trip back to the South to help others escape just after the Fugitive Slave Law made it a federal crime to help runaway slaves.
The rest of the CANADA Minnesota Territory Oregon Territory Nebraska Territory Utah Territory Kansas Territory New Mexico Territory Indian Territory Southwest was left open to slavery, depending on a vote of the people who settled there.
This compromise held the country together for a time, but it did not satisfy either side in the slavery dispute.
It admitted California into the Union as a free state, which pleased the North.
It divided the rest of the Southwest into two territories— New Mexico and Utah— and opened both to slavery, which pleased the South.
It ended the slave trade in Washington, D.C., but allowed existing slaveholders there to keep their slaves, making both sides happy.
The new law required the return of escaped slaves to their owners, something slaveholders had been demanding for years.
To get his plan through Congress, Clay persuaded Senator Daniel Webster of Massachusetts to lend his support.
Webster opposed slavery, but he agreed to support Clay’s compromise in an effort to end the crisis.
In a speech before Congress, Webster urged his fellow senators to unite for the good of the nation.
The debate went on for months, but Congress finally approved Clay’s compromise.
The Compromise Satisfies No One Clay and Webster hoped the Compromise of 1850 would placate both sides and help ease tensions over slavery.
The law allowed Southern “slave catchers” to come north to retrieve escaped slaves and required Northerners to come to the aid of these slave catchers or face fines, even imprisonment.
In this best-selling novel, Harriet Beecher Stowe described the cruelties of slavery through the story of a dignified slave named Uncle Tom.
The third, Simon Legree, abuses Tom and has Tom beaten to death for refusing to tell where two escaped slaves are hiding.
Stowe hoped her novel would help bring slavery to a quick and peaceful end.
Instead, the book increased the hostility of many Northerners toward the South.
Southerners, in turn, saw Stowe’s description of slavery as both inaccurate and an insult to their way of life.
The Kansas-Nebraska Act In 1854, another act of Congress set the North and the South on a collision course.
Senator Stephen Douglas of Illinois introduced a bill to organize the Great Plains for settlement.
Because this area lay north of the Missouri Compromise line, the bill did not mention slavery.
Southerners in Congress agreed to vote for the bill if the two new territories— Kansas and Nebraska— were organized on the basis of popular sovereignty.
With Southern support, the Kansas-Nebraska Act made it through Congress.
They thought the Missouri Compromise had put most of the Great Plains off-limits to slavery.
To prevent that from happening, antislavery activists and settlers, or Free-Soilers, united to form a new political party in 1854.
The Kansas-Nebraska Act overturned the Missouri Compromise by organizing Kansas and Nebraska territories on the basis of popular sovereignty.
The law angered Free-Soilers in the North, who feared that slavery would soon spread across the Great Plains.
Photographs, like this one of a cruelly treated slave, added fuel to the fire lit by Uncle Tom's Cabin.
As Northerners became more aware of the inhumanity of slavery, many refused to cooperate with the Fugitive Slave Law.
Some Northern states even passed personal liberty laws, which prohibited state and local officers from cooperating with slave catchers.
During the settlement of Kansas, supporters and opponents of slavery came into deadly conflict.
The mural, which appears in the Kansas State Capitol, was painted by John Steuart Curry almost a century after these events.
Kansas Becomes a Battleground over Slavery By 1855, settlers were pouring into Kansas.
But the territory also attracted agitators, or protesters, who wanted to influence the vote on slavery.
Abolition societies in the North sent in Free-Soilers, while groups in the South recruited proslavery settlers to occupy Kansas.
From Missouri, armed agitators called “border ruffians” crossed into Kansas and threatened the Free-Soilers.
On May 21 , 1856, proslavery forces raided the Free-Soil town of Lawrence, Kansas.
They burned buildings, looted stores, and destroyed two printing presses.
Northern newspapers called the border ruffians' rampage the “Sack of Lawrence ” Antislavery activists led by John Brown met violence with violence.
Brown was an antislavery zealot who had dedicated his life to ending slavery by any means necessary.
Brown and seven of his supporters attacked the proslavery town of Pottawatomie.
They dragged five men out of their homes and killed them with their swords.
Brown's massacre prompted still more bloodshed in Kansas, as proslavery and antislavery forces battled for control of the territory.
The day after the Lawrence raid, Preston Brooks attacked and beat Charles Sumner on the Senate floor.
Despite efforts at compromise, the struggle over slavery was getting more violent.
The Scotts had lived with their owner for several years in the free territory of Wisconsin.
They based their suit on the argument that living in a free territory had made them free people What began as a simple lawsuit led to one of the most notorious Supreme Court decisions in the history of the nation.
The Dred Scott Decision Outrages the North In 1856, the case of Scott Sandford reached the Supreme Court.
Taney, however, saw in this case the opportunity to resolve the slavery issue once and for all.
Writing for majority, Taney said, Missouri slave Dred Scott, pictured above beside his wife, Harriet, sued for his freedom by arguing that having lived with his owner in free territory, he should be a free man.
By a majority of 7-2, the Court ruled that Scott could not bring a suit in a federal court because African Americans were not United States citizens.
But it is too clear for dispute, that the enslaved African race were not intended to be included, and formed no part of the people who framed and adopted this declaration. —Chief Justice Roger Taney, Scott u Sandford, 1857 To this Taney added, “Dred Scott was not a citizen of Missouri within the meaning of the Constitution . . . and not entitled as such to sue in its courts ” The Court also rejected the idea that Scott’s stay in Wisconsin had made him a free man.
Taney reasoned that giving Scott his freedom would be like taking property from his owner.
Thus, the Missouri Compromise was unconstitutional by establishing territories “which prohibited a citizen from holding or owning property of this kind ” The ruling struck the nation like a bombshell.
They believed the Court had settled the slavery question in their favor.
The Court’s decision had invalidated the whole idea of “free soil” and opened all territories to slavery.
John Brown's Raid on Harpers Ferry Shocks the South The Dred Scott decision helped convince radical abolitionists like John Brown that slavery would never be ended by legal means.
In 1859, Brown decided to try a different approach— he provoked an armed uprising of slaves to free themselves.
With 21 other men, Brown seized the federal arsenal at Harpers Ferry, Virginia.
Brown intended to distribute the weapons to slaves in the area and spark a slave revolt.
Even so, John Brown's raid on Harper’s Ferry shocked the South and prompted widespread fears of a slave rebellion.
Most Southerners saw Brown as a lunatic whose extreme views were representative of the antislavery movement.
Many Northerners, on the other hand, saw Brown as a hero and martyr to the cause of abolition.
Lincoln won in the electoral college with less than 40 percent of the popular vote.
The Civil War began on April 12, 1861, when Southern troops opened fire on Fort Sumter.
After 34 hours of shelling, Major Robert Anderson sent a telegram to Lincoln's secretary of war, announcing the surrender of the fort.
Northern Democrats nominated Stephen Douglas of Illinois and backed popular sovereignty in the territories.
Southern Democrats picked John C Breckinridge of Kentucky, who wanted slavery to be allowed in all territories.
Lincoln, an Illinois lawyer, was a moderate but firm opponent of slavery who had first gained national attention during a run for the Senate in 1858.
Lincoln lost the Senate race to Douglas, but his campaign had won him strong antislavery support in the North.
Lincoln won the presidency with less than 40 percent of the votes, all of them cast in the North.
Lincoln’s victory raised the cry of secession, or withdrawal from the Union, in the South.
Southerners feared that with a Republican in the White House, Congress would try to abolish slavery.
Secession Spreads Across the South Lincoln tried to hold the nation together, but his efforts had little effect.
Together they formed the Confederate States of America, with Jefferson Davis as president.
In his inaugural address, Lincoln declared that secession was both wrong and unconstitutional.
He added that he had no legal right to interfere with slavery in the states where it existed, but he expressed his determination to keep the Union together.
On April 12, 1861, Southern forces opened fire on Fort Sumter, a federal fort in Charleston harbor.
After a day and a half of bombardment, the troops in the fort surrendered.
By I860, a series of events had widened this gulf to the breaking point.
The election of Abraham Lincoln as president that year triggered a secession crisis that led to the Civil War.
Missouri Compromise This 1820 compromise banned slavery from much of the Louisiana Territory while maintaining the balance of power between slave and free states in the Senate.
Compromise of 1850 Henry Clay hoped this compromise on slavery in the West would please everyone.
But its inclusion of the Fugitive Slave Law deeply angered many Northerners.
Uncle Tom’s Cabin This best-selling novel touched the hearts of Northerners with its story of a kind slave who was mistreated by a brutal owner, turning many against slavery.
Kansas-Nebraska Act This 1854 act opened Kansas and Nebraska to settlement under the banner of popular sovereignty.
Kansas erupted in violence as proslavery and antislavery settlers battled for control of the territory.
Dred Scott decision This 1858 Supreme Court decision denied citizenship to African Americans and opened all western territories to slavery.
Election of 1860 Republican candidate Abraham Lincoln won election in 1860 with a minority of the popular votes.
Fearing that Republicans would try to interfere with slavery, several slave states seceded.
On April 10, 1861, Southern forces attacked Fort Sumter, beginning the Civil War.
Introduction Wilmer McLean was about to sit down to lunch with a group of Confederate officers on July 18, 1861 , when a cannonball ripped through his roof.
This was more than McLean had bargained for when he moved his family to a farm in the country.
When he retired, he decided to move to the countryside for some peace and quiet.
He bought a farm outside the small village of Manassas Junction, Virginia.
The farm was comfortable and pleasant, with fields, woods, and a small stream called Bull Run.
Unfortunately for McLean, Manassas was also the site of an important railroad junction.
These rail lines made Manassas a strategic location in the Civil War— one that both the North and the South wanted to control.
Since the shelling of Fort Sumter in April 1861 , the North and the South had been in a state of war.
Then, in mid-July, the two opposing armies gathered their forces near McLean's farm.
Three days after the cannonball landed in McLean's kitchen, the First Battle of Bull Run began.
The fighting raged across McLean’s land for hours, but by afternoon, the Union forces were in full retreat.
At that point, McLean decided to leave Manassas and find a safer place to live.
The McLean family relocated to the south in a small Virginian town called Appomattox Court House.
McLean hoped that the town's remote location would keep the war away from his doorstep.
The First Battle of Bull Run, shown here, was the first major conflict of the Civil War.
The battle was fought on Wilmer McLean's farm in Manassas Junction, Virginia.
Interestingly, McLean's next home, in Appomattox Court House, Virginia, would play a key role at the end of the war.
Four Long Years of War Union and Confederate Resources, 1861 Total Population Production of Manufactured Goods When the Civil War began, the Union had clear advantages over the Confederacy in terms of resources.
At the time of the Confederate attack on Fort Sumter in April 1861 , seven states had seceded from the Union.
In the months that followed, the eight slave states in the Upper South faced a difficult decision— to secede or not.
Finally, four of them— Maryland, Delaware, Kentucky, and Missouri— remained in the Union, but not without serious reservations.
The country, now formally divided between the Union and the Confederacy, braced for war.
The Advantages of the Union and the Confederacy As the war began, both sides were confident of a quick victory.
Northerners were certain they could overwhelm the South with their superior resources.
Not only did the Union have more than twice as many people than the South, but it also had a much more diverse economy.
The North outstripped the South in farm production, factories, naval force, and railroad lines, which were crucial for moving troops and supplies.
They had the advantage of fighting a defensive war on their own soil, as well as outstanding military leadership.
Before long, they believed, the Union would tire of battle and leave the Confederacy in peace.
Believing their cause was just, volunteers on both sides rushed to enlist.
The 70,000 new troops that marched into battle on Wilmer McLean's farm in 1861 were certain the other side would collapse at the first whiff of gunpowder.
The realities of the First Battle of Bull Run, however, destroyed such illusions.
The Anaconda Plan Begins to Squeeze the Confederacy After Bull Run, President Abraham Lincoln realized he had to plan for a long war.
With General Winfield Scott, he devised a strategy that came to be known as the Anaconda Plan.
As the name suggests, the idea was to surround the South and squeeze it to death, like an anaconda snake crushing its prey.
To accomplish this goal, the Union planned to set up a naval blockade — a line of ships stopping sea traffic in and out of Southern ports.
The blockade would keep the South from trading its cotton in Europe for the war supplies it needed.
Next, the Union navy would take control of the Mississippi River, separating Texas, Louisiana, and Arkansas from the rest of the South.
From there, the Union army would move east to squeeze the life out of the Deep South.
Finally, Union forces would invade Virginia and lop off the enemy’s head, in this case the Confederate capital of Richmond.
At the same time, Union forces commanded by General Ulysses S Grant fought their way south toward the Mississippi.
Grant won decisive battles that brought much of Tennessee under Union control.
The Union navy’s push up the Mississippi was blocked at Vicksburg, a key city on the river.
The Confederate capital remained safe from Union forces for two more years.
Antietam:The Bloodiest Day of the War After Union forces failed to capture Richmond, the South tried to turn the tables on the North.
The top Confederate general, Robert E Lee, decided to invade Union territory by crossing into Maryland.
He hoped this show of strength would persuade Maryland to join the Confederacy.
He also hoped that major victories on Union soil would encourage Great Britain and France to give aid to the Confederacy.
After crossing the Potomac River, Lee's army clashed with Union forces on September 17, 1862, at Antietam Creek, near Sharpsburg, Maryland.
The Battle of Antietam was the bloodiest one-day battle in American history, with more than 20,000 soldiers killed or wounded.
One soldier recalled, “I have never in my soldier life seen such a sight.
Despite the enormous human cost, the battle ended in a stalemate, and Lee retreated back across the Potomac into Virginia.
Although the Battle of Antietam was not decisive, it was a turning point in the war.
Not only had Lee’s invasion of the North failed, but he had also lost a quarter of his army in the effort.
European countries remained reluctant to recognize or assist the Confederacy.
Furthermore, Lee’s failure gave Lincoln the chance to take a step that would change the course of the war.
The Emancipation Proclamation Changes Union War Aims Although Lincoln opposed slavery, he refused at first to make abolition a war aim.
But as the war dragged on, Lincoln decided that tying the war effort to emancipation— freeing the slaves— made sense.
Calling for the end of slavery, Lincoln knew, would link the war to a moral cause in the North.
It would also win support in Europe, where opposition to slavery was strong.
Freeing the slaves could also deprive the South of part of its workforce.
In fact, since the start of the war, thousands of slaves had freed themselves by running away to the Union lines.
News of these runaways may have influenced Lincoln’s decision to call for the emancipation of all slaves.
Return to the Union by January 1 , 1863, or he would free their slaves.
Slaves living in areas loyal to or under Union control were not affected.
The Emancipation Proclamation had little immediate effect, because the Confederacy ignored it.
Nevertheless, it gave the Union a great moral purpose and signified that a Union victory would mean the end of slavery.
The one-day Battle of Antietam in September 1862 was the bloodiest single day of the Civil War.
It climaxed with Pickett's Charge, a Confederate assault on Union forces dug in on Cemetery Ridge.
Today, Gettysburg National Military Park and the Gettysburg National Cemetery attract more than a million tourists each year.
General Grant continued to battle his way toward the Mississippi River.
In May 1863, he arrived at the Confederate stronghold of Vicksburg, Mississippi, and settled in for a long siege.
For six weeks, his troops shelled the city from one side, while Union gunboats battered it from the other.
The Confederates dug caves into the hillsides and tried to ride it out.
On July 4, the Confederate army at Vicksburg surrendered, and the Union finally gained control of the Mississippi.
Meanwhile, another great battle was underway in the village of Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.
On July 1 , 1863, his army of approximately 75,000 troops met a Union force of about 95,000 just west of the town.
At first, Lee’s troops held their position, but on July 3, they suffered devastating losses and were forced to retreat.
Having lost a third of his army, Lee would not attack the North again but would fight a defensive war only.
There he gave one of the most stirring speeches in American history, the Gettysburg Address.
Total War Forces the South to Surrender After the defeats at Gettysburg and Vicksburg, Southerners continued to defend their land fiercely, despite dwindling resources.
General Grant adopted a policy known as total war, which called for doing whatever was necessary to undermine the enemy’s willingness or capacity to fight.
He would lead his forces into Virginia to engage Lee’s army and take the Confederate capital of Richmond.
In September, Sherman captured Atlanta and burned much of it to the ground.
During Sherman's March to the Sea, his troops destroyed everything they found of value.
After taking the port city of Savannah, Georgia, Sherman turned north and swept through the Carolinas.
On April 9, Lee and Grant met at the village of Appomattox Court House.
Oddly enough, their meeting took place in the house of Wilmer McLean, the same man whose farm in Manassas had been the site of the first real battle of the war.
Most important, “Each officer and man will be allowed to return to his home, not to be disturbed by the United States authorities ” At long last, the Civil War was over.
In 1864, General William Tecumseh Sherman waged total war on the South in an effort to bring the Confederacy to its knees.
During his infamous March to the Sea through Georgia, his troops turned farms and towns, leaving a path of destruction 60 miles wide.
Challenges Facing Government Leaders While the war raged, leaders in both the Union and the Confederacy faced enormous challenges.
Not only did they have to mount a huge military effort, but they also had to find ways to pay for a long war.
In addition, they had to shore up public support for an increasingly unpopular struggle.
Two years later, a new state, West Virginia, was created when part of Virginia split from the Confederacy and joined the Union.
Because his base of support was so thin, he faced daunting political problems as he tried to hold the Union together.
His every move was criticized by political opponents and an often-hostile press.
Early in the war, one of Lincoln’s top priorities was to keep the border states of Maryland, Delaware, Kentucky, and Missouri in the Union.
Maryland, in particular, was crucial, because it surrounded Washington, D.C., on three sides.
At the start of the war, pro-secession mobs attacked a Union regiment as it passed through Baltimore.
Lincoln sent in troops and suspended the constitutional right of habeas corpus— the right of a person to appear in court so a judge can determine whether the person is being imprisoned lawfully.
Suspending this right allowed the Union to jail suspected opponents without charge and to hold them indefinitely.
Lincoln’s policy was harsh, but he saw it as necessary to keep Maryland and neighboring Delaware from seceding.
Although abolitionists pressured him to end slavery immediately, he resisted for fear of alienating the border states or angering those in the Union who did not support abolition.
After it became apparent to him that emancipation was necessary, he waited until he could make his announcement from a position of strength.
Even then, he made sure that his proclamation did not cover slaves in states loyal to the Union.
Although that decision upset the abolitionists, they still regarded the Emancipation Proclamation as a major step forward.
Lacking sufficient volunteers, Congress enacted a military draft in 1863.
The draft law required all white men between the ages of 20 and 45 to report for military duty.
For S300, a man who did not want to serve could buy his way out of the draft, or he could hire a replacement to serve in his place.
This meant that affluent Northerners could avoid service, while the poor went off to war.
President Lincoln also faced the challenge of leading a Union that was far from united.
These Democrats also did not see emancipation as a worthy war objective.
Republicans nicknamed these critics Copperheads, after a poisonous snake.
Challenges for Southern Leaders Confederate president Jefferson Davis also faced challenges in raising an army.
Like the Northern version that came later, this law included a loophole that allowed rich plantation owners to avoid military service.
Some Southern states tried to evade the law, calling it an assault on states’ rights.
The main challenge for Davis and other Confederate leaders, however, was figuring out how to pay for the war while keeping the Southern economy afloat.
Prior to the war, the South had relied on cotton sales for most of its income.
Much of that cotton was shipped to Europe, especially to Great Britain, where it played a key role in the textile industry.
When the war began, the South placed an embargo on cotton exports in an attempt to force Great Britain and other European countries to recognize the Confederacy and assist it with arms and money.
But Southern leaders failed to realize that Great Britain already had a surplus of cotton and was developing new sources of supply.
Thus, the cotton embargo failed to prompt European action, and the South lost valuable export income.
Without income from cotton sales, the South could not import the goods it needed to fight a long war.
Between 1860 and 1863, food prices in the South rose by more than 1 ,000 percent.
Bacon went from 12 cents a pound to $1 .50 and butter from 23 cents a pound to $3.00.
Hundreds of women rampaged through downtown, breaking windows and stealing food, shoes, and other goods.
Then he threatened to have troops open fire if the rioters did not leave.
The women went home, but other similar riots broke out in towns and cities across the South.
The mostly working-class Irish American mob burned buildings and attacked African Americans.
Angered by food shortages and rising prices, hundreds of women staged a bread riot in Richmond, Virginia, in April 1863.
However, newspapers denied reports of hunger and blamed the riot on criminals.
The Effect of the War on Soldiers Around 3 million men fought in the Civil War.
Even for those who escaped without injury, the war exacted a tremendous cost.
Soldiers had to leave their homes and families for up to four years while enduring numerous hardships.
New Weapons Make Battle More Deadly The Civil War was an extremely brutal and destructive conflict.
One reason for this was the development of new and deadlier weapons, such as the rifled musket.
Unlike the old smoothbore musket, this gun had grooves on the inside of the barrel that caused the bullet to spin, allowing it to travel much faster, farther, and with greater accuracy.
Improved cannons with explosive shells also allowed armies to unleash a hail of artillery fire on their opponents.
These new weapons were deadly enough, but poor battlefield tactics exacerbated their effects.
Instead of spreading troops out to make them difficult to target, generals massed the soldiers together for large frontal assaults on enemy lines.
This tactic had worked well enough in previous wars, when guns were less accurate.
But in the Civil War, snipers who were dug into defensive positions could mow down a line of charging troops with ease, even at great distances.
This mismatch of new weapons with old tactics led to incredibly bloody battles, like the one at at Antietam.
The screaming and bursting of shells, ... the death screams of wounded animals, the groans of their human companions, wounded and dying and trampled underfoot by hurrying batteries, riderless horses and the moving lines of battle ... a perfect hell on earth. — Unknown Union soldier, describing the Battle of Gettysburg Battles often took place in open fields.
The lines were very near each other, and from the dense underbrush and the tops of trees came puffs s of smoke, the “ping” of the bullets and the yell of the enemy.
Medical Care on the Battlefield Many soldiers who were wounded in battle died where they fell.
Those who were rescued often faced a grim fate in the hands of military doctors.
Doctors did not know how to treat many diseases, nor did they understand the causes of infection and the need for sanitary procedures in surgery.
They wiped their hands and surgical tools on their jackets or dipped them in dirty water between operations.
One of their most common tools was the bone saw, which was used to perform amputations.
Because musket balls typically shattered bones on impact, doctors had little recourse but to remove whole limbs, often without anesthesia.
Soldiers often pitched their tents near open latrines and bathed in the same water that they used for drinking.
For every soldier who died in battle, an estimated two or three more died of disease from unsanitary conditions in camp.
Keeping Busy Between Battles The life of soldiers was not all about the horrors of war.
On average, for every day of battle, they spent 50 days hanging around the camp.
When they were not marching or drilling, the men usually had a lot of time on their hands.
To stay occupied in camp, soldiers on both sides pursued various pastimes.
Soldiers also wrote letters to their loved ones, played cards, and went swimming.
Hunting and fishing were popular, as were sports like baseball and wrestling.
Soldiers even performed magic shows, skits, and plays for their campmates.
One Confederate production, called “Medical Board ” satirized army doctors and their fondness for amputation.
To raise their spirits before battle, they sang patriotic songs like “The Battle Cry of Freedom” and “Dixie ” Most of the time, however, they preferred traditional folk songs and sentimental ballads.
They also made up songs about the hardships of war and the tedium of camp life.
One mournful song, “Weeping Sad and Lonely,” was a favorite among homesick troops on both sides.
With plenty of time between battles, soldiers passed some of the time playing card games and sports.
Abner Doubleday, the man often credited with inventing baseball in 1839, became a major general in the Union army during the Civil War.
He commanded the troops at Fort Sumter when it was first fired on, and he later fought heroically at Gettysburg.
The Effect of the War on African Americans Although the war started as a conflict over states’ rights and a fight to preserve the Union, at heart it was a struggle over the future of slavery.
This war, disguise it as they may, is virtually nothing more or less than perpetual slavery against universal freedom. —Frederick Douglass, 1861 The Promise of Freedom Stirs African Americans Although the Emancipation Proclamation did not free any slaves when it was issued, it did cause great rejoicing among African Americans in the North.
Many saw emancipation as the first step toward gaining equal rights for blacks.
It was indeed a time of times, . . . nothing like it will ever be seen again in this life. — Henry M Turner, The Negro in Slavery , War, and Peace , 1913 African Americans and the War Effort Even before the Emancipation Proclamation, thousands of slaves had fled to Union lines.
Because there was no government policy on the fugitives, Union commanders were left to make their own decisions about what to do with them.
Some tried to return fugitives to their former owners or to keep them out of Union camps.
Others paid the fugitives wages for noncombat work as cooks, carpenters, guides, and drivers.
Black leaders and abolitionists had favored the idea of African American recruitment since the start of the war.
But Lincoln had sidestepped offers by free blacks in the North to raise African American regiments, fearing the effect black troops might have on the border states.
Widely held prejudices also played a role in his reluctance to recruit blacks.
Many Northerners doubted that African Americans would make good soldiers.
Thousands of these freed slaves followed the troops and became a key source of labor for the Union army.
With their owners gone, they split up the land and established their own farms.
Although African Americans made up 1 percent of the North's population, they accounted for nearly 10 percent of the troops.
The most famous black unit was the 54th Massachusetts Regiment, which played a critical role in winning acceptance for black soldiers.
On July 18, 1863, the 54th stormed the Confederate defenses at Fort Wagner, South Carolina.
The assault failed, and more than 40 percent of the regiment was killed.
Several were made up of freedmen— freed slaves— in the Confederate Army, including the 1st South Carolina Volunteers and the 1st and 3rd Louisiana regiments.
Racism and Discrimination Persist Despite their contributions to the war effort, African Americans still faced racism and hostility.
In the military, black soldiers were usually assigned menial tasks, like digging ditches.
They were often given poor weapons and did not receive the same training for battle as did white soldiers.
In addition, black soldiers who were captured in the South faced the risk of being enslaved or executed rather than imprisoned, as white soldiers were.
While white soldiers earned $13 a month, African Americans were paid just $10.
In November 1863, a company of black soldiers stacked their weapons and refused to pick them up again until they received equal pay.
Their leader, a black sergeant named William Walker, was charged with mutiny and executed by firing squad.
Finally, in June 1864, Congress agreed to equalize pay for white and black soldiers, including all back pay.
As Union soldiers moved into the South, they were followed by religious missionaries and teachers who wanted to help the liberated slaves adjust to their freedom.
These volunteers found former slaves of all ages eager to learn to read and write.
Barton sometimes brought care to wounded soldiers in the battlefield, even while bullets were still flying.
Her wartime experiences led her to found the American Red Cross in 1881.
Greenhow seemed to relish the role of the martyr who suffers for her beliefs.
The Contributions of Women to the War Effort Women on both sides of the conflict played a vital role in the war effort.
At Antietam, when the field hospital came under artillery attack, she steadied the operating table while the doctor completed his surgery.
Women Soldiers and Spies Though women were not allowed in the armed forces, some saw combat on the front lines.
One woman, “Franklin Thompson” of Michigan, had to desert on her way to a hospital in order to keep her secret.
Women made good spies, in part because they were not suspected as quickly as men.
A well-connected member of Washington society, she used her contacts to learn about Union troop movements and passed this information along to the Confederate army.
Eventually, Greenhow was discovered, arrested, and banished to the South.
Elizabeth Van Lew, a resident of Richmond, was a successful spy for the Union.
She even managed to plant one of her assistants, a former slave named Mary Elizabeth Bowser, as a maid in the home of Jefferson Davis.
In that way, Bowser and Van Lew gained access to Confederate war plans.
Van Lew managed to divert suspicion and avoid arrest by pretending to be mentally unbalanced.
The locals called her “Crazy Bet,” but when Union troops took Richmond in 1865, she dropped the act and was honored as a hero.
Women Provide Medical Care Other women, like reformer Dorothea Dix, played a crucial role by providing medical care to wounded and sick soldiers.
Sojourner Truth and Harriet Tubman served as Union nurses as well, dividing their time between medical work and scouting for the Union army.
Southern women also worked as nurses, and because almost all of the Fighting took place on Southern soil, many turned their homes into medical shelters.
After the First Battle of Bull Run, for instance, Sally Tompkins established a hospital in a private home and began caring for wounded Confederate soldiers.
Altogether, she treated more than 1 ,300 men over the course of the war, while registering just 73 deaths.
In honor of her achievements, Jefferson Davis made Tompkins a captain in the army.
The foul air from this mass of human beings at first made me giddy and sick, but I soon got over it.
The Journal of a Confederate Nurse , 1959 Women doctors faced even greater obstacles.
Surgeon Mary Walker tried but failed to get approval to join the Union army as a doctor.
Instead, she volunteered as an assistant surgeon in a Washington hospital.
Throughout the war, she worked as a battlefield doctor and later received the congressional Medal of Honor for her services.
Women Hold Down the Home Front With thousands of men fighting in the war, women— black and white— stepped in to perform crucial jobs to support their families and the war effort.
They also organized aid societies to raise money for war supplies and to collect and distribute food to soldiers.
Northern women had already been a part of the prewar workforce in the textile industry.
As the war dragged on, rising demand for military uniforms led to more women working in textile mills and garment factories.
Women in the South also made clothes, though most worked at home as private contractors.
For the first time, women filled a significant number of government positions.
They worked in offices copying documents, for the Treasury Department minting money, and for the postal service.
Women also took dangerous jobs in munitions factories, making bullets and artillery shells for the Union and the Confederate armies.
Accidents in these factories were common, and many women lost their lives.
Women held many jobs during the war, including working in munitions plants.
An explosion in a Richmond, Virginia, munitions factory killed 40 women.
But in those two minutes, he redefined the purpose of the Civil War from a war for union to a war for union and abolition.
Few events in American history have done more to define the American identity and values than the Civil War.
Historical societies mount exhibits, and every year, hundreds of Americans dress up in Civil War uniforms to reenact battles of the war.
Scholars still publish books about the Civil War, as they continue to debate its causes and assess its impact on American life.
Here, two scholars discuss the changes brought about by that great struggle.
Before the war, people had a theoretical notion of having a country, but when the war was over, on both sides they knew they had a country.
And they knew the effort that they had expended and their dead friends had expended to preserve it.
Grammatically, it was spoken that way and thought of as a collection of independent states.
After the war, it was always “The United States is . . as we say today without being self-conscious at all.
Now, I do not need to persuade you that there is no idea more central to our conception of ourselves as Americans than freedom.
But as the war progressed, these abstract definitions of . . . liberty began to give way to a more concrete meaning of freedom tied to the emancipation of the slaves.
To Lincoln, ultimately, slavery was a form of theft, stealing the products of labor of one person and appropriating it by another.
In the process, the meaning of freedom and the definition of those who were entitled to enjoy liberty were very radically transformed. —Eric Foner, “The Civil War and a New Birth of Freedom,” 2001 The national cemetery at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania, was dedicated on November 19, 1863, during Lincoln's Gettysburg Address.
The cemetery sits on the site of the battle and is part of the Gettysburg National Military Park.
More than 3,500 Union soldiers are buried there, along with United States soldiers from other wars.
It was by far the most destructive conflict ever waged on American soil.
Anaconda Plan Once it became clear that the war would not be quickly won.
President Lincoln prepared for a long conflict with a plan to slowly crush the Confederacy.
Emancipation Proclamation By 1863, Lincoln issued a proclamation freeing all slaves in the rebellious states.
However, freedom for most slaves did not come until the end of the war.
Sherman’s March to the Sea The Union won the war in 1865 after General William T Sherman waged total war across Georgia and General Ulysses S Grant captured Richmond, Virginia.
Copperheads Both Abraham Lincoln and Jefferson Davis had to deal with opposition groups that did not support their war aims.
In the South, part of Virginia seceded and joined the Union as West Virginia.
Draft riots and bread riots The leaders of the Union and the Confederacy faced challenges in managing the war effort.
In the South, women protested severe shortages of food and supplies. 54th Massachusetts Regiment African Americans welcomed emancipation and the chance to fight for the Union.
Although they showed great courage, blacks continued to suffer from racism and inequality.
They collected supplies and served as soldiers, spies, medical personnel, and farm and factory workers.
With malice toward none; with charity for all; with firmness in the right, as God gives us to see the right, let us strive on to finish the work we are in; to bind up the nation's wounds; to care for him who shall have borne the battle, and for his widow and his orphan; to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting peace among ourselves and with all nations. —Abraham Lincoln, Second Inaugural Address, March 1865 But Lincoln would not have the chance to put his plan into action.
Young Caroline Cowles Richards wrote in her diary, “I have felt sick over it all day and so has every one that I have seen.
Lincoln’s assassin, an actor named John Wilkes Booth, believed he was saving the Confederacy by murdering the president.
Although few Southerners rejoiced at Lincoln’s death, many Northerners blamed the South for his murder, as well as for the war.
With Lincoln gone, the task of bringing these two sides together fell to his vice president, Andrew Johnson.
A large part of healing the nation’s wounds would be to rebuild the devastated South.
But it was also an enormous opportunity to extend the ideals of liberty, equality, and opportunity to the almost 4 million African Americans who had just been freed from slavery. b 25 A £ 2E , President Abraham Lincoln was one of the last casualties of the Civil War.
By the time of his death on April 14, 1865, more than half a million people had died in the struggle.
Reconstructing a nation after such a long and bitter war would be even more difficult.
Andrew Johnson Begins Presidential Reconstruction “The queerest character that ever occupied the White House”— that is how one observer described Andrew Johnson.
Even though his state seceded, he kept his senate seat— the only senator from a Southern state to do so.
A lifelong Democrat, Johnson was nonetheless nominated by Republicans to run for vice president in 1864.
True to his party roots, Johnson saw himself as a champion of the common man.
But though he condemned former slaveholders as a “pampered, bloated, corrupted aristocracy,"" he had little concern for former slaves.
This 1864 cartoon shows Abraham Lincoln and Andrew Johnson trying to repair a torn map of the Union.
Lincoln, once a rail-splitter, is using a rail to push the South and the North closer to one another.
Johnson, once a tailor, is using the needle and thread to stitch together the two sides.
After Lincoln was assassinated, the job of reconstructing the South fell to Johnson.
A Smooth Return for Southern States Fewer than two months after taking office, Johnson announced his Reconstruction plan.
A former Confederate state could rejoin the Union once it had written a new state constitution, elected a new state government, repealed its act of secession, canceled its war debts, and ratified the Thirteenth Amendment to the Constitution.
The first of three Reconstruction-era amendments, the Thirteenth Amendment abolished slavery.
Republicans in Congress urged Johnson to add a requirement that Southern states must grant freedmen the right to vote.
Former Slaves Test Their New Freedom As Presidential Reconstruction got underway, former slaves were testing the meaning of freedom.
Before emancipation, slaves could not leave their homes without a travel pass from their masters.
Now they took to the road, often in search of loved ones who had been sold in slavery times.
As fast as any kind of teachers could be secured, not only were day-schools filled, but night-schools as well.
During the war, Congressman Thaddeus Stevens had advocated breaking up Southern plantations to give freed slaves “forty acres and a mule” in return for their years of unpaid labor.
Congress, however, refused to implement Stevens’s plan, arguing that to take planters’ land without payment would violate their property rights.
Before the end of the war, the Union government had established the Freedmen's Bureau to assist former slaves and poor whites living in the South.
It also gave legal assistance to former slaves and acted as a court of law in some situations.
But its attempts to solve the problem of farmland for freedmen were thwarted by Johnson, who pardoned former Confederates and returned the land to them.
Congress established the Freedmen's Bureau in 1865 to give relief to former slaves and poor whites.
The bureau provided food and medical care, as well as legal assistance.
The bureau also helped set up more than 4,300 schools for African Americans of all ages. the Government has made him free, but appear to believe that they still have the right to exercise over him the same old control. — Sidney Andrews, Atlantic Monthly \ 1866 Black Codes Restrict the Freedom of Former Slaves As new Southern governments were formed, Johnson withdrew Union troops from the South.
Many Northerners did not share Johnson’s willingness to let the South reconstruct itself.
Across the South, state legislatures passed black codes— laws intended to restrict the freedom and opportunities of African Americans.
But other civil rights, or rights of citizenship, such as the right to vote or to serve on juries, were denied them.
The second purpose was to ensure a workforce for planters who had lost their slaves.
The codes required freedmen to sign yearly labor contracts each January.
The final purpose of the black codes was to maintain a social order in the South that limited the upward mobility of African Americans.
The codes barred blacks from any jobs but farm work and unskilled labor, making it impossible for them to rise economically or to start their own businesses.
Such restrictions led a Northern journalist touring the South to write.
The whites seem wholly unable to comprehend that freedom for the negro means the same thing as freedom for them.
Their locomotives, labeled ""President"" and ""Congress,"" are on a collision course.
Stevens served on the House committee that recommended Johnson's impeachment In his Senate trial, Johnson was acquitted by just one vote.
Congress Takes Control of Reconstruction By the end of 1865, every Southern state had formed a new government.
After looking at the black codes enacted across the South, many in the North disagreed with Johnson.
We tell the white men of Mississippi that the men of the North will convert the state of Mississippi into a frog pond before they will allow such laws to disgrace one foot of soil in which the bones of our soldiers sleep and over which the flag of freedom waves. —Chicago Tribune, December 1865 Radical Republicans Challenge Johnson's Reconstruction When Congress met in December 1865, many lawmakers were of the opinion that Reconstruction had hardly begun.
A group of Radical Republicans, led by Thaddeus Stevens and Charles Sumner, were especially critical of Johnson’s plan.
Now they were determined to reconstruct the nation on the basis of equal rights for all.
Their commitment to racial equality put them on a collision course with the president.
Early in 1866, the Radical Republicans joined with more moderate lawmakers to enact two bills designed to help former slaves.
The first extended the life of the Freedmen’s Bureau beyond its original one-year charter and gave the bureau greater powers.
The second, the Civil Rights Act of 1866, took direct aim at the black codes.
The continuation of the Freedmen’s Bureau, he argued, was too costly and would encourage freedmen to lead a “life of indolence ” He rejected the Civil Rights Act as a violation of states’ rights.
In one of his veto messages, Johnson claimed to be representing the will of the people.
Republicans gathered the two-thirds majority in each house needed to override Johnson’s veto of the Civil Rights Act.
This was the first time in American history that a major piece of legislation became law over a president’s veto.
The amendment reversed the Dred Scott decision by defining “all persons bom or naturalized in the United States” as citizens.
President Johnson toured the North, making fiery speeches against the amendment and its Republican supporters.
Republicans won a veto-proof, two-thirds majority in both houses of Congress.
Until such governments could be established, the South was divided into five military districts.
Tennessee met the standards for readmission before the military districts were established in 1867.
Congress Puts the South Under Military Rule In 1867, Congress laid out its plan for Reconstruction in a series of laws known as the Reconstruction Acts.
These acts outlined a process for admitting Southern states back into the Union.
The South was to be divided into five districts, each controlled by federal troops.
Election boards in each state would register male voters— both black and white— who were loyal to the Union.
Southerners who had actively supported the Confederacy would not be allowed to vote.
The voters would then elect state legislatures, which were required to ratify the Fourteenth Amendment.
In addition, Congress enacted two laws designed to keep Johnson from interfering with its Reconstruction plan.
The Command of the Army Act limited the president’s power as commander in chief of the army.
The Tenure of Office Act barred the president from firing certain federal officials without the “advice and consent” of the Senate.
President Johnson Faces Impeachment President Johnson blasted both of these laws as unconstitutional restrictions on his power.
To prove his point, he fired Secretary of War Edwin Stanton, a Radical Republican appointed to office by President Lincoln.
Two days later, the House of Representatives voted to impeach Johnson for violating the Tenure of Office Act.
If two thirds of the senators found him guilty of any charge, he would be removed from office.
During his Senate trial, the president’s lawyers argued that Johnson’s only “crime” had been to oppose Congress.
They also quietly spread the word that if acquitted, Johnson would no longer oppose Congressional Reconstruction.
When the votes were cast, Johnson escaped removal by a vote of 36 to 25, just one vote short of the two-thirds majority required.
In their eyes, these newcomers were worthless fortune hunters whose few possessions could fit in a single carpetbag.
This portrait shows some of the 16 African Americans who represented Southern states in Congress between 1869 and 1880.
The last black Congressman from the South in this era was George Henry White of North Carolina.
Living Under Congressional Reconstruction White Southerners were shocked by the return of federal troops to the South under the Reconstruction Acts.
Having complied with Johnson's plan, they believed that Reconstruction was over.
As election boards began registering voters across the South in 1867, it seemed their pleas had been heard.
Freedmen, Scalawags, and Carpetbaggers With former Confederates barred from registering, the right to vote was limited to three groups.
The next largest group consisted of white Southerners who had opposed secession.
Southern Democrats, who viewed these new Republicans as traitors to the South, scorned them as “scalawags,"" or worthless scoundrels.
The last group of voters was made up of Northerners, most of them former soldiers, who were attracted to the South after the war.
Yankee-hating Southerners called them “carpetbaggers,"" a term for a piece of luggage travelers often carried.
They despised carpetbaggers as fortune hunters who invaded the South to profit from the misfortunes of Southerners.
The newly registered voters cast their first ballots in the 1868 presidential election.
The Republican candidate for president was the Union war hero Ulysses S Grant.
He supported Congressional Reconstruction and promised to protect the rights of freedmen in the South.
His democratic opponent, Horatio Seymour, promised to end Reconstruction and return the South to its traditional leaders— white Democrats.
A white Republican in Georgia wrote, “We cannot vote without all sorts of threats and intimidations.
Grant, however, won the popular vote with the help of half a million black voters.
Grant's victory helped persuade Congress to pass the last of the Reconstruction amendments.
These delegates wrote constitutions that not only banned racial discrimination but also guaranteed blacks the right to vote and to hold public office.
To the dismay of white Democrats, a majority of those elected were Republicans and about a fifth of them freedmen.
The new governments quickly ratified the Fourteenth and Fifteenth amendments, the last step of the Reconstruction process.
The most enduring accomplishment of these Reconstruction governments was the creation of the South’s first public, taxsupported school systems.
To attract white students, most states segregated their schools by race, even where doing so was prohibited by law.
Segregation— the forced separation of races in public places— was not the rule in other areas of life.
In fact, several of the Reconstruction governments outlawed segregation in transportation, places of entertainment, and other businesses.
Sharecropping grew out of the needs of planters who had no workforce and of former slaves and white farmers who had no land.
Freedmen often preferred sharecropping to working as paid farmhands because it gave them independence.
The South's Economic Recovery Remains Slow The new state governments undertook ambitious programs to strengthen the Southern economy.
They hoped economic growth would alleviate poverty and racial tensions.
Unfortunately, money intended to rebuild roads and bridges and to expand railroads often fell into the hands of corrupt government officials.
Although industry and trade led to the rebirth of some Southern cities, most of the South remained dependent on agriculture.
During the conflict, many whites had lost all they had— their homes, farms, and businesses.
Many planters divided their land into small plots that they rented to workers who would grow crops, a system known as tenant farming.
In some cases, tenant farmers would pay a share of their crop as rent instead of cash.
At first, sharecropping looked promising to both black and white landless farmers.
They hoped that in time they would earn enough money to buy land for themselves.
Most sharecroppers had to borrow money from planters to buy the food, tools, and supplies they needed.
Few ever earned enough from the sale of their crops to repay these debts.
As a result, sharecropping usually led to a life of debt peonage rather than one of economic independence.
Under this system, debtors were forced to work for the person they owed money to until they paid off their debts.
This Thomas Nast cartoon depicts a Klan member and another white supremacist holding the threat of death in the form of a skull over an African American family.
At the beginning of Reconstruction, there were a significant number of African Americans in Congress.
Reversing Reconstruction The South’s experiment with Reconstruction governments was short.
We had built schoolhouses, established charitable institutions, built and maintained the penitentiary system, provided for the education of the deaf and dumb . . . rebuilt the bridges and reestablished the ferries.
In short, we had reconstructed the state and placed it on the road to prosperity. —Thomas Miller Former Confederates, however, saw this period of biracial government quite differently.
White Resistance to Reconstruction Most Southern whites refused to support Reconstruction governments for a number of reasons.
Many considered the governments illegal, because so many former Confederates had been prevented from voting or running for office.
Others were angry at the governments for raising taxes to pay for schools and other improvements.
Some had even lost their land when they were unable to pay taxes on it.
Underlying all of these complaints was the fact that most Southern whites could not accept the idea of former slaves voting and holding office.
Many were white supremacists who believed in the superiority of the white race.
The most radical turned to violence, forming terrorist groups with names like the White Brotherhood and the Knights of the White Camelia.
These groups terrorized blacks and white Republicans to keep them from voting.
Their tactics included the burning of African American schools, attacks on Freedmen’s Bureau officials, and even outright murder.
Northerners Grow Tired of Reconstruction In 1870 and 1 87 1 , Congress took action to end the wave of terror by passing the Enforcement Acts.
These laws made it a federal crime to deprive citizens of their civil rights.
President Grant sent federal marshals into the South to crush the terror groups.
This act granted amnesty, or a general pardon, to most former Confederates, allowing them to vote and hold office once again.
In 1875, the governor of Mississippi asked Grant for help in protecting freedmen’s voting rights during the state’s November election.
Moreover, a new generation of Republican leaders had come to power and recognized that voters in the North no longer cared about Reconstruction.
During and after Reconstruction, African Americans in the South created their own schools and colleges.
He believed learning trades and succeeding economically would help African Americans gain civil rights.
The Election of 1876 Brings an End to Reconstruction President Grant did not run for reelection in 1876.
Instead, the Republicans nominated Ohio’s Rutherford B Hayes, a former Union general.
The electoral votes of South Carolina, Florida, and Louisiana were disputed.
Republican leaders claimed that Hayes won the most votes in those states.
With no clear resolution, the election went to the House of Representatives.
After weeks of secret dealing, leaders of both parties in the House arrived at an agreement known as the Compromise of 1877.
Under this agreement, Hayes received the electoral votes from the three disputed states and became president.
In return, he agreed to name a Southerner to his cabinet, remove the last remaining federal troops from the South, and give federal aid to Southern railroad construction.
Much of the deal fell apart after Hayes took office, but the troops were removed, and Reconstruction was officially over.
African Americans Lose Ground Under Redeemer Governments By the time Reconstruction ended, white supremacists calling themselves Redeemers had regained power in every Southern state.
Once in office, the Redeemers reversed improvements made in education by cutting spending for public schools.
As public funding dried up, schools either closed their doors or began to charge fees.
By the 1880s, only about half of all black children in the South attended school.
The Redeemers put even more effort into reversing the political gains made by freedmen during Reconstruction.
Many states passed laws requiring citizens who wanted to vote to pay a poll tax.
The tax was set high enough to make voting, like schooling, a luxury most blacks could not afford.
The tests were made so difficult that almost nobody could pass, no matter how well educated.
In practice, however, whites were excused from both by a grandfather clause inserted in voting laws.
This clause exempted citizens whose ancestors had voted before January 1 , 1867.
Because no African Americans could vote in the South before that day, the grandfather clause applied only to whites.
The Redeemer governments also reversed laws that had outlawed segregation in public places.
New legislation drew a “color line"" between blacks and whites in public life.
Whites called these new acts Jim Crow laws, an insulting reference to a black character in a popular song.
African Americans were not allowed to sit with whites in buses or rail cars.
Restaurants and other businesses served whites only or served black customers separately.
These are just a few' of the examples of how blacks were discriminated against.
African Americans Struggle to Protect Their Rights Blacks resisted attacks on their rights in many ways.
This put them at risk of being lynched— killed by hanging— by white mobs.
Homer Plessy, a black man arrested for sitting in a whites-only railroad car in Louisiana, looked to the courts for help.
Plessy argued that Jim Crow laws violated the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
The majority of the justices ruled that segregation was constitutional as long as the facilities provided vat -SH*’ Not all Southerners supported segregation.
When a law to separate blacks and whites in railway cars was proposed in South Carolina in 1898, the Charleston News and Courier tried to show how silly the idea was by taking segregation to ridiculous extremes.
This “separate but equal” doctrine was soon applied to almost every aspect of life in the South.
Some African Americans chose to move to the North rather than endure the humiliation of forced segregation.
Most African Americans, however, remained in the South and got by as best they could.
With participation in politics closed to them, they focused on their families, churches, and communities.
The majority farmed for a living, often as sharecroppers or tenant farmers.
The number of black-owned businesses in the South soared from 2,000 in 1865 to nearly 25,000 by 1903.
African Americans also banded together to build schools and colleges for their children.
By 1900, more than a million and a half black children were attending school.
As a result, literacy rates for Southern blacks rose from near zero to 50 percent.
The South’s new black colleges offered vocational training in such fields as farming and carpentry, as well as professional training in law, medicine, and teaching.
But the Fourteenth and Fifteenth amendments, with their promise of equal rights, were not completely forgotten.
In time, they would be reawakened as part of a new struggle for racial equality.
These governments expanded the rights and opportunities of former slaves.
Reconstruction amendments During Reconstruction, three amendments were added to the Constitution.
The Thirteenth Amendment outlawed slavery, the Fourteenth Amendment made former slaves citizens, and the Fifteenth Amendment gave African American men the right to vote.
Presidential Reconstruction In 1865, President Johnson allowed the Southern states to reconstruct themselves.
Most enacted black codes that severely restricted the rights of former slaves.
Congressional Reconstruction Congress took control of Reconstruction in 1867.
Federal troops were sent to the South to oversee the establishment of state governments that were more democratic.
Reconstruction governments The South’s first biracial state governments established a public school system and outlawed racial segregation.
But these governments were bitterly opposed by white terrorist groups like the Ku Klux Klan.
Once Democrats regained control of the state governments in the South, they passed Jim Crow laws that segregated blacks from whites in public life.
Before landing, the men sign the Mayflower Compact, a document establishing a ""civil body politic"" to make laws and govern the colony.
OTTERING most Excellent fmites by Planting in V l RG 1 N * Exciting all fuchasbe well affected to further the fame.
The English Settle The first permanent English-speaking colony in North America is established at Jamestown, Virginia. l 6 ° 9* 1619 The Beginnings of Slavery Virginia planters purchase the first African laborers in the original 13 colonies.
The American Civil War The Civil War divides the United States over the issues of states' rights and slavery.
Era of Reform and Expansion Reformers work to end slavery, earn equal rights for women, improve treatment in prisons and mental institutions, establish public schools, and expand voting rights.
As Americans moved westward, the continent was dotted with telegraph poles and towns.
As a new century dawned, frustrated ; citizens launched reforming crusades against a host of evils.
Introduction By the mid1800s, many Americans felt the need for a change, for a fresh start.
Like the early settlers who crossed the Appalachians, they migrated westward in search of opportunity.
Entire families packed their belongings into covered wagons and hit the westward trail.
From their perspective, this mighty river was the frontier, or boundary, marking the beginning of wilderness. “1 do remember my emotions after we were all landed on the side of the river,” one traveler recalled.
Overland travelers would spend weeks or months on what amounted to a long and challenging expedition.
They would have to adapt themselves to the demands of living on the trail, such as repairing wagons and handling oxen and other livestock.
Water and wood were scarce on the plains, and food was also difficult to find.
They brought very little to eat besides flour, bacon, beans, salt, and coffee.
Many of the new migrants were farmers, but other people also sought opportunity in the West.
Miners searched for gold, silver, and other minerals in the hills and mountains.
Immigrant workers found jobs laying rail lines, and railroad owners made profits shipping western goods to market.
However, this rising tide of migration brought further conflict with American Indians.
The tribes of the Great Plains, in particular, would fight long and hard against the massive invasion of their lands and destruction of their way of life.
They packed their goods in covered wagons for the long overland journey.
Many hoped to reach Oregon or California, but others settled on the Great Plains.
They shoveled soil from a streambed into a shallow pan and then washed away the sand and gravel with stream water.
Mining and Ranching Opportunities in the West The first settlers heading west from the Mississippi Valley had a distant objective.
Most of them stopped for good only when they reached the fertile fields and valleys of Oregon and California.
This trickle of migration changed quickly in the mid1800s, however, after settlers found gold in California.
In Search of the Big Strike In 1848, a landowner named John Sutter was building a sawmill on the American River, in California’s Central Valley.
Up and down the Pacific Coast, men deserted their work to head for Sutter’s Mill.
By the year’s end, gold fever gripped the whole nation and even spread abroad.
In the spring of 1849, some 40,000 migrants from the East headed overland to California.
That same year, about 40,000 more people boarded steamships bound for San Francisco.
Soon California swarmed with “forty-niners,” as these miners were called.
Many came from Mexico, and thousands more arrived from as far away as Europe and China.
Few of these prospectors and treasure hunters knew anything about mining.
Over time, water erosion had dislodged much of the gold and washed it down into streambeds.
Miners called this placer gold, which they could mine using simple tools, such as pans and shovels.
Often working in groups, they used hand tools and weak explosives to extract the metal.
Every prospector’s dream was to find the “mother lode” that would produce untold riches.
Between 1850 and 1860, California’s population jumped from about 93,000 to over 380,000.
As stores, banks, saloons, and restaurants opened up, some camps swelled into towns.
For three decades after the California gold rush, hordes of miners chased their dream of riches from Mexico to Alaska and east as far as the Black Hills of Dakota.
They endured backbreaking work and conditions that were dismal and sometimes dangerous.
By the early 1850s, most of the ore that could be easily mined in California had been found.
Individual prospectors eventually gave way to large mining companies that used hydraulic machines to wash away whole hillsides in search of gold.
In the process, they damaged the environment, destroying habitat, polluting rivers, and leaving behind large piles of debris on which nothing could grow.
Their beef cattle thrived on the abundant grasses and open range of the Great Plains.
The region had a long tradition of ranching going back to the first Spanish settlers.
They rode horses and wore boots with pointed toes and wide-brimmed hats.
Many Texas ranchers went off to fight in the Civil War and never returned.
By the mid1860s, several million tough longhorn cattle roamed wild on the open plains.
Some Texans began to round up unbranded cattle with an eye toward driving, or herding, them north to market.
The growing populations of eastern cities had raised the demand for beef.
In the East, ranchers could get $40 a head for cattle that sold for $5 or less back in Texas.
Also, railroad companies had begun extending rail lines west from Missouri into Kansas.
Cowhands could drive their herds to “cow towns” that sprang up along the rail lines.
The potential for large profits made a long cattle drive to one of these cow towns seem well worth the effort.
The era of the long drive began in 1867, when cowboys following the Chisholm Trail drove longhorns north from San Antonio, Texas, to Abilene, Kansas.
From Abilene and other cow towns, live cattle were shipped in rail cars to meatpacking centers like Chicago.
Working as a team, a dozen cowboys could drive more than a thousand cattle at a time along the trail.
African Americans and Mexican Americans made up at least a quarter of all cowboys on the long drives.
Cowboys led rough lives, working outdoors and sleeping on the ground in all types of weather.
They had to be prepared to defend the herd against people who wanted to steal the cattle, as well as against Indian attacks.
The long drives ended once rail lines reached into cattle country during the 1880s.
The new lines not only transported cattle to market but also brought farmers to the plains.
The newcomers sparked conflict with the cattle ranchers by fencing off their farms with barbed wire, effectively closing the open range.
Nature dealt cattle ranching an even harsher blow when the blizzards of 1886 and 1887 killed thousands of cattle, forcing many ranchers into bankruptcy.
Those who survived decided to fence in their ranches and raise only as many cattle as their land could support.
One of their jobs was to round up calves and use a hot branding iron to mark them with the special insignia of their ranch.
Major Cattle-Drive Trails, 1866-1886 Gulf of — Cattle trail • Major meatpacking center In 1866, Charles Goodnight and Oliver Loving blazed a cattle trail from south Texas to Denver.
Soon other Texans were driving herds of cattle to various cow towns located on railroad lines.
From there, the cattle were shipped to meatpacking plants in Chicago and other eastern cities.
Railroads Open the West to Rapid Settlement An easterner bound for the California goldfields in 1849 could not have made it halfway to the Mississippi River by train alone.
Before the 1850s, most railroads were short lines, connecting cities and towns in just one region.
By 1860, rail lines extended from the Atlantic Coast across the Mississippi.
This expansion set the stage for opening up western lands to settlement and for linking the East and West coasts by rail.
Yet this growing region remained in isolation, essentially separated from the rest of the nation.
During the 1850s, many people pointed out the need for better transportation and communication between East and West.
In particular, merchants demanded a faster way to transport goods across the Great Plains and the Rockies.
They wanted a transcontinental railroad, one that spanned the continent.
By 1900, there were more than 200,000 miles of railroad track in the country, including four transcontinental lines.
In 1883, the railroads adopted a system that divided the nation into the four time zones shown here.
Known as the “Big Four,” they sought government support for a transcontinental railroad.
Huntington, went to Washington to act as a lobbyist to push for a railroad bill.
Lobbyists try to persuade legislators to pass laws favorable to groups they represent.
Plans for a transcontinental railroad had been stalled by debate in Congress over whether to follow a northern or southern route.
However, the South's secession and the onset of the Civil War led Congress to approve a northern route that would unite California and Oregon with the rest of the Union.
The Pacific Railway Act, passed in 1862, directed the Central Pacific and the newly created Union Pacific Railroad Company to construct railway and telegraph lines from the Missouri River to the Pacific Ocean.
The Union Pacific would start in Omaha, Nebraska, and work its way west.
Building the first transcontinental railroad posed tremendous challenges.
Under the Pacific Railway Act, the government pledged to help each company by granting it 6,400 acres of land and up to $48,000 in loans for each mile of track laid.
Once the laying of rails began, the owners could sell the land to settlers to help pay for construction costs.
The Union Pacific had trouble raising funds and did not lay its first rails until 1865.
The Union Pacific also faced conflicts with some of the tribes that lived on the Great Plains.
Its route followed the Platte River through territory controlled by the Cheyenne, Arapaho, and Lakota Sioux.
The rail line had to pass over, and sometimes through, high mountain passes.
Beyond the Sierra Nevada lay the Great Basin, a vast, dry region where summers are blistering hot.
Jobs and Hardships for Immigrants In meeting these construction challenges, the two railroad companies owed much of their success to immigrant labor.
They needed thousands of workers, but the Civil War and the gold rush had siphoned off a large part of the labor pool.
The end of the Civil War in 1865 solved part of the Union Pacific’s labor problem.
In fact, the bulk of its 12,000-man workforce was made up of Irish immigrants.
Large numbers of Irish began immigrating to the United States after a potato disease brought famine to Ireland in 1845.
Many first settled in eastern cities, where they were looked down on for being Catholic and poor.
In the face of such discrimination, railroad jobs seemed like an attractive opportunity.
When the Central Pacific began construction in 1865, it also faced a shortage of workers.
In desperation, it decided to hire workers from China, despite widespread prejudice against the Chinese.
The company advertised in China, promising impoverished workers good pay.
By 1868, the Central Pacific was employing about 10,000 Chinese workers, who made up four fifths of its labor force.
Chinese workers were paid lower wages than white workers and were targets of racism.
The use of dynamite to blast tunnels through the Sierra Nevada also resulted in injuries and deaths.
Extreme cold in winter left many workers with frostbite, and snow avalanches killed others.
Railroads Become Lifelines in the West Both companies overcame all obstacles, and on May 10, 1869, their lines met at Promontory Point, Utah.
With the completion of the railroad, travel time between the Pacific and Atlantic coasts shrank from 4 months to 10 days.
To mark the occasion, two officials, one from each company, drove ceremonial spikes of gold and silver into the railroad ties.
Once the first transcontinental railroad had been completed, railroad construction continued elsewhere with a fury.
This rapid expansion made many “railroad barons,” like the Big Four, very rich.
It also encouraged settlement by making land available to farm families.
In addition, railroads served the transportation needs of new industries, such as mining and lumbering.
But because farmers depended on them, the railroads could charge excessive rates to ship their crops to market.
Such policies led to growing demands for some government control over the railroad companies.
The mostly Irish workers hired by the Central Pacific earned S35 a month and were given a steady diet of boiled beef and potatoes.
Chinese workers who laid track for the Union Pacific earned $30 a month and had to buy their own food.
GREAT EVENT Rail Road (ram the Atlantic to the Pacific GRAND OMAHA THROUGH TO SAN FRANCISCO Ii \m Au r*» H»A 1*^*1 tto ttopw < I* 1 Travelers for Pleasu re; He alth or Business I UXffkreOS CARS ft IATIHC HOUSES PULLMAN'S PALACE SLEEPING CARS CHEYENNE lor DENVER HTML «TY 4 SOT* K cm n dun m cun » i an •mmmjajmimmjm ""1 On May 10, 1869, workers completed the first railroad to span the continent.
This Union Pacific poster announced the opening of passenger service between Omaha and San Francisco.
Passengers who could afford to travel in style could cross the country in an elegant sleeping car.
Indian Wars ShatterTribal Cultures By the early 1870s, the United States Army had forced the Apache of Arizona and New Mexico onto reservations.
Chief Geronimo, shown here, refused to settle down and kept fighting until 1886 to protect his homeland.
He finally surrendered, though, and took up farming in Oklahoma Territory.
In 1850, Indians roamed freely over the western half of the United States.
Over time, the federal government forced them onto smaller and smaller reservations.
President Rutherford B Hayes admitted in 1877, ""Many, if not most, of our Indian wars have had their origin in broken promises and acts of injustice upon our part,"" To many people, the railroad represented progress.
But for the Indians on the Great Plains, it was a threat to their very existence.
The railroad cut through their hunting grounds, disturbing the buffalo, their main source of food, clothing, and shelter.
It also brought ranchers, farmers, and soldiers to the hunting grounds.
In response, many tribes fought the railroad, waging war to stop the rush of settlement that jeopardized their ways of life.
Their battle for survival represented the latest round of what are known as the Indian Wars.
Cultures Clash on the Great Plains From the perspective of a nation bent on expanding westward, the many Indian tribes in the West presented a problem.
They refused to change their customs to conform to the settlers' culture.
For example, they believed that tribes or villages had rights to areas of land.
However, they did not believe that land could be owned, bought, or sold.
Differences between Indians and settlers over land had led to conflict early in the nation's history.
Conflicts continued as settlers crossed the Appalachians and laid claim to tribal lands in the Ohio and Mississippi river valleys.
To end such conflicts, the Indian Removal Act of 1830 had forced the largest tribes living east of the Mississippi to move west to Oklahoma Territory on the Great Plains.
When settlers began to populate the West after the Civil War, they again clashed with native peoples.
The Indians were once more viewed as “an obstacle to the progress of settlement and industry,"" as one government official put it.
Nomadic tribes had roamed the plains freely for centuries in pursuit of buffalo.
They had little in common with eastern tribes, who had been conquered and “removed"" to the plains in the 1830s.
These differences led to conflict between nomadic tribes that wanted more open land and settled tribes that wanted to protect their farmland.
As settlers moved westward, they slaughtered millions of buffalo, endangering a vital element of tribal cultures.
Many tribes refused to give up their homelands and ways of life without a fight.
In 1864, troops raided a party of Cheyennes and Arapahos who had camped at Sand Creek, Colorado, with permission from the commander of a nearby fort.
The Sand Creek Massacre sparked a general uprising among the plains tribes.
In an effort to end conflict and open up land for settlers, the federal government tried to confine most western tribes to reservations.
However, instead of protecting Indians, the government far too often helped prospectors and settlers who invaded a reservation.
For example, a gold strike in the Black Hills of the Dakota Territory brought hordes of miners onto the Sioux reservation in the 1870s.
The government ignored the invasion, even though the Treaty of Fort Laramie, signed in 1868, guaranteed the Sioux exclusive rights to the land.
Many tribes, from the Apaches and Comanches in the south to the Sioux, Cheyennes, and Arapahos in the north, refused to stay on reservations.
Bands of raiders moved out onto the plains, where they fought to stop the expansion of settlements.
In 1876, Sioux and Cheyennes who were camped near the Little Bighorn River in Montana came under attack by United States Cavalry troops under George Armstrong Custer.
The much larger Indian force, led by Sioux chiefs Sitting Bull and Crazy Horse, wiped out Custer’s troops.
After the Battle of the Little Bighorn, also known as “Custer’s Last Stand,” federal forces hunted down and captured about 3,000 Sioux warriors.
Over the next few years, the army subdued the other major tribes of the Great Plains.
Adaptation and Efforts to Assimilate American Indians The settlement of the West was disastrous for large numbers of American Indians.
The eastern tribes that had been removed to Oklahoma became successful farmers.
At the same time, the United States government adopted policies aimed at speeding the assimilation, or absorption, of Indians into the dominant culture.
Federal officials set up about two dozen boarding schools to educate American Indians in “white men’s ways ” Congress furthered the assimilation push by enacting the Dawes Act of 1887.
Under this law, a tribe could no longer own reservation lands as a group.
Instead, the government began distributing land to individuals within a tribe.
Each family was granted its own plot of land, which it could hold or sell.
This change eroded a cornerstone of American Indian cultures— the belief that land could not be bought or sold.
Land sales, both free and forced, greatly decreased the amount of Indian-owned land.
As part of its assimilation policy, the federal government set up boarding schools for Indian children.
These photographs suggest the transformation that many young Indians underwent in government boarding schools.
Settling the Great Plains New farm machinery, like this horse-drawn reaper for harvesting wheat, helped to turn the Great Plains into the nation's breadbasket.
But to pay for such machines, most farmers had to borrow money Rising debt, along with years of drought on the plains, led to many bankruptcies.
The rumor held that the federal government would give free land and $500 to every black family that moved there.
Still, many of the new migrants settled down on farms or in small communities.
Despite resistance from tribes of the Great Plains, settlers continued to migrate there during the second half of the 19th century.
Opportunities and Challenges on the Great Plains Several factors transformed the Great Plains from a place to pass through on route to the West Coast into a land of opportunity.
The railroads carried settlers onto the plains, and the railroad companies sold settlers land that the companies had been granted by the government.
Another factor was that families felt much safer migrating to the West because the army had reduced the threat of attack by plains tribes.
A third factor was the passage in 1862 of two federal laws that encouraged settlement.
The two new laws were the Homestead Act and the Morrill Land-Grant Act.
The Homestead Act was designed to provide tracts of land called homesteads to settlers in the West.
This law attracted about 600,000 farmers who claimed more than 80 million acres of land by the end of the 1 8th century.
The Morrill Land-Grant Act gave each state large tracts of public land to help finance the establishment of agricultural colleges.
The settlers knew by the look and smell of the rich soil that crops would thrive in this land.
To be successful, however, they had to overcome some difficult challenges.
Lacking lumber, some homesteaders simply dug a hole in the side of a hill as a shelter.
Sod blocks, cut out of the ground with a shovel or an ax, formed the walls.
Once farmers could afford lumber delivered by train, they replaced their dugouts and soddies with wood-frame houses.
The settlers who flocked there in the 1870s and 1880s arrived during an abnormally wet period.
Still, farmers had to deal with winter’s deep cold, piercing winds, and blizzard snows.
By the early 1890s, drought conditions had returned, especially in Kansas, Nebraska, Colorado, and the Dakotas.
Great clouds of these pests, thick enough to darken the sky, descended on fields with little warning.
Others worked to overcome the harsh conditions by using dry-farming techniques.
To conserve soil moisture, they plowed and planted a field one year and left it uncultivated the next.
The mechanical reaper neatly cut and bound sheaves of grain at harvesttime.
Windmills pumped water from deep wells for household use and irrigation.
African Americans See the Plains as the ""Promised Land"" The women and men who settled the West represented a broad range of Americans.
Often they were lured by the claims of railroad agents skilled at stretching the truth.
Still others were former slaves searching for the opportunity to own their own land.
After the Civil War, many African Americans fled the South in search of better lives elsewhere.
Former slaves such as Henry Adams and Benjamin “Pap” Singleton encouraged African Americans to build farm communities on the Great Plains.
These leaders helped organize a postwar migration to Kansas and beyond.
Offered the opportunity to succeed or fail on their own terms, as independent farmers, thousands of African Americans made the trek to Kansas.
Others found work in towns and on farms in Texas, Oklahoma, and other plains states.
Despite their rising numbers and the independence that came with owning land, African Americans in the West still faced racism.
For example, when a group of black migrants from Mississippi tried to settle in Lincoln, Nebraska, ' white townspeople drove them away.
The migrants persisted, however, and Lincoln eventually accepted black residents into the community.
On April 22, 1889, about 50,000 people lined up on the Oklahoma border.
The federal government had decided to open nearly 2 million acres of Indian Territory to settlement At the signal, the Oklahoma land rush began.
Fanners Rise Up in Protest Farmers transformed the grasslands of the Great Plains into bountiful croplands.
Their hard work, aided by improved farm machinery, greatly increased agricultural productivity.
To buy costly new machinery, many had taken out bank loans, often at high interest rates.
They also owed money to merchants for the seeds they bought on credit every year, and to railroads, which kept raising shipping rates.
Crop prices, however, dropped as supply outstripped demand at home and in the world market.
With their incomes reduced, farmers found it difficult to pay their debts.
Farmers' Frustrations Give Rise to Populism In 1867, Oliver Hudson Kelley started an educational and social organization to help farmers in Minnesota.
They channeled their anger into a protest movement based on populism, a political philosophy that favors the common person’s interests over those of wealthy people or business interests.
In the early 1870s, several states passed “Granger laws” to regulate railroad rates.
Illinois that only the federal government has the right to regulate interstate commerce.
This law established the Interstate Commerce Commission to ensure that railroads set “reasonable and just” rates.
The Greenbackers’ goal was to increase the amount of greenbacks, or paper money, in circulation by changing the monetary policy of the government.
Monetary policy is aimed at controlling the supply and value of a country’s currency.
At that time, the amount of money flowing through the United States economy was controlled by a monetary policy known as the gold standard.
According to this policy, every paper dollar in circulation had to be backed by a dollar’s worth of gold in the United States Treasury.
The gold standard ensured the value of United States currency but limited the amount of money the government could print.
The Greenbackers wanted the government to increase the money supply by issuing greenbacks backed by both gold and silver.
By increasing the money supply, Greenbackers hoped to fuel inflation, or a general rise in prices, including crop prices.
Higher crop prices would give farmers more income with which to pay off their debts.
In the 1880s, farmers in the South and Midwest formed local organizations called Farmers’ Alliances.
These groups later led protests against railroads, banks, and other powerful interests centered in the East.
In the 1890 election, many Democratic and Republican candidates claiming to support policies proposed by Farmers’ Alliances won elections at the state level and seats in Congress.
In response, disappointed Alliance members vowed to create their own national political party.
Populist candidate James B Weaver ran for president that year on a platform that called for government ownership of railroads, the coinage of silver to increase the money supply, and other reforms designed to help working people.
More than a million Americans voted for Weaver, about 8. percent of the total vote.
The Democrats were deeply divided, but the silverites prevailed as the election of 1896 approached.
William Jennings Bryan won the Democratic presidential nomination with a moving speech that condemned the gold standard.
But the anger and idealism that had given rise to populism did not fade with it.
During the party’s short life, many Americans had begun to rethink what government could and should do to promote opportunity for all.
At the 1896 Democratic convention, William Jennings Bryan gave his ""Cross of Gold"" speech to populist acclaim.
Bryan demanded an end to the gold standard to increase the money supply.
This migration also sparked conflict as settlers invaded Indian homelands.
Though few fortunes were made, this migration helped populate California and other western regions.
Ranching Riding along the Chisholm Trail and other routes, cowboys herded cattle north to be shipped to meatpacking plants.
Transcontinental railroad Building the first rail line to California was a huge undertaking that relied on government support and immigrant labor.
The spread of railroads across the West brought wealth to railroad barons and opened the region to settlement.
Indian wars The tribes on the Great Plains fought to preserve their way of life.
To prevent conflict and open lands for settlement, the government moved tribes onto reservations.
Through the Dawes Act, it tried to assimilate Indians into white culture.
Homestead Act The Homestead Act brought more farmers to the Great Plains, including African Americans who called themselves Exodusters.
Protests by farmers Burdened by falling crop prices and large debts, farmers formed political organizations such as the Grange.
Introduction In September 1878, a young inventor from Menlo Park, New Jersey, went to see a set of experimental arc lights.
The lights were too hot and bright for practical use, but they fascinated him.
The more he studied the lights and the generator that powered them, the more excited he became.
The inventor, Thomas Alva Edison, knew he could invent a better lighting system, one that could be used anywhere.
Among his many inventions were the phonograph and a highly efficient automated telegraph system.
Now Edison vowed to invent a practical incandescent lamp— what we would call a light bulb.
Other inventors had tried for decades to produce a practical light bulb.
The main problem was finding a filament— a thin fiber or wire— that would heat to a bright glow when electric current passed through it, but would not melt.
Edison tried thousands of materials, from platinum to twine to human hair.
Finally, around 1879, he tried bamboo fibers that he had pulled from a Japanese fan.
After carbonization— the process of converting a fiber to pure carbon— the bamboo filament burned and burned without melting.
He was already hard at work on other components of a complete electric lighting system.
They were installing lighting displays to promote the benefits of the electric lamp.
He envisioned the future of electricity, and he acted to make his vision a reality.
Inventions like Edison’s light bulb helped spur a new age of innovation and industry after the Civil War.
This period also saw the rise of big businesses that created great wealth.
This chapter explores how industrialization affected the nation as a whole.
Thomas Edison set up his first laboratory when he was just 10 years old.
He would eventually become the most productive inventor in American history, with more than 1,000 inventions to his name.
New Inventions and Technologies Thomas Edison's light bulb was one of many innovations that dramatically changed the daily lives of Americans.
By the early 1900s, many people had electricity and refrigeration in their homes.
Edison was one of thousands of ingenious inventors, mechanics, and scientists working to create new products and machines in the late 1800s.
The United States evolved from a largely agricultural nation into a complex industrial society.
They kept fresh foods in an icebox, a cabinet cooled by a large block of ice.
They could send news across the continent in an instant by telegraph or telephone.
A few could even afford to replace their horse and buggy with a new automobile.
Americans Invest in New Technology These innovations captured the imagination of investors who were willing to finance, or fund, the development of new products.
Without this financial backing, many inventions would never have reached the market.
This willingness to risk money on new businesses lies at the heart of capitalism.
Capitalism is an economic system in which factories, equipment, and other means of production are privately owned rather than being controlled by government.
Capitalists in the late 1 800s provided the funds to build railroads and factories and furnish them with machinery and supplies.
In return for risking their money, they hoped to reap rewards if the new business proved profitable.
In return, Edison gave the company the rights to his lighting inventions for a five-year period.
The investors helped Edison pursue his vision, and they profited handsomely as a result.
A patent gives an inventor the sole legal right to make or sell an invention for a specified period of time.
Edison holds the record for patents issued to one person, with 1 ,093 in all.
Revolutionary Changes in Communication and Transportation The use of electricity had brought dramatic progress in communications even before the Civil War.
To send messages by electrical signal, he used a dot-and-dash system later known as Morse code.
In 1843, Morse set up an experimental telegraph line linking Washington, D.C., with Baltimore, Maryland.
Telegraph lines soon crisscrossed the countryside, mainly following railroad tracks.
Newspapers also used the telegraph to gather information and send stories to local newspapers.
By the 1870s, however, the Western Union Telegraph Company dominated the industry.
By 1900, nearly a million miles of telegraph wires were carrying more than 60 million messages a year.
For nearly 12 years, the inventor Alexander Graham Bell had pursued the idea of sending speech over wires.
According to popular legend, the first telephone message was the result of an emergency— with Bell calling out to his lab assistant, Watson, after accidentally spilling acid.
I was in one room at the Transmitting Instrument and Mr Watson at the Receiving Instrument in another room— out of ear shot.
I feel that I have at last struck the solution of a great problem— and the day is coming when telegraph wires will be laid on to houses just like water or gas— and friends converse with each other without leaving home.
That same year, the first commercial telephone line was strung in Boston, where Bell lived.
Independent telephone companies formed across the country, helping create a surge in home use of the new technology.
In 1903, the brothers Orville and Wilbur Wright made the first successful powered-airplane flights in history, near Kitty Hawk, North Carolina.
After that first success, inventors worked continually to improve airplane design.
At first, railroads and newspapers took the greatest advantage of this high-speed means of communication.
Someone could send a telegram from almost anywhere in the United States to almost anywhere else.
Refiners turned it into kerosene for lamps and into oil for lubricating machinery.
Before the Civil War, lamps mainly burned whale oil, which was very expensive.
In the mid1800s, a Canadian scientist discovered how to refine crude oil that seeped out of the ground into a lamp oil called kerosene.
Then a former railroad conductor named Edwin Drake made an important discovery.
He had bought stock in the Pennsylvania Rock Oil Company, which gathered surface oil for use in medicine.
While in Titusville, Drake studied the techniques of drilling salt wells.
Oil drilling and refining became a huge industry, supplying fuel for lamps, lubricating oils for machinery, and later, gasoline for automobiles.
The Bessemer process produced cheap steel, which was lighter and stronger than iron or brick.
Engineers could now build tall structures that didn't collapse under their own weight.
Invention of the passenger elevator provided easy access to the higher floors.
The Bessemer Process Revolutionizes Steelmaking A new technology for turning iron into steel gave rise to another major industry.
Engineers prefer steel for most purposes because it is harder, stronger, and lighter than iron.
Before the 1850s, however, the process for making steel out of iron was time-consuming and expensive.
Using this process, steel could be produced far more cheaply and quickly than in the past.
After seeing the process at work in England, Andrew Carnegie decided to invest heavily in steel production in the United States.
In 1873, he began to form the Carnegie Steel Company, which later built the largest and most modern steel mill of its time near Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
As the steel industry grew, steel became the metal of choice for heavy construction.
Builders began using steel to construct longer bridges and taller buildings.
Two years later, builders erected the world’s first skyscraper, a 10-story building in downtown Chicago.
Neither of these structures could have been built without the use of steel.
Electricity Lights Up America A single invention can have far-reaching effects.
Edison’s light bulb, for example, gave birth to the electric power industry.
Before long, the demand for electricity became too great for the Edison Electric Light Company to meet on its own.
Throughout the country, other companies built their own central generating stations to meet customers’ needs.
By 1891 , there were more than 1 ,300 stations, providing enough electricity to power about 3 million light bulbs.
Americans could not only work and read at night but also plug in electric refrigerators and other appliances.
Electricity was costly at first, though, and power companies built stations mainly in the cities.
Many Americans, especially in rural areas, had to wait decades more for electric transmission lines to reach them.
This sevenacre site displayed recent advances in the field of electricity.
Displays included a variety of electric motors, which had begun to replace steam engines in factories, and the fascinating new X-ray machine.
Workers often stood at their machines for 10 to 12 hours a day, with few breaks.
This system boosted productivity, but it made the work dull and exhausting.
An Explosion of Industrial Growth The growth of technology and the creation of communication and electric power networks helped fuel the expansion of American industry in the late 1800s.
Companies that had once served mainly local markets expanded to sell their goods nationwide.
To meet the needs of this growing national market, companies developed new ways of operating.
New Ways to Manage Work Farsighted business owners realized they could profit from serving customers nationwide.
But to do this, they had to create systems of mass production that would enable them to supply a much larger market.
By the early 1800s, factories were using interchangeable parts to produce goods in large quantities.
After the Civil War, factory owners improved these methods of mass production.
They built specialized machinery that could produce identical parts for quick assembly into finished products.
Instead, they could use unskilled workers to run the machines and hire supervisors to manage the“day-to-day operations.
Engineers reorganized factory work to increase productivity, dividing up the production process so that each worker did a single task.
One engineer, Frederick W Taylor, used scientific techniques to analyze these tasks.
Through these time-andmotion studies, he determined the most efficient way to perform each task.
Henry Ford pioneered the use of the moving assembly line to make a complex product with hundreds of parts.
This innovation cut the time needed to assemble a Model T Ford from more than 12 hours to less than 6 hours.
Each worker was trained to do just one step m Interchangeable parts were delivered to the factory for assembly.
The car moved, insteac the workers, saving tin Moving belts carried large parts to workers along the line.
One person who took it seriously was Henry Ford, who pioneered the moving assembly line to mass-produce automobiles.
Workers stood in one place all day, while a conveyor belt brought the work to them.
Each worker did one or two small tasks, and then the belt moved the car to the next worker’s station.
One worker might put bolts in the frame while the next worker tightened them down.
The process continued, part by part, until the car rolled off the assembly line, ready to be driven away.
Those who remained had to perform the same dull task all day long, but at a faster pace.
As you will read in Chapter 14, workers often protested for better working conditions.
New Ways to Finance and Organize Businesses Before the Civil War, individual owners ran most businesses.
As businesses grew larger, however, their need for the three basic factors of production — land, labor, and capital— grew as well.
Land, which includes resources such as soil, forests, and minerals, was still abundant.
Labor was plentiful as well thanks to a steady stream of immigrants into the country during this period.
Money, buildings, tools, and machinery are all forms of capital. eeping workers in one place ramatically reduced injuries.
Frederick Taylor, Father of scientific management Taylor used time-and-motion studies to determine how fast the line should move.
Andrew Carnegie used efficient business practices and new technology in his steel plants.
Carnegie and other ""captains of industry"" also set up trusts and built monopolies.
Small business owners did not have all the capital they needed to expand.
A corporation is a company that is recognized by law as existing independently from its owners.
People invest in corporations by buying stock, or a share in the ownership of the business.
Wealthy capitalists controlled corporations by buying huge amounts of stock.
As owners of a corporation, stockholders could profit from its success.
Unlike the owners of small businesses, however, investors were not liable for a corporation’s debts.
The corporation hired managers, accountants, engineers, and others to keep production going.
Competition among corporations provided consumers with a wide choice of new products, but it caused headaches for business owners.
Cutthroat competition threatened to drag down even the best-run companies.
As a result, some powerful capitalists decided that to stay in business, they would have to limit competition.
John D Rockefeller had great success with this approach in the oil industry.
Rockefeller’s company also undercut its competitors by making deals with railroads, which agreed to ship its oil at discount prices.
These price cuts forced smaller oil companies to reduce prices too, causing many of them to either be sold to Standard Oil or go bankrupt.
By 1882, Standard Oil had become a monopoly, a company that completely dominates a particular industry.
With its competitors out of the way, Standard Oil could raise its prices and reap great profits.
A trust is a set of companies that are managed by a small group known as trustees.
The trustees have the power to prevent companies in the trust from competing with each other.
Big Business and the Government Trusts and monopolies concentrated capital — and power— in the hands of a few people.
Unlike owners of small, traditional businesses, those who ran huge corporations seldom knew their workers.
Big business was impersonal, extremely profit-driven, and responsive mainly to investors.
Businesses Grow Larger and More Powerful Corporations generally expanded in one of two ways.
This approach called for joining together as many firms from the same industry as possible.
An example was Standard Oil’s practice of buying up refineries to gain control of the oil-refining industry.
This approach involved taking control of each step in the production and distribution of a product, from acquiring raw materials to manufacturing, packaging, and shipping.
He bought the iron mines and coalfields that sent raw materials to his company’s mills.
He bought the ships and railroads that transported supplies and finished products.
Vertical integration gave Carnegie complete control of the production process and the power to dominate the steel industry.
The Government Leaves Business Alone By the late 1800s, many Americans realized that big business was limiting competition.
Lack of competition allowed prices to rise, which helped producers but hurt consumers.
This doctrine held that the market, through supply and demand, would regulate itself if government did not interfere.
To political leaders, this meant “leave business alone ” Another influential idea at the time, social Darwinism, also discouraged government regulation of business practices.
Based on Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution, social Darwinism held that the best-run businesses led by the most capable people would survive and prosper.
Social Darwinists argued that government should leave businesses alone to succeed or fail on their own.
Some industrialists, like John Rockefeller, expanded their business through horizontal integration.
They worked to bring every process of their business — from generating raw materials to marketing the finished product to consumers — under their control.
These ""protectors"" amassed huge fortunes while paying their workers, seen below, as little as possible.
In reality, the federal government did not leave businesses alone, but actually helped many of them.
It sold natural resources such as forests and minerals at very low prices to companies that were prepared to exploit them.
It also imposed protective tariffs on foreign goods to make them more expensive than Americanmade goods.
Tariffs forced consumers to pay higher prices than they would have in a free market.
During the late 1800s, some businesses bribed legislators to pass laws favoring their companies.
Much of the free land handed out to the railroads, for example, came in return for cash payments to politicians.
By 1900, the United States had the strongest industrial economy in the world.
Government Takes Some Action to Limit Business As trusts and monopolies multiplied, many Americans grew alarmed that they were denying opportunities to smaller businesses.
A few states passed laws or filed lawsuits to try to restore competition.
Increasing public concern finally provoked a response from the federal government.
In 1890, Congress passed the Sherman Antitrust Act, which outlawed trusts, monopolies, and other forms of business that restricted trade.
However, the government made only feeble attempts to enforce the new law.
Congress left it to the courts to clarify the law, but the courts were not impartial, or unbiased.
For example, in 1895 the Supreme Court blocked government efforts to break up a sugar trust that controlled most of the nation’s sugar manufacturing.
Knight Co., the Court ruled that the Sherman Act applied only to trade, not to manufacturing.
The Gilded Age In 1873, the writer Mark Twain coauthored a book about rich industrialists and corrupt politicians called The Gilded Age.
But beneath that glitter, this period was marked by political corruption and social unrest.
From Industrialists to Philanthropists During the Gilded Age, the growth of three industries fueled a rapid expansion of the American economy.
From 1870 to 1900, steel production rose from 77,000 tons to more than 1 1 million tons.
Oil production swelled from around 5 million barrels annually to more than 63 million barrels.
All three started as entrepreneurs— bold risk-takers who established new businesses.
Some successful industrialists used their wealth to promote the common good.
Henry Clay Frick, Carnegie Steel's chairman of the board, followed his boss's example.
Julius Rosenwald, head of Sears, Roebuck and Company, was also a generous philanthropist.
Workers near his Pittsburgh mill lived in cramped, poorly ventilated rooms with primitive sanitation.
Others might have said that by working hard and following Carnegie’s example, anyone could be rich.
After arriving from Scotland in 1848 at the age of 12, he worked in a Pennsylvania cotton mill earning $1 .20 a week.
His thrift and shrewd investments gave him a $50,000 annual income by the time he was 30.
Through a combination of daring business tactics and technological innovation, Carnegie prospered and gained control of several steel plants.
Carnegie set a splendid example by using his fortune to benefit society.
This charitable foundation offered grants of money to promote the advancement of knowledge.
Carnegie helped build more than 2,500 free public libraries throughout the world.
He also used his money to support cultural institutions and to promote international peace.
Like Carnegie, Rockefeller had the foresight to get in on the ground floor of an industry with a bright future.
He started with one oil refinery, which he built into a huge corporation.
Rockefeller’s monopolistic approach to business brought him fabulous wealth— and a terrible reputation.
However, like Carnegie, he became a philanthropist, a person who gives money to support worthy causes.
He also started several charitable organizations, including the Rockefeller Foundation.
Through these organizations, he supported medical research, education, and the arts.
Ambitious and clever, Vanderbilt mastered the world of trade and transportation.
Unlike Carnegie and Rockefeller, however, Vanderbilt never believed he had a duty to use his wealth to benefit society.
History is not quite sure how to judge the business giants of the Gilded Age.
Critics call them robber barons for the way they gained their wealth and the lordly style in which they lived.
Supporters call them captains of industry who, despite some shady dealings, helped usher in our modem economy.
They ruthlessly drove rivals out of business and raised prices by limiting competition.
They robbed the nation of its natural resources and bribed officials to ensure their success.
They kept wages low and imposed dreadful working conditions, while trying to squeeze every ounce of work out of their employees.
Supporters argue, however, that industrialists prospered for mostly positive reasons.
Industrialists found new ways to finance and organize businesses for greater efficiency and productivity.
Shopkeepers, doctors, lawyers, and others in the growing middle class profited from the upsurge in business.
But it would take years of struggle before workers shared in these benefits, as you will read in the next chapter.
Perhaps the greatest inequality in American history occurred during the Gilded Age.
This debate about the overall impact of the industrialists may never be resolved.
The industrial expansion of the late 1800s helped give rise to a vibrant economy and consumer society.
Americans had access to an unprecedented abundance of goods and services— and they kept demanding more.
By the early 1900s, economic growth had helped make the United States one of the most powerful nations in the world.
Much of the philanthropy of a century ago still provides benefits today.
Charitable foundations established in the Gilded Age continue to support worthy causes.
Libraries like this one, built through a Carnegie grant, remain vibrant institutions in many communities.
Large steel, oil, and railroad corporations dominated the economy, with little governmental control.
Industrial expansion produced greater access to goods and services, and it improved standards of living for many Americans, but not all.
Innovations and inventions Innovations, such as the electric light bulb and kerosene, spurred the growth of new industries.
The telegraph and telephone brought modem communications to homes and businesses.
The Bessemer process lowered the cost of steel and encouraged new forms of construction.
New business techniques Business leaders formed corporations to attract capital from investors, who became owners by buying stock.
They improved production methods in order to mass-produce more goods in less time.
By promoting horizontal or vertical integration, some leaders gained control of major industries.
They also sought to reduce competition by forming monopolies and trusts.
Laissez-faire The federal government generally adopted a laissez-faire policy toward business.
The Gilded Age While industrialists amassed great fortunes, society was tainted by political corruption and a huge gap between rich and poor.
Carnegie, Rockefeller, and Vanderbilt used some of their wealth to promote the common good.
Historians debate their overall impact, noting increased industrial productivity but also unfair business practices.
But she would soon take on a much larger role in the story of American labor.
Like most factory workers at the time, Schneiderman worked long hours under difficult conditions.
However, demands for unlocked factory doors and working fire escapes were never met.
Although their walkout failed to achieve all of their goals, it did set the stage for more labor actions to come.
Two years later, a tragedy at a garment factory helped focus even more attention on the plight of workers.
Because the doors to the factory were locked, many of the women couldn’t escape.
Strikers stood on picket lines outside factories, where many were arrested by the police or beaten by hired thugs.
The strike lasted for 14 weeks but produced only modest gains for workers.
The only way they can save themselves is by a strong working-class movement.
Over the years, Schneiderman continued her efforts on behalf of American workers.
Steelworkers put up with noise, heat, and dust They also faced the ongoing threat of injury or death from heavy machinery or molten steel.
Conditions of the Working Class Americans have long cherished the ideal of equality.
Unlike European countries, the United States has never had monarchs or noble families who held economic and political power just because they were part of an upper class.
In the Gilded Age, however, a class system started to emerge in the United States.
That is, society began to divide into unequal groups based on wealth and power.
In 1879, the economist Henry George described this change as an ""immense wedge"" being forced through society.
Many Workers Labored UnderTerrible Conditions The working class included V men, women, and children.
They provided the skill and the muscle that helped push American productivity to new heights and made employers rich.
Yet those same employers often treated their workers— their human resources— as if they were merely parts of the machinery.
Unlike farming or craft work, in which a worker did a variety of tasks, the factory system relied on a division of labor.
This meant that production was divided into separate tasks, with one task assigned to each worker.
Factory owners designed the system this way for the sake of efficiency.
Whirling shafts, slippery floors, spinning blades, and molten steel all had the potential to injure or kill.
Workers were not given helmets or safety glasses, and those who were hurt or disabled received little or no financial compensation for their injuries.
Factory owners believed that paying wages fulfilled their obligation to workers.
Mary Harris Jones, a labor activist, described the “wretched work” that miners did.
Workers in cramped, unventilated sweatshops faced the constant threat of contagious diseases such as tuberculosis.
A sweatshop is a small factory where employees work long hours under poor conditions for low wages.
Laborers put up with such adversity, or hardship, because they could lose their jobs if they protested.
With immigrants pouring into the country, employers had little trouble replacing a complaining worker.
Widespread Child Labor Children worked in industry for two main reasons.
First, even with both parents employed, a typical family could barely survive.
Secondly, children earned less than adults, so factory owners were happy to employ them.
At the same time, children were expected to do the same amount of work as their parents.
Some states enacted laws setting a minimum age for workers, often 14 or 15 years.
Where child-labor laws existed, companies often ignored them, and states often failed to enforce them.
As a result, 6-year-olds worked in Georgia’s cotton mills, and boys as young as 8 worked in the coal mines of Pennsylvania.
Child workers experienced some of the most dangerous working conditions.
Because they were small, they could squeeze inside running machinery to make repairs.
Young miners driving mules through tunnels risked being crushed by loads of coal.
In January 1876, a Pennsylvania newspaper noted, “During the past week nearly one boy a day has been killed” in the mines.
Unsanitary Living Conditions When their shifts finally ended, worn-out industrial workers headed home.
The great mass of workers, especially immigrants, lived in slums— heavily populated parts of a city marked by filth and squalor.
The streets are inexpressibly dirty, the number of schools inadequate, sanitary legislation unenforced, the street lighting bad, the paving miserable and altogether lacking in the alleys and smaller streets, and the stables foul beyond description. —Jane Addams, Twenty Years at Hull-House ; 1910 In the slums, workers lived in tenements, run-down apartment buildings of four to six stories, usually housing four families on each floor.
Disease flourished in such cramped and often airless quarters, and fire was an ever-present danger.
Children often ran the machines in factories like this one, photographed in 1908.
As a result, children under 10 years of age worked long hours in cotton mills, mines, and factories into the early 1900s.
The Labor Movement In the late 1800s, workers in American industry faced a set of painful facts.
Their pay was low, and they worked in dangerous and unhealthy conditions.
Their homes were often equally dismal, and their children had little opportunity to go to school.
Perhaps most distressing of all, individual workers had little power to change their circumstances.
Nor could they seek help from the government, which did little to regulate working conditions.
American workers joined together in labor unions as early as the 1790s.
One early strike, in 1860, pitted women shoe makers against factory owners in Lynn, Massachusetts.
Workers Unite for Better Conditions In the early years of the Industrial Revolution, some workers developed a strategy for improving their lives.
A labor union is a group of workers organized to protect the interests of its members.
Much of a union’s power came from the threat of a strike, a labor action in which workers simply refuse to go to work.
Unions generally used the strike as a last resort, when owners would not sit down to discuss the issues.
A Difficult Start for National Labor Organizations After the Civil War. local unions began to realize that they might benefit from cooperating with each other to achieve their goals.
As a result, a number of unions joined forces to form a national labor federation, or group of unions.
In the mid1870s, an economic depression inflicted more damage on efforts to create national labor unions.
In times of economic crisis, high unemployment intensified the competition for jobs.
They pressured workers to sign “yellow-dog contracts,” written pledges not to join a union.
They also exchanged lists of union members and organizers, refusing jobs to any worker whose name was on these blacklists.
Yellow-dog contracts and blacklists discouraged workers from joining unions.
After the economy regained its strength, however, the labor movement also revived.
A series of new national labor organizations arose, bringing together various unions under one banner.
It attracted many members in the late 1870s with a policy of accepting both skilled and unskilled workers, including women and African Americans.
However, the Knights declined after 1886, in part because of competition from another federation.
Unlike the Knights, the AFL concentrated mainly on organizing skilled workers.
It also had a more narrow focus on “bread-and-butter” worker objectives, such as higher wages and shorter workdays.
Founded in 1886, the AFL became the only major national labor organization in the 1890s.
IWW leaders introduced radical ideas into the union movement, adopting the socialist theories of the German political philosopher Karl Marx.
Socialism is a political theory that advocates ownership of the means of production, such as factories and farms, by the people rather than by capitalists and landowners.
Its goals are the elimination of private property and the fair treatment of workers.
In practice, each of these national labor organizations acted as a union.
They engaged in collective bargaining— negotiations between employers and employee representatives concerning wages, working conditions, and other terms of employment.
These three national labor organizations had a huge impact on the labor movement.
Each had its own policies and strategies for improving workers' lives, and each attracted a different set of workers.
The strike spread rapidly, and strikers soon shut down most of the nation's rail lines.
Strikes Erupt Nationwide As labor unions gained strength in the late 1800s, workers showed a greater willingness to strike.
Violence Marks the Railroad Strike of 1877 The railroad strike began during the depression of the mid1870s.
The government, holding to its laissez-faire policy, did nothing to boost the economy or help suffering workers.
As families starved and children died, rage boiled up in working-class communities.
Meanwhile, railroad companies responded to the depression by slashing wages.
Before long, strikers had shut down at least half of the nation's rail lines.
Meanwhile, riots broke out in various cities as strike supporters expressed their anger by burning and looting railroad property.
He used federal troops to restore order and get the trains rolling again.
It was the first time the United States Army had been used to break a strike, but it would not be the last.
They feared a working-class revolution, perhaps led by socialists or other radical groups.
Such a revolution did not take place, but the stage was set for even larger and more violent strikes.
More Strikes, More Violence The Railroad Strike of 1877 boosted union membership and gave members a greater sense of their own power.
In the years that followed, national labor organizations tried to harness that power to change working conditions.
It started when strikers fought with “scabs,” nonunion workers brought in to replace striking workers.
Police trying to break up the fight shot into the crowd, killing at least one striker and wounding others.
A group of anarchists— people who reject all forms of government— called for a protest meeting the next day in Haymarket Square.
More than a thousand people showed up for the meeting, including the city’s mayor.
In the confusion that followed, someone threw a bomb that exploded among the police.
Panicked, the police fired into the crowd, killing at least four protesters.
The bomber was never identified, but four radical anarchists were tried and executed for their part in the demonstration.
It involved ironand steelworkers at the Carnegie Steel plant in Homestead, Pennsylvania.
Andrew Carnegie was away in Europe at the time and had left his manager, Henry Frick, in charge.
They often worked as spies, joining unions to discover their plans and identify union members.
When the Pinkerton agents arrived at the plant, the strikers were armed and ready.
After a daylong gun battle in which nine strikers died, the Pinkerton agents gave up and the strikers took control of the town.
Pennsylvania's governor then called out the state militia, and the strikers scattered.
Frick brought in nonunion workers to run the plant, and the union was shut out for the next four decades.
In the Pullman Strike of 1894, the government again supported management against striking workers.
The Pullman Palace Car Company, in the southern part of Chicago, made fancy railcars for long-distance travelers.
In company towns, workers rented company-owned housing and bought food and other goods at company stores, often at inflated prices.
Often all of their wages went toward paying off bills at the company store.
In the spring of 1894, during another depression, Pullman cut wages, but not rents or other charges, by about 25 percent.
Its members shut down most rail traffic in the Midwest by refusing to handle trains with Pullman cars.
Some of those trains included mail cars, and interfering with the mail was a federal offense.
Therefore, President Grover Cleveland sent federal troops into Chicago to break the strike.
After a violent encounter between troops and strikers, the strike collapsed, and the troops withdrew.
A bomb exploded among police in Chicago's Haymarket Square in 1886 during a rally held by local anarchists.
The flier shown above was used as evidence in the murder trial of the anarchists.
By the time the Haymarket Affair ended, four anarchists had been executed for the crime.
Mixed Success for Unions The union struggles of the late 1800s brought mixed results for organized labor.
Unions generally experienced more setbacks than gains and failed to get government support or the backing of most Americans.
Through collective bargaining and strikes, however, they made some advances, especially on the issues of hours and wages.
Government Favors Owners over Workers Although the Railroad Strike of 1877 helped boost union membership, it prompted the federal government to take the side of business owners in most labor disputes.
Unions needed government support to improve the lives of workers, but the federal government generally opposed union activities.
It sent troops to break up strikes and used legal means to undermine unions.
The Pullman Strike revealed one way the federal government could intervene to favor employers over unions.
To end the strike, a federal court issued an injunction against the American Railway Union and its head, Eugene V Debs.
The court based the injunction on a broad interpretation of the Sherman Antitrust Act.
Now it was being used against striking workers, on the grounds that their strike limited trade and commerce.
When Debs and other railway union leaders ignored the injunction, they were arrested and sent to jail.
Later the Supreme Court ruled, in the case In re Debs, that such a broad, or “blanket,” injunction was legal.
After the 1911 fire at the Triangle Shirtwaist Factory, she worked as a leader with the International Ladies Garment Workers Union to lobby for fire-safety laws and other union-backed reforms.
He later helped found the American Federation of Labor and served as its president for almost 40 years.
Mary Harris ""Mother"" Jones Mother Jones roamed the country helping coal miners, textile workers, and others to form unions.
Eugene V Debs As a young man, Eugene Debs worked as a locomotive fireman.
He later helped found the American Railway Union and the Industrial Workers of the World.
The violent nature of strikes and of events like the Haymarket Affair caused many Americans to view union members as dangerous radicals.
Violence and radicalism also weakened unions by scaring away potential union members.
Unions Win Small Bread-and-Butter Victories Most unions remained relatively small in the late 1800s.
From 1890 to 1915, average work hours per week for union employees fell from 54 to 49.
Wages and hours for nonunion workers also improved, though not to the same degree.
Most unskilled laborers, consisting largely of white women, African Americans, and new immigrants, still struggled to make ends meet.
Unions achieved more than just better wages, hours, and working conditions.
They challenged an economic system in which owners could treat their workers no better than machines.
Unions insisted that workers should be able to sit down with owners, as equals, at the bargaining table.
This in itself gave some power to the working class, where it had little or none before.
The Statistical History of the United States from Colonial Times to the Present, United States Census Bureau.
Horteon Press, 1965 This graph shows that, by 1915, workers were making an average of $3.70 more per week than in 1890.
Yet factory owners often treated their workers poorly, imposing low wages, long hours, and poor working conditions.
Many workers joined labor unions to fight for better treatment and to raise their standard of living.
Working-class conditions The working class suffered greatly during the Gilded Age.
Industrial workers accepted low pay and dangerous conditions because they could not afford to lose their jobs.
Many working-class families occupied run-down tenements in poor city slums.
Child labor American industry relied on the labor of whole families, including children, who often worked longer hours than adults.
Labor unions Workers united to form labor unions and to negotiate better wages and working conditions.
Union membership increased with the rise of national unions and labor federations, such as the American Federation of Labor.
Strikes Failed negotiations led often to strikes and sometimes to violence.
The government generally took the side of business and industry and often helped to break strikes.
Losses and gains for workers Periodic depressions shrank union membership, while violent incidents like the Haymarket Affair, Homestead Strike, and Pullman Strike helped turn public opinion against unions.
The colossal statue, with its torch of freedom held high, made a strong impression on the hundreds of thousands of immigrants who passed by it each year.
I looked at that statue with a sense of bewilderment, half doubting its reality.
Looming shadowy through the mist, it brought silence to the decks of the Florida.
This symbol of America— this enormous expression of what we had all been taught was the inner meaning of this new country we were coming to — inspired awe in the hopeful immigrants.
Many older persons among us, burdened with a thousand memories of what they were leaving behind, had been openly weeping ever since we entered the narrower waters on our final approach toward the unknown.
Now somehow steadied, I suppose, by the concreteness of the symbol of America's freedom, they dried their tears. —Edward Corsi, In the Shadow of Liberty, 1935 Corsi understood the symbolism of the Statue of Liberty for freedom-seeking immigrants.
Send these, the homeless, tempest-tost to me, I lift my lamp beside the golden door!” — Emma Lazarus, “The New Colossus,’' 1883 Millions of immigrants came to the United States at the turn of the century.
Why Europeans Immigrated to the United States Lazarus’s poem suggests that the United States was a land of opportunity for the world's poor and downtrodden masses.
Great waves of immigration had washed over the country since at least the 1840s.
Some immigrants who chose to come to the United States were from Asia, Mexico, and Canada, but the vast majority crossed the Atlantic Ocean from Europe.
From the 1840s until the 1890s, most of these Europeans came from northern and western Europe.
Millions of Irish, British, Germans, and Scandinavians crossed the ocean to become Americans.
In the late 1800s, however, immigration from southern and eastern Europe steadily increased.
Italians, Greeks, Hungarians, Poles, and Russians began to dominate the steamship passenger lists.
For all of these immigrants, the reasons for moving can be divided into push factors and pull factors.
Push factors are problems that cause people to move, whereas pull factors are attractions that draw them to another place.
In the late 1800s, many Jews in Europe faced persecution for their culture and beliefs.
The first Russian pogrom, or organized massacre of Jews, occurred in 1881.
Attacks like this reflected a brutal anti-Semitism that caused more than a million Jews to leave Russia for the United States.
Difficulties Push People from Europe Population growth and hunger were two major push factors that caused Europeans to emigrate, or leave their homeland.
This growth resulted in crow ded cities, a lack of jobs, and food shortages.
The Irish potato famine led to a wave of Irish emigration to the United States.
Another push factor was scarcity of arable land, or land suitable for growing crops.
In the 1800s, mechanization of agriculture led to the growth of commercial farming on large tracts of land in Europe.
In the process, common lands, traditionally available to all. were combined and enclosed by fences.
In parts of Europe, landholdings were divided among all children at the death of their parents.
After a few generations of such divisions, the resulting plots were too small to support a family.
Some immigrants planned to go to the United States, make their fortune, and return to their homelands.
Russian and Polish Jews, for example, fled their villages to escape deadly attacks by people who abhorred their religion.
Lazarus wrote her Statue of Liberty poem with this group of immigrants in mind.
They described the pogroms, or organized anti-Jewish attacks, that had forced them to leave their country.
Armenian immigrants, many of them Catholics, told similar stories about persecution and massacres at the hands of Turks in the largely Muslim Ottoman Empire.
Opportunities Pull Europeans to the United States One of the great pull factors for European immigrants was the idea of life in a free and democratic society.
They longed to live in a country where they had the opportunity to achieve their dreams.
Less abstract, or more concrete, factors such as natural resources and jobs also exerted a strong pull.
Germans, Scandinavians, and eastern Europeans brought their farming skills to the rolling hills and plains of the Midwest.
They introduced new types of wheat and other grains that would help turn this region into the country’s breadbasket.
Booming industries offered jobs to unskilled workers, like the Irish, Italian, Polish, and Hungarian peasants who poured into the cities in the late 1800s.
These new immigrants also worked on the ever-expanding rail system, sometimes replacing Irish and Chinese laborers.
They offered glowing descriptions of the Great Plains, hoping to sell land they received as government grants.
An even greater lure, however, came in the form of personal communications from friends and relatives who had already immigrated.
Their letters back to the old country, known as America letters, might be published in newspapers or read aloud in public places.
America letters helped persuade many people to immigrate to the United States.
The poorer ones crossed the Atlantic in steerage — the open space below the main deck that once housed the steering mechanism of sailing ships.
Conditions there were so cramped that many passengers spent most of their time on deck.
Improvements in Transportation Make Immigration Easier After the Civil War, most European immigrants crossed the Atlantic by steamship, a technological advance over sailing ships.
Some passengers could afford cabins in the more comfortable upper decks of the ship.
But most had to settle for steerage, the open area below the main deck.
In steerage, hundreds of strangers were thrown together in huge rooms, where they slept in rough metal bunks.
Seasickness, spoiled food, and filthy toilets combined to create an awful stench.
During the day, steerage passengers crowded onto the main deck for fresh air.
In the 1980s, the main buildings were restored, and a museum was established on the site.
They looked for infection, especially the highly contagious disease trachoma, which could lead to blindness.
After all they had been through, they looked forward to stepping onto dry land.
First-class and second-class passengers— those on the upper decks— did just that.
After a brief onboard examination, they disembarked at the Hudson River piers.
Steerage passengers passed through a set of buildings staffed by officers of the Bureau of Immigration.
An array of officials would examine them closely to make sure they were fit to enter the country.
Medical Inspections at Ellis Island Outside the main building at Ellis Island, officials attached an identification tag to each immigrant.
The medical inspection began after the immigrants entered the building.
Public Health Service doctors watched as people crossed through the baggage room and climbed the steep stairs to the enormous Registry Room, or Great Hall.
People who limped, wheezed, or otherwise showed signs of disease or disability would be pulled aside for closer inspection.
In the Great Hall, the immigrants underwent a physical examination and an eye test.
During the brief physical, the doctor checked for a variety of health problems, using chalk to mark the immigrant’s clothing with a symbol for the suspected disease or other problem.
For example, an L stood for lameness, an H meant a possible heart condition, and an X indicated a mental problem.
Disabled individuals or those found to have incurable illnesses would face deportation, a forced return to their home country.
The doctor would check for trachoma, a contagious infection that could lead to blindness.
Legal Interviews in the Great Hall Immigrants with medical problems would be sent to a detention area.
The rest got in line and slowly worked their way to the back of the Great Hall for the legal interview.
It was once thought that many names were shortened or respelled at Ellis Island, but actually such changes were rare.
Passenger lists, including the 29 questions and answers, were created at the port of departure in Europe.
Immigrants provided their name, age, sex, race, marital status, occupation, destination, and other information.
In most cases, Ellis Island inspectors merely asked the questions again to verify that the answers matched those on the passenger list.
Those immigrants who wanted to show they were able to succeed in their new country sometimes answered yes.
However, the Foran Act, a law passed by Congress in 1885, made it illegal for United States employers to import foreigners as contract laborers.
The law's main purpose was to prevent the hiring of new immigrants to replace striking workers.
Any immigrant who admitted to signing a contract to work for an employer in the United States could be detained.
About 20 percent of immigrants failed either the medical examination or the legal interview.
Those with treatable illnesses were sent to a hospital on Ellis Island for therapy.
There they might stay for days or weeks until a doctor pronounced them fit.
Other detained immigrants had to await a hearing in front of a Board of Special Inquiry.
These immigrants stayed in dormitories on the second and third floors of the main building, sleeping in iron bunks that resembled those in steerage.
Along with receiving a medical exam, immigrants lined up for a legal interview.
An inspector asked a series of questions to verify that immigrants could enter the country legally.
Those who failed would be held for days, or even weeks, until their cases were decided.
The smells, sounds, and ethnic vitality served to sustain the new Americans in a difficult time of transition.
Life in the Cities Some new European immigrants quickly found their way to the farm country of the Midwest.
From 1870 to 1920, the proportion of Americans who lived in cities jumped from about 25 percent to 50 percent.
Newly arrived urban immigrants tended to live in the least desirable districts, where housing was cheapest.
Such areas often contained the factories and shops that provided their livelihoods.
Amid the city’s din and dirt, immigrants crowded into tenement buildings and other run-down, slum housing.
Within the narrow limits of one-half square mile were crowded together thirty-five thousand people, living tier upon tier, huddled together until the very heavens seemed to be shut out.
A thousand wheels of commercial activity whirled incessantly day and night, making noises which would rack the sturdiest of nerves. —Constantine M Panunzio, The Soul of an Immigrant , 1969 The board members reviewed the details of each immigrant’s case and listened to testimony from the detainee’s friends and relatives, if any lived nearby.
The board voted to accept almost all of the immigrants who came before it.
Most of the immigrants who passed through Ellis Island spent a very short time undergoing medical and legal examination.
Yet the whole process, including the waiting time, lasted for several agonizing hours.
They felt comfortable among people who spoke the same language, ate the same foods, and held the same beliefs.
As a result, different areas of the city often had distinctive ethnic flavors.
Responses to New European Immigrants Immigrants typically came to the United States with little money and few possessions.
Because of their general poverty and lack of education, most were not welcomed into American society.
In time, some saved enough to move out of the slums and perhaps even buy a home.
A few opened small businesses, such as a grocery store or a tailor’s shop.
But many remained stuck in dangerous, low-wage factory jobs that barely paid their bills.
An accident on the job or an economic downturn might leave them without work and possibly homeless and hungry.
Immigrants Receive Aid from Several Sources In the late 1800s, the government did not provide aid or assistance to unemployed workers.
The first sources of aid were usually relatives or friends, who might provide housing and food.
If necessary, the needy might seek assistance from an immigrant aid society.
They met mainly in churches and synagogues, groceries, and saloons— the centers of immigrant community life.
In time, local immigrant aid societies joined together to form regional and national organizations, such as the Polish National Alliance and the Sons of Italy in America.
During the 1890s, a type of aid organization called a settlement house arose in the ethnic neighborhoods of many large cities.
A settlement house was a community center that provided a variety of services to the poor, especially to immigrants.
It might offer daytime care for children, as well as classes, health clinics, and recreational opportunities for the entire community.
While adult immigrants often found it hard to assimilate, their children made a much smoother transition.
As they learned to speak English and studied American history and civics, they quickly adapted to their new homeland.
TE Opponents of immigration claimed that the ""garbage"" of Europe was being dumped on American shores.
Political parties included anti-immigration statements in their platforms.
These bosses were powerful leaders who ran local politics in many cities.
They were in a position to provide jobs and social services to immigrants in exchange for the political support of immigrants who could vote.
These supporters often voted for the boss and his slate of candidates in local elections.
The Assimilation of Immigrants Many immigrants held on to their old customs and language as they gradually adapted to American life.
This was especially true for older immigrants living in ethnic neighborhoods.
The children of immigrants, however, typically found assimilation into American society much easier than their parents did.
Immigrant children in public schools studied American history and civics, and they learned to speak English.
Some patriotic organizations pushed for the Americanization of immigrants, fearing that increased immigration posed a threat to American values and traditions.
Through efforts such as the publishing of guides for new citizens, they promoted loyalty to American values.
Some Americans Reject Immigrants Many Americans disliked the recent immigrants, in part because of religious and cultural differences.
Later waves of immigrants came from southern and eastern Europe and were often Catholics or Jews.
Their customs seemed strange to Americans of northern European ancestry, who often doubted that these more recent immigrants could be Americanized.
Many people also blamed them for the labor unrest that had spread across the country in the late 1800s.
They especially feared that foreign anarchists and socialists might undermine American democracy.
Dislike and fear provoked demands to limit immigration and its impact on American life.
This policy of favoring the interests of native-born Americans over those of immigrants is called nativism.
Before the Civil War, nativists had opposed the immigration of Irish Catholics.
In the 1850s, they formed a secret political party known as the Know-Nothings, because when asked a question about the group, members were told to answer, “I don't know/’ As the main source of immigration shifted to southern and eastern Europe in the late 1800s, nativism flared up again.
Nativists were not only bothered by religious and cultural differences, but also saw immigrants as an economic threat.
Native workers worried that immigrants were taking their jobs and lowering wages.
Immigrants often worked for less money and sometimes served as scabs, replacement workers during labor disputes.
In 1894, a group of nativists founded the Immigration Restriction League.
This organization wanted to limit immigration by requiring that all new arrivals take a literacy test to prove they could read and write.
During the 1920s, Congress began passing quota laws to restrict the flow of European immigrants into the United States.
Immigration from Asia Although immigration after the Civil War was mainly from Europe, many immigrants also arrived each year from Asia.
Chinese Immigrants Seek Gold Mountain You have read about the thousands of Chinese railroad workers who laid track through the Sierra Nevada for the Central Pacific Railroad.
Thousands more joined the swarms of prospectors who scoured the West for gold.
In fact, the Chinese referred to California, the site of the first gold rush, as Gold Mountain.
They streamed into California, mainly through the port of San Francisco.
Besides finding employment in mining and railroad construction, Chinese immigrants worked in agriculture.
Some had first come to Hawaii as contract laborers to work on sugar plantations.
Farm owners on the mainland saw the value of their labor and began bringing the Chinese to California.
The Chinese were willing to do the “stoop labor” in the fields that many white laborers refused to do.
By the early 1880s, most harvest workers in the state were Chinese. , Many businesses hired the Chinese because they were willing to work for less money.
This allowed owners to reduce production costs even further by ' paying white workers less.
As a result, friction developed between workingclass whites and Chinese immigrants.
Mob violence against Chinese immigrants broke out in several American cities in the late 1800s.
Anti-immigrant forces blamed the Chinese for economic problems at the time.
Shutting the Doors on the Chinese During the 1870s, a depression and drought knocked the wind out of California’s economy.
Seeking a scapegoat, many Californians blamed Chinese workers for their economic woes.
They looked different from white Americans, and their language, religion, and other cultural traits were also very different.
As a result, innocent Chinese became victims of mob violence, during which many were driven out of their homes and even murdered.
The Chinese were seen as an inferior people who could never be Americanized.
Their outcries led to the passage of the Chinese Exclusion Act in 1882.
This law prohibited the immigration of Chinese laborers, skilled or unskilled, for a period of 10 years.
It also prevented Chinese already in the country from becoming citizens.
For the first time, the United States had restricted immigration based solely on nationality or race.
The Chinese Exclusion Act still allowed a few Chinese to enter the country, including merchants, diplomats, teachers, students, and relatives of existing citizens.
The Ellis Island of the West Although the Chinese Exclusion Act was highly effective, some Chinese managed to evade the law by using forged documents and false names.
In response, federal officials developed tougher procedures for processing Asian immigrants.
They also decided to replace the old immigrant-processing center in San Francisco with a new, more secure facility located on Angel Island in San Francisco Bay.
It was designed to enforce the exclusion act by keeping new Chinese arrivals isolated from friends and relatives on the mainland and preventing them from escaping.
Then they faced an intense legal interview, more involved and detailed than the Ellis Island version.
Officials hoped to exclude Chinese who falsely claimed to be related to American citizens.
Interviewers asked applicants specific questions about their home village, their family, and the house they lived in.
Those who failed the interviews could enter an appeal, but additional evidence took time to gather.
Detainees felt miserable and frustrated to be stopped so close to their goal.
Imprisoned in the wooden building day after day, My freedom withheld; how can I bear to talk about it? —from Ronald Takaki, Strangers from a Different Shore , 1989 Many Chinese never made it to the mainland.
About 10 percent were put on ships and sent back to China after failing the medical exam or legal interview.
Some Asian immigrants detained at Angel Island carved poems into the walls of the barracks there.
The poems described both the misery and the determination of the detainees.
In the picturebride system, families arranged marriage between a son living in the United States and a daughter in Japan.
The prospective bride and groom exchanged photographs and personal information.
Other Asian Groups Immigrate to the United States The Chinese Exclusion Act created a shortage of farm laborers.
Large-scale fanners looked to Japan and later to Korea and the Philippines for workers.
These other Asian immigrants had experiences similar to those of the Chinese.
They came to the United States through Angel Island to work in orchards, in vineyards, and on farms in California, Oregon, and Washington.
A number of Japanese immigrants leased farmland and had great success growing fruits and vegetables.
They formed ethnic neighborhoods that provided for their economic and social needs.
Only a small number moved from Hawaii to the mainland in the early 1900s, and they led more isolated lives.
Immigrants from the Philippines migrated up and down the West Coast, taking part in fruit and vegetable harvests.
In the winter, many of these Filipinos worked in hotels and restaurants.
Despite their contributions, all Asian immigrants faced prejudice, hostility, and discrimination.
In 1906, anti-Asian feelings in San Francisco caused the city to segregate Asian children in separate schools from whites.
Hoping to avoid offending East Asia’s most powerful nation, the president persuaded San Francisco’s school board to repeal the segregation order.
In return, he got a pledge from Japan to discuss issues related to immigration.
In 1907 and 1908, the American and Japanese governments carried out secret negotiations through a series of notes.
In the end, Japanese officials agreed not to allow laborers to emigrate to the United States.
They did, however, insist that wives, children, and parents of Japanese in the United States be allowed to immigrate.
Immigration from North and South The East and West coasts were the main gateways for immigrants to the United States in the late 1800s and early 1900s.
But immigrants also crossed the country’s northern and southern borders.
Before 1900, people passed back and forth across these land borders largely unchecked.
Even later, the length and isolation of the country’s borders made enforcement of immigration laws almost impossible.
Europeans and Asians sometimes crossed by land to avoid immigration restrictions.
However, most who came this way were either French Canadians from the north or Mexicans from the south.
A demand for low-wage labor in the late 1800s contributed to a surge of immigration from Mexico.
Mexican immigrants worked in various industries, from railroads and steel mills to canneries.
Immigrants from Mexico In the late 1800s and early 1900s, legal restrictions on Chinese and Japanese immigration mounted.
As they did, the population of Asian farmworkers in the United States shrank.
By the late 1920s, Mexicans constituted a large portion of California’s agricultural workers.
Many Mexicans also became migrant farmworkers and construction workers in Texas.
Mexicans had lived in the area of Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and California since the earliest Spanish settlements.
In the late 1800s, more Mexicans moved to this area, in part to escape poverty and civil unrest in Mexico.
Around this time, railroads began extending their lines across the border, which made travel faster and easier.
Still others worked on the farms and in the citrus groves that blossomed throughout the region with the expansion of irrigation.
The Mexican Revolution, which began in 1910, pushed even more Mexicans across the border.
Like other immigrant groups, the Mexicans often suffered at the hands of native-born Americans.
They might be welcomed as cheap labor, but they were commonly scorned as inferior to white Americans.
Racist attitudes toward Mexicans, especially those with dark skin, led to discrimination.
They were kept in low-level jobs and commonly denied access to public facilities, including restaurants.
The French Canadians Many Canadians also came to the United States after the Civil War.
Between 1865 and 1900, more than 900,000 immigrants arrived from Canada.
Some of these were Englishspeaking Protestants, but a larger number were French-speaking Catholics.
Like other immigrants, the French Canadians were seeking greater opportunities than they had at home.
Typically, they traveled by train across the border to the United States.
With their language, religion, and customs, the French Canadians differed from the English-speaking society around them.
At first, they resisted Americanization, preferring to maintain their cultural and historical ties to Quebec.
In part because of their apparent unwillingness to assimilate, French Canadians came under attack by nativists.
They are a horde of industrial invaders, not a stream of stable settlers. —Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor, Twelfth Annual Report, 1881 European, Asian, Mexican, and French Canadian immigrants all faced accusations that they were unwilling to become members of American society.
They would establish vibrant ethnic communities, and their cultures would become vital pieces of the American mosaic.
IRE STOCK Of ^ REMNANTS j NTS FURNISHINGS BE SOLDAT ONCE Most French Canadian immigrants formed communities in New England and typically worked in textile mills and lumber camps.
This Rhode Island clothing store announced sales events in both French and English.
The surges or waves of immigration shown here often reflected events or policies of the time.
The Three Great Waves of Immigration Immigration has always been an important part of American life.
Since 1820, immigration to the United States has come in three great waves, or surges.
The first wave, from 1820 to around 1870, came mostly from northern and western Europe.
The second wave, from about 1880 to 1920, included people from all parts of world, but especially southern and eastern Europe.
In the early 1920s, laws were passed that severely limited immigration from most parts of the world.
In 1921, Congress passed the first of a series of laws designed to reduce immigration into the country.
These laws used quotas to limit the total number of immigrants as well as the number of people allowed to enter from any one country.
Changes in immigration policy in 1965 triggered the last great wave of immigration.
By 2003, the number of foreign-bom people living in the United States rose to 33 million, nearly 12 percent of the population.
Like earlier immigrants, the most recent newcomers are raising questions about how we define ourselves as a people and a nation.
Most emigrated from Europe, but many also arrived from Asia and from other parts of North America.
They all saw the United States as a land of opportunity, but they faced challenges entering the United States and assimilating into American culture.
Push and pull factors Overcrowded cities, civil unrest, and shortages of food, land, and jobs pushed immigrants out of their homelands.
The promise of wealth, jobs, land, and freedom pulled them to the United States.
Through Ellis Island In the late 1800s, Europeans crossed the Atlantic on steamships, many of them in steerage.
Most of these new immigrants found homes in the ethnic neighborhoods of large cities or on farms in the Midwest.
Through Angel Island Asians immigrated to the United States in smaller numbers than Europeans.
Chinese, Japanese, Koreans, and Filipinos found work mainly on the commercial farms of the West Coast.
After 1910, Asians had to pass a rigorous inspection at the Angel Island Immigration Station before entering the country.
Across the northern and southern borders Other immigrants came from Mexico and French Canada.
Immigrants from French Canada settled mainly in New England and the Great Lakes states.
Both ethnic groups faced many of the same challenges as immigrants from other countries.
Nativism Some Americans objected to mass immigration, especially from Asia and southern and eastern Europe.
Strong opposition from nativists led to the persecution of immigrants and restrictions on immigration.
Introduction Jacob Riis. a photographer and journalist, took the picture of three homeless boys sleeping in an alley that you see on the opposite page.
In his book How the Other Half Live Y, Riis wrote about the conditions of the urban poor.
Like rabbits in their burrows, the little ragamuffins sleep with at least one eye open, and every sense alert to the approach of danger: of their enemy, the policeman, whose chief business in life is to move them on, and of the agent bent on robbing them of their cherished freedom.
When he became a reporter, he dedicated himself to exposing the conditions of the poor.
In this chapter, you will read about the social, environmental, and political problems Americans faced in the early 1900s.
In the next two chapters, you will see how reformers worked to solve these problems.
He documented conditions of urban poverty and published his work in the book How the Other Half Lives.
Riis was one of a group of journalists known as muckrakers, who exposed the nation's problems at the turn of the 20th century.
The State of the Union in 1900 Population by Region, 1800 and 1900 The United States population shifted to the West during the 1800s.
As this graph shows, the percentage of people living in the Midwest and West increased substantially, while percentages in the North and South declined.
Westward migration contributed to this shift, as did the rise of midwestern cities like Chicago and Cleveland.
In 1900, the United States looked very different from a century before.
In addition, the rise of industry had stimulated rapid urbanization— the growth of cities— by creating jobs that drew rural residents and new immigrants to American cities.
The United States had moved far beyond Thomas Jefferson's vision of a nation of small farmers.
It was becoming an urban, industrial society with an increasingly diverse population from around the world.
The Closing of the Frontier By 1900, the nation included 45 states and stretched across the North American continent.
Americans had fulfilled what many saw as their “manifest destiny”— their right to expand across the continent from the Atlantic to the Pacific.
This expansion was so successful that in 1890 a report from the Census Bureau announced that the “American frontier” was closed.
This report said that most of the land beyond the Appalachian Mountains had been settled.
Of course, there was still land available to settlers after 1890, but the popular notion of the “wide-open spaces” of the West was becoming an idea of the past.
Factories Increase Production Industrialization also brought changes to American life.
Advances in technology, transportation, and communications helped fuel rapid industrial growth after the Civil War.
American factory workers produced more goods much faster than anyone had ever thought possible.
More efficient machines and production methods made this increase possible.
Mass production of Chicago was founded as a small trading post on Lake Michigan in the 1840s.
With its lakeside location, Chicago was an ideal hub for railroad lines and shipping.
This transport network made it easy to bring raw materials to factories and finished products to markets.
After the war, the industry spread to the South, where the use of modern machinery produced a boom in textile production.
Between 1870 and 1900, production rose from about 3 million tons to more than 29 million tons.
As factory production increased, businesses looked for new ways to sell their products.
Companies like Montgomery Ward and Sears, Roebuck and Company published and distributed catalogs offering goods of all kinds, from hardware and tools to clothes and appliances.
They took orders by mail and shipped the products by railroad and canal to customers around the country.
Other companies, like Macy’s and Marshall Field’s, opened department stores in major cities.
These large stores sold a variety of goods and even offered services, like childcare, all under one roof.
Smaller chain stores like Woolworths established branches across the country to serve more Americans in the towns and cities where they lived.
Cities Attract Masses of Newcomers The United States was becoming an increasingly urban nation.
Most immigrants settled in cities because they could find work and mingle with others from their homelands.
African Americans were also beginning to move from the South to northern cities, seeking equality and opportunity.
Other new arrivals were rural residents from the North, who moved to cities in large numbers in the late 1800s.
Jobs were the most important attraction in cities, but other features also drew migrants.
A type of theater called vaudeville was especially popular for its lively combination of music, comedy, and dance.
Circuses were another common form of entertainment, as were spectator sports like baseball and football.
Cities also boasted broad avenues lined with the mansions of wealthy residents.
In some cities, steel-framed skyscrapers rose above downtown streets, reaching heights of 10 stories or more.
These modem buildings become symbols of American progress and prosperity.
As the graph shows, the percentage of Americans living in urban areas rose from 6 percent in 1800 to almost 40 percent in 1900.
The Census Reveals an Increasingly Diverse People Between 1870 and 1920, at least 12 million immigrants arrived in the United States.
By the turn of the century, immigration from different parts of the world was changing the face of American culture and society.
New waves of immigrants from southern Europe and Asia were joined by immigrants from Mexico and Canada.
All of these newcomers added their customs and languages to the nation’s mix of cultures.
Poor Living and Working Conditions While many Americans enjoyed the benefits of urban life in 1900, cities and city dwellers also suffered from serious problems.
Many urban residents lived in poverty and labored under backbreaking conditions.
They may have been tempted by the many goods generated by mass production, but most could not afford them.
Even those who did have the money had no guarantee that the products were safe or reliable.
Through their writings, muckrakers like Jacob Riis sought to expose these and other problems of urban life.
Conditions in the Slums Many of the urban poor lived in slum tenements.
They were crammed together in shoddy apartment buildings that housed four families on each floor.
Not only was each tenement crowded, but the buildings themselves were packed together.
Some slum neighborhoods were among the most densely populated areas in the world.
Infrastructure refers to the facilities and equipment required for an organization or community to function.
A number of muckrakers blamed city governments for failing to provide adequate infrastructure and services.
At the turn of the century, many city roads and sidewalks were constructed of wood, making cities virtual firetraps.
Much of Chicago burned to the ground in 1871, and much of San Francisco burned after the 1906 earthquake.
By 1900, many middle-class homes had running water and indoor plumbing.
These amenities reduced the incidence of disease in some neighborhoods, but they increased the amount of wastewater that cities had to remove.
In poorer neighborhoods that lacked indoor plumbing, however, the waste often ended up on the streets.
As a result of poor sanitation, contagious diseases such as tuberculosis and pneumonia often spread quickly through crowded slums.
Problems in the Workplace Muckrakers also exposed terrible working conditions.
By 1900, unskilled factory work had replaced most skilled manufacturing jobs.
And fire posed a risk to nearly everyone who worked in close quarters in factories.
Injuries could put workers out of jobs and throw their families into dire poverty.
Other workers, especially in the garment industry, worked at home for companies that paid them for each piece of work they completed.
Many employers squeezed their workers by reducing the rate they paid per piece.
It was common among immigrants for entire families, including children, to do piecework so that the family could make enough money to survive.
Buyer Beware Increased production meant that more products were available, but buying them was not always a good idea.
Consumers often did not know what was in the products because the government did not regulate product quality.
Sinclair reported that rat droppings, and even the rats themselves, often become part of processed meat.
Toxic chemical preservatives like borax and formaldehyde contaminated many processed foods.
Some products made ridiculous claims for curing illnesses, with the “cures” often involving narcotics.
Medicine labels boasted such ingredients as morphine, opium, and cocaine.
These substances were not prohibited, but their risks were becoming more apparent.
Popular magazines told stories of consumers who believed that these medicines would cure their illnesses, only to fall prey to drug addiction.
Meanwhile, the growth of big businesses went largely unregulated, as monopolies took over many industries.
Many Americans worried that small companies were being driven out of business and that monopolies were stifling opportunity.
Muckrakers protested that big businesses were growing richer, while small businesses and the poor struggled even harder to survive.
The Best Liniment The government did not regulate product quality or safety at the turn of the century.
As a result many medicines contained dangerous substances and made outrageous claims for curing illnesses.
Problems with the Environment By the turn of the century, urbanization and industrialization were transforming not only American society but also the natural environment.
Alexis de Tocqueville, a Frenchman who had visited the United States in 1831, noted that Americans seemed to think nothing of remaking nature for the sake of progress.
He observed that in the process of building towns, they could destroy forests, lakes, and rivers and “not see anything astonishing in all this.
This incredible destruction, this even more surprising growth, seems to the usual process of things in this world/’ By 1900, Americans had settled much of the country and exploited many of its natural resources.
Doing so enabled tremendous economic growth, but it also came at a cost to the environment.
Changing the Landscape As the 20th century began, economic activities had significantly changed the landscape.
Farmers cleared trees to plant crops, and loggers cut down large areas of woodland.
The government encouraged logging by selling large plots of land in the Northwest for the lumber they could provide.
By 1900, only a fraction of the country’s virgin, or original, forests were still standing.
Before settlers moved onto the Great Plains, buffalo had roamed across the region and grazed on its abundant grasslands.
By the time the buffalo returned to places they had grazed before, the grass had grown back.
But the cattle and sheep brought in by ranchers grazed the same area over and over, without moving on.
As a result, they stripped the land of its natural vegetation and left it more vulnerable to erosion.
Extracting Natural Resources The landscape was also transformed by extractive industries, businesses that take mineral resources from the earth.
Meanwhile, oil companies drilled deep to pump petroleum out of the ground.
Factories burned coal to heat water to make the steam that powered machinery.
Workers risked being buried alive if a mine caved in, and many got black-lung disease from breathing coal dust day after day.
Mining scarred the land, leaving open shafts, slag heaps, and polluted streams behind.
Unlike today, the government imposed no environmental regulations on mining companies.
Developers often drilled deep in search of black gold, only to come away empty-handed.
In other words, most people saw no problem with exploiting the environment and took no notice of the harm being done to the natural landscape.
Polluting Water and Air Economic activities were also polluting the air and water in urban areas.
In some cities, factories belched so much black smoke that it was difficult for people to breathe.
Pittsburgh, a steelmaking city, was known for being particularly filthy.
The people who lived closest to the steel plants suffered the worst of the pollution, but it affected those living outside the industrial center as well.
Animal waste was often left where it landed, producing a foul stench and a serious disposal problem.
In some cities, household sewage and industrial pollutants were simply released into nearby water sources without regard for the consequences.
In Chicago, for example, engineers reversed the flow of the Chicago River so that sewage and factory waste would not flow into Lake Michigan.
Some cities developed reservoirs to keep drinking water separate from wastewater.
In some cases, rivers that were in the way or became too much of a health hazard were simply paved over.
In most American cities at the turn of the century, factories released their smoke directly into the air.
In Chicago, the smoke grew so thick at times that people could see only one block ahead of them.
The Politics of Fraud and Bribery Another problem at the turn of the century was political corruption.
In 1902, the muckraking journalist Lincoln Steffens published The Shame of the Cities , a book on corruption in city government.
The book exposed the rampant fraud that plagued cities throughout the nation.
Steffens reported that politicians spoke openly about accepting bribes.
Coiruption served the interests of dishonest politicians and those who bribed them, while weakening the political influence of average Americans.
In American cities, political leaders called bosses handed out favors and money to their supporters.
Political Machines and Bosses By 1900, many cities were controlled by political machines.
These organizations consisted of full-time politicians whose main goal was to get and keep political power and the money and influence that went with it.
At the top of this corrupt structure was the political boss, who controlled the machine and its politicians.
Political machines exercised control at all levels of city government, down to the wards and precincts that subdivided most cities.
Ward bosses and precinct captains got to know local residents and offered them assistance in exchange for political support.
This aid could take a wide variety of forms, including supplying a Christmas turkey or helping a grieving family by paying for a funeral.
In exchange, residents agreed to vote for machine politicians at election time.
In some ways, the political machines worked for the good of city dwellers, particularly immigrants.
At a time when the national and state governments did not provide such benefits as welfare for unemployed workers, local political machines filled the void.
Corruption in Local and State Politics Although political machines provided aid. they also stifled opportunity for many citizens.
Political bosses controlled access to city jobs, such as employment in the police and fire departments or on construction projects.
With a good word from a boss, a poorly qualified person could land a job in place of a capable applicant.
To get a city work contract, a company often had to donate to the machine’s reelection campaign.
Many businesses also paid politicians to keep the city government from interfering with their activities.
The political machines profited from urban entertainment, both legal and illegal.
In exchange for a payoff, the boss could clear the way for such illegal activities as gambling.
They used some of the revenue to help those in need, but they made sure they profited themselves.
Average citizens had little influence in choosing candidates, and the machine frequently used fraud to win at the polls.
By controlling elections, political machines maintained their grip on American cities.
At the state level, corrupt politicians tied to powerful industries, such as railroads and mining, controlled many state governments.
In passing legislation that favored big business, state legislatures and governors often ignored the needs of average citizens.
Corruption on the National Level The national government also suffered from corruption.
For example, the Constitution gave state legislatures the power to choose senators, but corporations often bribed state legislators to elect their favored candidates to the Senate.
The Senate became known as the Millionaires Club because many of its members were wealthy men with close ties to powerful industries.
In both the House and the Senate, politicians received campaign contributions from big business in exchange for passing favorable legislation.
The railroad monopolies, for example, frequently gave company stock to members of Congress who passed laws that strengthened the railroads.
Other businesses also gave money to lawmakers who worked to limit competition.
Politicians frequently engaged in patronage— giving jobs to friends and supporters.
In 1883, Congress passed the Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act to limit patronage.
The Pendleton Act set guidelines for hiring civil service employees— nonmilitary government workers.
It set up a civil service commission to administer exams to new applicants for government jobs.
Over the years, most presidents have agreed to expand the number of specified jobs.
In the late 1800s, the Senate became known as the Millionaires Club because so many senators got rich on contributions from big business.
This 1890 cartoon, titled ""The Bosses of the Senate,"" shows tiny senators completely overshadowed by bloated trusts and monopolies.
Social Tensions American cities in 1900 brought together many types of people in crowded and often difficult circumstances.
Many poor city dwellers resented the comfortable lives of the rich, while the rich often looked down on the poor as the source of urban problems.
Many African Americans faced racism and violence as they struggled to improve their lives and claim their democratic rights.
Meanwhile, many American families feared that the stresses and strains of urban life were eroding traditional values.
Growing Differences Between Social Classes During the late 1800s, the gap between rich and poor grew wider.
Between 1865 and 1900, a small percentage of Americans grew fabulously wealthy.
At the same time, the arrival of many immigrants swelled the ranks of the working class.
So while the rich got richer, the poor continued to live in harsh circumstances.
Many took lodgers into their tiny flats to help share the cost of rent.
Between the two extremes, the middle class expanded as a result of the rising productivity of the American economy.
The growing middle class included doctors, lawyers, ministers, small business owners, merchants, and mid-level company managers.
Immigrants often clustered together, either out of choice or necessity.
Note that four primary ethnic groups were crammed into this small area, each group occupying its own section.
Many Fifth Avenue residents also owned summer homes in places like Newport, Rhode Island.
Their summer “cottages” were actually mansions resembling European palaces.
During this period, many middle-class families moved to comfortable homes in newly built suburbs.
The men often commuted on streetcars, part of new urban transit systems.
Members of the middle class tried to make their homes appear as elegant as the homes of the wealthy.
Many also had reproductions of famous paintings hanging on their walls.
Immigrants tended to cluster together in ethnic neighborhoods, where they could maintain many of their old customs.
Some immigrants, however, stayed in these areas because they were not allowed to live anywhere else.
The Chinese in San Francisco were jammed together in one district known as Chinatown because they were barred from other areas.
In cities like San Antonio and Los Angeles, Mexican immigrants lived in neighborhoods called barrios.
African American migrants, too, generally lived in neighborhoods separated from other city residents.
Such laws made it almost impossible for southern blacks to advance by isolating them and denying them opportunities to participate fully in American life. dramatically in the years that followed.
Life for African Americans In the 35 years since the end of the Civil War and the abolition of slavery, African Americans had made few gains in their struggle for equality.
Many southern states had passed Jim Crow laws that segregated blacks from whites in trains, schools, hospitals, and other public places.
Signs saying “White Only” and “Colored Only” told black Americans which waiting rooms they could enter, which bathrooms they could use, and where they could sit in theaters.
Segregation affected nearly every aspect of public life in the South at the beginning of the 20th century.
In addition, by 1900 most African Americans in the South had been disenfranchised.
Although the Fifteenth Amendment declared that voting rights could not be denied on the basis of “race, color, or previous condition of servitude,” southern states found ways to bypass the law.
Some state laws required potential voters to prove that they could read and write.
Such clauses limited voting only to those men whose fathers or grandfathers had had the right to vote in 1867.
Between 1882 and 1900, about 70 lynchings took place every year, mostly in the South.
In some cities, in both the North and the South, large-scale mob violence broke out against African Americans.
In response to racism, many African Americans fled from the South in the late 1800s.
By 1900, more than 30 northern cities had 10,000 or more black residents.
These laborsaving devices gave many middle-class women more free time to devote to pursuits outside the home.
The number of women in the labor force nearly tripled between 1870 and 1900.
At the start of the 20th century, women made up around 18 percent of the workforce.
Some performed unskilled labor in textile, food-processing, and garment factories.
Those with a high school education found skilled positions such as telephone operators, typists, department store clerks, nurses, and teachers.
Opportunities for African American women consisted mainly of working as domestic cooks or housekeepers.
New appliances made available through mass production changed the lives of many middle-class and upper-class women.
Washing machines, gas stoves, carpet sweepers, and other conveniences made housework easier.
For some women, however, these appliances also gave rise to new homemaking expectations.
But as they became available, cookbooks began to feature more time-consuming recipes.
Nonetheless, the new appliances helped many women find more time for social causes and charitable activities outside the home.
A number of women’s colleges, like Vassar, Wellesley, and Bryn Mawr, had opened after the Civil War.
But the number of women in college was still fairly small compared with the number training for such occupations as teaching and nursing.
As the 20th century began, most American women did not have the right to vote.
Although a few western states had granted voting rights to women, there was still no women’s suffrage at the national level.
Challenges for the American Family The American family also faced challenges at the turn of the century, most notably around the issue of child labor.
By 1900, roughly one out of every five children between the ages of 10 and 15 was a wage worker.
About 1. million children toiled in factories, sweatshops, and mines or worked in other nonfarm jobs such as shining shoes and selling newspapers.
Grueling workweeks could stretch to 72 hours, leaving child workers little time for anything else.
Lewis Hine, who documented conditions of child labor in the early 20th century, took this photograph of children picking cotton.
Although public education expanded in the late 1800s, working for wages kept many children out of school.
By and large, African Americans had even fewer educational opportunities than whites.
In the segregated South, schools for blacks were often of inferior quality.
Some African Americans, however, gained useful vocational training at all-black colleges such as Alabama’s Tuskegee Institute.
Many people saw alcohol as another obstacle to improving family life and society as a whole.
Since the early 1 800s, there had been calls for temperance, or moderation in drinking habits.
While some reformers emphasized moderation in drinking, a growing number wanted to ban alcohol altogether.
Men who did not drink, they argued, were more likely to keep their jobs and to work hard to support their families.
Many reformers believed that making alcohol illegal would help lift poor families out of poverty and improve social conditions in the cities.
In addition, many parents worried that city life was corrupting the morals of their children.
They believed that urban entertainments such as vaudeville theaters, dance halls, and amusement parks contributed to immoral behavior by bringing young people together in questionable surroundings, unsupervised by adults.
Many parents hoped that strong bonds within families and neighborhoods might protect children from the temptations of city life.
Many of these problems were the result of rapid changes brought on by industrialization, urbanization, and immigration.
Industrialization The rapid growth of industry resulted in poor working conditions for many workers.
Muckraking journalists like Upton Sinclair, author of The Jungle , worked to expose these problems.
Urbanization Cities grew rapidly with the rise of industry and increased immigration.
The infrastructure in many cities could not meet the demands of a growing population.
Environmental damage Industry and urbanization produced air and water pollution.
Ranching, logging, and extractive industries also damaged the natural environment.
Congress passed the Pendleton Act to clean up the federal government by creating a professional civil service.
Tensions in society A growing gap between rich and poor fueled social tensions.
African Americans suffered racism and mob violence, while women also faced discrimination.
The temperance movement tried to limit or even ban alcohol consumption.
Social changes strained American families, and many people feared the loss of traditional family bonds.
Introduction Garbage was a big problem in American cities at the start of the 20th century.
Most cities did not have decent garbage collection, so trash just piled up.
Addams knew that rats bred in the trash and that children played there.
Garbage heaps, she wrote, “were the first objects that the toddling children learned to climb ” She worried that these conditions promoted the spread of disease in Chicago’s poor neighborhoods.
When she got no response, she applied for the job of garbage collector for her ward.
In that position, Addams made sure that garbage collectors did their job.
Addams was one of many social and political reformers of the early 1900s.
These reformers called themselves progressives because they were committed to improving conditions in American life.
Cleaning up city streets was just one of the reforms that progressives supported.
In this chapter, you will learn who the progressives were and what they believed.
You will read about their efforts to improve urban life, eliminate government corruption, and expand American democracy.
Jane Addams was a cofounder of Chicago's Hull House, a settlement house that provided support for poor urban residents, including many new immigrants.
Hull House was one of a number of settlement houses founded in American cities around the turn of the century.
Progressives believed that government should actively address the problems caused by the rapid growth of industry and cities.
The third woman from the left is Florence Kelley, a noted reformer and colleague of Jane Addams.
These changes brought new opportunities but also created new problems, particularly in cities.
They wanted to improve society by promoting social welfare, protecting the environment, and making government more efficient and democratic.
The progressives had great faith in the future and a strong belief in the nation’s founding ideals.
We have made up our minds to square every process of our national life again with the standards we so proudly set up at the beginning and have always carried at our hearts.
Our work is a work of restoration. — Woodrow Wilson, inaugural address of 1913 Progressives See Problems and Seek Solutions Progressives worried about the growing problems they saw in society and were determined to solve them.
Until then, responsibility for addressing such issues did not lie with the government.
Taking a new approach, the progressives became activists who were prepared to use political action to achieve reforms.
The progressives included people with many different ideas about what to reform, how to reform it, and how far reforms should go.
They represented many smaller reform movements rather than joining together as a single movement.
But they all shared a commitment to progress and the belief that they could improve society.
The Political and Religious Roots of Progressivism The progressives were inspired by two reform movements of the late 1800s.
Populism was primarily a rural movement, whereas progressivism was bom mainly among the urban middle class.
They wanted to curb the power of big business and make government more accessible to average citizens.
They also sought to expand economic opportunity and make American society more democratic.
Many progressives were also inspired by the religious ideals of the Social Gospel movement.
This movement was based on the idea that social reform and Christianity went hand in hand.
Followers of the Social Gospel applied Christian teachings to social and economic problems.
They believed, for example, that the single-minded pursuit of wealth had taken some Americans down the wrong moral path.
If a man sacrifices his human dignity and self-respect to increase his income . . . he is . . . denying God.
Likewise if he uses up and injures the life of his fellow-men to make money for himself, he . . . denies God.
But our industrial order . . . makes property the end, and man the means to produce it. —Walter Rauschenbusch, Christianity 1 and the Social Crisis , 1907 Some progressives volunteered their time to provide services and solve problems in poor urban neighborhoods.
Followers of the Social Gospel believed that society must take responsibility for those who are less fortunate.
Many progressives embraced this ideal and infused their reform efforts with a strong emphasis on Christian morality.
The Progressive Challenge to Social Darwinism Progressives strongly opposed social Darwinism, the social theory based loosely on Charles Darwin’s theory of natural selection.
Social Darwinists believed that in human society the fittest individuals— and corporations— would thrive, while others would fall behind.
They asserted that the concentration of wealth and power in the hands of business owners and monopolies reflected the natural order.
In rejecting social Darwinism, progressives argued that domination by the rich and powerful was a distortion of democracy.
They declared that most Americans were harmed when monopolies controlled the economy and corrupted politics.
Progressives believed that government should play an active role in defending the political and economic rights of average citizens against the power of big business.
They also wanted government to promote social reforms to clean up the cities and help those in need.
They thought that government should balance the interests of business owners and workers, while promoting order and efficiency.
They favored helping the needy but also believed that aid should go to those willing to help themselves.
Although some radical reformers worked with the progressives, the progressives generally pursued moderate political goals.
It also required that there be at least one toilet for every three rooms.
The illustrations above show tenement housing before and after progressive reforms.
Along with other progressives, Hunter worked to improve conditions for the poor.
Improving Living Conditions in Cities Living conditions for the urban poor were terrible during the early 1900s.
Many city dwellers were jammed into tenements and lived in unsanitary conditions.
Progressives took on the challenge of making cities cleaner and more livable.
This law required each new tenement to be built with a central courtyard and to have a bathroom in each apartment.
Progressives like Addams also wanted the government to take responsibility for getting rid of trash.
Their collectors were called the White Wings because they wore clean, white uniforms.
Muckraker Jacob Riis wrote that because of the White Wings, “Streets that had been dirty were swept.
Fighting to Keep Children out of Factories and in School Progressives also addressed the problem of child labor.
Since many children worked in factories and sweatshops to help support their families, they could not attend school.
Florence Kelley, a colleague of Addams at Hull House, persuaded the Illinois state legislature to outlaw child labor in 1893.
By 1912, the committee had convinced 39 states to pass child labor laws.
The decline in child labor meant that more children could get an education, thus creating a demand for more schools.
By 1930, almost half of all high-school-aged youth were attending school.
They believed in pressuring immigrant schoolchildren to give up their cultural traditions and become assimilated into American society.
Progressives also protested the treatment of children by the criminal justice system.
In many places, the law required juvenile offenders to be sentenced to reform school, but accused children did not always get a trial.
Even if the children were not convicted, they might be sent away for rehabilitation.
In addition, destitute children living on the streets were often treated as juvenile offenders.
Like many progressives, Lindsey believed that juvenile offenders were basically good but that their surroundings led them astray.
If their living environment were improved, he argued, the delinquency would disappear.
Lindsey also thought that promoting good relationships between troubled youths and fair-minded judges would help young delinquents.
Lindsey and other progressives advocated creating a separate court system for juveniles.
Improving Conditions in the Workplace Progressives had mixed success in helping adult workers.
In 1908, the Supreme Court ruled in Muller Oregon that states could limit work hours for women.
Reformers also pushed for legislation to provide benefits to workers who were injured on the job.
By 1916, almost two thirds of the states had workers’ compensation laws.
Under these laws, workers who were hurt at work still received some pay, even if their injuries prevented them from working.
Reformers supported efforts to get children out of the workforce and into school.
As this map shows, by 1900 many states required school attendance, even though child labor was still legal in many places.
Southern states were among the last to pass compulsory school attendance laws.
He reduced streetcar fares to 3c, despite strong opposition from business leaders.
This lower fare was featured on tokens handed out during his 1907 mayoral campaign.
He said that citizens could improve city government by making demands on local politicians.
He wrote, “If our political leaders are to be always a lot of political merchants, they will supply any demand we may create.
Fighting for Honest, Effective Local Government At the start of the 20th century, corrupt political machines ran many local governments.
Businesses paid politicians to cast votes that favored their interests, and people who wanted public service jobs often had to buy their way in.
New teachers had to pay the political machine $120 of the first $141 they earned.
With the goal of improving democracy, progressives took aim at corruption in city governments.
In Toledo, Ohio, Mayor Samuel M Jones reformed the police department, set a minimum wage for city workers, and improved city services.
In Cleveland, Ohio, Mayor Tom Johnson reduced streetcar fares, set up public baths, and increased the number of parks and playgrounds.
In the early 1900s, a typical city was run by an elected mayor, and elected city councilors represented each of the city’s wards, or districts.
The system made it easy for political machines to control local government.
A devastating hurricane in Galveston, Texas, in 1900 set the stage for one type of reform.
Unable to solve the problems of rebuilding, Galveston’s government handed control to a five-person city commission appointed by the governor.
Each commissioner was an expert in a field, such as finance or public safety.
Other cities set up a city manager form of government, in which an elected city council hired a professional city manager.
This official was selected based on skills and experience rather than party loyalty.
Some progressives saw this system as limiting the power of political machines and making city governments more competent.
However, others worried that efficiency came at the expense of democracy because voters did not elect the city manager.
Reforming State Government Progressives also fought corruption at the state level.
In many states, big business controlled government, leaving average citizens little influence.
To return power to the people, progressives advocated various election reforms.
In the early 1900s, each party usually printed ballots in its own color, which meant voters’ choices were apparent for all to see.
With the secret ballot, citizens voted in a private booth and used an official ballot.
Direct primaries replaced a system in which party leaders picked the candidates.
A third reform was the recall, the process by which voters can remove an elected official before his or her term expires.
For a recall to be placed on the ballot, enough voters must sign a petition to demand a special election.
This is a lawmaking reform that enables citizens to propose and pass a law directly without involving the state legislature.
Enough voters must first sign a petition to place the proposal on the ballot.
This reform was more common in western states, where many progressives inherited a populist distrust of state legislatures.
In this process, a law passed by a state legislature is placed on the ballot for approval or rejection by the voters.
The referendum is similar to the Progressive state governors, like Wisconsin's Robert La Follette, used their positions to advance reform.
This cartoon highlights La Follette's success in controlling railroad monopolies.
He won three terms as governor and was later elected to the United States Senate. initiative, but less commonly used.
In addition to pressing for election reforms, progressives elected reformminded governors.
One famous progressive was Robert La Follette, governor of Wisconsin from 1900 to 1906.
Under his guidance, the state passed laws to limit lobbying, conserve forests and other natural resources, and support workers.
Known as “Battling Bob,” La Follette took a strong stand against the railroads, which controlled the distribution of many products, including meat and grain.
By charging favored customers lower rates for carrying freight, the railroads made it hard for other businesses to compete.
La Follette responded by forming a commission to regulate railroad rates.
Governor Hiram Johnson of California also promoted progressive reforms.
Johnson also regulated utilities, limited child labor, and signed into law an eight-hour workday for women.
Hiram Johnson was a two-term governor of California and later served nearly 30 years in the United States Senate.
A lawyer by training, Johnson had never held public office before his election as governor in 1910.
He was a strong supporter of progressive reform and a staunch opponent of corruption in public life.
Progressives Confront Social Inequality Although progressives faced issues of poverty, workers’ rights, and corrupt government, many did not address the inequality confronting women and African Americans.
However, progressive activism prompted many women and African Americans to struggle for their rights.
They defined their public work as an extension of the work they did at home.
If they could clean up their homes, they believed, they could clean up society, too.
Women continued to agitate for women's suffrage throughout the late 1800s.
During this period, leading suffragists joined together to form the National American Woman Suffrage Association, or NAWSA, with Stanton as its first president.
This group helped organize the suffrage movement into a powerful political force at the state and national levels.
The first victories in the struggle for women's suffrage came at the state level.
In Montana, they helped elect Jeannette Rankin to the House of Representatives in 1916, four years before women had the right to vote nationwide.
By 1918, women had full voting rights in 15 states, many of them in the West.
In the early 1900s, four fifths of African Americans lived in the South.
Most struggled to make a living as farmers and were subjected to strict segregation.
Southern blacks were also disenfranchised, as literacy tests, poll taxes, and other methods denied them the right to vote.
Nevertheless, many African Americans were inspired by progressive ideals and worked to improve their conditions.
Washington founded the Tuskegee Institute, a vocational college for African Americans in Alabama.
He encouraged blacks to gain respect and status by working their way up in society.
It also tried to ensure that African American men could exercise voting rights under the Fifteenth Amendment.
Between 1910 and 1934, he edited The Crisis, an NAACP journal that focused on issues important to African Americans.
In addition to its legal work, the NAACP protested lynching and other racist violence.
In 1892, Wells-Barnett protested the lynching of three African American grocers in Memphis, Tennessee.
She expressed her outrage in The Memphis Free Speech , a newspaper she co-owned and edited.
Based on systematic research, Wells-Barnett concluded that lynching had an economic motive.
Despite the efforts of Wells-Bamett and other progressives, the federal government did not pass any laws against lynching.
Du Bois appears on the right in this photograph, with members of The Crisis staff.
This graph shows the number of African Americans lynched between 1880 and 1930.
Although activists like Ida B Wells-Barnett protested, the federal government did not pass antilynching laws.
Washington believed that blacks should work in trades that were open to them.
He urged blacks to “cast down your bucket where you are”— to be patient and take advantage of current opportunities rather than agitating for quicker or more radical solutions.
Because Washington called on blacks to adapt themselves to the limits imposed by white society, his strategy was sometimes called accommodation.
To those of my race who depend on bettering their condition in a foreign land or who underestimate the importance of cultivating friendly relations with the Southern white man, who is their next-door neighbor, I would say: “Cast down your bucket where you are”— cast it down in making friends in every manly way of the people of all races by whom we are surrounded.
It is important and right that all privileges of the law be ours, but it is vastly more important that we be prepared for the exercise of these privileges.
His strategy was to push hard for civil rights through political action.
He believed that African Americans should protest unfair treatment and fight for equality.
North or South, does not rightly value the privilege and duty of voting, belittles the emasculating effects of caste distinctions, and opposes the higher training and ambition of our brighter minds,— so far as he, the South, or the Nation, does this,— we must unceasingly and firmly oppose them.
B Du Bois became the first African American to earn a PhD from Harvard.
He went on to have a distinguished career as a scholar and political activist.
Du Bois argued that African Americans must demand civil rights and encouraged them to protest when equality was denied.
Inspired by reform movements like populism and the Social Gospel, progressives tackled a variety of problems.
They tried to improve living and working conditions in cities, clean up state and local government, and advance the rights of women and minorities.
Urban living conditions Progressives like Jane Addams, the cofounder of Hull House, worked to fix up poor city neighborhoods.
They tried to improve tenement housing, sanitation, and garbage collection.
They promoted laws limiting work hours and guaranteeing workers’ compensation.
They formed the National Child Labor Committee to campaign against child labor and get more children into school.
Clean, responsive government Progressives sought to end government corruption at the local level.
They worked to curb the power of political machines and restructure local government.
They supported reform governors like Robert La Follette and passed electoral reforms like the secret ballot, direct primary, recall, initiative, and referendum.
Struggle for equal rights Women and African Americans sought to advance their rights.
Reform goals included voting rights for women and an end to lynching and segregation.
NAWSA led the struggle for women’s suffrage, while the NAACP tried to secure equality for African Americans.
Northern Securities was a holding company, a business that controls other companies by buying up a majority of their stock.
Morgan and other businessmen had created this holding company to control the long-distance railroad lines from Chicago to California.
By the time the Roosevelt administration filed suit against him, Morgan held a monopoly on rail service in the Northwest.
Morgan believed it would be easy for the two men to settle their differences.
He didn't like it when big business treated government as an equal, or worse, as its servant.
Two years later, in 1904, the Supreme Court ruled against Northern Securities.
In addition to local and state issues, progressives were also concerned about problems in the country as a whole.
Many of them believed that the national government no longer served the interests of all Americans.
In an age when big business seemed all-powerful, many reformers felt the United States was abandoning its promise of freedom and opportunity for all.
They wanted the government to play a stronger role in promoting democracy and solving national problems.
Three presidents— Theodore Roosevelt, William Howard Taft, and Woodrow Wilson— worked to advance the progressive reforms.
Their efforts helped change how Americans thought, and continue to think, about the role of government.
He was a strong president who believed in using his position to influence the nation.
Three Progressive Presidents After overcoming childhood illnesses, Teddy Roosevelt led a vigorous life, which included a great love of the outdoors.
As president, he put millions of acres of wilderness under government protection.
Although Taft backed reform, he lacked Roosevelt's political skill and lost the support of many progressives.
He later became chief justice of the United States, the job he had wanted all along.
The framers of the Constitution wanted the president to have prestige but not too much power.
Many feared what might happen if the chief executive became too powerful.
As the presidency evolved during the Progressive Era, Americans began to change not only their ideas about what the national government should do, but also their views about how strong the president should be.
They challenged the economic and political power of the industrial giants and worked to end government corruption.
In the process, all three of these leaders expanded the power of the presidency.
He was short and stout with big teeth, and he had a passion for physical fitness.
Roosevelt believed that businesses, workers, and consumers should all receive a “square deal”— fair and honest treatment.
His program of reform, which became known as the Square Deal, focused on regulating big business and protecting workers and consumers.
But he thought that presidential power should be used to benefit all Americans.
Describing himself as “the steward of public welfare,” he asserted that a president should take any actions necessary for the common good, as long as the Constitution did not forbid them.
Taft Continues Reforms After Roosevelt served two terms, he supported William Howard Taft, a member of his cabinet and a former judge from Ohio, to succeed him in 1908.
Roosevelt was outspoken and loved the limelight, while Taft was quiet and reserved.
He fought to limit the power of big corporations and added land to the national forest system.
However, on other issues Taft parted company with progressive reformers.
Lower tariffs would make foreign products less expensive for American consumers.
They would also increase competition, so that American producers would have to lower prices.
Taft had campaigned for president on a lowtariff platform, but in 1909 he agreed to sign the PayneAldrich Bill, which raised tariffs.
In this political cartoon, each candidate is represented by the animal that symbolizes his party.
The Election of 1912 The presidential campaign of 1912 centered on progressive reform.
When the Republicans chose Taft as their candidate, Roosevelt decided to run as the candidate of a third party, a political party outside the two-party system.
The split between Taft and Roosevelt helped Wilson win the 1912 election.
Wilson Promises New Freedom As governor of New Jersey, Wilson had supported progressive reforms to regulate big business and clean up machine politics.
As president, this idealist and scholar set out to implement a national reform program that he called New Freedom.
Wilson wanted to eliminate all trusts because he believed they were denying economic freedom to small businesses and ordinary citizens.
He was unable to remove the trusts, but he did further limit their power.
Wilson pushed through other progressive reforms to give a greater voice to the average citizen, restrict corporate influence, and reduce corruption in the federal government.
Among his most notable achievements were laws on banking and tariff reform and the creation of the Federal Trade Commission.
Wilson was the first president since George Washington to speak before Congress, introducing and lobbying for legislation.
Like Roosevelt, he also tried to influence, and utilize, public opinion to further his reform goals.
Woodrow Wilson, the last progressive president, was a scholar and idealist.
The president, he wrote in 1907, ""is the only voice in national affairs.
This map shows how the Standard Oil Trust was divided into smaller companies, nicknamed the Baby Standards, in 1911.
Each of the new companies took over Standard Oil operations in its assigned region of the country.
Standard Oil was one of the biggest trusts to be broken up by a progressive president.
Addressing the Effects of Industrialization Rapid industrialization gave rise to a number of problems in American society, including unsafe products, environmental damage, and corruption in public life.
The three progressives in the White House— Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilsonsought to correct these negative effects.
The progressive presidents worked to reduce the harmful effects of industrialization, starting with the power of the trusts.
Roosevelt believed that government should regulate monopolies to make sure they operated for the good of the nation.
Morgan’s Northern Securities Company, Roosevelt limited the power of railroads to set rates and stifle business competition.
In 1906, he signed the Hepburn Act, which gave the federal government the authority to set maximum rail shipping rates.
Under Taft, the Justice Department brought 90 lawsuits against trusts— more than twice the number under Roosevelt.
Roosevelt distinguished between good and bad trusts, trying to break up only trusts created specifically to squash competition.
In contrast, Taft did not think a court could determine a trust’s motives, so he prosecuted any trusts that had the effect of limiting trade, regardless of intent.
Wilson took even stronger action by helping to push the Clayton Antitrust Act through Congress.
Passed in 1914, the Clayton Act extended the power of the Sherman Act by laying out rules that made it harder for trusts to form and to squeeze out competition.
For example, the law made it illegal for a company to lower prices in one market but not others to try to force out local competitors.
Courts had ruled that unions could be prosecuted for restraining commerce under the Sherman Act, but the Clayton Act made unions exempt from antitrust laws.
Congress also created the Federal Trade Commission in 1914 to enforce the Clayton Act’s provisions.
Progressives who wanted to eliminate trusts were displeased that the antitrust reforms left many trusts intact.
Meanwhile, pro-business conservatives thought that the government should not have interfered at all with businesses.
Nevertheless, the moderate reforms that were typical of progressivism produced real benefits for society.
The Meat Inspection Act required the Department of Agriculture to inspect packaged meat.
This law was a response to muckraker accounts of unsanitary meatpacking plants.
The Pure Food and Drug Act established a new agency, the Food and Drug Administration, to test and approve drugs before they went on the market.
These nonprescription medicines often promised magical cures, but many contained little more than alcohol or opium.
In 1902, he pressured coal mine owners and the striking United Mine Workers to submit to arbitration, a legal process in which a neutral outside party helps resolve a dispute.
A government commission decided that the miners should have higher wages and shorter hours.
However, it also declared that the owners did not have to recognize the union or hire only union workers.
This arbitration pleased Roosevelt and many other progressives, who believed that government should be impartial in labor disputes and stronger than either big business or unions.
In 1916, he signed the KeatingOwen Child Labor Act, which prohibited companies involved in interstate commerce from hiring workers under 14 years of age.
Although the law protected fewer than 10 percent of children in the labor force, it set minimum protections and a precedent for future action.
Taft and Wilson also supported an eight-hour workday— at least for some workers.
Under Taft, the eight-hour day became the rule for government employees.
Congress passed the Meat Inspection Act in 1906 to ensure that meat was safe for consum ers.
This law was prompted by reports that meat was often tainted by rat droppings and even poison.
Federal inspectors made regular visits to meatpacking plants to enforce the law.
This map shows the national parks established by the end of Wilson's presidency.
The National Park Service was created in 1916, under Wilson, to manage and protect the park system.
Protecting the Environment Progressives also wanted to protect the natural environment.
They saw how industry and urban growth had polluted the air and water and devastated the landscape.
They believed that government should remedy these problems, but they sometimes disagreed on the solutions.
Some progressives supported preservation, the protection of wilderness lands from all forms of development.
John Muir, a preservationist who cofounded the Sierra Club in 1892, believed that the government must preserve the environment.
Other progressives supported conservation, the limited use of resources.
Conservationists believed that government should take a middle position between preservation and exploitation.
They wanted to preserve some wilderness while also allowing some use of natural resources.
The progressive presidents, especially Roosevelt, were sympathetic to the preservationist view.
Roosevelt, a great outdoorsman, once commented, “We are prone to think of the resources of this country as inexhaustible.
In practice, however, the government tended to favor the more moderate conservationist approach.
In 1905, Roosevelt backed the creation of the United States Forest Service.
Its mission was to protect forests and other natural areas from excessive development.
Roosevelt appointed Gifford Pinchot, a noted conservationist, to head the Forest Service.
Like Roosevelt, Pinchot advocated a “wise use” policy of balancing the demands of economic development with the need to conserve the natural environment.
However, he angered Roosevelt and many conservationists by firing Pinchot for criticizing the government’s sale of some wilderness areas in Wyoming, Montana, and Alaska.
The NPS was created to manage all these parks for preservation and public use.
Preservationists no longer argued that all wilderness areas should be left untouched.
Instead, they accepted the idea that tourism, and thus economic development, could help protect the natural landscape.
Reforming the National Government Progressives also sought to reform the federal government and its policies.
They favored a range of financial reforms that would improve government funding and the banking system.
They also worked for constitutional reforms, including the direct election of senators, a ban on alcohol, and women's suffrage.
Reforming the Banking System Progressives also wanted government to stabilize the banking system.
Since the early 1800s, the nation had been shaken by financial panics, periods when people withdrew their money from banks after losing confidence in the economy.
Panics caused banks and businesses to collapse and sometimes triggered economic depressions.
Taft urged Congress to reform the banking system, but Americans differed over the proper solution.
Progressives wanted government control over the system, while business leaders favored private control.
In 1913, Wilson backed a proposal for a government-controlled but decentralized banking system.
The Federal Reserve Act divides the country into 12 regions, each with a Federal Reserve Bank.
Together, these banks and their operating rules make up the Federal Reserve System, or central bank of the United States.
The Fed offers a safety net to private banks by lending them money if they are short of funds.
It also sets monetary policy to regulate the amount of money in circulation, including setting interest rates and regulating how much banks can lend.
The Federal Reserve Act, passed in 1913, established 12 regional banks around the country.
These banks can loan money to private banks and thus help to stabilize the banking system.
The Federal Reserve System Board of Governors A seven-member board oversees the Federal Reserve System.
Federal Reserve Banks Twelve Federal Reserve Banks provide financial services for banks in their regions.
Member banks Other banks All national banks are Other banks may not be members of the Federal members but must still follow Reserve System, some Federal Reserve rules.
X American people Americans deposit money in and borrow money from banks.
Setting Reserve Requirements Reserve requirements are the amount of money that member banks must keep on deposit.
The more money a bank has to keep on deposit, the less money it has to lend to businesses and consumers.
Controlling Interest Rates The Federal Reserve charges interest on the money it lends to member banks.The higher the interest rate charged by the Fed, the higher the interest rates member banks charge for loans.
Buying and Selling Bonds The Federal Reserve buys and sells government bonds to control the amount of money in circulation.
A bond is a certificate promising to pay back borrowed money at a fixed time.
They also liked that it was a graduated tax, which placed higher taxes on those who could afford to pay.
Reforming Taxes and Tariffs As the role of the federal government expanded, its need for revenue to fund its programs increased.
Big business favored raising tariffs, but progressives wanted to raise taxes.
By raising the cost of imported goods, tariffs increased the cost of living for average Americans.
Under strong pressure from progressives, and with some support from Taft, Congress proposed the Sixteenth Amendment, which would allow the federal government to impose an income tax.
Congress made the tax a graduated income tax, requiring people with higher incomes to pay a larger percentage of their earnings than those with lower incomes.
Progressives were pleased because a graduated income tax placed a higher burden on those who had more money.
Congress put both measures— the graduated income tax and reduced tariffs— into a single bill, the Underwood Tariff Act.
Electing Senators Directly For progressives, reform also meant giving citizens a greater say in their government.
The Constitution required that senators be elected by state legislatures.
However, state lawmakers and the senators they elected often had close ties to large corporations.
Progressives wanted senators to respond to the will of the people, not the power of big business.
Proposed in 1912 and ratified in 1913, the amendment required the direct election of senators by popular vote.
Prohibition supporters believed that a ban on alcohol would improve society.
Wilson eventually supported the measure, and it was ratified as the Eighteenth Amendment in 1919.
Prohibition The widespread public support for prohibition— a ban on the production and sale of alcoholic beverages— was rooted in the temperance movement dating from the early 1800s.
Most advocates were women, and the largest organization had been the Women’s Christian Temperance Union.
The WCTU argued that drinking alcohol made men unable to support their wives and children.
However, the leading organization advocating prohibition during the Progressive Era was the Anti-Saloon League, run mainly by men.
Founded in 1893 and supported mostly by Protestant churches, it became a national organization in 1895.
The prohibition movement gained momentum without help from Roosevelt or Taft.
Wilson finally supported a constitutional amendment on prohibition after the nation entered World War I in 1917.
Proponents had argued that grain was better used for food for the war effort than for making alcohol.
It declared that the prohibition of “the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors” would take effect one year after ratification.
They argued that women were more moral than men and that women’s involvement would help cleanse the corrupt world of politics.
Like prohibition, the struggle for women's suffrage was a grassroots effort that succeeded without much presidential support.
Roosevelt was sympathetic but did not push for the cause until his 1912 campaign.
After the nation entered World War I, leading suffragists such as Carrie Chapman Catt emphasized that giving women the right to vote would help them carry out their duties on the home front.
In 1919, Congress proposed the amendment by decisive votes in both the House and Senate.
Suffragists, women who sought voting rights, faced many obstacles, including threats and harassment from angry men.
However, women won the vote through ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920.
Their goals and styles of leadership differed, but they all worked to bring about reforms on the national level.
Three distinct leaders Despite their varying leadership styles, the progressive presidents believed in using government to improve society.
In carrying out reform programs, such as Roosevelt’s Square Deal and Wilson’s New Freedom, they increased the power of the presidency.
Addressing the effects of industrialization Reformers passed laws to break up monopolies and help workers.
They tried to protect consumers through such laws as the Pure Food and Drug Act.
Sixteenth Amendment This amendment established a federal income tax, which progressives favored as a means to fund government programs.
Congress made the tax a graduated income tax, which placed a heavier tax burden on the wealthy.
Seventeenth Amendment This amendment established the direct election of United States senators, another progressive goal.
Federal Reserve System Congress set up the Federal Reserve to bring stability to the banking system and prevent financial panics.
The Fed, which consists of 12 federal banks, lends money to private banks and sets policies that govern interest rates and the amount of money in circulation.
Eighteenth Amendment This amendment established prohibition, or a ban on alcohol.
Many progressives believed that alcohol consumption was a serious social ill.
Nineteenth Amendment This amendment guaranteed women the right to vote.
This was an important progressive goal designed to advance democratic rights.
The Dawes Act The Dawes Act divides all Indian lands among individuals within a tribe in order to encourage Indians to assimilate into white society.
Progressive politicians promote labor laws, consumer protections, environmental regulations, and democratic reforms.
April 6 — After a debate of nearly seventeen bourn, the House early to-day passed the -""evioualy adopted in the Senate, declaring a state of war against the Government of Germany. « to Vice President Marshall, who must sign it in formal session of the M 'hen be taken before the President for his signature IGHTH EDITIONl Expanding American Global Influence In this era of national expansion, American influence stretched from sea to shining sea and beyond.
For much of the 1800s, Americans focused their attention inward on continental expansion.
Late in the century, people began looking outward for new territory to conquer and new markets for American goods.
By 1900 the American eagle could spread its wings across a small empire.
In 1917, United States troops crossed the Atlantic to fight in Europe's first world war.
Introduction On July 8, 1853, Commodore Matthew Perry led a small fleet of American warships into Edo Bay, in Japan.
Fearing that foreign influence would threaten its power, the government had restricted trade to a few Chinese and Dutch merchants.
So they were astonished when the black-hulled American warships steamed into Edo Bay, bristling with cannons and belching smoke.
The vessels, which the Japanese called “black ships,” posed a threat to Japan’s isolation.
This time, however, the United States had sent one of its top naval officers.
Commodore Perry, with a letter from President Millard Fillmore addressed to the Japanese emperor.
The letter was an offer of peace and friendship, but the warships were a sign that the United States might be willing to use force in the future.
The letter asked that shipwrecked American sailors be protected and that American ships be allowed to stop for water, fuel, and other supplies.
It also proposed the opening of trade between the United States and Japan.
The Japanese did not agree to trade, but they did agree to the other requests.
This treaty paved the way for an 1858 treaty that opened Japan to trade with the United States.
These treaties with Japan were part of a broader effort to advance American interests in Asia.
Foreign policy is the set of goals, principles, and practices that guide a nation in its relations with other countries.
In this chapter, you will learn how both realists and idealists shaped American foreign policy during the 1800s.
Commodore Matthew Perry led a fleet of four American warships to Japan in 1853 in an effort to open the island nation to United States trade.
The painting on the facing page depicts one of the American ""black ships"" in Edo Bay during Perry's visit to Japan.
Early Developments in United States Foreign Policy George Washington's Farewell Address was published in newspapers in 1796.
As part of his advice to the nation, he urged neutrality in foreign relations.
He feared that forming alliances would lead to harmful entanglements in European affairs.
In 1796, late in his second term as president, George Washington presented his final message to the nation.
Although known as Washington's Farewell Address, it was not delivered as a speech but instead appeared in newspapers.
While Washington focused mainly on domestic issues, he ended with a discussion of foreign affairs, ‘it is our true policy,” he said, “to steer clear of permanent alliances with any portion of the foreign world ” These words would shape American foreign policy for more than a century to come.
Fundamentals of United States Foreign Policy From Washington’s time to the present, the president has led the way in formulating the nation’s foreign policy.
The State Department, led by the secretary of state, advises the president and carries out the details of United States policy.
Congress also plays a role by debating and voting on foreign policy issues.
A treaty with another nation does not become legally binding unless the Senate approves it by a two-thirds vote.
Presidents have a variety of tools to use in pursuing foreign policy goals.
One is diplomacy, the art of conducting negotiations with other nations.
Such aid can be used to support friendly nations or influence their policies.
Over the past two centuries, two schools of thought, known as realism and idealism, have shaped United States foreign policy.
Realism is based on the belief that relations with other countries should be guided by national self-interest.
From this perspective, foreign policy should pursue practical objectives that benefit the American people.
Such objectives might include national security, increased trade with other nations, and access to overseas resources.
Idealism in foreign policy is based on the belief that values and ideals should influence how countries relate to one another.
From this point of view, foreign policy should be used to promote America’s founding ideals —particularly democracy, liberty, and rights— to ensure a better world not just for Americans, but for all people.
At any given time, realism or idealism may dominate this country's relations with other nations.
But most of the time, United States foreign policy reflects a blend of the two schools of thought.
Washington Advocates Neutrality and Unilateralism George Washington established two key principles of United States foreign policy.
The first, neutrality, was a response to the outbreak of war between France and Great Britain in 1793.
Neutrality is the policy of refusing to take sides among warring nations.
Idealists were eager to side with France, pointing out that the United States and France had signed a treaty of alliance during the War of Independence.
It was now time, they argued, for the United States to stand by its ally.
In 1789, French leaders had issued a statement of revolutionary ideals known as the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen.
Two years later, they had abolished France’s monarchy and established a republic.
Many Americans were eager to support the French in their struggle for liberty.
They warned that with a tiny army, the United States was ill prepared for war.
Moreover, a British blockade of its ports would cripple an already wobbly economy.
Convinced that war would be disastrous for the young nation, Washington issued a proclamation of neutrality.
This advice was translated by the presidents who followed Washington into a policy of unilateralism.
Under this policy, the United States “went it alone” in its relations with other countries.
It did not seek either military or political alliances with foreign powers.
The War of 1812 As a neutral nation, the United States had both rights and duties.
Nor could it allow a warring nation to use its harbors or territories as a base of operations.
One was the right of its citizens to live in peace without fear of attack.
A second was the right to trade freely with other nations, including those at war.
The seemingly endless war in Europe tested Americans’ commitment to neutrality.
Both France and Britain seized United States ships to prevent goods from reaching the other’s ports.
Even more alarming, the British began kidnapping American sailors from United States ships, claiming they were deserters from the British navy.
Both the ship seizures and the kidnappings violated what Americans saw as their rights as citizens of a neutral nation.
Presidents John Adams and Thomas Jefferson used every foreign policy tool short of war to defend the right of American ships to trade freely without being attacked.
In 1809, President James Madison took up the challenge of defending neutrality.
When the British still refused to end attacks on neutral ships, Madison asked Congress for a declaration of war.
The senators and representatives who voted for war did so for a mix of reasons.
Those motivated mainly by realism believed that a war with Great Britain would give the United States the opportunity to expand its borders into Canada.
With no victory in sight, peace talks began in Ghent, Belgium, in mid-1814.
During the War of 1812, the British bombarded Fort McHenry, near Baltimore, Maryland.
This 1896 cartoon portrays the United States as having the power to keep European nations out.
The doctrine was also used to justify the spread of United States influence in the region.
The Monroe Doctrine Bans Colonization When James Monroe took office as president in 1817, he faced new challenges.
In 1821 , Russia issued a decree extending its colony south into territory claimed jointly by the United States and Great Britain.
Americans cheered as one colony after another freed itself from Spain, but rumors soon emerged that Spain meant to recolonize the region.
Britain then invited the United States to join it in warning European leaders against taking such action.
These twin policies of non-colonization and non-interference in the Western Hemisphere became known as the Monroe Doctrine.
The United States invoked the Monroe Doctrine only a few times during the 1800s.
One of those occasions came about when Venezuela asked for help in settling a long-standing dispute with Britain over its border with British Guiana, a British colony in South America.
Venezuela appealed to the United States in the name of the “immortal Monroe” to intervene.
Siding with the Venezuelans, Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts warned.
The supremacy of the Monroe Doctrine should be established and at once— peacefully if we can, forcibly if we must. — Henry Cabot Lodge, North American Review, 1895 Britain agreed to negotiate with Venezuela, but only after deciding that it was not worth going to war with the United States over a few thousand square miles of mosquito-infested jungle.
Still, Americans saw the settlement of the Venezuelan boundary dispute as a victory for the Monroe Doctrine.
The United States Pursues a Policy of Territorial Expansion In 1803, President Thomas Jefferson arranged for American diplomats to attempt to buy New Orleans, a port city at the mouth of the Mississippi River.
Jefferson feared that French control of the port would pose a threat to American trade flowing down the Mississippi.
Much to Jefferson's surprise, the French offered to sell all of Louisiana.
For the price of $15 million, less than 3 cents an acre, the United States could double its territory.
Expansion Through Diplomacy The new policy of territorial expansion was motivated by both idealism and realism.
Idealists were inspired by the idea of manifest destiny— the belief that the United States was meant to spread its founding ideals and democraticway of life across the continent and beyond.
Realists believed that expansion made the nation more secure by removing foreign threats on its borders.
If possible, expansionists hoped growth could come about through diplomacy.
In 1819, United States diplomats persuaded Spain to cede Florida to the United States.
Expansionists then looked west to Oregon, an area that included what is now known as the Pacific Northwest.
The two nations had jointly occupied Oregon since 1818, and Britain had repeatedly refused United States attempts to extend the boundary to the 54th parallel.
Tensions increased in 1845 when President James K Polk declared that the United States had a “clear and unquestionable’’ claim to the entire area.
Their rallying cry of “Fifty-four forty or fight” referred to the latitude 54'40°, the northern limit of the region.
Unwilling to go to war over Oregon, Britain signed a treaty in 1846 dividing the region at the 49th parallel.
Faced with the choice of pouring money into Alaska to defend it or of making money by selling it, Russia decided to offer this huge region to the United States.
Secretary of State William Seward jumped at the chance, negotiating a price of $7. million and signing a treaty early the next day.
Many Americans made fun of “Seward’s Icebox,” but later it became clear that Alaska had vast natural resources, including gold.
Secretary Seward—"" My dear Mr Kamtkalca , yon really must dine xriih me.
I have some of the very Jhust tallow candles and the lovUesl train ©T "" ’ — * * "" "" mm * “ andjn'ny bring your friend Mr Seal along icilh This cartoon pokes fun at the 1867 purchase of Alaska from Russia for $7. million.
With this purchase, the United States gained about 586,000 square miles at a cost of approximately 2 cents an acre.
They changed their minds later, especially after gold was found there in 1880.
Now York The Alamo was built as a mission but was occasionally used as a fort.
The Annexation of Texas Diplomacy did not work as smoothly when Americans looked south to Texas.
In 1821 , a businessman named Moses Austin received permission from Spain to found a colony in Texas, which at that time was part of Mexico.
Stephen Austin arrived in Texas just as Mexico declared its independence from Spain.
Mexican officials agreed to let Austin begin his colony, but only if the settlers he attracted consented to learn Spanish, become Mexican citizens, and join the Catholic Church.
As their numbers grew, tensions between the Americans and the Mexican government began to rise.
They resented having to deal with official documents in Spanish, a language most of them were unwilling to learn.
Those who had brought slaves with them to Texas were upset when Mexico ended slavery in 1829.
American slaveholders in Texas ignored the law and kept their slaves in bondage.
Hoping to reduce these tensions, Stephen Austin traveled to Mexico City to 1833.
Instead of negotiating with Austin, General Santa Anna, the dictator of Mexico, threw him in jail.
Santa Anna also amended Mexico’s constitution to increase the power of the central government.
Faced with the prospect of losing the right to run their own affairs, the Texans revolted.
Early in 1836, they declared Texas to be an independent country and named Sam Houston as their commander in chief.
Determined to crush the Texas Revolution, Santa Anna marched north with an army of several thousand troops.
On reaching San Antonio, Texas, he found a band of Texas volunteers defending an old mission called the Alamo.
The defenders included the famous frontiersman Davy Crockett, crack rifleman Jim Bowie, and a group of Texas freedom fighters led by William Travis.
After a 13-day siege, the Mexicans overran the Alamo and executed all of the defenders who had survived the assault.
Two weeks later, a force of three or four hundred Texan volunteers led by James Fannin was captured by Mexican troops near Goliad.
After luring Santa Anna deep into Texas, Sam Houston sprang a trap beside the San Jacinto River.
To win his freedom, Santa Anna signed two treaties agreeing to an independent Texas with the Rio Grande as its southern border.
On his return to Mexico, however, the general declared that his country was not bound by any agreement on Texas.
Now an independent country, Texas became known as the Lone Star Republic because of the single star on its flag.
Most Texans and many Americans wanted Texas to become part of the United States.
The issue was complicated, however, by the fact that Texas allowed slavery.
Whenever the question of annexing Texas came up in the Senate, Northerners who opposed slavery voted no.
Not until 1845 was Texas finally admitted to the Union as a slave state.
Polk Provokes a War with Mexico The annexation of Texas by the United States angered Mexico, which had never accepted the loss of this territory.
The two nations also disagreed on where to draw the Texas-Mexico border.
President Polk sent a diplomat to Mexico City to try to settle the border dispute.
He also instructed the diplomat to offer to buy New Mexico and California.
In 1846, he sent troops to occupy the north bank of the Rio Grande, deep inside what Mexico considered its territory.
Aided by superior weapons and leadership, United States troops moved quickly through northern Mexico.
At the same time, other United States forces seized New Mexico and California.
The Mexican War finally ended after Americans captured Mexico City in 1847.
This painting shows American troops defeating the Mexican army at the Battle of Buena Vista.
As a result of the war, the United States gained almost all of the present American Southwest, from Texas west to California.
Germany, Britain, and the United States competed for influence in the Samoan Islands in the late 1800s.
King Mataafa, seen here with two advisors, gained and lost the kingship three times in this troubled period.
V-r*U ^ , 4 / '//•/J hint * <<tSy'ut t jf In 1848, the United States and Mexico signed the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
Mexico formally recognized the annexation of Texas, with the Rio Grande as its border.
It also ceded a huge region stretching from Texas to California to the United States.
In return for the Mexican Cession, the United States paid Mexico $15 million.
While idealists worried that the war had been an unjust land grab, realists cheered the results.
The Beginnings of Imperialism The acquisition of California from Mexico and Oregon from Britain gave the United States a new window on the Pacific Ocean.
Business leaders were eager to open up new markets for American goods across the Pacific in China and Japan.
Many European nations, they observed, were expanding their overseas markets by acquiring colonies in Africa and Asia.
This new wave of colonization was inspired by a policy known as imperialism, or empire building.
The colonies acquired by the imperialist powers supplied resources for their industries and served as markets for their manufactured goods.
While some Americans were reluctant to join this rush for empire, many were happy to acquire islands that could serve as supply stations for United States ships in the Pacific.
It was hoped that these tiny islands, located northwest of the Hawaiian Islands, could serve as a coaling station for steamships.
The Samoan Islands were even more attractive as a way station for United States ships.
In the 1870s, the United States, Germany, and Britain signed treaties with the Samoan king giving them access to the islands.
Later the three countries made Samoa a protectorate— a nation protected and controlled by a stronger nation.
In 1899, the islands were divided between Germany and the United States.
American Samoa provided United States ships with an excellent harbor at the port of Pago Pago and also became an important military post.
As the United States approached the end of the 1800s, Americans began to debate whether or not the country should continue to expand overseas.
Some argued that acquiring an overseas empire would enable the United States to play a stronger role in world affairs.
Others opposed becoming an imperialist power for both moral and pragmatic reasons.
The United States Must Expand to Compete Pointing to the European scramble for colonies, some Americans argued that from a practical perspective, the United States must expand to compete economically.
The modem movement is all toward the concentration of people and territory into great nations and large dominions.
The great nations are rapidly absorbing for their future expansion and their present defense all the waste places of the earth.
It is a movement which makes for civilization and advancement of the race.
As one of the great nations of the world, the United States must not fall out of the line of march. — Henry Cabot Lodge, “The Business World vs. the Politicians,” 1895 In the late 1800s, the imperialist nations of Europe established new colonies in various parts of the world.
Great Britain is pictured as a giant octopus with its tentacles grabbing up lands across the globe.
Carl Schurz:The United States Should Become a Power for Peace Others saw imperialism as fundamentally un-American.
They wondered how the United States could spread its democratic ideals abroad if it did not respect the rights of other nations.
Anti-imperialist politician and reformer Carl Schurz acknowledged that the nation should defend its interests.
In its dealings with other nations should have scrupulous regard, not only for their rights, but also for their self-respect.
It should seek to influence mankind, not by heavy artillery, but by good example and wise counsel.
It should see its highest glory, not in battles won, but in wars prevented.
Many Christian groups stayed in China until 1949, when the new Communist government expelled them.
The United States Should Spread ""Anglo-Saxon Civilization"" Still other Americans supported imperialism from a moral rather than an economic perspective.
It was the duty of the United States, in their view, to bring the light of freedom and Christianity to those dark places.
Josiah Strong, a Christian missionary leader, was a leader of this group.
In his influential book Our Country, Strong wrote that the United States had a “divine mission” to spread its “Anglo-Saxon civilization” around the world.
When he used the term Anglo-Saxons, Strong was referring to white English-speaking peoples.
In his view, Anglo-Saxon civilization was superior to all others because it was founded on the twin ideas of civil liberty and Christianity.
While such views seem racist today, they were widely accepted a century ago.
The United States Must Become a Great Sea Power Other supporters of imperialism were more concerned with national power than the spread of civilization.
In an important book titled The Influence of Sea Power upon History, Mahan argued that sea power was key to national greatness.
The time had come, he believed, for Americans to pay more attention to becoming a major world power.
To Mahan and his supporters, becoming a world power meant building a strong navy.
It would also require naval repair facilities and coaling stations overseas in U.S .-controlled territories like American Samoa.
Mahan wrote that influence in world affairs requires underlying military readiness, like the proverbial iron hand under the velvet glove.
Secondly, naval force, the arm of offensive power, which alone enables a country to extend its influence outward.
For fuel is the life of modem naval war; it is the food of the ship; without it the modem monsters of the deep die. — Alfred Thayer Mahan, “The United States Looking Outward ” Atlantic Monthly, 1890 Influenced by Alfred T Mahan's writings, Congress authorized the rebuilding of the United States Navy.
Known as the Great White Fleet, the ships covered 43,000 miles with stops at six continents.
The 14-month tour was a vivid demonstration of United States sea power.
The first was to keep the United States free of foreign alliances and out of foreign conflicts.
The second was to expand the United States across the North American continent.
As Americans began to look outward in the late 1800s, they debated the nation's proper role in world affairs.
Realism and idealism United States foreign policy is generally a blend of realism and idealism.
With realism, the focus is on practical concerns and national self-interest.
With idealism, the focus is on moral values and the spread of American ideals.
Neutrality and unilateralism Following the advice given by Washington in his Farewell Address, the United States tried to stay neutral in foreign wars and avoid alliances with other countries.
The War of 1812 was fought in part to defend American rights as a neutral nation.
The Monroe Doctrine The Monroe Doctrine warned European powers that the United States would view efforts to establish colonies in the Americas or interfere with new Latin American republics as hostile to its interests.
Continental expansion Following a policy of expansion through diplomacy, the United States acquired the Louisiana Territory, Florida, Oregon Territory, and Alaska.
Overseas expansion In the late 1800s, the United States began to look overseas for new territory and influence.
At the same time, Americans began to debate the role and value of overseas expansion.
Srgsbee and Consul-General Lee Are in Doubt— The World Has Senl Special Tug, With Submprire DiVers, to Havana to Find OuL-Lee Asksjor an Immediate Court of Inquiry —Capt.
He was the Yellow Kid, a character in a wildly popular newspaper comic.
Joseph Pulitzer, the publisher of the World f faced off against William Randolph Hearst, the publisher of the Journal in a battle to dominate the city’s newspaper market.
Their struggle over newspaper sales helped to provoke a real war, the Spanish-American War.
Newspaper comics were new at the time, and Pulitzer’s World enjoyed a huge jump in sales.
Not to be outdone, Hearst lured Outcalt to the Journal by promising him more money.
In response, Pulitzer hired another cartoonist to draw his own version of the cartoon.
The rivalry between the World and the Journal extended beyond the Yellow Kid cartoons.
One favorite subject was the brutal suppression of a rebellion in Cuba against Spanish rule.
Yellow journalism helped inflame public support for going to war against Spain.
In this chapter, you will learn why the United States went to war against Spain and why this conflict was a significant event in American foreign relations.
In competing to attract readers, these papers often exaggerated the facts.
Sensationalized reporting on the brutal suppression of the revolt in the Spanish colony of Cuba increased public anger against Spain.
Trouble Brewing in Cuba The island of Cuba lies just 90 miles off the coast of Florida, in the Caribbean Sea.
It was founded as a Spanish colony by Christopher Columbus in 1492 and later became one of the world’s leading sugar producers.
Cuba's proximity to the United States led to close economic ties in the late 1800s and a growing American presence on the island.
Cubans living in the United States helped fund efforts to win Cuba's independence.
Cubans Struggle for Independence During the 1800s, many Cubans had voiced a desire for self-rule.
In 1868, a revolutionary group largely made up of poor whites, free blacks, and slaves demanded independence from Spain, the establishment of a republic, and the end of slavery.
Spain eventually crushed the revolt but then tried to ease tensions by agreeing to limited reforms.
It gave Cubans some representation in the government, and it abolished slavery in 1886.
Meanwhile, Cuba was coming under the economic influence of the United States.
American business interests saw it as a good place to trade and invest.
By the mid1890s, American investment in Cuba’s sugar plantations had reached many millions of dollars.
American investors were therefore nervous about the island's political instability.
Despite some reforms, the political situation did not improve significantly.
This second struggle for independence was led by Jose Marti, a Cuban poet, journalist, and statesman.
Forced to leave Cuba because of his revolutionary activities, Marti lived in the United States from 1881 to 1 895.
Even while he was living abroad, Marti inspired his fellow Cubans with calls for liberty.
He wrote, “Like bones to the human body . . . so is liberty the essence of life.
Marti sailed to Cuba i n/f995| to lead the revolt but was soon killed in combat.
The Cuban rebels engaged in guerrilla warfare, launching surprise attacks against Spanish forces and fading back into the countryside.
In 1896, Spain sent a new commander, General Valeriano Weyler, to put down the uprising.
To eliminate support for the rebels, Weyler forced tens of thousands of Cubans into reconcentration camps.
Many Americans sympathized with the rebellion, seeing it as a struggle for freedom, like the American Revolution.
Meanwhile, American investors feared that the political unrest was putting their Cuban investments and property at risk.
Despite public calls for the United States to intervene in Cuba, President Grover Cleveland followed a policy of strict neutrality.
When William McKinley was elected president in 1896. he hoped to maintain neutrality.
But that would become more difficult as the public increasingly called for the United States to help the rebels.
American Newspapers React Most Americans learned about the events in Cuba through newspapers and magazines.
At that time, these were the only forms of mass media— methods of communicating to a mass audience.
With the yellow journalism of the time, however, many papers were not as careful in their reporting as they are today.
To sell newspapers, publishers like Joseph Pulitzer and William Randolph Hearst sensationalized the news.
Reporters and artists were encouraged to stretch the truth about the bravery of Cuban rebels and the horrors of Spanish rule, especially “Butcher” Weyler’s brutality.
In this way, yellow' journalism helped stir public support for United States intervention to aid the rebels.
Jose Marti was an accomplished writer and the father of Cuban independence.
This cartoon from 1898 depicts the island suffering from Spanish misrule and anarchy.
Americans Call for War with Spain In 1897, the Spanish government promised greater self-rule in Cuba.
It also removed General Weyler from his post and ordered him to return to Spain.
In February 1898, however, two events aroused American anger and led to increasing calls for war.
The de Lome letter was addressed to a friend in Cuba but was somehow stolen from the mail and sent to the Journal for publication.
The publishing of this letter intensified anti-Spanish feelings in the United States and underscored the power of the press to inflame public opinion.
The Maine had sailed to Cuba in January after riots broke out in the streets of Havana.
Fearing harm to American citizens and property, President McKinley had sent the Maine to Cuba to protect American interests.
Inflammatory articles and illustrations about the sinking of the USS Maine helped rouse public support for war with Spain.
Then, on the night of February 15, a tremendous explosion rocked the battleship.
An official navy investigation began immediately, but the Journal and other newspapers immediately blamed Spain.
Across the country, “Remember the Maine ” became a rallying cry for war.
The United States Responds In March, the navy issued its report on the sinking of the Maine.
Though the evidence was sketchy, navy investigators concluded that the explosion was caused by an underwater mine.
Senator Redfield Proctor of Vermont gave a compelling speech on the Senate floor.
Proctor had just returned from Cuba and described the appalling conditions there.
Although General Weyler was no longer in charge, the reconcentration camps were still in operation, and the Cuban people were still suffering.
To me the strongest appeal is not the barbarity practiced by Weyler nor the loss of the Maine ... but the spectacle of a million and a half of people, the entire native population of Cuba, struggling for freedom and deliverance from the worst misgovemment of which I ever had knowledge. —Redfield Proctor, speech before the Senate, March 17, 1898 OVER ONE muJjon tvo hundred thousand every day.
HADE ON THE SfAlLS — On April 25, 1898, Congress declared war on Spain after the Spanish government rejected American demands for Cuban independence.
Newspapers trumpeted the news and called for a quick victory over Spanish forces.
The Maine report and Proctor’s speech helped turn opinion in Congress and the public toward war.
But President McKinley, still hoping to avoid conflict, gave Spain one last chance.
He called for an armistice, a cessation of hostilities, until a permanent peace could be discussed.
He also called on Spain to close the reconcentration camps and to take steps to grant Cuba its independence.
Spain agreed to an armistice and to closing the camps, but was unwilling to give up control of Cuba.
Under great public pressure, McKinley asked Congress to declare war on Spain.
Congress passed a resolution, a formal statement about a course of action, recognizing Cuban independence and authorizing military force, if necessary, to liberate Cuba.
On May 1, 1898, the United States Navy under Commodore George Dewey destroyed the Spanish fleet in Manila Bay.
He did not know that Spain and the United States had declared peace the day before.
A ""Splendid Little War"" with Spain The Spanish-American War lasted only a few months, but it had dramatic results.
The United States won the conflict convincingly, demonstrating military power in overseas combat, with few American battle casualties.
Fighting Begins in the Philippines Even though the war was sparked by problems in Cuba, the first battle took place much farther away, in the Philippines.
A large group of islands southeast of China, the Philippines were Spain’s largest remaining colony.
When the SpanishAmerican War began, he was living in exile in Hong Kong.
At least two months before war was declared, the United States began preparing for battle in the Philippines.
If war broke out, it wanted to strike a quick blow against the Spanish fleet in Manila Bay.
Theodore Roosevelt, the assistant secretary of the navy at the time, instructed the commander of the Pacific squadron.
On May 1 Just days after the declaration of war, Dewey’s squadron steamed into Manila Bay and opened fire on the Spanish fleet.
Dewey did not lose a single ship and suffered only a few battle casualties.
Dewey had scored a stunning victory but did not have sufficient troops to land in Manila and take the city.
In the meantime, Aguinaldo returned to the Philippines with his rebel forces to fight the Spanish on his own.
On August 13, the Philippines fell to a combined force of American soldiers and Filipino rebels.
The United States Navy quickly set up a blockade of Havana and the north coast of Cuba.
At the eastern end of the island, however, a Spanish squadron slipped into the harbor at Santiago de Cuba.
The American troops, led by General William Shafter, arrived outside Santiago on June 20.
Among them were four regiments of African American soldiers, many of whom had fought in the Indian Wars in the American West.
The army also relied on volunteer regiments, including one led by Theodore Roosevelt.
When the war began, Roosevelt quit his post as assistant secretary of the navy so that he could join the fighting.
Together with Colonel Leonard Wood, he helped form the First United States Volunteer Cavalry, better known as the Rough Riders.
Handpicked by Roosevelt, this regiment was a mix of college athletes and western cowboys.
On July 1 , General Shafter launched his assault on Santiago, moving against Spanish troops dug in along a ridge.
Roosevelt and the Rough Riders charged up Kettle Hill, while other United States forces fought the even tougher battle for San Juan Hill.
The American navy destroyed the Spanish squadron as it tried to leave Santiago harbor, and on July 17, Santiago surrendered.
With no prospect of success, Spain agreed to a peace settlement on August 12.
Despite their quick victory, not everything went well for the United States forces.
About 5,500 Americans died in the war, mostly from tropical diseases like malaria and yellow fever.
As regiments were formed on short notice, many soldiers lacked proper equipment and supplies.
Most had heavy wool uniforms, a severe liability in Cuba’s tropical heat, and food was often of poor quality.
Despite these difficulties, the United States had won a major victory in its first overseas war.
Black and white troops fought together in the assault on San Juan Hill.
By taking the hill, American forces broke Spain's main line of defense for the city of Santiago.
A New Power on the World Stage With its victory in the Spanish-American War, the United States emerged as a new world power.
It had defeated a European nation and won control of overseas territories.
In the peace treaty, the United States solidified its new position in world affairs.
The Treaty of Paris The war ended on August 12, 1898, with the signing of a peace protocol, a first draft of a treaty to be submitted for ratification.
In October, Spanish and American officials met in Paris to finalize the terms.
On December 10, the United States and Spain signed the Treaty of Paris.
Second, it ceded Puerto Rico and the Pacific island of Guam to the United States.
And third, it ceded the Philippines to the United States in exchange for a payment of $20 million.
Under the treaty, Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines became American possessions.
This cartoon refers to clashing views on the Philippines in the presidential election of 1900.
Democrat William Jennings Bryan argued that the islands should be independent President McKinley and the Republicans declared that American control was needed to keep law and order.
The Senate Debate over the Treaty For the treaty to take effect, the Senate would have to ratify it by a two-thirds vote.
While some Americans supported creating an American empire, others were strongly opposed.
The debate over the treaty raged not only in the Senate but also across the entire country.
Leading opponents were the members of the Anti-Imperialist League, an organization formed during the war to oppose the establishment of United States colonies.
Its membership was diverse, ranging from union leader Samuel Gompers to millionaire industrialist Andrew Carnegie.
Although the motives and political views of league members varied widely, they all believed that imperialism violated the country’s founding principles of freedom and democracy.
Supporters of the treaty included many prominent political leaders, such as President William McKinley, Theodore Roosevelt, and Senator Henry.
Lodge argued that forming an empire was critical to the nation’s future.
He declared that the United States needed to compete equally with other great nations.
By a vote of 57 to 27, a two-thirds majority by the narrow margin of two votes, the Senate ratified the Treaty of Paris on February 6, 1899.
Although the Treaty of Paris granted Cuba independence, the island was in ruins.
President McKinley decided that the United States should remain in Cuba to restore order and assist in the island's recovery.
For four years, the United States ruled Cuba under a military government.
They believed that the occupation violated the spirit of the Treaty of Paris and the Teller Amendment, which had pledged that the United States would leave the island after the war was over.
The United States finally withdrew its troops in 1902, but only after Cuba added provisions to its constitution to protect American interests.
These provisions, called the Platt Amendment, allowed the United States to intervene in Cuban affairs and to buy or lease land for naval bases.
In the years to come, United States troops reoccupied Cuba on several occasions.
The United States finally agreed in 1934 to repeal the Platt Amendment.
However, a United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay, on Cuba's southeastern coast, still operates under a permanent lease.
American companies also gained significant control over the Cuban economy.
By 1913, American investment on the island had quadrupled from prewar levels to $220 million.
United States business interests owned 60 percent of Cuba's rural lands and controlled many of the island’s industries.
In the eyes of many, the United States had become an imperialist nation.
Cuban revolt Cubans rose up against Spanish rule in the late 1800s, and many were imprisoned in reconcentration camps.
Role of the press American newspapers exaggerated stories about the Cuban revolt to play on American sympathies and sell papers.
The de Lome Letter and the USS Maine Two incidents increased tensions between the United States and Spain.
A letter from the Spanish ambassador criticizing President McKinley, followed by the sinking of the USS Maine in Havana harbor, incited American anger.
The war, which lasted just four months, began in the Philippines and ended in Cuba and Puerto Rico.
Many volunteers fought with the United States forces, including Theodore Roosevelt’s Rough Riders.
The most important battle of the war took place on San Juan Hill, outside Santiago.
Arguing over imperialism The Treaty of Paris recognized the United States victory and left the United States in possession of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Philippines.
Members of the Anti-Imperialist League spoke out against the treaty, but it was eventually ratified by the Senate.
Cuba and the Platt Amendment Although the Treaty of Paris granted independence to Cuba, the United States maintained control over the island.
The Platt Amendment allowed the United States to intervene in Cuban affairs and establish military bases in Cuba.
The exposition was designed to highlight the achievements of the nations of the Western Hemisphere.
But coming just three years after the SpanishAmerican War, it also heralded the emergence of the United States as a great power.
A Triumphal Bridge served as the entrance to the fair and a symbol of American triumph.
The exposition presented a glowing demonstration of progress at the dawn of the 20th century.
It showcased new developments in transportation, agriculture, and industry.
Visitors thrilled when the tower’s many thousands of light bulbs blinked on every night, creating a magical atmosphere.
Nevertheless, the exposition was meant to promote a spirit of cooperation and goodwill between the United States and the other nations of the hemisphere.
On September 5, 1901, President William McKinley visited the fair and gave a speech.
The following day, a young anarchist approached the president and shot him twice at pointblank range.
McKinley died a week later, and Vice President Theodore Roosevelt assumed office.
Under Roosevelt and the next two presidents, William Howard Taft and Woodrow Wilson, the United States embarked on a new era in foreign policy marked by increased intervention in Latin America and other parts of the world.
The Electric Tower was the centerpiece of the Pan-American Exposition, held in Buffalo in the summer of 1901.
Dotted with 44,000 light bulbs, the tower cast a dazzling glow at night Despite its impressive architecture, however, the tower — along with most other buildings at the fair — was not a permanent structure.
Built rapidly out of wood, wire, and plaster, many of the buildings began to decay during heavy rains in Buffalo that year.
Three Presidents, Three Foreign Policies By going to war with Spain and acquiring overseas possessions.
President McKinley had set the stage for a more aggressive foreign policy.
The next three presidents— Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson— pursued their own policies.
But all three gave the United States an even greater role in world affairs.
Although their foreign policies differed, each president intervened abroad to pursue American goals.
Some goals were realist, such as controlling access to foreign resources.
In developing foreign policy, the guiding principle for all three presidents was to serve the national interest.
This is the set of goals— political, economic, military, and cultural— that a nation considers important.
Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson carried out foreign policies they believed would advance American interests.
Roosevelt Expands United States Involvement Overseas Theodore Roosevelt applied an energetic spirit to foreign policy.
He wanted to make the United States a great power that could exert influence around the world.
He believed that the country must meet any challenge to its national interest abroad.
He believed in working quietly and patiently to achieve goals overseas but using force if necessary.
Roosevelt’s strong-arm approach to foreign affairs became known as the Big Stick Policy.
In 1904, Roosevelt formalized this policy in a major address to Congress.
He reminded his audience that the Monroe Doctrine was designed to prevent European meddling in the Americas.
Yet he noted that nearly a century later many countries in the hemisphere were still too weak to defend themselves.
He asserted that the United States therefore must use “international police President Roosevelt believed that the United States should act as an international police force to protect its interests.
His Big Stick Policy was designed to bring order and stability to the hemisphere.
He claimed that this power would help protect weak nations and was a direct extension of the Monroe Doctrine.
For that reason, his statement became known as the Roosevelt Corollary to the Monroe Doctrine.
A corollary is a proposition that is a logical extension of a principle.
Over the next several decades, the United States intervened repeatedly in Latin America and the Caribbean.
It sent troops to suppress unrest and prop up rulers who supported United States interests.
Roosevelt and his successors claimed that these actions were necessary to promote stability in the region, but many critics saw them as an exercise of imperial power.
In 1905, he mediated a conflict between Japan and Russia, which were fighting to control Korea and Manchuria.
For his efforts in ending the war, he won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1906.
However, the treaty left both Japan and Russia dissatisfied and resentful of the United States.
Taft Advances United States Economic Interests After becoming president in 1909, William Howard Taft continued the main thrust of Roosevelt’s foreign policy but shifted to economic goals.
His policy, which became known as Dollar Diplomacy, was to encourage and protect American trade and investment in Latin America and Asia.
Taft believed that a strong economic presence abroad would advance American interests.
Taft claimed that Dollar Diplomacy would limit the use of force overseas.
The government was corrupt and unpopular, however, and a new revolt broke out in 1912.
Taft sent marines to put it down and to protect American business interests.
The United States kept troops in Nicaragua almost continuously until 1933.
Wilson Champions Democracy Around the Globe When Woodrow Wilson became president in 1913, he tried to take a moral approach to foreign relations.
It was based on democratic ideals, rather than on economic investment or the use of force.
Wilson also introduced a concept called self-determination into American foreign policy.
By this he meant the right of other peoples to determine their own government, free of outside influence.
In 1915, a revolt in Haiti prompted him to send marines to protect American lives and investments.
It was not until 1934 that the United States withdrew its troops from Haiti.
In 1916, Wilson sent troops to the Dominican Republic, where they stayed for 12 years.
Beginning in the early 1900s, the United States intervened regularly in Latin America and the Caribbean.
It sent troops to support friendly rulers and protect United States interests.
Here, American marines fight antigovernment rebels in Nicaragua in 1912.
United States forces trained the Nicaraguan army and helped establish a dictatorship that ruled that country for more than 40 years.
United States Involvement in Latin America The construction of the Panama Canal was an enormous task.
Workers toiling in tropical heat had to remove tons of soil and rock and erect massive concrete structures.
The three major challenges were cutting through the hills, building a dam to create Gatlin Lake, and constructing the locks.
Before the Panama Canal was built, ships traveling between the east and west coasts of the United States had to make the long journey around South America, as shown at the bottom left of this map.
The route chosen for the canal took advantage of natural lakes and rivers.
Ships traveling by canal from the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean move in a southeasterly direction across the Isthmus of Panama.
In the early 1900s, Latin America and the Caribbean were a special focus of United States foreign policy.
The United States viewed this region as its own “backyard"" and therefore a good place to exert its power and influence.
In addition to Nicaragua, Haiti, and the Dominican Republic, the United States intervened in other Latin American countries, notably Panama, Mexico, and Puerto Rico.
The United States Helps Panama Overthrow Colombian Rule The United States became interested in Panama in the mid1800s.
Various nations wanted to build a canal across Central America as a shortcut between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.
During the SpanishAmerican War, the battleship USS Oregon had to travel almost 14,000 miles around the tip of South America to get from California to Cuba.
The Roosevelt administration tried to lease land in Panama for a canal, but the Colombian government turned down the offer.
The revolt succeeded, and the United States quickly recognized Panama as an independent nation.
An Engineering Feat The new government soon signed a treaty allowing the United States to build the Panama Canal.
At least 40,000 workers carved the “Big Ditch” through mountains, rainforests, and swamps.
Thousands of workers fell prey to tropical diseases such as malaria and yellow fever.
Although the canal helped to improve international trade, Roosevelt’s actions in Panama angered many Latin Americans.
In 1921, the United States tried to undo some of this damage by paying Colombia $25 million.
For most of the 1900s, however, the United States treated the canal as its own property.
The Panama Canal uses a series of locks to lift and lower ships over the Isthmus of Panama.
By using the canal, ships sailing between the Atlantic and Pacific oceans avoid an 8,000-mile voyage around South America.
Elevation Profile Madden Lake and Dam Lifting and Lowering Ships Once a ship moving up the canal enters a lock, the gates are closed behind it.
Water is released into the lock to raise the ship to the level of the next lock.
Once the water levels are equal, the gates open and the ship moves to the next lock.
Fitting Through the Locks The largest ships that can use the Panama Canal are known as Panamax vessels.
Their maximum size is determined by the dimensions of the locks and the depth of the water in the canal.
Many modern ships, known as post-Panamax vessels, are too large to use the canal.
NewYorfc President Wilson tried to support the growth of democracy in Mexico.
In the caption, Wilson threatens to keep wagging his finger if Mexico does not behave.
The United States Nearly Goes to War with Mexico Tensions between Wilson and the Huerta government almost led to war.
In 1914, Wilson sent troops to Veracruz, a port on the Gulf of Mexico, to keep weapons from reaching Huerta's army.
Much to Wilson's surprise, most Mexicans— including Carranza— opposed the United States action.
Wilson hastily pulled the forces out, saying that he was only trying to help Mexico.
Two rebel leaders, Emiliano Zapata and Francisco “Pancho"" Villa, rose up against Carranza.
Hoping to force a United States intervention, he ordered attacks on American citizens in Mexico and the United States.
In one crossborder raid in 1916, Villa was responsible for the killing of 17 Americans in New Mexico.
Wilson sent troops to capture him, but Villa eluded the American forces, drawing them deeper into Mexico.
This military action alarmed the Mexican people, who feared a United States invasion.
At that point, the United States was nearing entry into World War I Recognizing the failure of the intervention, Wilson withdrew from Mexico. liMotiraUvr Wit** ls\ IF YOU DON’T TAKK CUU., 1 SUAEJU U.WU TO •1-Jh.KT Yol Till.
United States Businesses Invest Heavily in Mexico The United States also played a strong role in Mexico in the early 1900s.
Since 1884, the dictator Porfirio Diaz had ruled the country with a heavy hand.
Most Mexicans remained poor, while a handful of landowners, businesspeople, and foreign investors grew very rich.
By 1910, United States businesses had invested around $2 billion in Mexico, buying up land, banks, mines, and other properties.
Madero failed to gain enough support, but another uprising ousted Diaz in 1911.
One of his generals, Victoriano Huerta, overthrew him and had him killed.
They believed that Huerta would stabilize the country and protect their investments.
General Venustiano Carranza, who he hoped would support democratic reform.
After the Spanish-American War, it instituted a military government that began to develop Puerto Rico’s infrastructure.
In 1900, the United States established a civilian government led by an American governor.
Over the next two decades, Puerto Ricans grew increasingly frustrated with American rule.
The United States recognized Puerto Rico’s strategic value in the Caribbean, however, and wanted to maintain control over the island.
In 1917, President Wilson signed the Jones Act, making Puerto Rico a United States territory.
Puerto Ricans became citizens but were not granted all the rights of citizenship.
They could not elect their own governor or vote in United States elections.
Puerto Rico's Status Evolves Over time, Puerto Rico became more integrated into the United States economy.
At first, American investors poured money into sugar production, which became the island’s main economic activity.
The sugar industry produced great wealth for a small minority but left most Puerto Ricans in poverty.
In 1930, the average annual income was just $122, one fifth of the United States average.
Later on, Americans would make large investments in manufacturing plants.
This status gave Puerto Rico control over its own laws and finances but left decisions on defense and tariffs in United States hands.
Although most Puerto Ricans welcomed this change, some wanted more control over their affairs.
They argued that the island would be better off as either a United States state or an independent nation.
In several elections held after 1967, however, voters chose to remain a commonwealth.
This photograph shows San Juan harbor a few years later, after American rule was established.
San Juan has grown enormously since then, though portions of the old Spanish city still remain.
Members of the United States Army of Occupation in Puerto Rico during the Spanish-American War received a medal for their service.
The medal features a Spanish castle on one side and the American eagle on the other.
United States Involvement in Asia and the Pacific After the Spanish-American War, the United States became a colonial power in Asia.
By holding on to the Philippines, the United States would have greater access to Chinese trade and more influence in Chinese affairs.
The United States wanted to ensure free trade in the Asia-Pacific region.
The Philippines Fight for Independence from the United States During the SpanishAmerican War, the United States captured the Philippines with the help of Filipino leader Emilio Aguinaldo.
He claimed that the United States had promised freedom for the islands.
President McKinley believed that the Filipinos were not ready for self-government.
He said that he wanted to ""uplift and civilize and Christianize” the Filipino people.
He also wanted to maintain American control over the islands to prevent another nation from seizing power.
Still, the Filipinos moved ahead with their plans for independence by writing a constitution and electing Aguinaldo president.
In February 1899, fighting broke out between Filipino and American forces.
The United States sent hundreds of thousands of soldiers to the Philippines to put down the revolt.
Aguinaldo then switched to guerrilla tactics, launching quick strikes on American troops.
The United States responded with brutal force, destroying villages and herding civilians into prison camps.
After the war, the United States set up a central government for the islands.
The United States built schools and made improvements to Philippine harbors.
It also established local governments and encouraged Filipinos to participate in them.
The United States controlled the Philippines for the next half-century, finally granting independence on July 4, 1946.
Known as the “Crossroads of the Pacific,” Hawaii was an important stop for ships crossing the Pacific Ocean.
By the late 1800s, the United States regarded Hawaii as an economic asset.
The economy of the islands centered on the export of tropical crops, especially sugarcane and pineapple.
White American planters controlled the industry, shipping most of their crops to the United States and becoming wealthy and powerful in the process.
At the time, Hawaii was still a kingdom ruled by a constitutional monarch.
She was a strong leader who resented the dominance of the wealthy white minority on the islands.
She established a new constitution that gave more power to native Hawaiians.
But a small group of white planters refused to accept the constitution and called on the American government for help.
In 1893, United States military forces landed and helped the planters overthrow the queen.
She was overthrown with United States support in 1893 and withdrew from public life.
Seated to her left is Sanford B Dole, the first head of government after Hawaii became a United States territory.
The United States Annexes the Hawaiian Islands After the revolt, the white planters controlled the government.
They applied to Congress for annexation, hoping to make Hawaii part of the United States.
After discovering the circumstances of the revolt, Cleveland withdrew the annexation treaty and called on the planters to return Queen Liliuokalani to her throne.
The planters refused and instead proclaimed Hawaii an independent republic.
Throughout the 1890s, Americans continued to debate the question of annexing Hawaii.
Those in favor stressed the importance of Hawaii’s location and the value of controlling the islands.
They also hoped to continue spreading Christianity and the American way of life in Hawaii.
Those opposed to annexation pointed out that colonization often caused problems.
Some feared the introduction of new races and cultures into the United States.
Others thought it was un-American to deprive a people of their sovereignty.
The American intervention in Hawaii produced deep resentment among native Hawaiians.
Nevertheless, during the Spanish-American War in 1898, Hawaii was annexed as Congress recognized its importance as a port for the navy.
In 1959, it became a state, the only one that is not part of North America.
This huge nation was rich in resources and offered a potentially large market for American goods.
In the 1890s, the United States and other foreign powers watched with interest as China and Japan engaged in a war over Korea.
Russia, France, and Germany supported China at the war’s end and demanded favors in return.
These powers, along with Britain and Japan, began to carve out spheres of influence from Chinese territory.
In some cases, the foreign powers also demanded land for military bases.
As a result, much of China was soon carved into pieces of foreigndominated territory.
The United States wanted to prevent foreign colonization of China in order to maintain its own access to Chinese markets.
Secretary of State John Hay issued several foreign policy statements, which became known collectively as the Open Door Policy.
The first statement, in 1899, called on foreign nations to allow free trade in China.
They were proud of their ancient heritage and furious with other countries for controlling China and undermining Chinese traditions.
Some Chinese tried to persuade their government to implement reforms so that China could compete in the modem world and resist western influence.
One Chinese group eventually took up arms in an effort to restore national control.
This group, called the Righteous and Harmonious Fists, was commonly known as the Boxers.
In 1900, the Boxers led an insurrection, rising up to try to expel the “foreign devils” from China.
The Boxers killed hundreds of foreigners, including Christian missionaries, along with thousands of Chinese Christians.
Within a few months, however, the United States, Japan, and European powers had banded together to crush the uprising.
Secretary of State Hay feared that foreign powers would attempt to use the Boxer Rebellion as an excuse to take stronger control over China.
He therefore issued a firmer statement of the Open Door Policy, insisting that foreign nations not only allow free trade, but also respect Chinese independence.
The other nations did not object, mainly because they did not want to fight each other over China.
It portrays the United States as having the power to keep China open to trade with all nations.
Three presidents— Roosevelt, Taft, and Wilson— developed foreign policies designed to expand American power and protect American interests.
Roosevelt Corollary President Roosevelt followed the Big Stick Policy in foreign affairs.
This policy called on the United States to use “international police power” to promote order and security in the Western Hemisphere.
Dollar Diplomacy President Taft’s Dollar Diplomacy focused on economic goals overseas.
He emphasized the spread of American influence through economic activity.
Moral Diplomacy President Wilson favored a moral approach to foreign policy.
Latin America The United States became deeply involved in Latin America in the early 1900s.
Asia and the Pacific The Philippines became a United States possession, and the United States put down an independence movement there.
In China, it applied its Open Door Policy to limit foreign control and maintain access to Chinese markets.
Introduction In the spring of 1914, President Woodrow Wilson sent “Colonel” Edward House, his trusted adviser, to Europe.
House’s task was to learn more about the growing strains among the European powers.
After meeting with government officials, House sent Wilson an eerily accurate assessment of conditions there.
On June 28, 1914, Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife, Sophie, made an official visit to Sarajevo, the capital of Austria-Hungary’s province of Bosnia.
A few years earlier, Bosnia had been taken over by Austria-Hungary, a move that angered many Bosnians who wanted closer ties to nearby Serbia and other Slavic ethnic groups.
On the day of the visit, several terrorists, trained and armed by a Serbian group, waited in the crowd.
Early in the day, as the royal couple rode through the city in an open car, a terrorist hurled a bomb at their car.
Another terrorist, Gavrilo Princip, was waiting farther down the route.
When the car came into view, Princip fired several shots into the car, killing the royal couple.
When the Russian foreign minister learned that Austrian soldiers had begun shelling the Serbian capital of Belgrade, the stunned diplomat warned the Austrian ambassador, “This means a European war.
To help Austria-Hungary, Germany declared war on Russia and its ally France.
In 1914, during a visit to Sarajevo, Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria-Hungary and his wife were gunned down by a terrorist.
Although this assassination sparked the outbreak of World War I, the conflict had deeper causes.
The United States Tries to Stay Neutral For most Americans, the war was a distant conflict that did not concern them.
One cause was the system of alliances that linked the European nations to each other.
This system required member nations to come to one another's aid in case of attack.
When the conflict started, these ties led to the division of Europe into two camps.
Germany sided with Austria-Hungary, and they headed the Central powers.
Nationalism is a strong feeling of pride in and loyalty to a nation or ethnic group.
Nationalism led some European powers to put national interests first, regardless of the consequences for other countries.
For example, pride in Germany's rapid growth and military power led Kaiser Wilhelm II to seek an overseas empire for his country.
Smaller ethnic groups expressed their nationalism by seeking independence from rule by foreign countries.
For example, Serbs in Bosnia who resented Austro-Hungarian rule wanted to unite with other Slavic peoples in Serbia.
As World War I began, a system of alliances divided Europe into two camps.
They were opposed by Austria-Hungary and Germany, known as the Central powers.
Other nations joined the Allies or the Central powers as the war expanded to engulf most of Europe.
When Germany modernized its army and added to its navy, Britain felt it had to do the same.
By the 1880s, Britain and France had colonies in Africa and Asia that provided raw materials and markets for their products.
The only way for Germany to get the territory it wanted was to take it from someone else.
Wilson Adopts a Policy of Neutrality Soon after the war began, Woodrow Wilson declared a policy of neutrality.
Ever since George Washington had warned the nation to avoid “entangling alliances ” American presidents had tried to steer clear of European infighting.
A Mississippi senator asserted, “There is no necessity for war with Germany— there is no necessity for war with any of the belligerent powers.
As a neutral nation, the United States could make loans and sell supplies to both sides.
United States leaders were also happy to have a way of helping American bankers, farmers, and businesses recover from a painful economic slowdown.
Finally, members of the peace movement, who spoke out strongly against war, were in favor of this policy of neutrality.
Yet the situation was more complicated than America’s neutrality policy expressed.
In 1914, more than 32 million Americans— a full one third of the population — were either foreign bom or the children of foreign-bom parents.
Many of these Americans had strong emotional ties to their homelands and found it hard to remain neutral.
Irish Americans also sided with the Central powers out of their long-standing hatred of the British.
Many felt connected by ancestry, language, culture, and democratic values.
While Americans debated neutrality, the war raged on two fronts in Europe.
On the eastern front, Russia quickly advanced into Germany and AustriaHungary.
In two key battles, the number of Russian casualties— soldiers killed, captured, wounded, or missing— totaled about 250,000.
On the western front, German troops easily rolled across Belgium and into France.
Intense fighting by British, French, and Belgian armies finally stopped the German advance, but not until German troops were within 30 miles of Paris.
By the end of 1914, the war on the western front had turned into a long and bloody stalemate, or deadlock.
Neither side was able to knock out its enemies, and yet neither side was willing to sue for peace.
The lines of battle stretched across Belgium and northeastern France to the border of Switzerland.
Month by month, casualties mounted in what, to many Americans, looked like senseless slaughter.
Although the United States may have declared itself neutral, American businesses and banks were anything but.
Between 1914 and 1916, the value of American trade with the Allies soared from $800 million to S3 billion.
United States banks loaned the Allies $2 billion to pay for these purchases.
Unable to defeat their enemy on land, both Britain and Germany looked for ways to starve their enemies into submission.
Britain Stops United States Ships Heading for Germany The war at sea started with a British blockade of ships headed for Germany.
British ships turned back any vessels carrying weapons, food, and other vital supplies to the Central powers— even ships from neutral nations such as the United States.
President Wilson complained to the British about the policy of stopping neutral ships, but he did not threaten to take action.
His hesitancy came in part from the strong economic ties between Britain and the United States.
Trade with Britain had given a boost to the sagging American economy, and United States banks and businesses were earning millions of dollars from loans and exports to the Allies.
These same banks and businesses made fewer loans and sold fewer supplies and weapons to the Central powers.
Moreover, many businesspeople in the United States openly supported the Allies.
The German navy hoped this new weapon would break the British blockade and at the same time stop vital supplies from reaching the Allies.
Within this zone, German U-boats could sink enemy ships without warning.
Because British ships sometimes disguised themselves by flying the flags of neutral nations, neutral ships going into this zone were also at risk.
By international law and custom, warships had the right to stop and search merchant ships that they suspected of breaking a naval blockade.
Such vessels could even be sunk, but only if the passengers and crew were removed first.
This practice worked for warships, which could take on extra passengers, but not for submarines, which were small and cramped.
In theory, a U-boat could allow the ship's crew and passengers to launch lifeboats before sinking the ship.
A U-boat that surfaced to warn a merchant ship of an attack would become an easy target, foiling its surprise attack.
Wilson protested that sinking merchant ships without protecting the lives of passengers and crews violated international law.
He warned that the United States would hold Germany to “strict accountability” for any American casualties in such attacks.
On May 7, 1915, a U-boat sank the British liner Lusitania without warning.
Germany tried to absolve itself from blame by arguing that the ship was armed and was carrying weapons and ammunition.
He argued that the United States should accept the reality of submarine warfare and warn its citizens that they traveled on British ships at their own risk.
He argued not only that Americans had a right to travel on British ships, but also that the United States should vigorously protect that right.
Wilson sided with Lansing and sent Germany a series of notes demanding that it stop unrestricted submarine warfare.
Afraid that the notes violated neutrality and might involve the United States in war, Bryan resigned.
Four months later, in August 1915, Germany sank a second British ship, the Arabic , killing two Americans.
German officials promised that Germany would sink no more passenger ships without warning.
In March 1916, they broke that promise by sinking the French liner Sussex , an attack that left several Americans injured.
Wilson threatened to break off diplomatic relations with Germany if it did not stop surprise attacks.
In an agreement called the Sussex pledge, Germany promised to spare all lives in any future U-boat attacks on merchant ships.
The Lusitania , a British passenger ship, sank near Ireland after being torpedoed by a German U-boat.
The American public was outraged, and the incident helped strengthen American support for the Allies.
In 1916, Woodrow Wilson ran for reelection against the Republican presidential candidate, Charles Evans Hughes.
Preparedness, Promises, and Propaganda Concern over President Wilson's handling of the war fueled a growing preparedness movement.
This movement was led by former president Theodore Roosevelt, who pointed out that the United States was ill-prepared for war should it need to fight.
At the outbreak of the war, Roosevelt had not sided with either the Allies or the Central powers.
Roosevelt had long believed preparedness for war, not talk of neutrality, was the best guarantor of peace.
As he toured the country promoting preparedness, many newspapers took up his cause.
Advocates of preparedness called for an army of a million trained men and a navy larger than Great Britain’s.
For a time, Wilson resisted calls to strengthen the military, but the submarine menace persuaded him that he had to increase the nation’s readiness for war.
Back in the capital, he pressed Congress to allocate money to double the size of the army and begin construction of the world’s largest navy.
Enough Americans saw Wilson’s efforts as preparedness for peace, not war, to elect him to a second term.
V-SUtHO WtJKI ■ While Wilson tried hard to keep the nation out of war, both the Allies and the Central powers launched propaganda campaigns designed to whip up support for their side.
Propaganda is information or rumor spread by a group or government to promote its own cause or ideas or to damage an opposing cause or idea.
Either way, the intention of propaganda is not to inform, but rather to persuade others to adopt the view or to take the action supported by the propagandist.
Early in the war, the British circulated stories about alleged atrocities committed by German soldiers in Belgium.
Published just days after the attack of the Lusitania , the Bryce commission’s report was filled with stories of German soldiers torturing innocent women and children and using civilians as “human shields” during combat.
The German government angrily denied these stories, as did American reporters traveling with the German army.
Nonetheless, the British government made sure the Bryce report was sent to nearly every newspaper in the United States.
The more horrible the story, the more likely it was to be reprinted in the American press.
As a result, neutrality “in thought” gave way to anti-German feeling in the minds of many Americans.
Both the Allies and the Central powers used propaganda posters to drum up support for the war at home.
The German poster reminds German soldiers that they are fighting to resist the forces of anarchy while protecting their women and children.
Vm ,m> "" m imT 14.14 «rn V — ’«• mm «4P HM «'< «” JTJTjr.^ *:~e W4i *•*« * m ti4M “ ^ „ lW> *« m* »>« W4i nm y«r *» •»» HIM »« In a speech to the Senate on January 22, 1917, Wilson declared that he wanted to find a way to end the stalemated war in Europe.
He also spoke of forming a “league of honor” to help nations settle conflicts peacefully.
Germany’s response to Wilson’s peace efforts was to launch an all-out effort to win the war, including a return to unrestricted submarine warfare.
Keeping to his Sussex pledge, Wilson broke off diplomatic relations with Germany.
The Zimmermarm Note Stirs Up Anti-German Feelings Wilson had hoped the Germans would back down, but his hopes were dashed in late February 1917.
Britain had gotten hold of a note sent in code by the German foreign minister, Arthur Zimmermann, to the German minister in Mexico.
Zimmermann suggested that if the United States entered the war, Mexico and Germany should become allies.
The Zimmermann note created a sensation in the United States and stirred anti-German feeling across the nation.
Events in Russia removed another barrier to the United States joining the Allies.
In March 1917, a revolution toppled the autocratic Czar Nicholas II and replaced him with a democratic government.
At the start of the war, Wilson had not wanted to be allied to a dictator.
With the hope of democracy in sight, the United States could now see Russia as “a fit partner” in a war against German aggression.
Written in code, the Zimmermann note was deciphered by British cryptographers.
The British waited to release the telegram to American newspapers until relations between the United States and Germany were at an all-time low.
The threat in the telegram to help Mexico regain territory lost to the United States further inflamed public opinion against Germany.
He reminded lawmakers of the loss of life caused by German U-boats and how these attacks hurt the nation’s ability to trade freely with other countries.
The right is more precious than peace, and we shall fight for the things which we have always carried nearest our hearts— for democracy, for the right of those who submit to authority to have a voice in their own governments. — Woodrow Wilson’s War Message, address to Congress, 1917 In 1917, President Woodrow Wilson asked Congress to declare war.
Nebraska Senator George Norris argued that the United States was going to war for economic reasons only.
In spite of such protests, on April 4, 1917, the Senate voted 82 to 6 to declare war on Germany.
The assassination of Archduke Franz Ferdinand sparked the outbreak of World War I However, the war had many underlying causes, including the European alliance system and the growth of nationalism and imperialism, which led to military buildups.
The United States remained neutral until events in 1917 convinced Americans to fight on the side of the Allies.
The Allied and Central powers When World War I began, the nations of Europe divided into two alliances— the Allied powers and the Central powers.
U-boats The war at sea started with a British blockade of German ports.
Germany fought back by introducing a new weapon called a U-boat, or submarine.
German U-boats sank both neutral and enemy vessels, often without warning.
The United States strongly protested U-boat attacks on merchant ships carrying American passengers.
Sussex pledge Germany agreed in the Sussex pledge to stop sinking merchant ships without warning but attached the condition that the United States help end the illegal British blockade.
Preparedness movement As anger over American deaths at sea grew, some Americans called for the country to prepare for war.
Although Wilson won reelection on the slogan “He kept us out of war,” he was already preparing the country to fight by building up the army and navy.
Unrestricted submarine warfare In a desperate bid to end the conflict, Germany announced early in 1917 that it would resume unrestricted submarine warfare.
Zimmermann note The disclosure of the Zimmermann note, calling for cooperation between Mexico and Germany to take back United States territory, outraged Americans.
Introduction In 1917, many Americans viewed the nation's entry into World War I as the commencement of a great adventure.
Others saw it as a noble or heroic cause that would give the country a chance to demonstrate its courage.
President Woodrow Wilson’s call to help make the world safe for democracy appealed to Americans’ sense of idealism.
A young recruit named William Langer enlisted to fight in the war because, as he described it, “Here was our one great chance for excitement and risk.
He eagerly followed incidents on the battlefields of Europe, reading newspapers and discussing events with friends.
In 1917, Villard got his chance when a Red Cross official visited his college looking for volunteers to drive ambulances in Italy.
After securing his family’s reluctant consent, Villard enlisted and soon headed out for combat duty.
Very soon after arriving in Italy, Villard discovered how little he knew about war.
As Villard sped from the front lines to the hospital, the wounded soldier kept asking him to drive more slowly.
By the time the ambulance reached the hospital, the young man was dead.
More than 2 million Americans served in Europe during World War I Eager to promote democracy around the world, many entered the war with great enthusiasm.
But their first taste of battle left them more realistic about the horrors of war.
This famous World War I recruiting poster helped entice tens of thousands of young American men to register for the draft in 1917.
Once they did, it took weeks of training to prepare them for combat. i For the United States, World War I was a war of firsts.
To start, it was the first time the government had agreed to commit large numbers of American soldiers to a distant war across the sea.
In fact, when Congress first declared war, many Americans thought the nation would provide money, food, and equipment to the war effort— but not troops.
Still, with Germany preparing for a final assault, many Americans wondered whether the United States could set up military camps, train large numbers of troops, and transport these soldiers to Europe quickly enough to make a difference.
The Nation's First Selective Service System Prior to American entry into the war, the United States had a volunteer army of about 200,000 soldiers.
To enter the war, the military would need tens of thousands more soldiers— and quickly.
In May 1917, Congress passed the Selective Service Act, which created a national draft.
The act required all men ages 21 to 30 to register for military service at local polling stations.
This was the first time the United States government had established a draft before entering a war.
To encourage Americans to comply with the draft, the government launched a major propaganda campaign.
Secretary of War Newton Baker hoped tens of thousands would register on the assigned day.
Across the nation, many towns held parades and celebrations honoring their draftees.
Within months, officers at camps around the country were training more than 500,000 draftees.
While the new soldiers marched and drilled, the Allies grew more anxious.
In a message to United States officials, British prime minister David Lloyd George stressed the Allies’ urgent need for troops.
The First Americans Reach French Soil American troops first landed in France in June 1917.
The AEF fought under the command of General John J Pershing, and most were infantrysoldiers who fight on foot.
Although few in number, the American infantry bolstered the Allies’ morale.
By the time the Americans reached France, the war was going badly for the Allies.
The battle at Passchendaele in November 1917 cost the Allies 300,000 soldiers.
For all that bloodshed, the Allied forces had regained control of barely 5 miles of German-held territory.
As soon as Russia’s new revolutionl LANDS ^ Tannenberg Passchendqdle Cambrai-l -\Jfeni me* Marne ‘ GERMANY Verdui 'AUSTRO-HUNGARIAN { J EMPIRE ) ^ Isonzo W MONTEi^-^jROMANIA SW( FRANCE SPAIN Mediterranean Sea Major Battles of World War I /Atlantic/ OCEAN / ary leaders took control of the government, they began making plans to withdraw Russia from the war.
Early in 1918, Russian peacemakers met with German and Austrian officials to hammer out the treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
The treaty forced Russia to give up large amounts of territory, including Finland, Poland, Ukraine, as well as the Baltic States— Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.
The Central powers gained not only territory but, more important, an end to the fighting on the eastern front.
Germany was free to throw all its troops into the war on the western front.
To counter the increase in German troops on the western front, the Allies asked General Pershing to assign American soldiers to Allied units to replace men killed or wounded in action.
He did not think the Allies could end the stalemate by fighting a defensive war from the trenches.
Second, both Wilson and Pershing felt that if the AEF did well as a separate army, the United States could demand a greater role in the peacemaking process after the war.
Russia's withdrawal from the war in early 1918 closed down the eastern front The First African American Officer Training Camp During the course of the war, nearly 400,000 African Americans joined the armed forces.
The military strictly segregated black and white troops in training camps and overseas.
However, people across the country held mass meetings to push for officer training for African Americans.
In 1917, the military set up a separate camp to train black soldiers as officers.
Most black soldiers served under white officers in labor or supply units in France or the United States.
As an exception to Pershing’s rule about American soldiers not fighting in Allied units, the 369th operated under French command.
After the war, France awarded the 369th the country’s highest military honors.
The new weapon's heavy firepower made mass assaults across open ground suicidal.
As a result, both sides retreated into a vast network of trenches to fight a defensive war.
New Technologies Change the Way War Is Fought World War I proved to be unlike previous wars in many ways.
For example, for centuries, opposing forces had conducted combat face-to-face and hand-tohand.
During the American Civil War, combatants— those physically fighting the war— had faced off against their enemies with handguns or rifles, supported by cannons.
New technology made World War I a more impersonal war, as well as a far deadlier one.
Combatants Introduce More Effective Killing Machines Weapons such as the machine gun, an improved flamethrower, and large cannons known as howitzers changed how and where war was fought.
Unlike rifles and pistols, the machine gun was a rapid-firing weapon— the first tally automatic gun.
In time, military commanders realized that machine guns could make a greater effect when grouped together.
In fact, the Germans created separate machine gun companies to support the infantry.
The invention of the machine gun had a major impact on military strategy.
Armies accustomed to taking the offensive and attacking head-on were now at a disadvantage.
A group of well-placed machine gunners could stop the advance of a much larger force.
German forces learned this lesson quickly, but the British and French did not.
Allied armies charged across open fields toward enemy lines, only to be mowed down by machine gun fire, leading to thousands of casualties.
In September 1915, British infantry units, each comprising about 10.000 men, charged a well-protected German position.
In four hours, more than 8.000 men were killed, almost all by machine gun fire.
At first, machine guns were used mostly for defense, because soldiers found them too heavy and bulky to carry in an offensive attack.
Over time, both sides found ways to mount these weapons on aircraft and to use them on warships.
In the days of the Roman Empire, soldiers had hurled these tubes filled with burning fuel at one another.
During World War I, Germany developed a small, lightweight flamethrower that a single person could carry.
This weapon was effective in attacks on nearby trenches but could not be fired long distances.
Before firing these weapons, gunners loaded them with shells that often contained dozens of small lead balls.
A new type of loading, firing, and recoil mechanism made these guns very useful.
Gunners used them to blast through barbed wire, knock out enemy machine gun nests, and lob poison gas shells at enemy trenches.
Each weighed about 75 tons and could fire a 2,100-pound shell a distance of more than 9 miles.
Big Berthas helped Germany sweep through Belgium on its drive west toward France.
Unable to withstand the assault of these guns, concrete Belgian forts crumbled.
Soldiers found rifles to be lighter and easier to carry than bigger guns when advancing toward the enemy.
Soldiers with good aim trained to be sharpshooters, who are specialists at hitting an exact target, or snipers, who fire from a concealed position.
Both Armies Seek Safety in Trenches The introduction of new weapons such as rapid-firing machine guns and powerful, long-range big guns made the old style of ground attack far too dangerous.
Each side dug multiple lines of trenches, often in zigzag patterns to make it hard for enemy sharpshooters to hit soldiers.
From opposing frontline trenches, soldiers hurled grenades and fired machine guns at one another.
In a third line of reserve trenches, weary soldiers rested before returning to the front lines.
In the course of trench duty, soldiers rotated through the frontline, supply, and reserve trenches.
In World War I, typical frontline trenches were 6 to 8 feet deep and wide enough for two people to stand side by side.
However, living in and doing combat from the trenches was not pleasant.
Nurses, such as those in the photograph below, provided medical care under difficult conditions.
In April 1915, the Germans first released poison gas over Allied lines.
Both sides soon developed gas masks to protect troops from such attacks.
Large barriers of barbed wire circled each side’s front line and extended into the open area between the opposing trenches.
In this treeless space, any moving object was an easy target for sharpshooters and machine gunners.
Water-filled craters made by bombs and artillery shells soon speckled no-man’s land.
Because neither side could find a way to get its troops safely across no-man’s land, the war ground to a stalemate.
The muddy trenches smelled of rotting bodies, sweat, and overflowing latrines.
Soldiers often caught fevers or suffered from painful foot infections called trench foot, which resulted from standing in the mud and cold water that pooled in the bottom of the trenches.
One got used to many things, but 1 never overcame my horror of the rats.
About the same time every night the dug-out was invaded by swarms of rats.
They gnawed holes in our haversacks and devoured our . . . rations. —Harold Saunders, quoted in Everyman at War, 1930 One of the most terrifying threats soldiers faced was the use of chemical weapons, which utilize toxic agents such as poison gas to kill or harm many people.
Germany was the first to use poison gas in World War I In time, the British and French did as well.
This caused huge, painful blisters, blindness, and lethal damage to the lungs.
Early on, soldiers simply released mustard gas from cylinders and relied on the wind to carry it across no-man’s land to the enemy.
However, shifting winds often blew the gas back on the sender’s trenches.
Both sides eventually found ways to put poison gas into the shells they fired at each other.
In time, both sides developed gas masks to protect their troops from these attacks.
Another new weapon, the tank, finally helped end the stalemate in the trenches.
Soldiers could drive tanks over barbed wire and crush the otherwise treacherous material.
They could also steer the tanks up steep embankments and across ditches to attack enemy trenches.
Unsure of how effective this weapon would be, Germany was slow to develop tanks of its own.
During the final Allied advance in the summer of 1918, tanks rolled across no-man’s land ahead of Allied troops, protecting them from enemy gunfire and weakening enemy defenses.
The Sky Is the New Battlefield Improvements to airplanes brought war into the sky.
But by 1917, powerful motors allowed airplanes to travel more than three times that fast.
Planes also became easier to fly and could travel farther than ever before.
From the start of the war, both sides used airplanes to scout enemy territory.
But the war challenged inventors to create airplanes for more specialized uses, such as fighting and bombing.
Then Dutch inventor Anthony Fokker, working for Germany, built a device that timed the firing of a machine gun with the rotation of a plane’s propeller.
This allowed a pilot to safely fire a machine gun mounted on the front of his aircraft.
The Germans also created high-flying, gas-filled airships called zeppelins.
These cigar-shaped aircraft were first used for scouting enemy positions.
Although the German airships terrified British civilians and alarmed the Allies, they often missed their targets.
They built fighter planes that could fly as high as a zeppelin and developed bullets sharp enough to pierce the airship’s outer skin, causing it to explode.
The various roles of the airplane in World War I showed its usefulness and versatility.
Waging a Savage War at Sea When World War I started, most naval experts had already predicted that the greatest sea battles would take place between heavily armed and armored battleships.
In 1906, Britain had introduced the world’s first modern battleship, the HMS Dreadnought.
It was larger, more powerfully armed, and more heavily armored than earlier warships.
Faced with this threat, the major naval powers had scrapped their old fleets and began replacing them with similar battleships.
In 1916, the German and British navies fought a major naval battle with their battleships.
Its new strategy resulted from Germany’s development of armed submarines, or U-boats.
Moving silently under the sea, U-boats went undetected until it was too late to stop their torpedoes from reaching their targets.
In the first four months of 1917, German U-boats sank more than 1 ,000 ships carrying supplies and weapons to Allied ports.
The effectiveness of U-boat attacks was greatly reduced by the development of the convoy system.
Under this system, Allied warships protected merchant ships by escorting groups of them across the Atlantic Ocean.
From April 1917 to November of that year, the material lost to U-boat attacks dropped from more than 850,000 tons to just over 200,000 tons.
In 1918, the Allies further reduced the submarine menace by laying an underwater barrier of mines across the North Sea and the English Channel.
Early in the war, when enemy planes met, pilots exchanged smiles and waves.
Soon they were throwing bricks and grenades or shooting pistols at one another.
These ""underwater ears"" helped ships sense the approach of a U-boat and take defensive action.
Kaiser Wilhelm abandoned his throne and fled to the Netherlands as the German government agreed to a truce.
Estimated World War I Casualties Country Total Casualties Allied Powers Russia 9,150,000 France 6,160,800 British Empire 3,190,235 Italy 2,197,000 United States 323,018 Japan 1,210 Other Allied nations 1,040,164 23.
The War Comes to a Close As 1918 began, the Allies knew Germany would soon launch a final offensive to end the war in the west.
Every day, more troops arrived on the front lines as the Germans raced to defeat the warweary Allies before the Americans arrived.
The Meuse-Argonne Offensive Leads to an Armistice In early spring 1918, the Germans began their final push.
By this time, however, American forces were arriving in Europe at the rate of 300,000 soldiers per month.
Between July 15 and August 5, 1918, American forces joined French and British forces in the Second Battle of the Marne.
Soon after the Allied forces counterattacked, the German troops fell back.
The AEF’s goal was to break through the German line to reach the Sedan railroad in northern France.
This rail line was the German army’s main line of supply and communication with Germany.
More than 1 million United States troops took part in this final assault.
After six weeks of hard fighting through the Argonne Forest, the Americans achieved their objective.
Counting the Costs and Casualties For all involved, the costs of the war in human life and suffering were immense.
Another 21 million were injured, and many would never fully recover or be able to work.
Central Powers Germany 7,142,558 Austria-Hungary 7,020,000 Turkey 975,000 Bulgaria 266,919 Source: United States Department of Justice.
For people will always be kind, And you need not show that you mind When the others come in after hunting To gobble their muffins and eggs.
There’s such splendid work for the blind; And people will always be kind.
As you sit on the terrace remembering And turning your face to the light. —Siegfried Sassoon, “Does It Matter?”, 1918 In addition, millions of civilians throughout Europe died from starvation, disease, and other war-related causes.
The United States suffered far fewer casualties, with about 1 16,000 soldiers killed and twice that many wounded or missing.
They are utterly destroyed, so that there are not even skeletons of buildings left— nothing but a churned mass of debris, with bricks, stones and . . . bodies pounded to nothing.
All is buried and churned up again and buried again. —John Raws, letter to a friend, August 4, 1916 The war had also destroyed roads, bridges, railroad lines, and other transportation facilities.
Countries already severely burdened by the financial cost of war withered under the weight of these additional losses.
For Europe, economic recovery would come very slowly in the years ahead.
Another cost of the war was hard to measure but very real— damage to the human spirit.
Many men and women who had eagerly joined the war effort now felt deeply disillusioned by what they had experienced.
They questioned long-held beliefs about the glories of Western civilization and the nobility of war.
New inventions and technological advances affected how the war was fought and how it ended.
The United States provided soldiers, equipment, and finances, which contributed to the Allied victory.
Selective Service Act Before the United States could join the Allies, tens of thousands of troops had to be recruited and trained.
Congress passed the Selective Service Act to create a national draft. 369th Regiment Hundreds of thousands of African Americans served in segregated military units during World War I The all-black 369th Regiment received France's highest military honors for its service in Europe.
The land war New weapons made land warfare much deadlier than ever before.
The air war Both sides first used airplanes and airships for observation.
Technological improvements allowed them to make specialized planes for bombing and fighting.
The sea war Early in the war, ocean combat took place between battleships.
Later, the Allies laid a mine barrier across the North Sea and English Channel.
Meuse-Argonne Offensive In 1918, close to 1 million United States soldiers took part in the MeuseArgonne Offensive.
Introduction As “doughboys” left for France, Americans at home mobilized— organized the nation's resources— for war.
Years after the war ended, popular stage and film star Elsie Janis recalled this time as the most exciting of her life.
Along with many other movie stars, Janis eagerly volunteered for war work.
She had a beautiful singing voice and a gift for impersonating other actors.
Janis later went overseas to become one of the first American performers to entertain United States troops.
Before her arrival in Europe, no other woman entertainer had been permitted to work so close to the front lines.
While only a few women like Janis helped the war effort publicly, thousands found more prosaic but just as useful ways to do their part.
Eager for workers, employers across the nation put large-print “Women Wanted” notices in newspapers.
In the final months of the war, a Connecticut ammunition factory was so frantic for workers that its owners hired airplanes to drop leaflets over the city of Bridgeport listing their openings.
Although the number of women in the workforce stayed about the same throughout the war, the number of occupations in which they worked rose sharply.
Many who were already in the workforce took new jobs in offices, shops, and factories.
Women worked in plants, assembling explosives, electrical appliances, airplanes, and cars.
Many took jobs in the iron and steel industry— jobs once open only to men.
Most had to give up these jobs when the war ended, but they had shown the public just how capable they were.
Entertainer Elsie Janis became a tireless supporter of the war effort and used her talents to work as a fund-raiser.
Janis also took her act on the road, entertaining troops stationed near the front lines.
The United States goverment used ""Over There"" to inspire patriotic spirit at fund-raisers and recruitment drives.
Cohan was later awarded the congressional Medal of Honor for his contribution to the war effort.
Mobilizing Public Opinion in Favor of War When President Woodrow Wilson called the nation to war, he knew that not all Americans would respond with enthusiasm.
Opposition to the war had surfaced almost as soon as the first shots were fired.
In the fall of 1914, automaker Henry Ford had financed the sailing of a “peace ship” to Europe.
The passengers were pacifists, people who for political, moral, or religious reasons oppose all wars.
They hoped to get leaders of neutral countries like Sweden to act as peacemakers.
Ford and his fellow passengers came back determined to let the American public know their views.
Peace Groups and Pacifists Oppose Entry into the War As the war raged in Europe, pacifists, progressives, and other activists joined forces to keep the United States out of the conflict.
This was true of Congresswoman Jeannette Rankin of Montana, the first woman to serve as a member of Congress.
A lifelong pacifist, Rankin wanted the United States to set an example by refusing to fight.
Other opponents claimed they were willing to fight to defend the United States but were opposed to getting involved in what they saw as a European conflict.
They called for limitation of arms and mediation of the European conflict rather than combat.
They believed that progressive social reforms would help eliminate the economic causes of war, and they feared that United States entry into the war would diminish support for their reform efforts.
Some young men acted on their beliefs by declaring themselves conscientious objectors.
A conscientious objector is someone who opposes war for religious or moral reasons and therefore refuses to serve in the armed forces.
Despite the objections of these men, military officials drafted many pacifists into the armed forces.
Wanting a greater say in matters of war, women quite naturally linked the issues of suffrage and peace.
Some even hoped that once all American women won the right to vote, they would use that power to end war.
Creel hired reporters, artists, movie directors, writers, and historians to create a massive propaganda campaign.
It also produced films with such titles as The Kaiser, Beast of Berlin , and Claws of the Hun.
These movies showed Germans as evil savages out to take over the world.
CPI printing presses also produced leaflets and books on topics such as German war practices.
Many CPI books were printed in foreign languages, so immigrants could read How the War Came to America in Polish, German, Swedish, or Spanish, for example.
In cities and towns across the country, CPI officials recruited 75,000 men to make short, four-minute speeches at civic and social clubs, movie theaters, churches, farmhouses, and country stores.
Written by CPI writers in Washington, these patriotic speeches addressed such topics as why the United States was fighting or the need to conserve fuel.
In places with large numbers of immigrants, speakers gave their talks in Italian, Yiddish, Serbian, and other languages.
Patriotic Fervor Sweeps the Country In small towns and large, people of all ages found ways to show their support for the war effort.
In schools, children saved tin cans, paper, and old toothpaste tubes for recycling into war materials.
Women met in homes or at churches to knit blankets and socks for soldiers.
Many people joined local Red Cross chapters, where they rolled bandages and packed supplies to send overseas.
Propaganda and patriotism sometimes had the unfortunate effect of stirring up anti-German hysteria.
Almost all German American communities supported the war effort once the United States entered the conflict.
However, they often suffered as the result of the suspicions of others.
Employers in war industries fired German American workers, fearing they might sabotage machinery or report plans to the enemy.
Karl Muck, the German-bom conductor of the Boston Symphony Orchestra, was arrested as an enemy alien after refusing to conduct the “Star Spangled Banner” and protesting the wartime ban on German music.
For many Americans, all things German became associated with disloyalty.
Four-Minute Men made short speeches to build support for the war wherever they could find an audience.
A Seattle newspaper reported ""a sudden influx of women into such unusual occupations as bank clerk, ticket seller, elevator operator, chauffeur, street car conductor,"" as well as factory worker and farmer.
Transforming the Economy for the War Effort Like Elsie Janis, movie idol Douglas Fairbanks was a top fund-raiser for the war effort.
He followed his knockout punch to the Kaiser with a rousing speech, urging the crowd to back the war effort.
Americans Buy Liberty Bonds to Fund the War World War I cost the United States about $35. billion.
About one fourth of that cost came from taxes, which increased drastically during the war.
In October 1917, Congress passed the War Revenue Act, which raised income tax rates and taxes on excess profits.
As a result, the number of Americans paying income tax increased from 437,000 in 1916 to 4. million in 1918.
A bond is a certificate issued by a government or company that promises to pay back the money borrowed at a fixed rate of interest on a specific date.
Throughout the war, the government held rallies to promote the sale of Liberty Bonds.
Thousands of ordinary citizens worked tirelessly selling war bonds in their hometowns.
In some places, those who were reluctant to buy bonds faced pressure from self-appointed patriot groups.
Many foreign-bom citizens felt they had to buy bonds— even if they were poor— or risk being thought un-American.
In the past, the government had left businesses alone to make this transition.
For the first time, government officials worked closely with industries to make sure they met the military’s needs.
In July 1917, Woodrow Wilson created the War Industries Board to direct industrial production.
The WIB, headed by stockbroker Bernard Baruch, coordinated the work of government agencies and industry groups to make sure supplies and equipment were produced and delivered to the military.
Baruch had the authority to tell factories what goods to produce and how much to make.
After being told to use less material in clothes, fashion designers began making shorter skirts.
Women’s corsets, with their metal hooks and stays, also came under scrutiny.
To reduce the use of metal, women were urged to give up wearing corsets.
Many were glad to comply, donating these tight-fitting undergarments to scrap drives.
The government also worked to ensure the cooperation of unions in the war effort, and labor leaders readily agreed.
The War Policies Board set standards for wages, hours, and working conditions in war industries.
The booming wartime economy created many jobs, and union membership rose rapidly.
Food and Fuel Help Win the War The United States faced the huge responsibility of feeding the armed forces, as well as Allied troops and civilians.
To meet the challenge, Wilson set up the Food Administration to oversee production and distribution of food and fuel.
To head the effort, Wilson chose Herbert Hoover, an engineer who had led relief efforts in Belgium.
Hoover raised crop prices to encourage farmers to produce more food and began a campaign that urged Americans to conserve food and reduce waste.
Using the slogan “Food will win the war,” he urged families to participate in Meatless Mondays and Wheatless Wednesdays.
Across the country, schoolyards, vacant lots, and public parks sprouted seeds.
The Wilsons set an example by having a victory garden planted on the White House lawn.
The Fuel Administration met the nation’s energy needs through a combination of increased production and conservation.
On “gasless Sundays,” they went for walks instead of driving their cars.
By adding an extra hour of daylight at day’s end, households used less electricity for lighting.
With all of these new boards and agencies, the size of the federal government grew rapidly during the war years.
The number of federal employees more than doubled between 1916 and 1918.
In 1917, the American Red Cross put out an urgent call for knitted wristlets, mufflers, sweaters, and pairs of socks.
Soldiers stuck in wet trenches desperately needed dry socks to ward off a condition known as trench foot.
Fighting for Democracy on the Home Front President Wilson asked Americans to help make the world “safe for democracy,” but many African Americans wondered more about democracy at home.
With lynchings, Jim Crow laws, and segregated army units, some were not sure what they should be fighting for.
B Du Bois urged blacks to serve in the military to show their loyalty and help gain greater equality.
He argued that the federal government should be working to end discrimination at home before fighting for democracy overseas.
Trotter did not believe serving in the armed forces would lead to better treatment for African Americans.
African Americans Migrate North for New Opportunities On the home front, the war had a major impact on African Americans in the South.
As production of war materials rose, thousands of new jobs opened up in the North at the nation's steel and auto factories.
At the same time, the flood of new immigrants from Europe had stopped, contributing to a growing labor shortage.
Black newspapers urged southern blacks to leave home and take advantage of these opportunities in the North.
My children are going to the same school as whites and I don't have to umble to no one.
I have registered— Will vote the next election and there isn't any “yes sir” and “no sir.” — Author unknown, from Letters of Negro Migrants of 1916-1918 What began as a trickle soon turned into a mass movement of African Americans known as the Great Migration.
Whites suddenly found themselves competing with blacks for jobs and housing.
During the “red summer” of 1919, blood flowed in many cities, including the nation’s capital.
Louis, Illinois, after a factory owner brought in black workers to break a strike.
At least 39 African Americans and 9 whites died before peace could be restored.
Before World War I, nine out of ten African Americans lived in the South, mostly in rural regions.
During the Great Migration, up to a million blacks left the South, traveling north and west along three migration corridors.
The migrants were motivated both by push factors driving them out of the South and by pull factors drawing them to northern cities.
Louis^ The Great Migration, 1916-1930 1 1 Southern States • Destination cities Migration Corridors ◄— West of the Mississippi Midwestern Lynchings of African Americans, such as those being mourned here, made southern blacks fear for their own lives.
Boll weevil infestations and drought drove black sharecroppers off the land.
Thousands of Latinos served in the armed forces, despite discrimination against them.
Others worked in war industries and on farms that provided much-needed food.
Enforcing Loyalty Among All Americans Early on the morning of July 30, 1916, a huge fire destroyed the Black Tom pier on the New Jersey waterfront.
Warehouses filled with weapons and explosives awaiting shipment to the Allies in Europe went up in flames.
In time, officials figured out that the fire had been set by German agents.
Such incidents were few in number, but they fed the fears of a nervous public that German spies threatened the nation.
Immigrants Face Forced ""Americanization"" Most immigrants, like most Americans, supported the war.
They bought war bonds, participated in conservation efforts, and worked in wartime industries.
Nevertheless, rumors of enemy agents sparked anti-immigrant sentiments.
Recent immigrants became targets of self-appointed patriot groups like the American Protective League.
Their members sometimes walked around immigrant neighborhoods looking for signs of disloyalty.
They also sent the Federal Bureau of Investigation names of people they suspected of disloyalty.
In April 1918, Robert Prager, a German-bom citizen, was lynched by a mob near St.
Prager had tried to enlist, but officials had turned him down for medical reasons.
Immigrants were not the only victims of unwarranted attacks by patriot groups.
For instance, a mob whipped an Ohio minister for giving what was considered to be an antiwar speech.
The Government Cracks Down on Dissent Fear of espionage, or spying, motivated Congress to pass the Espionage Act in 1917.
The Espionage Act also gave the postmaster general broad powers to refuse mail delivery of any materials that might encourage disloyalty.
Postmaster General Albert Burleson used his new power to ban Socialist newspapers and magazines from the mail.
Popular magazines began asking readers to spy on their neighbors and coworkers.
The CPI ran magazine ads wanting people not to “wait until you catch someone putting a bomb under a factory.
In 1918, Congress further cracked down on dissent by enacting the Sedition Act.
This act made it a crime to say anything that was “disloyal, profane, scurrilous, or abusive” about the government.
Hundreds of people were arrested for offenses such as criticizing the draft or wartime taxes.
Wars throughout history have been waged for conquest and plunder . . . that is war in a nutshell.
The master class has always declared the wars; the subject class has always fought the battles.
The master class has had all to gain and nothing to lose, while the subject class has had nothing to gain and all to lose— especially their lives. —Eugene Debs, ""The Canton, Ohio, Speech,” June 16, 1918 Members of the Industrial Workers of the World , better known as Wobblies, also spoke out against the war.
The Wobblies’ antiwar views gave their enemies a chance to attack them as disloyal.
In September 1917, federal agents raided 48 IWW meeting halls, seizing letters and publications.
In all, the government arrested and tried more than 1 ,500 people under the Espionage and Sedition acts.
Approximately 1 ,000 were convicted, including Debs, who was sentenced to a 10-year prison term for urging young men to refuse to serve in the military.
In 1919, Schenck United States , a case involving the Espionage Act, reached the Supreme Court.
Charles Schenck, a socialist, was charged with distributing leaflets to recent draftees, urging them to resist the military draft.
His lawyer appealed Schenck ’s conviction on the grounds that his right to free speech had been denied.
In a unanimous opinion, written by Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., the Court held that Schenck’s conviction was constitutional.
Schenck’s publications created “a clear and present danger” to a nation engaged in war.
During World War I, he publicly condemned both the war and the government's crackdown on dissent.
Posters like this one discouraged Americans from speaking out against the war.
Trampling or burning the flag conveys opposition to the actions or policies of the United States government Q Current Connections 24.
Defining the Limits of Free Speech In the years since Schenck United States, the Supreme Court has expanded its definition of free speech.
This is speech combined with action, such as a protest march or picketing during a strike.
For example, a protest march may need to secure a permit from the city in which the march is to be held.
Symbolic speech is conduct that conveys a message without spoken words.
Just which kinds of conduct should be protected as free speech is less clear.
United States O'Brien One such test of symbolic speech came in the 1960s, when Americans were deeply divided over the Vietnam War.
Some antiwar activists protested the war by publicly burning their draft cards, despite a law that required young men to carry their cards at all times.
On March 31, 1966, David Paul O’Brien was convicted of breaking the new law.
The Court ruled that although O’Brien’s actions were a form of symbolic speech, a person does not have a First Amendment right to break a law in which the government has a “substantial” interest.
The government needed to have young men carry their draft cards to make the Selective Service System work properly.
Thus, it could punish protesters like O’Brien who destroyed their cards on purpose.
Texas Johnson In the summer of 1984, the Supreme Court took up another free speech issue involving symbolic speech.
At the Republican National Convention in Dallas, Texas, Gregory Lee Johnson protested the Reagan administration’s policies by setting an American flag on fire.
A Texas court convicted him of breaking a state law that made it a crime to intentionally damage a national flag.
Johnson appealed his conviction on the grounds that his conduct was protected symbolic speech.
In Texas Johnson, the Supreme Court ruled that flag burning was protected symbolic speech.
The government of Texas, the Court argued, could not prohibit someone from expressing an opinion by burning the flag, even if it found such conduct offensive.
Congress reacted to this decision by passing the Flag Protection Act of 1989.
This law made it a federal crime to knowingly bum or mutilate an American flag.
Since 1990, a constitutional amendment making flag burning a crime has been introduced several times in Congress.
Year after year, the amendment has failed to receive the required two-thirds vote in Congress needed to send it to the states for ratification.
The flag-burning issue illustrates the difficulty of deciding what speech should be protected.
Almost all Americans are offended by the mistreatment of an American flag.
Yet many are troubled by the idea of making the expression of opinions by such conduct a crime.
After World War I, Justice Holmes was equally troubled by the idea of punishing people for expressing an opinion.
After siding with the government in the Schenck decision, Holmes took the opposite view when another Espionage Act case came before the Court.
At the same time, tensions arose as the need for national unity was weighed against the rights of Americans to express their opposition to the war.
Committee on Public Information During the war, the government created this propaganda agency to build support for the war.
Although CPI propaganda helped Americans rally around the war effort, it also contributed to increased distrust of foreign-bom citizens and immigrants.
Liberty Bonds The purchase of Liberty Bonds by the American public provided needed funding for the war and gave Americans a way to participate in the war effort.
Great Migration During the war, hundreds of thousands of African Americans migrated out of the South.
They were attracted to northern cities by job opportunities and hopes for a better life.
Espionage and Sedition acts The Espionage and Sedition acts allowed the federal government to suppress antiwar sentiment.
Socialists and Wobblies Socialists and Wobblies who opposed the war became the targets of both patriot groups and the government for their antiwar positions.
Schenck United States The Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Espionage Act in this 1918 case.
Introduction On December 13, 1918, President Woodrow Wilson’s ship, the George Washington , slipped into the dock at Brest, France.
The Allies and the Central powers had put down their guns and signed an armistice.
As the ship made its way to the pier, its passengers could hear the sounds of warships firing their guns in Wilson’s honor.
On the dock, bands played the “Star Spangled Banner” as French soldiers and civilians cheered.
Once on shore, Wilson made his way through cheering throngs to the railway station.
There he and the other members of the American peace delegation boarded a private train bound for Paris.
In the French capital, a crowd of 2 million people greeted the Americans.
They were grateful for the help Americans had given in the last months of the war.
Moreover, they believed Wilson sincerely wanted to help them build a new and better world.
President Wilson arrived in Europe with high hopes of creating a just and lasting peace.
The warm welcome he received could only have raised his hopes still higher.
Few watching these events, including Wilson himself, could have anticipated just how hard it would be to get leaders in both Europe and the United States to share his vision.
He offered hope to millions who had been left deeply disillusioned by the war.
Wilson's Vision for World Peace Woodrow Wilson unveiled his Fourteen Points in a speech to Congress on war aims and peace terms.
On January 8, 1918, Wilson went before Congress to explain his war aims.
It was designed to protect “every peace-loving nation” and peoples from “force and selfish aggression,” Fourteen Points to End All Wars The first goal of Wilson’s peace plan was to eliminate the causes of wars.
He called for an end to secret agreements and the web of alliances that had drawn the nations of Europe into war.
Recalling the deadly submarine warfare that brought the United States into the war, he wanted freedom of the seas.
By this, he meant the right of merchant ships to travel freely in international waters in times of peace and war.
He also wanted European countries to reduce their armaments, or weapons of war, instead of competing to make their military forces bigger and better.
A second key goal was to ensure the right to self-determination for ethnic groups so they could control their own political future.
With the defeat of the Central powers, the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empires were falling apart.
Wilson hoped to see these groups living in newly formed nations under governments of their choosing.
It called for setting up an international organization called the League of Nations to ensure world peace.
Member nations would agree to protect one another’s independence and territorial integrity.
Under the principle of territorial integrity, nations respect one another’s borders and do not try to gain another country’s territory by force.
League members would resolve conflicts before those conflicts escalated into wars.
Up to that time, no president had traveled outside the United States while in office.
Wilson broke with tradition by deciding to lead the American delegation to the peace conference in France.
Democrats and Republicans were getting ready for the 1918 midterm elections.
Wilson called on the American public to show their support for his peace plan by keeping the Democrats in power.
The voters’ repudiation of Wilson’s appeal weakened his position just as he was about to seek the support of European leaders for his peace plans.
Wilson made matters worse by his choice of other American delegates to the peace conference.
Moreover, not one of the delegates had the confidence of key Republican leaders in the Senate.
Because the Senate would have to ratify whatever treaty came out of the negotiations, this oversight would come back to haunt the president.
U-boat attacks on shipping had drawn the United States into World War 1. fSBSm Point 3 ""The removal, so far as possible, of all economic barriers and the establishment of an equality of trade conditions among all the nations"" Free trade among countries would promote economic growth and reduce trade conflicts that could draw nations into war.
Imperialism and competition for colonies had been a cause of World War 1.
Restoring land taken from countries by war would restore respect for international law.
Redrawing some borders on the basis of selfdetermination would reduce conflicts among ethnic groups.
Point 14 ""A general association of nations must be formed"" Countries would work together in the League of Nations to resolve conflicts before those conflicts escalated into war.
The final treaty, with its harsh treatment of Germany, upset many people.
Ideals Versus Self-Interest at Versailles The Paris peace conference opened with great ceremony at the Palace of Versailles.
The leaders of the four largest victorious nations made almost all the decisions.
This group, known as the Big Four, included President Wilson and three prime ministers— David Lloyd George of Great Britain, Georges Clemenceau of France, and Vittorio Orlando of Italy.
Representatives of Germany and the other defeated nations took no part in the talks.
Russia, which had made a separate peace with Germany after its revolution, did not attend.
Peace Without Victory Gives Way to War Guilt and Reparations Wilson came to the talks eager to share his Fourteen Points with other world leaders.
Although the other leaders liked Wilson's vision of a peaceful world, they were more interested in protecting the interests of their own countries.
He hoped to weaken Germany to the point that it could never threaten France again.
He further insisted that Germany be stripped of its coal-rich Saar Valley.
Lloyd George, who had recently won reelection on the slogan “Hang the Kaiser,” insisted that Germany accept responsibility for starting the war.
The inclusion of a war-guilt clause in the treaty demolished Wilson's earlier hope for “peace without victory ” hTaddition, the treaty required Germany to pay $33 billion in reparations to the Allies.
Reparations are payments demanded of a defeated nation by the victor in a war to offset the cost of the war.
Germans resented both the war-guilt clause and the reparations, rightly fearing that the payments would cripple their economic recovery from the war.
Their countries had lost many lives and property, and they expected compensation.
They also argued that although the United States was not to receive reparations, it would benefit from them.
The Allies had borrowed huge sums from American banks to finance the war.
Self-Determination Survives, but Only in Europe Wilson also clashed with the other Allied leaders over territorial claims.
In the Fourteen Points, he had called for self-determination for the peoples of Europe.
The collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Empire had left unclear the fate of many ethnic groups.
Wilson wanted these peoples to be free to determine their own political futures.
Wilson's commitment to self-determination helped some ethnic groups form their own nations.
Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, Poland, and the former Russian states of Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania all gained independence.
For example, parts of Germany were given to France, Poland, Denmark, and Belgium, with little thought about the desires of the people living there.
Britain, France, Italy, and Japan grabbed German colonies in China, the Pacific, and Africa.
Britain and France took over areas in Southwest Asia that had once been controlled by the collapsing Ottoman Empire.
They were to govern these areas as mandates, or territories controlled by the League of Nations, until each mandate was ready for self-rule.
These mandates included Iraq, Syria, Lebanon, and Palestine, as well as some former German colonies in Africa and the Pacific Islands.
Wilson Pins His Peace Hopes on the League of Nations President Wilson had not been able to preserve all of his goals.
He did, however, get the other leaders to include a charter for the League of Nations in the final agreement.
Wilson hoped that, in time, the League would be able to correct the peace treaty’s many flaws.
More important, he believed the League would maintain peace by providing collective security for its members.
Collective security is a commitment by many countries to join together to deal with a nation that threatens peace.
The Big Four formally signed the Treaty of Versailles on June 18, 1919.
The Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman empires ceased to exist, and their territories became new countries or mandates of Allied nations.
Idaho Senator William Borah, on the left, led the irreconcilables, who opposed the treaty in any form.
The Great Debate About Ratification Two days after President Wilson returned home, he called on the Senate to ratify the Treaty of Versailles with United States membership in the League of Nations.
More than 30 state legislatures and governors endorsed League membership.
Still, Wilson had yet to win the necessary twothirds vote of the Senate needed to ratify a treaty.
The question was whether he could get enough Republican votes in the Senate to reach that magic number.
Reservationists Seek Changes Before Approving Treaty Many Republicans in the Senate were reluctant to approve the treaty as it was written.
Known as reservationists, they said they would vote yes, but only with a number of reservations, or changes, added to it.
The reservationists were mostly concerned with Article 10 of the League's charter.
It required member nations to work together— and even supply troops— to keep the peace.
Reservationists feared this would draw the United States into wars without approval from Congress.
Republican Senator Henry Cabot Lodge of Massachusetts was the leader of the reservationists.
This cartoon illustrates the struggle in the Senate between supporters of the League of Nations and opponents who believed its covenant, or charter, conflicted with the United States Constitution.
The key issue was whether the League could involve the United States in a conflict without congressional approval.
Beware how you trifle with your marvellous inheritance, this great land of ordered liberty, for if we stumble and fall freedom and civilization everywhere will go down in ruin. — Henry Cabot Lodge, “On the League of Nations,” August 12, 1919 Lodge had both personal and political reasons for opposing the Treaty of Versailles.
He was also angry that Wilson had snubbed Republicans when choosing delegates to the peace conference.
As head of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, Lodge found ways to delay action on the treaty.
Next, he held six weeks of public hearings, during which opponents of the treaty were given ample time to speak out against it.
Irreconcilables Reject the Treaty in Any Form A group of 16 Senate Republicans firmly opposed the Treaty of Versailles.
They were completely opposed to any treaty that included an international organization that might draw the nation into war.
Internationalists Support the Treaty of Versailles Most Senate Democrats strongly supported the treaty.
This group, known as internationalists, believed that greater cooperation among nations could work for the benefit of all.
They argued that the United States had already become a major world power.
As such, it should take its rightful place in the world community by becoming a member of the League of Nations.
Rather than worry about the United States being dragged into another war by the League, the internationalists focused on the League’s role in keeping the peace.
President Wilson Takes His Case to the People As the ratification hearings dragged on, the public began to lose interest.
Upset by Lodge’s delaying tactics, Wilson decided to go directly to the public for support.
On learning the president was planning a speaking tour of the country, his doctor warned that it could damage his already failing health.
Wilson is reported to have replied, own health is not to be considered when the future peace and security of the world are at stake.
If the Treaty is not ratified by the Senate, the War will have been fought in vain, and the world will be thrown into chaos.
I promised our soldiers, when I asked them to take up arms, that it was a war to end wars. —Woodrow Wilson, August 27, 1919 The president embarked on a grueling, 8,000-mile speaking tour of the West.
He spoke up to four times a day, giving about 40 speeches in 29 cities.
Two irreconcilables, Borah and California Senator Hiram Johnson, followed Wilson on their own tour.
Despite their attacks, the campaign for the treaty seemed to be picking up speed when disaster struck.
On September 25, 1919, the president collapsed with a severe headache in Pueblo, Colorado.
His doctor stopped the tour, and Wilson’s train sped back to Washington.
In this cartoon, Woodrow Wilson is shown leaving Congress to seek public support for the League of Nations.
The president's speaking tour of the country was cut short when he suffered a collapse.
A Divided Senate Decides the Treaty's Fate A few days after returning to the White House, Wilson had a major stroke that left him partly paralyzed.
Hoping to restore his health, his wife, Edith Galt Wilson, became a gatekeeper.
When the extent of his illness became clear, Wilson’s critics accused Edith of making decisions for the country.
Still, in her role as caregiver, Edith Wilson became caught up in the nasty political fighting that marked the debate on the Versailles Treaty.
During the months of debate, senators on both sides put loyalty to their party above all else.
By the time the treaty came to the Senate for a vote late in 1919, the reservationists had added 14 amendments to it.
He refused to accept any agreement that did not have the precise language he had agreed to in Paris.
The president called on his supporters to vote down the amendments and then pass the treaty in its original form.
Democrats loyal to Wilson joined the irreconcilables to defeat the amended treaty.
When the Senate voted on the unamended treaty, Democrats voted yes, but reservationists and irreconcilables joined forces to defeat it.
Under strong public pressure to try again, the Senate reconsidered the treaty four months later.
Fearing that the nation might be left with no treaty at all, 21 Democrats voted to accept the 14 amendments.
But even with their support, the final count fell seven votes short of the two thirds needed for treaty ratification.
The 1920 Election Becomes a Referendum on theTreaty As the 1920 presidential election heated up, Wilson struggled to save the treaty.
Governor James M Cox of Ohio, declared himself, firmly in favor of the League of Nations.
By this time, however, Americans were losing interest in the partisan debate over ratification.
When the votes were in, Cox received just 9. million votes, compared with Harding's 16. million.
In October 1921 , the United States, which had fought separately from the Allies, signed a separate peace treaty with Germany.
The League of Nations had begun operations by that time, but the nation whose president had created it was not a member.
Two decades would pass before Americans would rethink the idea of collective security.
He insisted that the treaty ending the war should include a peacekeeping organization called the League of Nations.
Many Americans feared that membership in the League could involve the United States in future wars.
The Fourteen Points Wilson outlined his goals for lasting peace in his Fourteen Points.
Key issues included an end to secret agreements, freedom of the seas, reduction of armaments, selfdetermination for ethnic groups, and collective security through creation of an international peacekeeping organization.
The Big Four When the heads of the four major Allies— France, Great Britain, Italy, and the United States— met in Paris for peace talks, they were more focused on self-interest than on Wilson’s plan.
Treaty of Versailles The treaty negotiated in Paris redrew the map of Europe, granting selfdetermination to some groups.
Some Allies sought revenge on Germany, insisting on a war-guilt clause and reparations from Germany.
League of Nations Wilson hoped that including the League of Nations in the final treaty would make up for his compromises on other issues.
He believed that by providing collective security and a framework for peaceful talks, the League would fix many problems the treaty had created.
The ratification debate The treaty ratification debate divided the Senate into three groups.
Reservationists would not accept the treaty unless certain changes were made.
United States Enters World War I After the Zimmermann note and the sinking of the Lusitania , President Woodrow Wilson asks for, and Congress approves, a United States Mobilizes for War Americans support the war by buying liberty bonds, working in defense industries, and planting victory gardens.
Americans Fight ""Over There"" For the first time in United States history, the government sends soldiers overseas to fight.
In contrast, the 1930s call forth dismal images of breadlines and of faces etched with pain.
During this time, Americans grappled with important questions a about race, immigration, religion, alcohol, ^ women, wealth, and poverty.
Introduction In the summer of 1927, Alvan Fuller, the governor of Massachusetts, held the lives of two men in his hands.
Six years earlier, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti had been found guilty of committing a double murder and robbery and were condemned to die.
Sacco and Vanzetti were Italian immigrants in a time of great prejudice against foreigners.
In addition, both men had fled to Mexico in 1917 rather than serve in the army.
This question may have turned trial judge Webster Thayer and the jury against the defendants.
Defense attorney Fred Moore argued that there was no clear evidence tying his clients to the murders.
Sacco’s gun fired the type of bullets used to kill the two men. but tests could not prove the bullets came from his weapon.
Moore claimed the two men were being tried because they were immigrants who had radical political beliefs.
When the jury returned a guilty verdict, many people questioned the decision.
During the next six years, concern over the verdict spread as Judge Thayer rejected all legal appeals on Sacco and Vanzetti ’s behalf.
There were demonstrations in London, Buenos Aires, and other world capitals.
The Sacco and Vanzetti trial raised fundamental questions about America’s founding ideals of equality and rights under the law.
In this chapter, you will see how Americans grappled with such questions in the years following World War I This demonstration on behalf of Sacco and Vanzetti took place in London, England.
As the execution date drew near, mass protests took place across Europe.
To many native-born Americans, Sacco and Vanzetti represented an alien threat to their way of life.
To many immigrants, Sacco and Vanzetti were fellow victims of prejudice against newcomers.
Emerging EconomicTensions As soon as World War I ended, the federal government canceled its contracts with weapons manufacturers, like this one in New Jersey.
Demobilization Causes Massive Unemployment World War l had created great economic prosperity in the United States.
The federal government had signed billions of dollars’ worth of contracts for war-related materials.
It had also centralized the management of transportation, manufacturing, and agriculture under the War Industries Board.
During the war years, steel production had doubled and agricultural exports tripled.
Nonetheless, the government was ill prepared for conversion to a postwar economy.
When the fighting ended sooner than expected, the federal government had no plans for demobilization, the transition from wartime to peacetime.
The day after the armistice was signed, telephone lines in Washington, D.C., were so clogged by government officials canceling contracts that ordinary citizens had trouble making long-distance calls.
This sudden cancellation of government contracts made wide ripples in the economy.
The employment situation grew even worse when the army discharged nearly 4 million soldiers, giving each of them just $60 and a one-way ticket home.
Economic Upheaval Results in Inflation and Recession By the end of 1920, the economy reflected the longer-term effects of demobilization.
Immediately after the war, Americans had gone on a spending spree, buying goods with money they had saved during the war.
As prices went up, the value of the dollar shrank by more than 15 percent a year.
Average Americans in 1920 paid twice as much for clothing or for foods such as bread, butter, and After coming to the United States, Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti struggled to make a living.
After 12-hour shifts at work, he spent three nights a week studying English.
Over the years, he worked as a dishwasher, a bricklayer, a cook, and a factory hand in an iron mill.
At the time of his arrest, he was selling fish from a cart that he pushed through the streets.
None of his jobs ever paid enough for him to buy a home, wear nice clothes, or marry.
In the years just after World War I, many other American workers did not.
All but the richest Americans saw their standard of living drop as prices rose.
The combination of high inflation and rising unemployment led to a sharp recession— a decline in economic activity and prosperity.
People got by as best they could, in some cases turning to crime to survive.
The robbery-murder involving Sacco and Vanzetti was just one of many violent incidents in a growing crime wave.
The robbery took place on April 15, 1920, in South Braintree, Massachusetts.
At 3:00 in the afternoon, two payroll masters for the Slater and Morrill shoe factory were carrying lockboxes containing $16,000 from the payroll office to the factory.
One of the gunmen fired a shot into the air, signaling their getaway car.
The South Braintree crime was similar to another robbery four months earlier in nearby Bridgewater, Massachusetts.
It was the sort of crime which was taking place constantly all over the country. — Frederick Lewis Allen, Only Yesterday , 1931 When soldiers and sailors shipped home from Europe at the war's end, they found the nation in economic distress.
Government employment posters, like the one above, encouraged employers to hire veterans.
Despite public fear of food shortages and revolution, neither came to pass.
Rising LaborTensions Like many workers after World War I, Sacco and Vanzetti were union men.
Sacco and his wife, Rosina, acted in plays to raise money for striking workers.
Vanzetti helped organize a strike at the Plymouth Cordage Company, where he worked as a rope maker.
The dedication of the two men to the union movement was one reason workingclass communities later raised money for their legal defense.
Businesses Return to Prewar Labor Practices After World War I, workers struggled to keep the gains they had made during the war years.
As the war had raged, the federal government had encouraged business and labor to cooperate.
The National War Labor Board had settled labor disputes on generous terms to keep factories humming.
Wages went up as the number of unemployed workers decreased and unions gained more clout.
After the war, however, the government stepped aside, and the struggle between business and labor over wages and working conditions resumed.
Some businesses tried to increase the workday to 12 hours, whereas eight hours had been typical during the war.
Workers Respond by Organizing and Striking Working-class Americans reacted to deteriorating working conditions in several ways.
At this time, the American Federation of Labor dominated the union movement.
The AFL was a group of unions representing skilled workers, such as machinists or mechanics, organized by their craft.
It concentrated on improving wages and working conditions for its union members.
In contrast, the more radical Industrial Workers of the World . whose members were known as Wobblies, saw socialism as the solution to workers' problems.
In 1919, unions staged more than 3,600 strikes across the country, creating the greatest wave of labor unrest in the nation's history.
One out of every 10 workers walked off the job at some point during that year.
When 35,000 shipyard workers were refused a wage increase, the Seattle Central Labor Council called on all city workers to walk off their jobs.
Approximately 100,000 people joined Seattle's general strike— a strike by workers in all industries in a region.
Mayor Ole Hanson condemned the walkout as “an attempted revolution"" and called in federal troops to take control of the city.
As fears of chaos mounted, Seattle's middle class turned against the workers.
Public fear of radicals contributed to unions' decline The most controversial strike of 1919 involved the Boston police force.
The police walked off the job after city officials cut their wages and refused to negotiate with their union.
Governor Calvin Coolidge called in National Guard troops to keep order.
Unions Lose Public Support and Membership As the strikes persisted, middle-class Americans began to view unionism as a threat to their way of life.
Strike-related violence added to fears that radical union activity could lead to anarchy.
Public hostility was one reason that overall union membership declined in the 1920s.
The AFL, for example, limited its membership by refusing to organize unskilled employees.
The best known, the Brotherhood of Sleeping Car Porters, was a union of black railroad workers led by A Philip Randolph.
First, the Court restricted unions’ right to boycott a business that fought unionization.
Then, in 1922, the Court declared unconstitutional a federal child labor law.
A year later, the Court rejected a Washington, D.C., law that established a minimum wage for women workers.
These decisions hurt labor unions by making it easier for companies to hire children and women at low wages.
Even after the postwar recession ended, many working-class Americans gained little economic ground.
Their average income remained well below $1 ,500 per year at a time when families needed more than that to get by.
Growing Political Tensions Nicola Sacco became an anarchist while working in a shoe factory.
Bartolomeo Vanzetti learned about anarchism while working at a rope factory.
The two met in 1917, when they fled to Mexico to escape the military draft.
When they returned to Massachusetts, they joined an East Boston anarchists’ group.
Sacco also had a pamphlet advertising an anarchist rally at which Vanzetti would speak.
After their trial, many came to believe that Sacco and Vanzetti had been convicted because of their radical politics.
A Bomb Scare Fuels Fear of Radical Groups On April 28, 1919, a mysterious package arrived in Seattle mayor Ole Hanson’s office.
The next day, a similar package sent to former Georgia Senator Thomas Hardwick exploded, injuring his maid.
The addressees included capitalists like John D Rockefeller and political figures like Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes.
Many Americans saw the bomb scare as another sign that radicalism was threatening public order.
Radicalism is a point of view favoring extreme change, especially in social or economic structures.
At this time, it referred to the ideas of socialist, communist, and anarchist groups.
Socialists called for public ownership of the means of production, including land and factories.
They believed such changes could be brought about through peaceful reforms.
Similar to socialism, communism called for public ownership of the means of production.
The result would be a classless society in which all people shared equally in the wealth produced by their labor.
Communists, however, believed such change could only be brought about through a revolution by the working class.
American communists drew inspiration from the Russian Revolution of 1917.
During that time of unrest, a small group of communists called Bolsheviks, led by Vladimir Lenin, had seized control of the country.
Windows shattered throughout a half-mile radius, showering glass onto busy streets.
It ""turned into a shamble the busiest corner of America's financial center,"" said a reporter who witnessed the blast.
The Comintern united radical groups throughout the world who accepted Lenin’s views on the need for revolution to create a communist state.
They wanted a society based on freedom, mutual respect, and cooperation.
Most anarchists were peaceful, but they had been associated with violence since the Chicago Haymarket Square bombing of 1886.
In that incident, seven policemen were killed as they broke up an anarchist rally.
Combined, their membership came to less than 1 percent of the adult population.
The Red Scare Leads to Raids on ""Subversives"" On June 2, 1919, the intensity of the Red Scare increased.
Palmer launched a campaign against subversives, or people who sought to overthrow the government.
Palmer and his assistant, J Edgar Hoover, conducted raids on homes, businesses, and meeting places of people they thought might be subversives.
The Palmer Raids sought weapons, explosives, and other evidence of violent activity.
Officials entered buildings without warrants and seized records without permission.
Civil Liberties Suffer Palmer’s tactics trampled civil liberties, basic rights guaranteed by law.
Yet for some Americans, the fear of radicalism overshadowed concerns about abuses of civil liberties.
Some 30 states passed sedition laws, which made stirring up opposition to the government a crime.
Another mob seized a Wobbly out of a jail in Washington, hanged him from a bridge, and used his body for target practice.
Palmer had hoped to ride the wave of public alarm about radicals all the way to the White House.
As that day drew near, the city’s police force was put on 24-hour duty.
Most of the people arrested in the Palmer Raids were released without being accused of a crime.
In this cartoon, a grim Uncle Sam holds radicals in his hands, wondering what to do with them.
During the Red Scare, fear of radicalism led to the deportation of hundreds of immigrants.
When searched, the suspects were found to be carrying pistols and ammunition.
When questioned, they lied about where they had been and how they had obtained their guns.
Their behavior made them look suspicious to the police and, later, to a jury.
But during this troubled time, some native-born Americans eyed many immigrants— especially those who were poor and spoke little English — with suspicion.
The first one follows passage of the Emergency Immigration Act of 1921.
Increased Immigration Causes a Revival of Nativism Between 1905 and 1914, a million people a year immigrated to the United States.
Immigration dipped sharply during World War I and then picked up again afterward.
The rising tide of immigrants triggered a resurgence of nativism along with calls for immigration restriction.
Others argued that reducing immigration would relieve urban crowding and reduce ethnic conflicts.
Union members favored restrictions because they worried that immigrants were taking jobs from union workers.
For this group, fear of immigrant radicalism had come to outweigh their desire for cheap immigrant labor.
This new law capped the number of people allowed into the country each year at 375,000.
It also introduced a quota system to limit the number of immigrants from each country.
The quota, or maximum number, was set at 3 percent of a country’s residents in the United States in 1910.
The quota system was intended to be a temporary measure until Congress could study immigration more closely.
This law reduced the number of immigrants allowed into the country each year to 164,000.
By moving the date back, the law severely reduced immigration from southern and eastern Europe.
When the Japanese government heard this news, it declared a national day of mourning.
In 1929, they persuaded Congress to lower the number of immigrants each year to 150,000.
A Revived Ku Klux Klan Targets ''Alien"" Influences Anti-immigrant feelings played a role in the revival of the Ku Klux Klan.
The Klan was reborn in Atlanta, Georgia, in 1915 after the lynching of Leo Frank, a Jewish factory manager.
Frank had been condemned to death for killing a young girl named Mary Phagan.
Convinced that Frank was innocent, the governor of Georgia reduced Frank’s sentence to life imprisonment.
At that point, armed men, calling themselves the Knights of Mary Phagan, broke Frank out of jail and hanged him.
The Knights then re-formed themselves as the new invisible order of the Ku Klux Klan.
The revived Ku Klux Klan portrayed itself as a defender of American values.
It restricted membership to native-born white Protestants and set itself against African Americans, immigrants, Catholics, and Jews.
In the early 1920s, the Klan swelled to between 3 and 4 million members and gained considerable political power throughout the country.
Lawmakers supported by the Klan won control of state legislatures in Oregon, Oklahoma, Texas, and Indiana.
To demonstrate their power, Klan members held massive marches in Washington, D.C., and other major cities.
They often struck at night, wearing hoods that concealed their faces and using whippings, kidnappings, cross burnings, arson, and murder to terrorize entire communities.
The first Ku Klux Klan arose during Reconstruction to intimidate freedmen.
The American Civil Liberties Union Defends Unpopular Views The views of nativists and the Klan did not go unchallenged.
In 1920, a group of pacifists and social activists founded the American Civil Liberties Union to protect freedom of speech.
The ACLU specialized in the defense of unpopular individuals and groups, including Nicola Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti.
In the first year of the ACLU, its lawyers fought to protect immigrants who had been rounded up in the Palmer Raids for their radical beliefs from being deported.
The ACLU also defended the right of trade unions to hold meetings and organize workers.
ACLU lawyers helped win the release of hundreds of Wobblies and other pacifists who had been jailed during the war for expressing antiwar sentiments.
The ACLU opposed censorship by fighting efforts by the Customs Office and the Post Office to ban certain books from the mail.
As you will read in Chapter 29, the ACLU would later play a leading role in one of the most controversial trials of the 1920s.
Two years later, rioting in Tulsa, Oklahoma, left at least 75 African Americans dead.
The Tulsa riots began when a local newspaper published a false report of a white woman being attacked by a black man.
Born in Jamaica, Marcus Garvey traveled widely throughout the Americas.
Everywhere he went, he saw discrimination against blacks and the need to restore black pride in people of African heritage.
Enduring Racial and ReligiousTensions On July 27, 1927, six years after Sacco and Vanzetti were convicted of murder, the Lowell Committee concluded that the trial of the two men had been fair.
Modern analysis of the evidence has confirmed that the gun found on Sacco at the time of his arrest was one of the murder weapons.
Asians and African Americans Face Discrimination Italians were not the only victims of such prejudice.
Asians were barred from becoming citizens and, in several states, from owning land.
At the end of World War I, returning black soldiers had high hopes that their service to the country would lessen prejudice.
In the summer of 1919, tensions between whites and blacks erupted into race riots.
The most serious riot occurred in Chicago when whites killed a black swimmer who had strayed into the white section of a Lake Michigan beach.
If we must die, let it not be like hogs Hunted and penned in an inglorious spot.
Pressed to the wall, dying, but fighting back! -Claude McKay, “If We Must Die,” 1919 In this climate of violence, many African Americans responded to the message of a leader named Marcus Garvey.
The Jamaican-born Garvey believed blacks would never be treated fairly in a white-dominated country.
He also collected enough money to start several businesses, including a steamship line intended to transport his followers to Africa.
In 1925, however, Garvey was imprisoned for mail fraud connected with the sale of stock in one of his businesses.
In some communities, landlords refused to rent apartments to Jewish tenants.
The Leo Frank case, which gave birth to the new Ku Klux Klan, also led to the founding of the Anti-Defamation League in 1913.
Throughout the 1920s, the ADL battled discrimination against Jews in all areas of life.
Soon, rumors swept the country that if Smith were elected, the Catholic pope would run the United States.
Smith spent most of the campaign trying to persuade voters that his religious beliefs did not present a threat to the nation.
Smith was not convincing enough to overcome strong anti-Catholic sentiment in many parts of the country.
More than 30 years would pass before another Catholic candidate would be nominated for the nation’s highest office.
Some Americans saw Sacco and Vanzetti as victims of prejudice against immigrants and radicals.
Recession A poorly planned demobilization resulted in an economic recession after World War I As unemployment rose, living standards for all but the richest Americans declined.
Labor unrest Unions staged thousands of strikes for better wages and working conditions.
Despite these efforts, unions began to lose strength, and their membership declined.
Red Scare Fear of socialists, communists, and anarchists fueled the Red Scare.
Attorney General Mitchell Palmer led raids against suspected subversives, often violating their civil liberties.
Immigration restriction Congress responded to anti-immigrant pressure by restricting immigration.
A quota system also limited the number of immigrants from each country.
Back-to-Africa movement African Americans were disappointed that their service to the country in World War I did not reduce racial prejudice.
Marcus Garvey’s Back-to-Africa movement appealed to blacks who had given up hope for equality in the United States.
A revived Ku Klux Klan targeted blacks, immigrants, Jews, and Catholics as un-American.
The American Civil Liberties Union formed to protect freedom of speech.
Pennsylvania Senator Boies Penrose jokingly warned Republican leaders, “Keep Warren at home.
For all of its wordiness, Harding’s speech captured the public mood perfectly.
Later that year, he was nominated to be the Republican candidate for president.
For Harding, normalcy meant a return to life as it was in prewar America.
Wilson’s concentration on world affairs would be replaced by a focus on prosperity at home.
Afterward, a woman in the audience observed, “We have had Wilson for eight years, and I have not understood him.
Harding’s inauguration began the Republican Era, which lasted through the 1920s.
In this campaign poster, Warren G Harding looks quite presidential as he promises to put America first.
On inauguration day, the handsome, people-loving Harding was a striking contrast to the frail Woodrow Wilson.
This was the first election in which women were allowed to vote everywhere in the country.
Harding's secretary of the interior, Albert Fall, sold oil-drilling rights on federal land in Teapot Dome, Wyoming, and elsewhere in exchange for bribes.
Like this cartoonist, many saw the scandal steamrolling right toward Harding's White House.
A Republican Era Begins The contrast between the aged, sickly Woodrow Wilson and the robust Warren Harding was proof enough that a new era had arrived.
Harding was the first president to have his inauguration speech amplified through loudspeakers.
After speaking, he walked to the Senate to personally nominate his cabinet members.
On entering the White House, he opened the front gates, raised the blinds, and welcomed the public.
Ordinary Americans had not been allowed on the White House grounds since the beginning of World War I Harding Cuts Taxes and Spending Before going into politics, Harding had owned a small newspaper in his hometown of Marion, Ohio.
For the next 21 years, Daugherty managed Harding’s political career all the way to the White House.
Such an economic system is characterized by private ownership of property, including land and resources.
It relies on competition for profits and the forces of supply and demand to determine what goods and services should be produced and at what price.
With the support of a Republican Congress, Harding set to work to end the postwar recession.
He repealed taxes that had been raised under Wilson to fund the war effort.
His budget director, Chicago banker Charles Dawes, made the government operate in a more efficient way.
Dawes’s efforts were believed to have saved at least a billion tax dollars annually at a time when the federal government’s yearly spending came to less than $5 billion.
Harding’s fiscal policy, or approach to taxes and government spending, brought renewed prosperity.
Prices plunged in 1921, so Americans could afford more goods and services.
Unemployment dropped from nearly 12 percent when Harding took office to just above 2 percent in 1923.
The Teapot Dome Scandal A loyal friend, Harding filled several government positions with old pals from Ohio.
The leading member of this “Ohio Gang” was Harding’s former campaign manager and now attorney general, Harry Daugherty.
Another old friend, New Mexico Senator Albert Fall, became Harding’s secretary of the interior.
The worst instance of corruption was the Teapot Dome Scandal, which began when Secretary of the Interior Fall persuaded Harding to give him control over national oil reserves in Elk Hills, California, and Teapot Dome, Wyoming.
Fall then leased the oil reserves to two companies that had paid him $360,000 in bribes.
But the scandal left the public wondering whether any other national properties had been offered up for sale.
While on a “bloviating” tour of the West, Harding suffered a heart attack in San Francisco.
Calvin Coolidge Promotes Business On August 3, 1923, Vice President Calvin Coolidge took the oath of office in a Vermont farmhouse.
Working closely with Treasury Secretary Andrew Mellon, Coolidge worked to cut taxes and eliminate unnecessary spending.
He pushed for reductions in corporate taxes, income taxes, and inheritance taxes— taxes on assets received from people who have died.
Coolidge even cut his own White House budget, economizing in little ways, such as reducing the number of towels in the bathrooms.
Despite this, he worked his way through college and became a very wealthy mining engineer.
At the age of 40, Hoover decided to leave engineering and devote his life to public service.
During World War I, he headed President Woodrow Wilson’s Food Administration.
When the war ended, Hoover gained fame by setting up programs to feed the hungry in Europe.
This involved bringing industry leaders together to improve economic efficiency.
In accepting the Republican nomination for president in 1928, he said, We in America today are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before in the history of any land.
We have not yet reached the goal, but given a chance to go forward with the policies of the last eight years, we shall soon with the help of God be in sight of the day when poverty will be banished from this nation. —Herbert Hoover, speech accepting the Republican nomination, 1928 Calvin Coolidge was at his family's dairy farm in Vermont when President Harding died.
Although Coolidge had a very different personality from Harding, his policies were similar.
In this 1927 photograph, Secretary of War Herbert Hoover and Secretary of Commerce Dwight Davis pose with young victims of a recent flood in Natchez, Mississippi.
When Hoover became president in 1929, he pledged to end poverty in the United States.
Isolationist attitudes had been strong in the Senate when it had voted down the Treaty of Versailles.
At heart, however, Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover were not isolationists.
They recognized that foreign trade connected American farmers and businesspeople to the rest of the world.
Avoiding Involvement in Europe Isolationist feeling was strongest toward Europe.
During his presidency, the State Department did not even open mail from the League.
The United States sent delegates to several League conferences in the 1920s.
Presidents Harding and Coolidge also supported United States membership in an international court of justice known as the World Court.
Established by the League in 1921, the World Court’s purpose was to settle international disputes before they turned into wars.
By the time the Senate approved membership in 1926, it had attached so many reservations that the other member nations refused to approve United States membership.
By 1925, the date of this cartoon, 48 nations had joined the League of Nations.
But some countries, including the United States, Russia, and Mexico, still held back.
Cartoonist Rollin Kirby pictures these nonjoiners as renegades living out in the wild.
Both Mexico and Russia later joined the League, but the United States did not.
Promoting Peace Through Disarmament Although public opinion leaned toward isolationism, Americans also longed for world peace.
President Harding responded to this longing by inviting representatives of Britain, France, Italy, and Japan to Washington to discuss naval disarmament, or weapons reduction.
When the Washington Naval Conference opened in 1921, Secretary of State Charles Evan Hughes shocked the delegates by offering to scrap 30 United States warships.
The other nations soon agreed to limit the size of their navies as well.
Supporters of the naval disarmament agreement hoped it would discourage future wars.
Naysayers, however, feared that military ambitions would not be so easily contained.
The Washington Naval Conference did limit the construction of large warships, but it did not affect smaller ships and submarines.
Soon Japan, Great Britain, and the United States were adding cruisers and other small ships to their fleets.
Using Diplomacy to Outlaw War Efforts to negotiate an end to warfare peaked in 1928, when the United States signed the Kellogg-Briand Pact.
This treaty began with an agreement between the United States and France to outlaw war between their countries.
Americans cheered the Kellogg-Briand Pact as an important step toward world peace.
More practical-minded realists sneered that this “international kiss” was not worth much, because it still permitted defensive wars.
Charles Dawes developed a ""circular loan"" program to reduce the war debt.
The United States loaned money to Germany, which used the money to pay back Great Britain and France.
Settling Europe's War Debts In addition to worrying about the next war, the Republican presidents worked to clean up debts from the last one.
At the end of World War I, Great Britain and France owed United States lenders $11 billion.
With their economies in shambles, these countries relied on reparations from Germany to make their loan payments.
Charles Dawes, a banker who had served as Harding’s budget director, came up with a solution to the debt crisis.
But it also increased the amount of money Germany owed the United States, an issue that would cause problems later.
Reducing Involvement in Latin America Isolationist sentiment also had an impact on United States policy toward Latin America.
When Harding took office in 1921, United States troops were stationed in Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic, and Haiti.
In 1921 , Harding settled a long dispute with Colombia over the Panama Canal.
Three years later, Coolidge withdrew troops from the Dominican Republic.
Still, business ties and American investments continued to pull the United States into Latin American affairs.
After withdrawing the marines from Nicaragua in 1925, Coolidge sent them back in 1927 to counter a revolution.
Immediately after his election in 1928, he embarked on a goodwill tour of Latin America.
In 1930, he signaled his rejection of the Roosevelt Corollary by announcing that the United States did not have the right to intervene militarily in Latin America.
Even when revolutions shook Panama, Cuba, and Honduras in 1931, Hoover did not send troops.
Anticipating this growth, Congress passed the Air Commerce Act in 1926.
The act called for the licensing of pilots and provided for a system of navigation aids across the country to make passenger service safer.
Henry Ford Pioneers a New Age of Mass Production The automobile industry led this new age of productivity.
In 1910, United States automakers built fewer than 200,000 cars a year at prices that only the wealthy could afford.
The credit for this transformation of the car from luxury item to consumer good goes to Detroit automaker Henry Ford.
He accomplished his goal by designing a revolutionary moving assembly line that cut production time from 14 to six hours.
He then could cut the price of his cars from $950 in 1908 to under $290 in 1926.
When he unveiled his assembly line in 1914, Ford made a stunning announcement.
He was more than doubling his workers’ pay from the $2.40 per nine-hour day common in his industry to $5.00 per eight-hour day.
Business leaders hated him, saying that he was ruining the labor market.
Unemployment dropped and wages rose to double what they had been before the war.
By 1929, the United States was producing 40 percent of the world’s manufactured goods.
This is the principle that the more goods you produce, the less it costs to produce them; and the more people are well off, the more they can buy, thus making this lavish and economical production possible. —Frederick Lewis Allen, The Big Change, 1952 Ford sold so many cars that by the mid1920s his Detroit, Michigan, factory complex had 19 buildings covering 2 square miles.
Innovations Give Birth to New Industries The automobile industry’s rapid expansion fueled growth in other industries, such as steel, rubber, and oil.
Restaurants and hotels sprang up along new roads to meet the needs of motorists.
The popularity of cars also created new service industries, such as gas stations and repair shops.
By the mid1920s, one of every eight American workers had a job related to the auto industry.
In 1927, the Boeing Airplane Company won the United States Post Office contract to fly mail and passengers from Chicago to San Francisco and back.
By 1930, there were 38 domestic and five international airlines operating in the United States.
See-through cellophane became the first fully flexible, waterproof wrapping material.
Bakelite, the first plastic that would not bum, boil, melt, or dissolve in any common solvent, was vital to the production of radios.
Radio had first been used for wireless communication among ships at sea.
By 1929, radios were a big business, with Americans spending $850 million on sets and parts that year alone.
Big Businesses Get Even Bigger Businesses were not only prospering but also getting bigger due to a wave of consolidation.
During the Progressive Era, antitrust laws had slowed business consolidation.
Harding, Coolidge, and Hoover, in contrast, chose to ignore antitrust laws.
The Republican presidents defended consolidation on the grounds that it made the economy more efficient.
Before 1910, there were hundreds of companies building cars in the United States.
By 1929, three automakers— Ford, General Motors, and Chrysler— built almost 90 percent of the cars on the market.
General Motors was the brainchild of an entrepreneur named William Durant.
Unlike Ford, who made just one car model, Durant offered several models at different price levels.
In the 1920s, a handful of holding companies bought up nearly 5,000 small utility companies.
A holding company is a corporation that owns or controls other companies by buying up their stock.
By 1929, about two thirds of American homes were wired for electricity, and consolidation led to a decline in the cost of electricity.
Consolidation also revolutionized the grocery business, as the Great Atlantic and Pacific Tea Company launched the first grocery store chain.
Momand-pop grocery shops were driven out of business as A&P’s chain grew from fewer than 5,000 stores in 1920 to more than 15,000 by 1929.
An anti-chain store movement swept through a number of states and cities.
Speculators Aim to Get Rich Quick As the good times rolled on, some Americans got caught up in get-rich-quick schemes, such as Ponzi Scheme and the the Florida Land Boom.
In this Florida scheme, shady real estate developers sold lots along the Florida coast to eager speculators in other parts of the country.
A speculator is someone who takes the risk of buying something in the hope of selling it for a higher price later.
As long as prices were going up, no one cared that some of the lots were under water.
Prices collapsed, however, after a hurricane devastated the Florida coast.
During the Republican Era, ordinary Americans put money in get-rich-quick schemes, like the Florida Land Boom.
Speculators bought land without seeing it in hopes of making a quick profit.
Many learned later that the land they owned was under water or hard to build on, making it worthless.
Charles Ponzi, an Italian immigrant, came up with one of the get-rich-quick schemes of the time.
Ponzi advertised that he had a surefire way to double investors' money in just 90 days.
New investors, lured in by the success of others, poured money into the scheme.
Unfortunately for Ponzi and his investors, a newspaper revealed that he was a fraud.
Seeing early investors double their money makes other^ager to invest. w KW Others saw the stock market as the road to riches.
Raskob told his readers that if they invested a mere $15 a month in the stock market, they could expect a massive payoff of $80,000 in 20 years.
Barbers, cab drivers, and elevator operators bought stocks on “hot tips” they had overheard while working.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average, a measure of stock prices still used today, doubled between May 1928 and September 1929.
Enduring Poverty Between 1921 and 1929, the gross national product of the United States rose by 40 percent.
The GNP is a measure of the total value of goods and services produced within a country in a year.
More than half the families filing tax returns that year earned $ 1 ^500 or less.
The 1920s were hard times for farmers, many of whom were deeply in debt after the war.
Mexican, Mexican American, Asian, and Asian American workers earned the lowest wages and endured the worst working and living conditions.
Coal miners were laid off by the thousands as gasoline, natural gas, and electricity became more popular sources of energy.
The textile industry faced heavy competition from new synthetic fabrics.
Among the hardest hit were African Americans, who were often the last to be hired and the first to be fired.
They were usually paid less than their white counterparts and were also barred from most unions.
During that time, three Republican presidents— Warren G Harding, Calvin Coolidge, and Herbert Hoover— worked to return the nation to ""normalcy"" or peace and prosperity.
Isolationism After World War I, many Americans favored a policy of isolationism, or withdrawal from international affairs.
Free enterprise system The Republican presidents supported individual enterprise and the free enterprise system by adopting business-friendly fiscal policies.
Teapot Dome Scandal The Harding administration was marred by corruption.
Harding’s distress over the Teapot Dome Scandal contributed to his declining health.
Washington Naval Conference The Republican presidents turned to diplomacy to prevent another world war.
The Washington Naval Conference attempted to reduce military competition by limiting the size of the world’s most powerful navies.
Kellogg-Briand Pact Sixty-two nations signed this treaty, in which they agreed to outlaw war.
Dawes Plan The United States set up the Dawes Plan to help European nations pay their war debts to American lenders.
Dow r Jones Industrial Average Americans hoping to “get rich quick” engaged in speculation in land and stocks.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose as money flowed into the stock market.
Business consolidation led to the domination of most major industries by just a few companies.
However, poverty persisted, and many farmers and workers were left out of the boom.
But she was only part of a Broadway musical chorus line, so no one really knew her.
Then one night in 1923, Jackson went to see Runnin' Wild, the new African American musical everyone was talking about.
The dancers began doing a dance she had never seen before called the Charleston.
There, Elida Webb, the dance mistress for Runnin' Wild, saw it and adapted the dance for the musical.
After seeing the Charleston onstage, Jackson asked Webb to teach it to her.
A booking agent took one look at the act and said, “That dance is a hit.
From there, she took her dance act on the road to other clubs around the country and then to London and Paris.
As the dance craze spread, Jackson gained the fame she had always wanted.
Its fast-paced music and swinging moves were a perfect fit for a time known as the Roaring Twenties.
At Smith College, students were not allowed to practice it in their dorm rooms.
This conflict over a dance was a sign that American culture was changing, sometimes far faster than many people could or would accept.
The Charleston began as a black folk dance, only to become an international dance craze in the 1920s.
Don't fool yourself that you never have halitosis as do so many self-assured people who constantly offend this way.
Read the facts in the lower right hand corner and you will see that your chance of escape is slight.
Nor should you count oo being able to detect this ailment io yourself Halitosis docsn t announce itself.
Recognising these truths, nice people end any chance of offending by systematically rinsingthc mouth with Listerine.
Being antiseptic, it strikes at its commonest cause— fermentation in the oral cavity.
Then apply Listerine dear Immediately. every trace of onion odor is gone Even the strong odor of fish yields to it.
A I READ THE FACTS Yi had halitosis MhairdrcMcn tmcthit about every third woman, many of them from t he weal i hy cl a taea , ia haliimk.
Who ihould koow better than they* ThanewbobyLISTERINI WAVING CREAM -you’ve got a trot ahead of you.
TRY rr This advertisement is typical of the Listerine ads of the 1920s.
Its inventors first sold Listerine as a powerful germ-killer for use in surgeries.
In 1914, it became the first over-the-counter mouthwash sold in the United States.
New Products Promise to Make Life Easier At the root of the Listerine ad was a promise.
In the 1920s, the makers of other new products repeated such promises in radio and print advertisements.
This is a culture that views the consumption of large quantities of goods as beneficial to the economy and a source of personal happiness.
George Washington Carver, for example, pioneered the creation of new goods based on agricultural products.
In 1919, Charles Strite invented the pop-up toaster because he was tired of being served burnt toast in a company cafeteria.
Clarence Birdseye, with an investment of $7 in an electric fan, buckets of saltwater, and cakes of ice, invented a system of flash-freezing fresh food in 1923.
The electrification of homes spurred the introduction of a host of new household appliances.
The ad might show a sophisticated couple gliding across the dance floor, face-to-face.
Nice people end any chance of offending by . . . rinsing . . . with Listerine.
In 1914, Listerine was introduced as the nation’s first over-the-counter mouthwash.
Suddenly people began to worry about “halitosis”— an obscure medical term for bad breath that Listerine’s makers popularized.
In just seven years, the product’s sales revenues rose into the millions— all thanks to the power of advertising.
No longer was it enough to say what the product was and why it was good.
Now advertisers used psychologists to tailor their ads to people’s desires and behaviors.
Advertising does give a certain illusion, a certain sense of escape in a machine age.
Now the practice of introducing new models every year was extended to goods that were supposed to last a long time, including cars, furniture, and household appliances.
Advertisers worked hand-in-hand with businesses to convince consumers of the value of staying up-to-date.
Buying the latest model, even if you didn’t need it, became a sign of prestige.
In Barton’s view, “Jesus was a real executive ... a great advertising man.
Barton's “irreverent” and controversial book topped the nonfiction best-seller list in 1925, selling more than 750,000 copies by 1928.
Americans Begin to Buy Now, Pay Later In the 1920s, Americans achieved the highest standard of living in the world.
Still, many consumers could not afford all the goods they wanted and thought they needed.
One reason was that the new products often cost far more than the older ones they were replacing.
An electric washing machine cost much more than an old-fashioned washboard.
The expansion of credit made it possible for consumers to buy what they wanted, even when they lacked enough cash.
Credit is an arrangement for buying something now with borrowed money and then paying off the loan over time.
In the past, most Americans had thought it shameful to borrow money to buy consumer goods.
The growth of installment buying made it possible for Americans to buy goods on credit.
If the buyer stops making payments before the loan is repaid, the seller can reclaim the product.
By the end of the 1920s, about 15 percent of all retail sales were on installment plans.
This included about three out of every four radios and six out of every ten cars.
Buying on credit was so easy that many Americans began to think the good times would go on forever.
Born into slavery, George Washington Carver put himself through school and then joined the faculty of Tuskegee Institute.
He developed hundreds of useful products from such crops as peanuts, sweet potatoes, and soybeans.
AmericansTake to the Air and Roads On May 20, 1927, a little-known airmail pilot from Minnesota took off on an extraordinary journey.
Lindbergh hit storm clouds and thick fog over the Atlantic that forced him at times to barely skim the ocean waves.
I could make out long lines of hangers, and the roads appeared to be jammed with cars. —Charles Lindbergh, The Spirit of St.
The most famous, Amelia Earhart, was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic Ocean.
In 1935, she became the first person to fly alone from Hawaii to California.
When Earhart tried to fly around the world in 1937, her plane vanished over the Pacific Ocean.
That “Lucky Lindy” did not seem to care about such adulation only endeared him more to the public.
Airplanes Give Americans Wings Airplanes had proven their usefulness during World War I After the war, the United States government offered thousands of surplus warplanes for sale at bargain prices.
Still, many wartime pilots bought the planes and used them for an exciting but dangerous style of flying called barnstorming.
Barnstormers toured the country, putting on daring air shows at county fairs and other events.
The United States Post Office also bought surplus military planes to fly mail between a few large cities.
Meanwhile, engineers were working to design safer, more powerful transport planes.
By 1926, Henry Ford was producing an all-metal airplane powered by three engines rather than one.
In 1932, Amelia Earhart became the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic.
When other manufacturers began to produce better-looking cars, Ford stopped making the Model T and instead made the Model A — another great success.
Automobiles Reshape American Life By making cars affordable, automaker Henry Ford had changed the way Americans lived.
Urban workers no longer had to live within walking distance of their workplace or near a streetcar line to get to work.
Suburbs began to spread farther around cities as people found it easier to travel to and from work by car.
In the 1920s, for the first time in the nation's history, suburbs grew more quickly than cities.
Motorists often had to wait days for mud to dry before they could move on.
The Federal Highway Act of 1916 encouraged states to create highway departments to address this problem.
As highways crept across the continent, new businesses took root beside them.
Gas stations, diners, campgrounds, and motels sprang up to serve the needs of the car traveler.
The number of people killed in automobile accidents each year increased from fewer than 5,000 before the 1920s to more than 30,000 by the 1930s.
The automobile age brought a parking problem that was forever being solved and then unsolving itself again.
It was also a sign that Valentino had become an important part of his adopted country’s popular culture.
Popular culture is the culture of ordinary people and includes their music, art, literature, and entertainment.
Popular culture is shaped by industries that spread information and ideas, especially the mass media.
Print Media Bring Popular Culture to a National Audience Newspapers and magazines had long been sources of information for Americans.
During the 1920s, the amount of printed material available expanded enormously.
As newspaper and magazine circulation increased, more and more people read the same stories, learned of the same events, and saw the same ideas and fashions.
As a result, a popular culture common to all regions of the United States began to take shape.
At the same time, regional differences that had once divided Americans began to fade in importance.
Radio Gives Popular Culture a Voice Radio burst onto the American scene in the 1920s.
Like newspapers and magazines, radio was a mass medium that could reach very large audiences.
Radio station KDKA in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, is thought to be the first commercial radio station.
When it broadcast the results of the 1920 presidential election, people began to have an inkling of what this new medium could do.
Radio pioneer David Sarnoff had a huge impact on the development of broadcast radio.
Sarnoff, a Jewish immigrant from Russia, began working for David Sarnoff was a leader in the growth of radio and television.
He pioneered the development of radio programming, bringing news, music, tears, and laughter into homes across the nation.
Radio was first called the “wireless,” because it received signals through the air rather than over wires, as the telephone did.
For the next 72 hours, he stayed at his post, relaying the names of survivors to anxious relatives as the disaster at sea unfolded.
In 1919, Radio Corporation of America , a company that built radios, bought Marconi Wireless.
Sarnoff saw that for RCA to sell many radios, it had to invest in programming that people would want to hear.
Public response to this event confirmed the power of radio broadcasting to reach large numbers of people.
He saw this network as a collection of radio stations across the country that would share programming.
People soon came to expect radio stations to broadcast national news, such as elections.
Many stations also brought play-by-play accounts of sports events to their listeners.
In addition, stations began to broadcast regular programs of music, comedy, and drama.
A situation comedy called Amos ’n Andy became so popular that many people would not answer their phones during its weekly broadcast.
Motion Pictures Create Movie Stars and Fans The movies, too, became a big business in the 1920s.
After World War I, people flocked to movie theaters, eager to escape the problems of the postwar recessio They drank in melodramatic love scenes, were thrilled by exciting fight scenes, and laughed at silly situations.
Income from ticket sales rose from $301 million in 1921 to $721 million in 1929.
Weekly attendance climbed from 50 million in 1920 to 90 million in 1929.
The discovery of how to add sound to movies revolutionized the motion picture industry.
Dialogue became an important part of films, expanding the job of writers.
While some silent-film stars adjusted to the new medium, a whole new group of stars were bom.
Motion pictures exposed Americans to new fashions, new hairstyles, and a loosening of the rules of social behavior.
This photograph shows silent film actor Charlie Chaplin in his famous role as the Tramp.
The Tramp's ill-fitting clothing and shuffling walk made him look like a hobo who had never owned a pair of shoes his own size.
Although the Tramp was penniless and homeless, his lighthearted attitude suggested a spirit that could bounce back from the most crushing defeats.
She won office in 1917 with a promise of ""no war/' as World War I raged in Europe.
Women Move Toward Greater Equality Some of the most significant social changes of the 1920s occurred in the lives of women.
That same year, women voted on a nationwide basis in a presidential election for the first time.
Many had hoped that because women had worked for the vote as a group, they would also vote as a group.
The “woman’s vote,” they argued, could bring an end to war, crime, and corruption in politics.
Once women won the right to cast ballots, they tended to make the same choices as their male relatives made.
Women Organize and Enter Politics Many of the women who had worked so hard to gain the vote continued to be active in politics.
Some formed a grassroots organization known as the League of Women Voters.
A grassroots organization is created and run by its members, as opposed to a strong central leader.
Members of the League of Women Voters worked to educate themselves and all voters on public issues.
Carrie Chapman Catt, a leader of the suffrage movement, saw that the vote alone would not gain women political power.
The decisions that mattered most, she observed, were made behind a “locked door” by men.
A few women did manage to get behind that door to run for public office.
In 1917, Jeannette Rankin of Montana became the first woman elected to the House of Representatives.
Two women— Nellie Tayloe Ross of Wyoming and Miriam Amanda Ferguson of Texas— became governors of their states in 1924.
Representative Mae Ella Norton became the first woman to chair a congressional committee.
Women Lobby for Health Care and Equal Rights Women’s groups also lobbied lawmakers to enact legislation of special interest to women.
One of their concerns was the high death rate among new mothers and their infant children.
This act distributed federal funds to states to create health services for pregnant women, new mothers, and infant children.
Congress enacted this law, in part because lawmakers wanted to appeal to new women voters.
The intention of the ERA was to guarantee equal rights for all Americans, regardless of gender.
The amendment was reintroduced to Congress many times, always failing to win passage.
She said of her life's work as a crusader for women's rights, ""I never doubted that equal rights was the right direction.
But to me there is nothing complicated about ordinary equality."" concerning women.
In 1972, Congress finally approved the ERA and sent it to the states for ratification.
Over the next decade, however, not enough states gave their approval to add the ERA to the Constitution.
Despite this setback, Paul’s amendment has been reintroduced to Congress every term since 1982.
Women Seek New Opportunities and Freedom The 1920s brought expanded educational and job opportunities for women, in addition to their greater political rights.
By the 1920s, one out of every four college faculty members was a woman.
The number of women professionals rose by 50 percent by the end of the decade.
With wider opportunities and greater incomes, women, especially young women, rebelled against old customs.
They cut their hair into short “bobs,” a hairstyle easier to care for than the long hair of their mothers’ generation.
Lipstick, rouge, and eye shadow were no longer signs of an “immoral” woman.
Drinking alcohol and smoking in public were no longer socially unacceptable.
Between 1914 and 1929, the number of divorces per year more than doubled.
The decline in birth rates was due in part to the pioneering work of Margaret Sanger.
She also came to believe that women would never achieve equality with men unless they could choose when and if to bear children.
In 1916, Sanger opened the country’s first family planning clinic, only to be arrested and jailed.
At the time, distributing birth control information was illegal in every state.
She also founded what became the nation’s leading family planning organization— the Planned Parenthood Federation of America.
Yet, by the 1920s, family planning clinics had begun to appear across the country.
African American Musicians Launch the Jazz Age Louis Armstrong was famous for his extended trumpet solos.
They took one look at Armstrong’s long underwear and big clumpy boots and wondered if this was really the famed cornet player.
On the first night that Armstrong played a solo with the band at the Roseland Ballroom, he was nervous as well.
For months afterward, the Roseland was packed with people who couldn’t get enough of Armstrong’s playing.
This new music became so popular in the 1920s that this decade is often called the Jazz Age.
Jazz Grows Out of Blues and Ragtime Jazz is a distinctly American musical form.
It grew from a combination of influences, including African rhythms, European harmonies, African American folk music, and 19th-century American band music and instruments.
At the turn of the 20th century, these forms began to mix and grew into blues and ragtime.
The blues sprang from African American work songs, with elements of gospel and folk music.
Many blues songs are about loneliness or sorrow, but others declare a humorous reaction to life’s troubles.
Ragtime used a syncopated, or irregularly accented, beat that gave the music a snappy, lilting feel.
Jazz combined the syncopation of ragtime with the deep feelings of the blues.
This is a process by which musicians make up music as they play rather than relying solely on printed scores.
There, African American musicians were in demand to play at funeral parades, in minstrel shows, and as part of riverboat orchestras.
Many gifted but untrained black musicians did not know how to read music.
As boats and then railroads traveled away from New Orleans, they carried the new music with them.
The black migrants brought their love of jazz with them to the city, and the African American neighborhood of Harlem became a magnet for jazz lovers.
Although the dancers and musicians were African American, most of the patrons were white.
Although people could hear jazz at nightclubs in the cities, many first heard the new music on records.
As the style gained popularity, many artists made records featuring their own work.
In the late 1920s, the music of Duke Ellington and his band was broadcast nationwide from the Cotton Club.
By 1929, a survey ofra3io""sfations showed that two thirds of airtime was devoted to jazz.
Jazz Becomes America's Music By then it was clear that jazz was here to stay.
Jelly Roll Mortojrj became the first musician to write the new music down.
Band leader Duke Ellington composed jazz standards that are still played widely today.
George Gershwin blended jazz with classical musical pieces like Rhapsody in Blue, which were written for full orchestras.
Unlike earlier forms of dancing, the new dances, with their kicks, twists, and turns, seemed wild and reckless.
They felt that its fast rhythms and improvisations were contributing to a loosening of moral standards.
Jazz, however, became the first uniquely American music to be played and loved around the world.
I stood there, dropped my bags, took a deep breath and felt happy again. —Langston Hughes, The Big Sea , 1940 For African American writers in the 1920s, Harlem was the place to be.
The Harlem Renaissance was the outpouring of creativity among African American writers, artists, and musicians who gathered in Harlem during the 1920s.
Many African American writers who were part of this movement explored what it meant to be black in the United States.
Langston Hughes wrote poetry, plays, and fiction that captured the anguish of African Americans’ longing for equality.
I’ve known rivers ancient as the world and older than the flow of human blood in human veins.
I heard the singing of the Mississippi when Abe Lincoln went down to New Orleans, and I’ve seen its muddy bosom turn all golden in the sunset.
My soul has grown deep like the rivers. — Langston Hughes, “The Negro Speaks of Rivers ” 1920 James Weldon Johnson broke new ground with his best-known book, The Autobiography of an Ex-Colored Man.
The novel describes an attempt by an African American to escape racial discrimination while exploring black culture in early 1900s.
He also wrote the lyrics for “Lift Every Voice and Sing,” which is sometimes called the Negro national anthem.
She traveled through the South and the Caribbean, collecting the folklore of black people.
Hurston lets her characters, both men and women, speak in their own dialect and voices.
Literature and Art Reflect American Life White writers were also critical of American ideas and values.
Sickened by the slaughter of war, some even moved to Europe, especially Paris.
There they gathered at the apartment of writer Gertrude Stein, who called these young people the Lost Generation.
Cummings, Ernest Hemingway, F Scott Fitzgerald, John Dos Passos, and Sherwood Anderson.
These writers developed themes and writing styles that still define modern literature.
He used no capitalization and did not follow the usual way of presenting verse on a page.
The Sun Also Rises , describes the rootless feelings of many young people after the war.
His novel The Great Gatsby critiques the moral emptiness of upper-class American society.
This passage from another Fitzgerald novel reveals the impact of the World War on the Lost Generation.
It took the British a month to walk it— a whole empire walking very slowly . . . leaving the dead like a million bloody rugs.
No Europeans will ever do that again in this generation. — F Scott Fitzgerald, Tender Is the Night, 1933 Writers in the United States also found fault with American life.
Sinclair Lewis’s novel Main Street looked at the tedium and narrowness of life in smalltown America.
Playwright Eugene O'Neill wove dark, poetic tragedies out of everyday life.
Rockwell Kent, one of the most popular artists of this period, used tonal contrasts to create moody scenes of nature.
She is famous for her paintings of huge flowers and, later, desert landscapes.
Exploring Culture Becomes a Popular Pastime Americans responded to this explosion of culture with enthusiasm.
Art museums displayed the works of new artists such as Hopper and O'Keeffe.
The American public developed a growing interest in literature as well.
Magazines and newspapers helped introduce new writers to a range of readers.
In addition, two publishing innovations made books more available to readers.
One was the paperback book, less expensive than hardback, clothbound books.
F Scott and Zelda Fitzgerald were both part of the Lost Generation that rejected the consumer culture taking root in the United States.
Still, the Fitzgeralds remained deeply attracted to American life and lived wildly in their youth.
Georgia O'Keeffe focused on natural objects and painted them in pure forms and colors.
Her subjects were often enlarged views of flowers, shells, rocks, or skulls.
Here, Ederle is being greased to protect her body from the cold waters of the channel.
He made baseball more exciting by making home runs a common part of the game.
He also set many major league records, including 2,056 career bases on balls and 72 games in which he hit two or more home runs.
In 1936, he was one of the first five players elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame.
Many people doubted that a woman could, but Gertrude Ederle. an American swimmer, was about to try.
Spectator Sports Become Big Business in the 1920s By the 1920s, the eighthour workday, five-day workweek had become the rule in many industries.
Economist Stuart Chase estimated that Americans spent one fourth of the national income on play and recreation.
Some of this money went toward spectator sports, or sports that attract large numbers of fans who attend games.
Professional baseball and football teams attracted legions of loyal fans.
When Dempsey fought to regain his title from Gene Tunney in 1927, more than 100,000 people bought tickets worth $2,658,660— a record at that time.
Millions of Americans listened to radio broadcasts of popular sporting events.
One entrepreneur even figured out a way to add “live action” to a radio broadcast.
In the 1927 season, Ruth hit 60 home runs, a record that would remain unbroken for 34 years.
Jim Thorpe, an American Indian, was one of the greatest all-around athletes.
He won fame as an Olympic track and field champion, and then went on to play professional baseball and football.
Gertrude Ederle broke national and world swimming records on a regular basis.
Tennis star Helen Wills won many tennis championships in the United States and Europe.
Jim Thorpe began his athletic career as a football star at the Carlisle Indian Industrial School in Pennsylvania.
In the 1912 Olympics, Thorpe became the first athlete to win both the pentathlon and the decathlon.
The creative energy of writers, artists, filmmakers, and musicians, as well as innovations by businesspeople and inventors, all contributed to new directions in American life.
Consumer culture New products and advertising encouraged a buying spree.
Mass media National magazines, radio, and motion pictures brought news, information, and entertainment to millions of Americans.
Regional differences began to fade as a new national popular culture became part of daily life.
The League of Women Voters encouraged all voters to become informed about public issues.
Congress considered, but rejected, the first version of the equal rights amendment.
The Jazz Age Jazz, a new form of music, expressed the mood of the decade.
Introduced by African American musicians, jazz became popular throughout the country and the world.
Harlem Renaissance Musicians and writers centered in Harlem gave voice to the experiences of African Americans in song, poetry, and novels.
Lost Generation Disillusioned by World War I and the nation’s growing consumer culture, some artists and writers fled to Paris.
This “Lost Generation” produced books and poetry that are still read and enjoyed today.
Spectator sports More leisure time allowed Americans to attend sporting events.
Spectator sports became a big business, and athletes became national celebrities.
For many young painters in the 1920s, it would have been natural to draw all the new and strange sights the city offered.
Instead, they depicted a more traditional America, one that could be found on farms and in small towns.
In 1916, the Saturday Evening Post , one of the country’s most popular weekly magazines, started putting Rockwell’s charming pictures on its covers.
Most of the trends and changes that made the 1920s roar emerged in the nation’s cities.
Although rural life was changing as well, Rockwell’s paintings appealed to a longing for the reassurance of the simple life.
Some people who lived in rural areas did not approve of the changes they had witnessed since the end of World War I They were traditionalists, or people who had deep respect for long-held cultural and religious values.
For them, these values were anchors that provided order and stability to society.
For other Americans, particularly those in urban areas, there was no going back to the old ways.
They were modernists, or people who embraced new ideas, styles, and social trends.
For them, traditional values were chains that restricted both individual freedom and the pursuit of happiness.
As these group clashed in the 1920s, American society became deeply divided.
The result was a kind of “culture war” that in some ways is still being fought today.
The two magazine covers shown opposite and above capture the tension between traditionalism and modernism during the 1920s.
The Saturday Evening Post appealed to traditionalists with nostalgic images rooted in small-town America.
Life reached out to modernists with images of trendy fun seekers and style setters.
In big cities, jazz clubs offered freedom from traditional rules of behavior.
People could dress in the latest fashions, dance the latest dances, smoke, and drink, despite prohibition.
After seeing the bright lights of cities, many returning soldiers decided to leave behind the small towns they came from.
This population shift set the stage for the growing divide between traditionalists and modernists.
This farm wife, shown with her new washing machine in 1920, was lucky to have a family earning enough from farming to afford the new appliance.
That year, falling farm prices forced half a million families off their farms.
Economic Opportunity and Personal Freedom During the 1920s, some 19 million people would move from farms to cities, largely in search of economic opportunities.
Urban areas, with their factories and office buildings, were hubs of economic growth.
At the same time, the consumer price index, a measure of the cost of basic necessities such as food and housing, remained steady.
Cities also offered freedom to explore new ways of thinking and living.
City dwellers could meet people from different cultures, go to movies, visit museums, and attend concerts.
They could buy and read an endless variety of magazines and newspapers.
They could drink, gamble, or go on casual dates without being judged as immoral.
Falling Crop Prices and Failing Farms The personal freedom people experienced in cities stood in strong contrast to small-town life.
In rural areas, most people lived in quiet communities, where they watched out for one another.
In addition to losing their younger generation to cities, rural communities faced other problems during the 1920s.
Farmers had prospered during the war, producing food crops for the Allies and the home front.
After the war, however, European demand for United States farm products dropped sharply, as did crop prices.
With their incomes shrinking, large numbers of farmers could not repay their loans.
Hundreds of thousands of farmers lost their farms in the early 1920s alone.
For the rest of the decade, farmers’ share of the national income dropped steadily.
By 1929, per capita income for farmers was less than half the national average.
Congressmen from rural states tried to reverse this downward slide with farm-friendly legislation.
The most ambitious of these measures, the McNaryHaugen Bill, was first introduced in 1924.
This legislation called on the federal government to raise the price of some farm products by selling surplus crops overseas.
Congress passed the bill twice, in 1927 and then in 1928, but President Calvin Coolidge vetoed it both times.
Changing Values Lead to Mutual Resentment The divide between urban modernists and rural traditionalists was not just economic.
Sinclair Lewis, the first American writer to win the Nobel Prize for Literature, mocked small-town values.
In one of his novels, he described the residents of a small Midwestern town as a savorless people, gulping tasteless food, and sitting afterward, coatless and thoughtless, in rocking-chairs prickly with inane decorations, listening to mechanical music, saying mechanical things about the excellence of Ford automobiles, and viewing themselves as the greatest race in the world. —Sinclair Lewis, Main Street, 1920 Rural traditionalists, not surprisingly, resented such attacks on their behavior and values.
They saw the culture of the cities as money-grubbing, materialistic, and immoral.
At the same time, however, many rural people could not help but envy the comfort and excitement city life seemed to offer.
The defenders of traditional values often looked to their faith and the Bible for support in their struggle against modernism.
As a result, the 1920s saw a rise in religious fundamentalism— the idea that religious texts and beliefs should be taken literally and treated as the authority on appropriate behavior.
Billy Sunday, a former major league baseball player, emerged as the most prominent fundamentalist preacher in the nation.
A growing number of young modernists were rejecting long-accepted American values.
Rural areas were losing population to the cities, and agriculture was no longer the backbone of the American economy.
In addition, with improvements in mass media, country people themselves were being exposed to new ideas, music, and social values.
All workers saw their incomes drop during the recession that followed the war.
Generations Clash over the New Youth Culture Pole-sitting was just one of many youthful fads of the 1920s.
Others were dance marathons, a game called mah-jongg, beauty contests, and crossword puzzles.
During the 1920s, many young women broke free of traditional restrictions on their dress and behavior.
Flappers cut their hair short, wore revealing dresses, and enjoyed hot new dances.
They learned to drive and used their new freedom of movement to attend parties, theaters, and nightclubs without a chaperone.
Before World War I, if a young man were interested in courting a young woman, he would visit her at home and meet her parents.
If he invited the girl to a dance or concert, an older adult would go with them as a chaperone.
Eventually, the girl’s parents might trust the young couple enough to let them sit by themselves on the front porch.
In traditional families, these courtship patterns continued after the war.
In more modern families, however, courtship changed dramatically, often confusing, if not upsetting, the older generation.
Courtship was one example of how the older and younger generations clashed in the 1920s.
The Old Ways Are Repressive During the 1920s. a growing drive for public education sent a majority of teenagers to high school for the first time in United States history.
As young people spent more time than ever before outside the home or workplace, a new youth culture emerged.
This culture revolved around school, clubs, sports, music, dances, dating, movies, and crazy fads.
Flagpole sitting, in which a participant would spend days perched atop a flagpole, was another short-lived fad.
One fad from the 1920s that remains popular today is the crossword puzzle.
Their skimpy dresses— worn without restrictive corsets— barely covered their knees.
They rolled their stockings below their knees and wore unfastened rain boots that flapped around their ankles.
Flappers wore makeup, which until that time had been associated with “loose” women of doubtful morals.
Draped with beads and bracelets and carrying cigarette holders, they went to jazz clubs and danced the night away.
Mothers disapproved of their sons taking the Flapper to dances, to teas, to swim and most of all to heart. —Zelda Fitzgerald, “Eulogy on the Flapper,” 1922 Modem young couples traded old-fashioned courtship for dating.
Whereas the purpose of courtship had been marriage, the main point of dating was to have fun away from the watchful eyes of parents.
Sedate tea parties or chaperoned dances gave way to unsupervised parties.
After witnessing the war’s waste of life, they decided that the adults who had sent young men into battle did not deserve respect.
Easy access to cars and the mass media helped fuel the youth rebellion.
Cars gave young people a means to escape the supervision of their elders.
Magazines and movies, in the meantime, spread images of a good life that was often very different from the way their parents had grown up.
Perhaps no one better captured the feelings of rebellious youth than poet Edna St.
My candle burns at both ends; It will not last the night; But ah, my foes, and oh, my friends— It gives a lovely light. — Edna St.
Young People Have Lost Their Way Many adults considered the behavior of young people reckless and immoral.
They also pressured Filmmakers for less sexually suggestive scenes in movies.
The Hays Office, named for former Postmaster General Will Hays, issued a movie code that banned long kisses and positive portrayals of casual sex.
In bedroom scenes, movie couples had to follow a “two feet on the floor” rule.
They passed laws to discourage women from wearing short skirts and skimpy swimsuits.
Mostly, however, the older generation restricted itself to expressing loud disapproval.
When nagging did not work, many parents crossed their fingers and hoped for the best.
Most young people, even the most rebellious flappers, usually ended their dating days by getting married and raising the next generation of rebellious youth.
In this 1921 photograph, a Chicago policewoman checks the length of a young woman's bathing suit.
Traditionalists in many communities passed laws designed to prevent women from appearing in public in immodest clothes.
The harder they tried to enforce prohibition, the more fashionable it became to flout the law.
Wets and Drys Clash over Prohibition On February 14, 1929, men dressed in police uniforms raided the headquarters of Chicago's Moran gang.
When the officers ordered the gangsters to raise their hands and line up against the wall, the gang members thought nothing of it.
These ‘‘police officers,"" however, were members of Al “Scarface"" Capone's rival gang in disguise.
Seven members of the Moran gang died in what soon became known as the Saint Valentine’s Day Massacre.
This bloodbath was one of many unexpected consequences of what Herbert Hoover called “an experiment noble in purpose""— prohibition.
Prohibition Improves Society Traditionalists and progressive reformers saw passage of the Eighteenth Amendment, which prohibited the manufacture, sale, or transport of alcoholic beverages, as a great victory.
They pointed to evidence that alcoholism caused crime, violence, and the breakup of families.
Support for prohibition centered mainly in rural areas, and many drys saw the Eighteenth Amendment as a triumph of rural over urban Americans.
They associated beer drinking with immigrants of German descent and wine drinking with Italian immigrants.
At first, prohibition seemed to the drys to deliver its expected benefits.
The national consumption of alcohol did decline, from an annual average of 2. gallons per capita before the war to less than 1 gallon by the 1930s.
Fewer workers spent their wages at saloons, to the benefit of their families.
In their view, prohibition was just another example of nativist prejudice toward immigrants.
Prohibition Restricts Freedom and Breeds Crime Opponents of prohibition, called “wets,” were small in number at first.
Many modernists attacked prohibition as an attempt by the federal government to legislate morality.
Another modernist, Massachusetts Senator David Walsh, rejected traditionalist arguments that drinking was sinful.
He reminded drys that the first miracle performed by Jesus had been to turn water into wine.
In October 1919, Congress passed the Volstead Act to enforce the Eighteenth Amendment.
But the federal government never gave the enforcement agency, called the Prohibition Bureau, sufficient personnel, money, or supplies.
The bureau’s agents were simply outnumbered by the millions of Americans who wanted to drink.
Hoover later estimated that the government would need 250,000 agents to make prohibition work.
As a result, prohibition led to an increase in illegal behavior by normally law-abiding citizens.
Others bought “bootleg” alcohol that was distilled illegally or smuggled into the United States from Canada.
As thousands of bars and pubs were forced to close, they were replaced by nearly twice as many secret drinking clubs, called speakeasies.
The term speakeasy came from the practice of speaking quietly about illegal saloons so as not to alert police.
The growing demand for liquor created a golden opportunity for crooks like A1 Capone.
Bootlegging— the production, transport, and sale of illegal alcohol— was a multibillion dollar business by the mid-1920s.
To keep his profits flowing without government interference, he bribed politicians, judges, and police officers.
In 1931 , Capone finally went to jail— not for bootlegging or murder, but for tax evasion.
As lawlessness, violence, and corruption increased, support for prohibition dwindled.
By the late 1920s, many Americans believed that prohibition had caused more harm than good.
In 1933, the states ratified the Twenty-First Amendment, which repealed prohibition.
Many Americans believed that the Eighteenth Amendment violated their individual liberty.
Gangsters made big profits by supplying the nation with bootleg liquor.
While chatting with friends one day, Rappelyea mentioned an offer by the American Civil Liberties Union to defend any teacher who would test the law.
One of his friends knew just the man for the job— a young science teacher named John Scopes, who would be willing to teach a lesson on evolution.
And so the stage was set for a dramatic contest between modernists and traditionalists over the place of science and religion in public schools.
Aimee Semple McPherson, a famous fundamentalist preacher, founded the International Church of the Foursquare Gospel.
In 1923, she built the Angelus Temple, which sat more than 5,000, in Los Angeles, California.
She enhanced her services there with bands, choirs, and other theatrical touches.
Radio broadcasts increased her audience and made her a nationally known religious figure.
Science Shows How Nature Works Like many modernists, Rappelyea looked to science, not the Bible, to explain how the physical world worked.
Scientists accepted as true only facts and theories that could be tested and supported with evidence drawn from nature.
By the 1920s, people could see the wonders of modern science every time they turned on an electric light, listened to the radio, or visited their doctors.
One of the most controversial scientific ideas of that time was British naturalist Charles Darwin’s theory of evolution.
Darwin theorized that all plants and animals, including humans, had evolved from simpler forms of life.
The evolution of one species from another took place over thousands or millions of years.
In this process, species that make favorable adaptations to their environment are more likely to survive than those that do not.
Rather than choosing between science and religion, they believed that both ways of looking at the world could coexist.
The Bible Is the Word of God Traditionalists were more likely to see science and religion in conflict.
This was especially true of Christian fundamentalists, who believed the Bible was the literal word of God.
They rejected the theory of evolution because it conflicted with creationism, the belief that God created the universe as described in the Bible.
During the early 1920s, fundamentalists vigorously campaigned to ban the teaching of evolution in public schools.
A spellbinding speaker, Bryan had played a major role in American politics for 30 years.
He had run for president three times and served as secretary of state under President Woodrow Wilson.
The second was his fear that teaching evolution could lead young people to accept social Darwinism.
This is the belief that as in nature, only the fittest members of a society will survive.
Social Darwinism had been used to justify imperialism on the grounds that the fittest, or most powerful, peoples should rule the less powerful.
It had also been used to promote eugenics, or the idea that the human species should be improved by forbidding people with characteristics judged undesirable to reproduce.
Creationism Versus Evolution in Tennessee Tennessee became the first state to enact a law banning the teaching of evolution in public schools.
The law might not have caused a nationwide stir if Rappelyea had not decided to contest it.
Scopes not only agreed but also volunteered to teach a lesson on evolution the next day.
Rappelyea then asked the American Civil Liberties Union to defend the young science teacher before going to the police and having Scopes arrested.
The Scopes trial, which began on July 10, 1925, brought far more attention to Dayton than Rappelyea had hoped.
Scope’s supporters added high-powered lawyer Clarence Darrow to the defense team.
Although Darrow had supported Bryan for president, he disagreed with him about religion and agreed to defend Scopes for free.
The whole country was following this contest between creationism and evolution.
In their opening statements, the opposing lawyers recognized that the issue to be decided was much more than whether Scopes had broken the law.
To make his point, Darrow had brought a variety of experts to Dayton to testify against the Tennessee law.
After hearing one of them, the judge refused to let the rest testify because what they had to say was not relevant to the guilt or innocence of the science teacher.
Then he surprised everyone by calling Bryan to the stand as an expert on the Bible.
Darrow had tricked Bryan, the fundamentalist champion, into admitting that he himself did not always interpret each and every word in the Bible as the literal truth.
When the trial ended, it took the jury fewer than 10 minutes to find Scopes guilty, whereupon the judge fined him $100.
A year later, the Tennessee Supreme Court overturned the conviction because the judge, not the jury, had imposed the fine.
The Scopes trial pitted the respected fundamentalist William Jennings Bryan, sitting on the right, against the brilliant defense attorney Clarence Darrow, seated on the left.
Although Bryan won the case, he did not win his war against the teaching of evolution.
John Scopes did not testify during his trial for violating Tennessee's anti-evolution law.
I will continue in the future, as I have in the past, to oppose this law in any way I can.
Evolution, Creationism, and Intelligent Design The Scopes trial did not end the debate over teaching evolution in public schools.
In the 1960s, an Arkansas science teacher named Susan Epperson came up against such a law when her district adopted a biology textbook containing evolution.
She could use the book and violate an Arkansas law making it illegal to teach that humankind came from lower animals.
Epperson chose to resolve her dilemma by challenging the Arkansas law in court.
The Supreme Court Bans Creationism in the Classroom Epperson Arkansas was the first of several cases involving religion in public schools to come before the Supreme Court.
The Court ruled that it did, saying, Government in our democracy, state and national, must be neutral in matters of religious theory, doctrine, and practice.
It may not be hostile to any religion or to the advocacy of no-religion; and it may not aid, foster, or promote one religion or religious theory against another. —Justice Abe Fortas, Epperson Arkansas, 1968 Three years later, in Lemon Kurtzman, the Supreme Court issued a ruling that still affects the debate over evolution.
In this case, the Court established a three-point Lemon test to determine when and whether a government action violates the First Amendment.
To be constitutional, a government action must • have a secular, or nonreligious, purpose. • neither help nor hurt religion. • not result in an “excessive entanglement” of the government and religion.
In 1987, the Supreme Court applied the Lemon test to a case brought against Louisiana’s Creationism Act.
In Edwards Aguillard, a group of teachers, parents, and religious leaders challenged the Louisiana law as a violation of the First Amendment.
The Supreme Court agreed that the Creationism Act did not have a secular purpose and, therefore, failed the Lemon test.
The Debate on Intelligent Design The Epperson and Edwards decisions made it clear that the courts would not allow the biblical story of creation into biology classes.
In the meantime, critics of evolution were developing a new theory of creation called intelligent design.
The intelligent design theory is not based on any specific teachings in the Bible.
Instead, it argues that some features of the natural world are too complex to have evolved by means of natural selection.
In October 2004, the Dover, Pennsylvania, school board became the first in the nation to require that students be told about intelligent design theory in their biology classes.
In December 2005, Judge John Jones ruled that the theory of intelligent design had no place in the public school science curriculum.
If the past is any guide, however, Judge Jones’s decision is unlikely to be the last word in the debate over whether and how evolution is taught in public schools.
Evolution is a theory , not a fact, regarding the origin of living things.
This material should be approached with an open mind, studied carefully, and critically considered.
Approved by Cobb County Board of Education Thursday, March 28, 2002 In 2002, school officials in Cobb County, Georgia, placed a warning sticker on biology textbooks.
A federal judge ruled that the stickers send ""a message that the school board agrees with the beliefs of Christian fundamentalists and creationists"" and ordered them removed.
Tensions arose between traditionalists, with their deep respect for longheld cultural and religious values, and modernists, who embraced new ideas, styles, and social trends.
Urban versus rural By 1920, the United States was becoming more urban than rural.
Youth versus adults Suspicious of the older generation after the war, many young people rejected traditional values and embraced a new youth culture.
Flappers scandalized the older generation with their style of dress, drinking, and smoking.
Wets versus drys The Eighteenth Amendment launched the social experiment known as prohibition.
The Volstead Act, which outlawed the sale of alcohol, was supported by drys and ignored by wets.
Religion versus science Religious fundamentalists worked to keep the scientific theory of evolution out of public schools.
The Scopes trial, testing Tennessee’s anti-evolution law, was a legal victory for fundamentalists but a defeat in the court of public opinion.
The issue of teaching creationism in biology classes is still current today.
Groucho Marx, a wealthy, famous actor, and quite likely the funniest man in America, was breathless.
From the doorway, Groucho shouted the news to his sleepy-eyed brother Harpo.
Harpo, still in his bathrobe, asked his brother to wait while he got dressed.
The Marx brothers were not alone in their enthusiasm for buying stocks.
As more and more people put money in the stock market, prices of shares kept rising.
Unfortunately, Groucho’s world, and that of every other American, was about to change significantly.
On Tuesday, October 29, 1929, a day still remembered as Black Tuesday, stock prices plunged.
Stocks lost their value because, all at once, many people wanted to sell their shares but very few people wanted to buy.
Instead, the nation slid into the longest economic slump Americans had ever experienced— the Great Depression.
The stock market crash was a key cause of the Great Depression, but it was not the only cause.
In this chapter, you will learn how conditions of the 1920s and choices made after the stock market crash combined to bring about the worst economic crisis in American history.
Ticker-tape printouts showed the prices at which stocks were being bought and sold.
BROOKLYN D^^X^^ Gljirj MLSMS PANIC AS STOCKSJCRA^ 1 ttenmt Made to Kill Itafys Crown Prince |BBWBIi Stempi jnuu* | w High Duty Group tlK JP aooi Hollywood nrr JMggTgSnjin Gave $700,000 to SSS ip Frightening headlines on the stock market crash fueled public anxiety and helped contribute to the financial collapse that followed As the graph shows, the index of industrial stocks plunged between its peak in 1929 and 1932, losing nearly two thirds of its value.
The purpose of the stock market is to provide businesses with the capital they need to grow.
Business owners sell portions, or shares, of their companies to investors.
When all is well, the stock market is a useful tool in a capitalist economy.
A Speculative Boom Leads to a Spectacular Crash The stock market boom began innocently enough.
As Americans saw business profits growing, many thought they could make a lot of money by buying shares in successful companies.
The result was a bull market, or a steady rise in stock prices over a long period of time.
In the late 1920s, a lot of people were swept up in the wave of speculative enthusiasm for the stock market.
Like Groucho Marx, these investors believed that if prices were high today, they would go even higher tomorrow.
So they bought the maximum number of shares they could afford and began counting their paper profits as the price of most stocks went up.
It seemed to many Americans that there was no limit to how high the bull market could go.
Investor optimism was so intense that not only did people put their savings in the stock market, but a growing number actually borrowed money to invest in stocks.
A buyer might pay as little as 10 percent of a stock’s price and borrow the other 90 percent from a broker, a person who sells stockrThe result was that someone with just $1 ,000 could borrow $9,000 and buy $10,000 worth of sharesrThis is called buying on margin.
When the market was rising, brokers were happy to lend money to almost anyone.
Easy borrowing encouraged speculation, or the making of risky investments in the hope of earning large profits.
Stock speculators do not necessarily buy stock to own a part of a company they believe will do well.
They buy stock to make as much money as they can as quickly as possible.
In a speculative market, a company’s stock price does not go up because the company is growing.
Prices rise because speculators want to buy a stock today and sell it for a quick profit tomorrow.
As speculation drives up the price of a company’s stock, the total value of the stock may become worth far more than the company itself.
Rising stock prices created a high-flying bull market without a solid foundation.
When the market turned down, this borrowed-money house of cards collapsed.
As prices dropped, creditors who had loaned money for buying stock on margin demanded that those loans be repaid.
Unfortunately, because of falling prices, most investors could not make enough selling their stocks to repay their loans.
Many companies that had invested their profits in the stock market lost everything and had to close their doors.
By then it was clear to many investors that a bear market, in which prices decrease steadily, had begun.
Fearful of losing everything, investors rushed to sell their stocks, pushing prices down still further.
By the end of the year, investors had lost more than $30 billion— an amount that exceeded the money spent by the United States to fight World War I A Banking Crisis Wipes Out People's Savings The stock market crash also hurt banks, triggering a crisis that unfolded over the next three years.
To understand how stock losses affected banks, think about how banks operate.
When people are prospering, they deposit money they do not need for day-to-day expenses in banks.
In the 1920s, banks caught the same stock market fever that gripped the nation as a whole.
But in the 1920s, they increasingly loaned money to stockbrokers, who in turn loaned that borrowed money to individual investors.
When the stock market took a nosedive in October 1929, many investors could not repay the money borrowed from their brokers.
In turn, brokers who had borrowed money from banks could not repay their loans.
With bad loans piling up, banks stopped looking like a safe place to keep one’s money.
Even before the Depression, it was not unheard of for banks to go out of business, wiping out the savings of their depositors.
During the “good times” between 1923 and 1929, banks folded at the rate of about two per day.
As the economy continued to falter in 1930 and 1931 , large numbers of depositors lost confidence in their local banks.
In a typical bank run, panicked depositors lined up around the block to try to withdraw their money.
By 1933, one fifth of the banks that were in business in the United States in 1930 had gone out of business, and millions of people had seen their savings vanish. sm atposn UNION B K N K \MLKM V NION 4 As news of bank failures spread, worried depositors rushed to local banks like this one in hopes of getting their money out before it was too late.
Bank runs only made matters worse by forcing healthy banks to close once they ran out of funds to meet their depositors' demands.
Bank failures were part of the general economic collapse brought about by the stock market crash, falling farm prices, and the decline of industry.
By 1925, a new Model T was rolling off the assembly line every 10 seconds.
By the end of the 1920s, however, Americans could not afford to buy all the cars and other products that were being produced.
Too Much for Sale, Too Little to Spend Industry had thrived in the 1920s because manufacturers were able to make a lot of merchandise very quickly.
The ability to mass-produce a wide range of consumer goods started the stock boom.
However, for mass production to succeed, people had to buy the goods being churned out of factories.
By the late 1920s, demand for consumer goods could not keep up with production.
The resulting glut of goods in the market, combined with the stock market crash and the bank crisis, caused the economy to collapse.
Overproduction Puts Too Many Goods in Stores By 1920, most American factories were using the assembly-line method of mass production.
As a result, they were able to make more goods more quickly than ever before.
Between 1923 and 1929, the output per worker-hour in manufacturing increased an astounding 32 percent.
New machines and new farming techniques expanded farm production even while demand for farm products was falling.
In general, companies welcome increased production because it means increased income.
A company that makes appliances, for example, wants to produce as many refrigerators as possible because the more refrigerators it makes, the more it can sell.
If making refrigerators costs less than it did before, so much the better.
Trouble arises when there are not enough consumers to buy all those products rolling off the assembly lines and arriving from the farms.
The term refers to a situation in which more products are being created than people can afford to buy.
As the 1920s came to an end, overproduction overwhelmed the American economy.
A Widening Wealth Gap Leads to Rising Debt Greater productivity led to greater profits for businesses.
Some of the profits went to workers, whose wages rose steadily in the 1920s.
But workers’ wages did not go up nearly enough for them to consume as much as manufacturers were producing.
On one side of the gap, the wealthiest 5 percent of American families received about a third of all the money earned in the country.
That was more than the 60 percent of all families at the bottom on the income scale earned.
For a time, Americans made up for the unequal distribution of wealth by using credit to buy the radios, cars, and household appliances that flooded the market.
The growing advertising industry also helped persuade people that thrift was an old-fashioned value.
The more modem approach was to borrow money to buy the latest products right away.
Between 1921 and 1929, personal debt more than doubled, from $3. billion to $6. billion.
Underconsumption Causes Farm Failures, Bankruptcies, and Layoffs By 1929, the buying spree was coming to an end.
Many Americans found themselves deep in debt and were unwilling or unable to borrow more.
Even the wealthy, who could afford to buy whatever they wanted, were buying less because they had all the goods they needed.
One historian remarked that by 1929, everyone who could buy a car or radio probably already had one.
This means that people were not buying as much as the economy was producing.
Their financial difficulties began after World War I, a full decade before industry began to suffer.
During the war, farmers had prospered by supplying food for American soldiers and the people of war-tom Europe.
But farmers still wanted to buy goods made by industry, such as cars, tractors, and appliances.
Like everyone else, farmers borrowed money and paid for their goods in installments.
As agricultural prices continued to decline, more and more farmers had difficulty making their payments.
Some farmers lost everything they owned when banks seized their farms as payment for their debts.
As a result, for the first time in the nation's history, the number of farms and farmers began to decline.
By the late 1920s, the problem of underconsumption had spread to industry.
Responding to the glut of products on the market, many manufacturers cut back production.
In the auto and steel industries, for example, production declined by as much as 38 percent by the end of 1930.
Some companies lost so much business that they were forced to declare bankruptcy and close down altogether.
Those who lost their jobs also lost the ability to buy the products that industry produced.
A vicious downward spiral— consisting of layoffs, reduced consumption, and then more layoffs— was set in motion.
Between 1929 and 1933, the unemployment rate rose from 3 percent of the American workforce to 25 percent.
Millions of Americans found themselves out of work and, as the Depression wore on, out of hope. t The pain of shrinking markets hurt agriculture years before it affected industry.
Excess farm goods could not sit in warehouses until buyers were able to purchase them.
Many farmers discarded farm products such as milk because they were unable to sell them.
Government Actions Make a Bad Situation Worse By early 1931, the economy was a shambles.
The federal government, under the leadership of President Herbert Hoover, took steps to improve the situation.
Unfortunately, instead of minimizing the damage, many of the government’s actions made things worse.
A Tight Money Supply Hobbles the Economy Many economists blame the Federal Reserve System, known as “the Fed,” for further weakening the economy in 1930 and 1931.
It decides how much money will be available to circulate among investors, producers, and consumers.
This is the rate of interest at which banks that belong to the system can borrow money from Federal Reserve banks.
Member banks use the discount rate to determine the interest rates they will charge borrowers.
In fact, low interest rates had supported the excessive borrowing of the 1920s.
Following the crash, Federal Reserve officials kept rates low for a time.
The immediate effect of this action was to decrease the amount of money moving through the economy.
Many people had already stopped spending, and producers had slowed production.
Higher interest rates further damaged the economy by depriving businesses of the capital they needed to survive.
As the amount of money dwindled, the economy slowed down, like an animal going into hibernation.
If Federal Reserve officials had concentrated on expanding the money supply after the crash, things might have gotten better.
More money in circulation would have stimulated the economy to grow by making loans less expensive.
Companies would have found it easier to borrow the money they needed to stay in business.
Instead, the Fed allowed the money supply to drop by a third between 1929 and 1933.
Tariffs Cause Trade Troubles Economists also blame Congress for making decisions that further hurt the economy.
Financial problems overseas, especially in Europe, also contributed to the onset of the Great Depression.
The Allies were having trouble paying back money borrowed from United States banks to finance the war.
The Germans were able to make their reparation payments to the Allies only by borrowing the money needed from the United States.
In order to earn the dollars required to pay off these debts, these nations desperately needed to sell large amounts of goods in the United States.
After the war, however, Congress enacted tariffs on many imported goods that made such sales difficult.
In 1930, Congress made a bad situation worse by passing the HawleySmoot Tariff Act.
Congress meant for this law to protect American businesses from foreign competition by raising tariffs still higher.
Instead, it triggered a trade war as European countries raised their tariffs on goods imported from the United States.
As a result, United States farmers and businesses were not able to cope with overproduction by selling their excess goods to other countries.
The record-high tariffs on both sides of the Atlantic stifled international trade.
Like most important events in history, the economic calamity that began with the stock market crash had many causes.
The stock market crash triggered a long period of falling stock prices High tariffs hurt foreign sales.
The few rich people did not buy enough, and the many poor did not spend enough, to consume all the goods being produced.
At the height of ""tulipmania,"" as the tulip bubble of the 1630s is known, a single bulb was worth a fortune.
Dot-Com Stock Prices, 1998 E-company Price per Share, Sept.98 Price per Share, Dec.98 eBay $18 $241 Amazon $80 $240 At the height of the dot-com boom, the values of companies, like eBay and Amazon, that used the Internet to sell goods or services skyrocketed.
Some investors quit their day jobs to devote all of their time to trading stocks.
Many of the companies these daytraders hoped would make them rich did not survive the dot-com bust.
Past, Present, and Future The Great Depression was the worst economic slump in American history.
The country had experienced depressions before, often when the economy became “overheated” and then collapsed.
Historians and economists warn that this “boom-and-bust” cycle could happen again.
As in 1929, the trigger for the next economic crisis could be the “popping” of a speculative bubble.
A speculative bubble is an unrealistic or unfounded rise in economic values.
Bubbles can develop around a particular product— like baseball cards, for example.
In this chapter, you read about the rampant speculation in stocks that helped provoke the stock market crash of 1929.
The rise of stock values at the time was a speculative bubble, and Black Tuesday was an example of the popping of a b ubbl Speculative b abble s have occurred many times throughout history.
In the 1600s, for example, many investors in Holland got carried away by a rising market in tulip bulbs.
It seems strange now, but for a time, tulip bulbs— the bulbs that produce tulip flowers— became as valuable as gold.
As “tulipmania” gripped Holland, people sold their homes, businesses, and family jewels to invest in tulips.
One bill of sale shows that someone traded a single bulb for 12 sheep, 8 hogs, 4 oxen, 1 ,000 pounds of cheese, 6 loads of grain, 4 barrels of beer, 2 hogshead of wine, 2 barrels of butter, a marriage bed, and a wagon large enough to haul it all away.
When the market came to its senses, the bubble popped and many investors lost vast fortunes.
During this period, investors poured money into the stocks of brand-new Internet companies— known as dot-coms— hoping to take advantage of the commercial possibilities of the World Wide Web.
In some parts of the country, home prices doubled between 2000 and 2005.
By then, analysts were warning that housing prices couldn’t keep rising forever.
But the fact is, investors, and people in general, are drawn to making a profit in the capitalist economy.
There are likely to be speculative bubbles again, in stocks, real estate, art, or something else yet unknown.
And if the history of bubbles is any clue, the market will eventually take a tumble, sending a ripple effect throughout the economy.
Pets.com was founded in 1998 to sell pet supplies over the Internet Ads featuring a cute sock-puppet dog helped make pet owners aware of the new way to shop.
But not enough of them ordered pet supplies online to keep the company going.
The stock market crash The stock market crash cost investors millions of dollars and contributed to bank failures and industry bankruptcies.
The financial crisis Banks made risky loans and investments in the 1920s.
Some banks had to shut down when the economy collapsed, and many depositors lost their savings.
An unequal distribution of wealth The concentration of money in the hands of a few left most wage earners unable to buy all of the goods businesses were producing.
Underconsumption For a time, many consumers used credit, rather than cash, to buy such goods as cars and radios.
When their level of debt grew too high, people stopped buying new products.
Overproduction American businesses produced more goods than people wanted or could afford.
As the amount of money in circulation fell, economic activity decreased.
This made it more difficult for businesses to produce and consumers to spend.
Federal Reserve officials raised interest rates, making loans more expensive and limiting the amount of money in circulation.
Decline of international trade High import tariffs and collapsing European economies restricted international trade and deepened the Depression.
Introduction By 1932, Americans all across the country were feeling the pain of the economic collapse triggered by the stock market crash.
Desperate job seekers wandered from town to town in a fruitless quest for work.
In Portland, Oregon, an unemployed veteran of World War I named Walter Waters decided it was time to take action.
There, Waters hoped to persuade Congress to accelerate payment of a long-promised bonus to World War I veterans.
Congress had voted to pay former soldiers a dollar for every day they had served during the war, plus an extra 25 cents for every day spent overseas.
The government would not pay the bonus until 1945— the money was to be a retirement benefit.
Veterans argued that they needed the money sooner to help them through the hard times.
Members of Congress sympathetic to the cause crafted a bill that would pay the bonus right away.
The group’s numbers swelled as other unemployed veterans joined this Bonus Army.
Supportive townspeople provided them food, while some local officials, fearing violence, hurried them on their way.
By then newspapers had picked up the story, convincing veterans throughout the country to join the cause.
District police set up camp for the veterans in the fields along the Anacostia River, a few blocks from the Capitol building.
The veterans vowed to remain in the capital until the bonus bill was passed.
In 1932, thousands of war veterans joined the Bonus Army to demand that the government help them survive the hard times.
They maintained strict discipline and required newcomers to prove they were veterans.
Ideological Responses to the Economic Crisis Members of the Bonus Army continued to pour into Washington for weeks.
The scraggly veterans, many with families, gave a human face to the nation’s hard times.
Many Americans wondered how the government would respond— not only to the frustrated veterans, but also to the economic crisis they represented.
Politicians and other public figures proposed various ways to deal with the country’s economic problems.
An ideology is a set of basic ideas, beliefs, and values that form the basis of a social, economic, or political philosophy or program.
While running for president in 1932, Franklin Roosevelt used a metaphor to explain three ideological responses to the Depression.
In time, economic activity peaks, and then the business cycle moves into a period of decline.
After the downturn reaches its lowest point, a new period of economic expansion begins.
Let the Economy Stabilize A conservative is someone who cherishes and seeks to preserve traditional customs and values.
For conservatives in the 1930s, these values included self-reliance, individual responsibility, and personal liberty.
Conservatives tend to prefer the status quo, or current conditions, to abrupt changes.
Depression-era conservatives opposed large governmental efforts to effect change, which they felt challenged their values.
As the Depression worsened, conservatives resisted calls for radical changes to the free enterprise system.
Left alone, they argued, the economy would soon stabilize and then begin to improve.
They insisted that economic downturns and periods of low economic activityknown as panics— were normal.
They were part of the business cycle, a pattern in which economic growth is followed by decline, panic, and finally recovery.
Most preferred to suffer in silence rather than admit they needed help.
Conservatives insisted that charities take on the growing task of providing basic necessities to the needy.
If government had to step in, they argued, it should be local governments’ responsibility to care for their own.
The Government Must Help A liberal is someone who is committed to the expansion of liberty.
In the 1800s, liberals had focused on protecting individual liberty from the heavy hand of government.
They favored limited government that left individuals free to exercise their rights and pursue happiness in their own way.
They realized that limited government could offer individuals little protection from dangerous working conditions, price-fixing monopolies, or unsafe food and drugs.
By the start of the Progressive Era, many liberals believed that the government should play a role in regulating economic affairs.
As the Depression set in, liberals looked to the government to expand its powers once again to protect individual liberty.
These governmentfunded construction projects provide for such local needs as roads, bridges, and dams.
Next, liberals suggested placing new taxes on corporations and the wealthy to raise money for social welfare programs.
They effectively redistributed money from the 4t haves” in a society to the '‘have-nots/’ Finally, liberals called on the government to work closely with businesses to aid in their recovery.
In short, they urged the government to take on an active role within the framework of the capitalist system.
Capitalism Must Go A radical is someone who wants to make sweeping social, political, or economic changes in a society.
By the 1930s, both socialists and communists were attracting supporters with their calls for radical change.
Communists, for example, proposed doing away with the market economy altogether.
Under that system, economic decisions would move out of the marketplace and into the hands of government planners.
Radicals viewed events like the Bonus Army protest as opportunities to spread their ideas.
As the Depression wore on, such ideas began to appeal to a growing number of disillusioned Americans.
The government employed 21,000 workers, who completed the dam in just five years.
Liberals favored increasing government spending on such projects to create jobs for the unemployed.
While early on the party called for the people to revolt, a policy change in 1935 pushed its members to work through the political system for political and economic reforms.
A sitting president typically ran a “front porch"" campaign, leaving the White House for only a speech or two.
Hoover's Conservative Response to Hard Times President Herbert Hoover strongly believed in self-reliance, rugged individualism, and hard work.
Hoover became a millionaire and a respected public official through his own talents and determination.
But like most conservatives, he did not believe that the federal government should give aid to the needy.
Federal relief, he worried, would undermine selfreliance and encourage people to become dependent on government handouts.
Limited Government Intervention Like many economists, Hoover viewed the American economy as basically sound.
The economy would then bounce back without direct government involvement.
Meanwhile, Hoover looked to local communities, mainly through churches and private charities, to take care of their citizens.
In time, however, even he could see that this depression was different from past ones.
So did the number of Hoovervilles — shantytowns that homeless Americans in many cities built out of crude cardboard and tarpaper.
While people in cities went hungry, desperate farmers tried to boost crop prices by causing food shortages.
However, it was the sharp increase in bank failures that finally caused Hoover to rethink the government’s role in an economic crisis.
To deal with failing banks, Hoover at first tried his standard approach of voluntary cooperation.
He prodded the owners of healthy banks to loan money to banks that were suffering.
In 1932, he supported the creation of a government agency to save failing banks and businesses.
That agency, called the Reconstruction Finance Corporation , issued government loans to banks, railroads, and other big businesses.
Once companies began hiring again, he believed, prosperity would trickle down through the economy to those most in need.
Still, conservatives criticized Hoover for putting the government in the business of saving banks.
At the same time, liberals criticized what they called his trickle-down theory of helping the needy.
The poor, they argued, could not wait for money to seep down to them from expanding businesses.
In July 1932, he supported a bill authorizing the RFC to loan money to states that no longer had enough resources to help the needy.
The bill also allowed the RFC to finance a variety of public works projects.
This legislation stopped just short of offering direct federal relief to those in need, but it was a giant step in that direction.
Hoover signed the bill into law just as the issue of the Bonus Army was about to boil over.
However, on June 17, 1932, Congress defeated the bill that called for paying the bonuses immediately.
Fearful that the remaining veterans might become violent, Hoover ordered their removal.
On July 28, troops used tear gas and tanks to push the veterans out of Washington.
Like his distant cousin Theodore Roosevelt, FDR had a charming, magnetic personality.
As he campaigned across the country, he radiated confidence in his ability to take charge of the economic crisis and lead the country to better times.
While he did not yet make the details clear, FDR pledged, with this New Deal, to do whatever was needed to help the needy and promote recovery.
A gloomy Hoover warned Americans that a Roosevelt presidency could bring disaster.
Federal meddling in the economy, he claimed, would stifle free enterprise.
To the attendees, Roosevelt gave compelling speeches that he carefully planned with the help of a group of advisors nicknamed the Brain Trust.
March 9 The Emergency Banking Act gave the federal government broad power to help reopen the nation's banks.
March 22 The Beer-Wine Revenue Act legalized the sale of beer and wine.
March 31 The Reforestation Relief Act established th Civilian Conservation Corps, which would provide work for 250,000 young men that May 12 The Federal Emergency Relief Act granted money to states for relief projects to help the unemployed.
May 12 The Agricultural Adjustment Act set prices for farm crops while trying to reduce overproduction.
May 12 The Tennessee Valley Authority funded construction of flood control dams and power plants in Tennessee Valley states.
May 27 The Federal Securities Act regulated the sale of stocks and bonds.
June 13 The Home Owners Refinancing Act provided aid to families in danger of losing their homes.
June 16 The National Industrial Recovery Act established the Public Works Administration to supervise building projects and the National Recovery Administration to encourage fair business practices.
June 16 The Banking Act of 1933 established the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to insure depositors from losses when banks failed.
FDR Launches the New Deal's First Hundred Days Franklin D Roosevelt took office as president in March 1933.
In his inaugural speech, he told Americans, This great nation will endure as it has endured, will revive and will prosper.
So, first of all, let me assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself— nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance.
FDR presented Congress with a broad array of measures focusing on relief, recovery, and reform.
Lawmakers dispensed with their usual lengthy debates to enact a record number of bills in just over three months.
For that reason, this session of Congress became known as the Fir$t Hundred Days.
The relief measures that Congress passed during this remarkable session were intended to help the unemployed.
For example, the Civilian Conservation Corps put young jobless men to work maintaining forests and planting trees.
The recovery measures were designed to reverse the downward slide of the economy.
One such law, the Agricultural Adjustment Act, tried to make farming profitable again by reducing overproduction and raising crop prices.
The reform legislation passed in this session focused mainly on the financial sector.
The Truth-in-Securities Act, for instance, required companies issuing stock to provide full and accurate information to investors.
As Congress finished its work, no one could say how well the new laws would work.
Still, the whirlwind of activity that launched FDR’s New Deal brought fresh hope to a worried nation.
The election of 1932 presented voters with a choice between Republican president Herbert Hoover's conservative approach and Democratic challenger Franklin Roosevelt's promise of a New Deal.
The conservative response Conservatives thought the government should leave the economy alone.
The liberal response Liberals thought the government should play a more active role in the economy.
They also believed the government should step in to help those in need.
The radical response Radicals advocated abolishing the free enterprise system.
They believed that the government should plan economic activity and distribute wealth according to need.
Herbert Hoover At first, President Hoover relied on voluntary cooperation to ease the Depression’s effects.
As conditions worsened, Hoover gave government a limited role in the economy.
His Reconstruction Finance Corporation, however, failed to revive the economy.
Franklin D Roosevelt After his landslide victory in 1932, Roosevelt presented Congress with a variety of New Deal measures.
Congress enacted many programs to provide relief, promote recovery, and enact reforms.
Introduction In 1933, Harry Hopkins, director of the newly formed Federal Emergency Relief Administration, hired a journalist named Lorena Hickok to travel around the country as his eyes and ears.
Go talk with the preachers and teachers, businessmen, workers, farmers.
Go talk with the unemployed, those who are on relief and those who aren't.
And when you talk with them don’t ever forget that but for the grace of God you, I or any of our friends might be in their shoes.
Lorena Hickok Reports on the Great Depression 1 98 1 Hopkins had studied lots of statistical data.
He knew what percentage of the workforce was unemployed, how much the gross national product had fallen, and how many people had lost their homes.
What he could not learn from these numbers was how such realities had changed people’s lives.
First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt suggested that Hopkins hire Hickok— a seasoned reporter who had covered Mrs.
Roosevelt as her husband Franklin campaigned for the presidency— to study this question as a roving investigator.
Once hired, Hickok traveled from West Virginia coal mines to North Dakota wheat farms, from Georgia cotton fields to western mining camps.
Wherever she went, she reported to Hopkins about the hardships she observed— and there were plenty.
The Depression had left many Americans hungry and homeless, and it had forced others to give up school, postpone marriage, or put off parenthood.
In this chapter, you will discover how the economic collapse of the 1930s affected workers, farmers, and families.
You will consider how natural disasters intensified the suffering of many Americans.
Finally, you will see how some managed to survive despite the hard times.
As Lorena Hickok traveled through 32 states, she regularly penned letters to Harry Hopkins and the Roosevelts detailing what she saw.
She reported that unemployment had devastated city dwellers and farmers alike.
Those without jobs endured the hardships caused by economic insecurity as best they could.
At the worst point of the Depression, almost one in four workers was jobless.
It told of the sense of betrayal felt by many hardworking people who had suddenly become poor.
An Oral History of the Great Depression , 1970 Rising Unemployment Affects Millions of Americans From 1929 to 1933, almost one in every seven businesses failed.
In 1933, when Lorena Hickok began her travels, 13 million Americans were out of work.
In comparison, only about 3. percent of the population had been jobless before the stock market crash in 1929.
Losing their jobs was a crushing blow to people who were accustomed to providing for their families and who believed in the American ideal of opportunity for all.
Those who did manage to keep their jobs often found their hours— and their pay— reduced.
When companies had to lay people off, they first let go of very young, elderly, and minority workers.
African American unemployment rose as high as 50 percent in some cities during the Depression.
When the New Deal began in 1933, about 20 percent of people listed on government relief rolls were African Americans, even though they made up only about 10 percent of the population.
Men tended to work in heavy industries like automobile assembly and steelmaking, which were badly hit by the downturn.
Female secretaries, waitresses, maids, and telephone operators often kept their jobs, at least at first.
As the Depression wore on, employers began firing women to give the jobs to men with families to support.
Many states refused to hire women for government jobs if their husbands earned a living wage, or a wage high enough to provide an acceptable standard of living.
The unemployed had little to spend, so many businesses lost customers and had to close— increasing unemployment.
In addition to losing their jobs, many people lost their savings and their homes.
Farmers Lose Their Farms Farmers had faced economic troubles even before the Depression began.
But as unemployment reduced consumers’ buying power, many farmers could no longer sell their crops.
As a result, they could not make mortgage payments to banks that had loaned them money.
In desperation, some farmers tried to sell their farms— only to find that their property values had sunk along with the economy.
Property value tells what a piece of real estate is worth on the market.
Those who could not sell their farms lost them to foreclosure, a legal process that allows a lender to take over the property it has helped a borrower buy.
Farm families that went through foreclosure lost their homes, their livelihoods, and all the money they had invested.
Tenant farmers and sharecroppers in the South suffered the most, for these farmers, both black and white, could not afford to buy land.
Instead they rented it, borrowing money from the owner to purchase seeds and other supplies.
Typically, they did not earn enough selling their crops to cover their debts and rent.
To make matters worse, in Mississippi the average annual income per person fell from a meager $239 in 1929 to a pathetic $1 17 by 1933.
When tenant farmers and sharecroppers could no longer pay rent, some landowners forced them to leave.
Financial Woes Stress American Families Families suffered not only financial but also psychological stress when breadwinners lost their jobs.
Many jobless men and women felt ashamed of being unemployed, believing they had brought it on themselves.
Men also often felt that they lost status and authority within their families when they lost their jobs.
Those who could not afford rent sometimes squeezed in with relatives or friends.
But when costs rose too high, thousands of people, many of them teenagers, left home.
One man recalled that when he turned 16, his fath^told him, “Go fend for yourself.
The marriage rate declined 22 percent from 1929 to 1933, and the birth rate also dropped.
The divorce rate also fell, since many couples could not afford to live separately or to pay the legal fees involved in a divorce.
Farm Foreclosures, '*320-1932 Year Foreclosures per 1,900 Farms 1920 3.
Since 1920, the value of farm real estate had dropped more than 30 percent.
In this famous Depression-era photograph, the mood of the people waiting in line for a handout contrasts sharply with the cheerful message on the billboard.
People living in these shantytowns built shelters out of anything they could find.
The makeshift settlements were nicknamed Hoovervilles by those who believed that President Hoover had not done enough to combat the Depression.
In 1937, as Franklin Roosevelt began his second term as president and addressed the nation, he told of improvements made over the previous four years.
I see millions denied education, recreation, and the opportunity to better their lot and the lot of their children.
I see millions lacking the means to buy the products of farm and factory and by their poverty denying work and productiveness to many other millions.
I see one-third of a nation ill-housed, ill-clad, ill-nourished. —Franklin Roosevelt, second inaugural address, January 20, 1937 While the Depression affected all Americans in some way, this one third of the nation suffered the most.
Evictions Force People Out of Their Homes Without a steady income— or sometimes any income at all— many people could not pay their rent.
Eviction is a legal process that landlords use to remove tenants from their property.
Similarly, if homeowners could not make their monthly mortgage payments, banks would foreclose on their homes, forcing families to find shelter elsewhere.
Some crowded into apartments with other families, huddling together against the cold when they could not afford fuel for heat.
Others slept on park benches, in doorways, or, as one young homeless man reported, in haystacks, tobacco warehouses, a YMCA, a Salvation Army shelter, and jails.
Once he even pried open a church window, climbed in, and pulled two seats together to make a bed.
As an increasing number of people lost their homes, Hoovervilles sprang up around many cities.
City officials tried twice to get rid of the makeshift village by burning the shacks to the ground.
Some men, finding themselves unable to support their families, left home to live on the streets.
Teenagers also left home, often to ride the railroads in search of work.
Hopping on and off moving freight trains, however, carried its own set of dangers.
Millions Face Hunger and Starvation In addition to homelessness, loss of work often led to hunger.
One teenager who left home to find work later recalled, “I was hungry all the time, and I wasn’t used to hunger.
Food was so scarce that children sometimes picked through garbage dumps looking for scraps of anything edible.
Hunger led to malnutrition— a physical condition that results from not getting an adequate diet of healthy food— among the poor.
In coal-mining areas, childhood malnutrition rates may have risen as high as 90 percent.
One study reported that the illness rate among families of the unemployed soared to 66 percent higher than that of families with a full-time wage earner.
Not surprisingly, the poor could rarely afford the medical care their sicknesses required.
Some picked through garbage cans looking for scraps, some stole, and still others begged.
Lorena Hickok witnessed desperate mothers in South Dakota feeding their children a soup made of Russian thistle, a plant Hickok likened to barbed wire.
Reporter Louis Adamic described being at home one morning when his doorbell rang.
Instead, he saw a girl, as we learned afterward, of ten and a boy of eight.
Not very adequate for the season and weather, their clothing was patched but clean.
Mister,” said the girl in a voice that sounded older than she looked, “but we have no eats in our house and my mother said I should take my brother before we go to school and ring a doorbell in some house”— she swallowed heavily and took a deep breath— “and ask you for something to eat.” —Louis Adamic, My America , 1938 To feed the hungry, soup kitchens sprang up across the country.
Soup was easy to prepare and could be increased in order to feed more people by adding water.
Breadlines— long lines of people waiting for their bowl of soup and piece of bread— became a common sight in most cities.
For many, that soup kitchen meal was the only food they would eat all day.
Farmers watched helplessly as winds picked up precious topsoil and blew it away in massive dust clouds.
The drought affected much more of the country than just the Dust Bowl, but this region suffered the most.
Natural Disasters Intensify the Suffering As the year 1931 began, most farmers on the Great Plains were feeling optimistic.
Wheat prices were holding up despite the Depression, and prospects for a record-breaking crop looked good.
That summer, however, the rains abruptly stopped, and crops began to wither; then strong winds began to blow across the plains.
As one wheat farmer recalled, “The winds unleashed their fury with a force beyond my wildest imagination.
It blew continuously for a hundred hours and it seemed as if the whole surface of the earth would be blown away/’ The farmer was hardly exaggerating— he was describing the beginning of one of the worst natural disasters in the nation’s history.
Over the course of the next decade, drought, dust storms, and floods would add to the human misery already brought on by the hard times of the Great Depression.
Black Blizzards Plague the Great Plains At first, farmers on the Great Plains viewed the disastrous summer of 1931 as a freak of nature.
The following year, they once again planted their fields and waited for the rain needed to nourish their crops.
However, that rain never came — not that summer, nor the summers that followed.
The prolonged drought devastated farmers, who could not get their land to produce anything but dust.
Winds whipping across the plains picked up the dried-out topsoil and formed ominous black clouds.
The blowing dust became so thick that people called the storms black blizzards.
And I kept bringing my hand up closer and closer and closer and closer.
And I finally touched the end of my nose and I still couldn’t see my hand.
A journalist traveling through the region at the time described it as a Dust Bowl— a name that stuck.
Desertification In 1932, the weather bureau reported the occurrence of 14 dust storms.
The Great Plains was experiencing desertification, a process in which land becomes increasingly dry and desertlike.
Several factors contributed to the desertification of the Great Plains.
Drought, of course, was one, since without rain nothing would grow in farmers’ fields.
During World War I, the federal government had encouraged farmers on the Great Plains to raise as much wheat as possible.
After the war, as crop prices dropped, farmers had tried to increase their harvests even more to make up the difference.
To do this, they had plowed and planted every tract of land they owned.
By 1930, Great Plains farmers were harvesting far more wheat than they had been 10 years earlier, and they were also grazing more cattle.
Such intensive use of the land depleted the soil of nutrients and left it stripped of its native drought-resistant vegetation.
Once the drought came, there was no plant covering to hold the soil in place.
In 1935, the federal government responded to the loss of so much valuable topsoil by establishing the Soil Conservation Service.
The service promoted new farming methods designed to reduce soil erosion.
It planted about 18,000 miles of trees to act as windbreaks, reducing the force of winds blowing across the plains.
Dust storms known as black blizzards made life misery in towns like this one in rural New Mexico.
Desertification is a threat whenever drought hits a semiarid area like the Great Plains, In such regions, the native vegetation is adapted to dry conditions.
When this plant cover is removed, by farming or overgrazing, the soil below is exposed to sun and wind.
The desertification that created the Dust Bowl was not reversed until the drought ended in 1939.
Lands Threatened by Desertification Native vegetation of a semiarid area has adapted to the climate and can survive periods of drought.
Nonnative vegetation planted on cleared land may not have adapted to local conditions and may die during long dry spells.
Without plant cover to hold soil in place during a drought, it can blow away.
Destitute farm families loaded everything they could carry into old cars and fled the Dust Bowl.
Depopulation Although the federal government geared up to combat the drought, it took action too late for many farmers.
During the 1930s, a quarter of the people living in the Dust Bowl left the region.
Some had no option but to depart after banks foreclosed on their farms.
Others moved away because breathing in the dust was making their families sick.
Still others simply gave up, loading their possessions into a car or truck and driving away.
As the dry years piled up. depopulation, or the loss of residents from an area, took a heavy toll on the region.
Even churches shut their doors, as few people remained to come together in prayer on Sundays.
Some of the Dust Bowl refugees headed for nearby cities in hopes of finding work.
However, with the unemployment rate still high, jobs were scarce, so many more people left the region entirely.
Like the fictional Joad family in John Steinbeck’s novel about Dust Bowl migrants.
The Grapes of Wrath, those who left often followed United States Route 66 to California.
California appealed to migrants for its promise of farmwork in the fertile Central Valley.
Californians nicknamed the newcomers Okies because many of them came from Oklahoma.
During the 1930s, more than 300,000 people migrated from Oklahoma, Texas, Arkansas, and Missouri to California.
Many trekked along a migrant-farmworker circuit that followed the ripening of crops up and down the state.
Starting near the Mexican border in the spring they picked peas and later moved north to pick strawberries.
Then they headed farther north until they reached the San Joaquin Valley, where cotton was blooming.
All summer long, they followed ripening fruit up and down the Central Valley, moving from one farm labor camp to the next as the crops required.
In time, however, most of the migrants would find steadier work and put down roots.
The Great Flood of 1936 While the Great Plains suffered from drought, a different natural disaster— the Great Flood of 1936— struck the Northeast.
The rain, combined with heavy melting snow, caused rivers to spill over their banks.
The Great Flood of 1936 hit Pennsylvania the hardest of all states in the region.
Across the state, the flood caused the deaths of 84 people and the destruction of more than 82,000 buildings.
The disaster paralyzed Pittsburgh, a leading industrial city in the western part of the state.
Fires burned unchecked because fire trucks could not travel through flooded streets.
On March 20, 1936, the Pittsburgh Sun-Telegraph reported to its readers, Water famine hit devastated Pittsburgh today.
The specter of thirst and pestilence joined the twin horror of fire and flood.
In other sections of the city supplies will be exhausted within a few hours.
As Congress debated the creation of a national flood-control program, members of the Civilian Conservation Corps labored feverishly to build a sandbag levy around the Lincoln Memorial and the Washington Monument, which were located not far from the Potomac.
In the past, lawmakers had offered only weak support for flood-control measures.
Overflow from the Ohio River turned the streets of Louisville, Kentucky, into fast-flowing streams.
Lawmakers from the East who had long opposed spending money on flood-control projects changed their minds as floodwaters inundated their states and districts.
That year, Congress established the first national flood-control program.
They needed food and money, but they also needed to repair their spirits, as many blamed themselves for their circumstances.
An outof-work teacher said, “If with all the advantages I've had, I can't make a living.
Struggling to Get By People who lost their jobs did whatever they could think of to survive.
Those who owned land often grew food, both to eat and to trade for other necessities.
In cities, some people sold apples on the street, from which they might make $1 .15 on a good day.
One young artist traveled around the country painting and selling portraits on the street for 25 cents each.
Scraping by to meet basic needs, many Americans made sacrifices in all realms of life.
The financial crisis forced some 80,000 college students to drop out of school during the 1932-33 school year.
Middle-class men traded in their white collars for overalls in order to bring home a paycheck.
The work might not be what they had once hoped for, but they preferred it to going on government relief.
Looking for Help Despite people’s efforts, the day often came when even the proudest family had to look for relief.
However, as Lorena Hickok heard repeatedly on her travels, many found it difficult to admit they needed help.
Before he could seek relief, “I simply had to murder my pride,” an engineer explained to her.
Before Franklin Roosevelt launched his New Deal in 1933, there were few places the poor and unemployed could turn for help.
Herbert Hoover had believed that private charities could cope with the economic crisis, as they had with earlier downturns, and he had encouraged Americans to rely on them to do so.
Many wealthy Americans generously supported charities to help the less fortunate.
For example, the notorious gangster A1 Capone and his gang established the first soup kitchen in 32.
Coping with Hard Times Americans found many ways to deal with the grim realities of the Depression years.
A Cleveland teenager named Jerry Siegel coped by escaping into a world of fantasy and adventure.
In particular, tales of men with superhuman strength tickled his imagination.
The next morning he explained his idea to a friend who could draw well.
Average Americans were not as strong as Superman, but, using their wits, they did manage to endure.
Capone hoped that this act of charity would help clean up his shady image and keep him out of jail.
It did not— he was tried and convicted of income tax evasion the following year.
Local and state governments also attempted to aid people who were out of work.
They offered public assistance— support in the form of money, goods, or services provided to those in need.
Harry Hopkins, the man who had hired Hickok, agreed with the mayor's sentiment.
In his first few months as director of the Federal Emergency Relief Administration, an agency established to grant money to states for relief projects, he had come to understand that doling out his limited funds would not adequately deal with the crisis.
When his critics argued that doing more would cost too much, Hopkins responded bluntly, “Hunger is not debatable.
Private charities like the Salvation Army and Red Cross stepped up to help those in need when the Depression began.
Soup kitchens like this one in Los Angeles, California, provided food to the hungry.
But as the Depression deepened, the need for assistance was far greater than private groups could cope with.
As unemployment rates skyrocketed to 25 percent, American families shouldered the burdens of financial and emotional stress, while many farmers, unable to pay their bills, lost their farms.
Still, resourceful Americans found ways to endure during the hard times.
Homelessness Without steady incomes, many people faced eviction from their homes.
Still others lived on the streets or in shantytowns called Hoovervilles.
Children suffered the most from the effects of hunger and malnutrition.
In many cities, soup kitchens offered free meals to the needy, who might not eat anywhere else.
The Dust Bowl Years with no rain on the Great Plains created a disaster area known as the Dust Bowl.
Hundreds of thousands of people left the drought-stricken region to find work in California.
The Great Flood of 1936 Floods in the Northeast caused millions of dollars of damage and put more people out of work.
Charity and public assistance Private charities and state and local relief agencies attempted to relieve the human suffering of the Great Depression.
He grew up on a large estate overlooking the Hudson River and attended exclusive private schools, including Harvard College.
During his youth, Franklin had little contact with working-class Americans, except perhaps his parents’ servants.
When Franklin fell in love with Eleanor Roosevelt, a distant cousin, she broadened his awareness.
One day in 1903, while Franklin was still a college student, Eleanor took him to the home of one of her young pupils.
The girl lived in a tenement in a poor neighborhood, and the dark, crowded home shocked Franklin.
That day, Franklin Roosevelt opened his eyes to the harsh reality of life for the poorest Americans.
Spurred on by his memory of how the poor lived, he pushed for social and economic reforms.
In the 1932 presidential election, Roosevelt stormed to victory in part because he promised to help the working men and women whose labor energized the American economy.
During the first two terms, his New Deal programs gave hope to millions of Americans.
He worked to find jobs for the unemployed and urged Congress to do more for those in need.
With his radio addresses, FDR revolutionized the relationship between the president and the people.
After his first fireside chat, hundreds of thousands of letters flooded into the White House.
To manage the volume of mail, the White House increased its mailroom staff from one or two clerks to dozens of mail handlers.
The First New Deal In 1933, some 13 million Americans— nearly one fourth of the workforce— were unemployed.
FDR recognized that getting people back to work was his primary task as president.
Since 1930, thousands of banks and other companies had closed their doors.
In these brief broadcasts, the president explained his plans and asked Americans for their support.
FDR’s soothing voice and upbeat tone greatly appealed to people, and he quickly gained the public’s trust.
They in turn backed the New Deal programs of the First Hundred Days, often called the First New Deal.
Restructuring the Financial Sector President Roosevelt first attacked problems in the financial sector— the areas of money, banking, and investment.
This banking holiday stopped the steady withdrawal of funds from financial institutions.
Over the next few days, officials put together the Emergency Banking Act, and Congress quickly passed it into law.
This law reformed the banking system and gave the federal government more power to supervise bank activities.
On March 12, with many banks set to reopen the next day, FDR gave his first fireside chat.
About 60 million radio listeners tuned in to the broadcast to hear the president explain the government’s efforts to halt the banking crisis.
The following day, deposits began to flow back into the nation’s banks.
This law created the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation , which guaranteed individual bank deposits up to $5,000.
This guarantee helped restore public confidence in banks and stabilize the banking system.
The law also limited the freedom of banks to trade in stocks and bonds.
Before the stock market crash, banks had used depositors’ savings for risky, speculative investments.
A key step was the creation of the Securities and Exchange Commission in 1934.
The SEC required companies to publish the important facts about their business.
It also regulated the activities of stockbrokers and others in the investment business.
Shoring Up the Free Enterprise System During the Great Depression, some people thought the free enterprise system had failed.
They wanted to do away with it, but FDR differed— he wanted to help the system recover.
As with the New Deal in general, the president did not have a master plan for economic recovery.
He preferred to experiment, even though he knew that some programs would succeed and others would fail.
One of his grandest experiments was the National Industrial Recovery Act of 1933.
The NIRA was the centerpiece of the New Deal's efforts to breathe life into the economy.
It was designed to increase production while boosting wages and prices.
Its goals were to make more goods available and to give consumers more money with which to buy them.
This government agency worked with business leaders to create codes of fair competition in various industries.
Each industry followed its own code, which required companies in that industry to standardize products, set minimum prices, and announce any expected price increases.
With the NRA, the New Deal increased government regulation and economic planning and moved away from the laissez-faire policies of the past.
To help labor unions, the NIRA guaranteed workers the right to organize and bargain collectively.
It also authorized the NRA to propose codes for establishing minimum wages and maximum hours in various industries.
These measures represented a new level of government support for organized labor.
To help the unemployed, the NIRA allotted $3. billion for various public works.
It established the Public Works Administration to oversee these construction projects.
FDR hoped not only to create jobs but also to restart the economy with a large infusion of government cash.
Unfortunately, the PWA spent its money so slowly that it had little effect on jobs or the economy.
This agency tried to aid farmers by reducing crop production and raising prices.
Farmers had long suffered from low market prices for their products, which eroded their purchasing power— their ability to buy farm machinery and other goods.
Many farmers also lost their farms because they were unable to pay their mortgages.
This is the price that gives farmers the same purchasing power they had during an earlier, more prosperous time.
In theory, this would reduce crop supplies and increase market demand, thereby boosting prices.
The AAA also provided loans to farmers so they could pay their mortgages and stay on their land rather than join the jobless in cities.
Doing so indicated that the business engaged in fair competition by following the NRA codes for its industry.
Here, Chief Little John, a Porno Indian leader, poses with his great-grandson beside an NRA poster.
Among the largest projects were dams like those built for the Tennessee Valley Authority.
Workers also built bridges and roads, planted trees, and cut trails through national forests.
This Depression-era mural by artist William Gropper is titled Construction of the Dam.
Promoting Economic Development and Homeownership Another New Deal program worked to promote economic development in one of the poorest regions of the country, the Tennessee River valley.
In 1933, at the urging of the Roosevelt administration, Congress passed a bill creating the Tennessee Valley Authority.
The TVA, an independent government agency, built a series of dams on the Tennessee River and its tributaries.
These dams provided flood control and hydroelectric power to seven southern states.
The TVA also battled erosion and deforestation, both processes that posed serious problems in the Tennessee Valley.
In addition, this far-reaching program brought badly needed jobs to the region and encouraged businesses to invest there.
The New Deal also created two new federal agencies that would deal with housing issues.
Like farmers, many homeowners had lost their homes because they could not pay their debts.
One agency, the Home Owners' Loan Corporation, provided loans to help people meet their mortgage payments.
The other agency, the Federal Housing Administration , gave a boost to the banking and construction industries by insuring mortgage loans up to 80 percent of a home’s value.
Remembering the ""Forgotten Man"" After FDR’s inauguration, more than 450,000 Americans wrote letters to the new president.
Now, under the First New Deal, he carried out that promise by providing relief programs designed to help ordinary Americans as they struggled to survive the Depression.
One important work-relief program was the Civilian Conservation Corps , which gave young men jobs planting trees and working on other conservation projects.
A much larger program, the Federal Emergency Relief Administration , took an approach different from providing people with work.
Instead, it sent funds to state governments, which then distributed the cash to the needy.
For the first time in American history, a federal agency provided direct relief to the unemployed.
State and local agencies also pitched in with supplies of food and clothing to help the poor.
Protests and Political Challenges The flurry of activity during the First Hundred Days caught most Americans by surprise.
However, while Roosevelt managed to instill hope in desperate Americans, he had not yet beaten the Depression.
Critics Attack the New Deal When the early New Deal failed to restore economic prosperity, critics began to question FDR’s approach.
Some came from the right wing, those on the conservative side of the political spectrum.
When asked whether he was “left or right politically,’' FDR claimed to be part of the mainstream near the center of the spectrum.
Right-wing critics generally thought the New Deal had gone too far in expanding the role of the federal government.
These critics included a mix of conservative politicians, wealthy industrialists, bankers, and religious leaders.
Some of these critics joined forces in 1934 to form the American Liberty League.
This organization attacked FDR as a leftist radical and called New Deal legislation socialist and unconstitutional.
In 1936, Smith bitterly attacked the New Deal as a betrayal of Progressive ideas about good government and threw his support to the Republican candidate for president.
Although the First New Deal was popular with most Americans, it sparked criticism from both the left and the right.
Critics on the right complained that much of the tax money being pumped into the economy by New Deal programs was being wasted.
Critics on the left argued that the New Deal was not doing enough to help those in need.
The Louisiana senator and former governor attacked the New Deal for not doing enough to help poor Americans.
Demagogues Turn Up the Heat At the extremes of the political spectrum, demagogues also denounced the New Deal.
A demagogue is a political leader who appeals to people’s emotions and prejudices.
Charles Coughlin, a Roman Catholic priest, attracted millions of listeners to his radio broadcasts.
With his dynamic voice, the “radio priest” stirred up hatred against Wall Street bankers and greedy capitalists.
Huey Long, regarded by his supporters as a champion of the poor, seemed to his opponents a wild-eyed demagogue.
Long colorfully portrayed himself as the hero of the common man in the fight against big business.
In 1934 he launched his Share Our Wealth program with the slogan “Every Man a King ” Long wanted to take money from the rich and give every American family a grant of $5,000, a guaranteed job, and an income of at least $2,500 per year.
Left-wing critics of the New Deal generally thought the New Deal should give greater aid to the needy.
Robert La Follette, a progressive Republican senator, favored larger public works programs.
Francis Townsend devised a plan calling for a monthly payment of $200 to everyone over the age of 60.
Recipients would promise to retire and spend the money in the same month it was issued.
Townsend claimed his plan would free up jobs for younger workers and boost the economy.
Another socialist, the muckraker Upton Sinclair, called for a more radical New Deal.
He urged California’s state government to buy, rent, or seize unused land and factories and give them to jobless workers to use to produce their own food and goods.
Sinclair ran for governor of California in 1934 on the EPIC platform but was soundly defeated.
Any man with a thimble-full of sense ought to know that if you take 85 percent off of that table and give it to one man that you are bound to have two thirds of the people starving because they haven’t got enough to eat.
The work of famed Mexican muralist Diego Rivera, shown here, was a major inspiration to many WPA artists.
Others, like artist Ben Shahn's study of a riveter below, show ordinary Americans at work or play.
The Second New Deal To meet challenges from the right and the left, Franklin Roosevelt took to the airwaves once again.
In a June 1934 fireside chat, he asked Americans to judge the New Deal’s progress by “the plain facts of your individual situation.
In the November 1934 congressional elections, Democrats gained a large number of seats in both the House and the Senate.
In part to counter the demagogues, FDR shifted his focus away from recovery and toward social and economic reforms.
Energizing the Country with Electricity and Jobs In the spring of 1935, Congress passed FDR’s Emergency Relief Appropriation Bill.
FDR called it the Big Bill because it created several new agencies and called for nearly $5 billion in new spending, an unprecedented increase.
The REA established hundreds of publicly owned electrical cooperatives, built generating plants, and strung power lines.
When it completed its work, about 90 percent of the country’s farms had access to cheap power.
The WPA, a work -relief organization, put more than 3 million Americans to work in its first year.
They built hundreds of thousands of bridges, public buildings, and parks.
At the urging of Eleanor Roosevelt, the WPA also established arts projects.
Musicians combed the American backcountry to find and record folk music.
Many conservatives denounced the program’s cost, while labor unions attacked it for depressing wage rates.
The court ruled that the act violated the constitutional separation of powers by giving the president, rather than Congress, the power to issue “codes of fair competition” to businesses.
Roosevelt fumed that the Court had created a “no-man’s land” where no government, state or federal, could act effectively.
The Great Depression was especially hard on older people and disabled Americans.
Many, like this elderly couple in New Mexico, depended on government relief programs to survive.
The Social Security Act created an insurance system to help such people.
The act provided unemployment benefits for the jobless, old-age pensions for retired workers, and assistance for people who were too disabled to work.
A Bill of Rights for Workers Despite the Court’s rulings, FDR continued to push for reform legislation.
A month after the Supreme Court declared the NIRA unconstitutional, Congress passed a new bill to protect workers.
The National Labor Relations Act, also called the Wagner Act for the senator who sponsored it, came to be seen as a bill of rights for organized labor.
This board had the power to supervise union elections to ensure that they were free and democratic.
It could also penalize employers for “unfair labor practices,” such as attempting to discourage workers from joining or forming a union.
It also set a minimum wage of 25 cents an hour and a maximum 44-hour workweek for most workers.
Together, the Wagner Act and the Fair Labor Standards Act met many of the longstanding demands of American workers and promised to make their lives more secure.
Economic Security for Americans FDR also addressed the long-term problems of the aged and unemployed.
Congress passed the bill in June, and in August the president signed it into law.
Retirement benefits are cash payments made to retired workers sometime after they reach the age of 62.
The government finances these payments by taxing current workers and their employers.
Disability benefits are payments made to workers who have become too disabled to continue working, regardless of their age.
Severely disabled children are eligible for Social Security disability benefits as well.
The Social Security Act also set up an unemployment insurance program for workers.
This program makes payments to people who have lost their jobs and are seeking new work.
However, Congress has sometimes extended benefits for longer periods during economic recessions.
Battling the Supreme Court In 1936, FDR won a second term as president with a landslide victory.
He viewed this victory as a mandate— a grant of authority— to extend the New Deal further.
But FDR feared that the Supreme Court would continue to block his efforts.
By then, several Court decisions had threatened his attempts to give government a greater role in stabilizing the economy and society.
In 1937, FDR presented Congress with legislation to redesign the Supreme Court.
The bill called for adding a new justice for every sitting justice over age 70.
FDR claimed that the Court was behind in its work, partly because aging justices could not keep up.
He wanted to pack the Supreme Court with liberal justices who would favor New Deal programs.
Republicans and Democrats alike expressed outrage at FDR’s court-packing plan.
Around this time, the Supreme Court shifted course, becoming more accepting of government regulation of the economy.
In 1937, the Court upheld both the Social Security Act and the Wagner Act.
Conservatives, backed by the Court, had long equated liberty with the freedom of private enterprise to act without government interference.
Chief Justice Charles Evans Hughes observed that there was no constitutional basis for this narrow definition.
That is, government could promote liberty by using its powers to ensure fair treatment of all Americans.
To Sx ol the Nine A AND INDEPENDENT Roosevelt's scheme to put more liberal justices on the Supreme Court backfired.
Opponents accused him of threatening the independence of the judiciary and undermining the system of checks and balances.
Congress rejected the court-packing plan and dealt FDR a harsh political blow.
One popular union tactic was the sit-down strike, in which workers take over their workplace by ""sitting down"" on the job.
This sit-down strike was organized by the United Auto Workers union in 1937 at the General Motors plant in Flint, Michigan.
Social and Political Impacts The New Deal was a bold attempt to resolve the worst economic crisis in American history.
President Roosevelt wanted to use the vast power of the federal government to end the Depression.
The New Deal’s sweeping reforms aimed, in part, to meet this social objective.
Workers, women, and members of minorities all felt the impact of the New Deal, though some got a better deal than others.
A Good Deal for Workers The New Deal helped many workers by strengthening the labor movement.
First the NIRA and then the Wagner Act guaranteed the right of workers to form unions and to bargain collectively.
This growth presented a challenge to the American Federation of Labor , a large and powerful alliance of unions.
From its birth in the late 1800s, the AFL had organized skilled workers according to their craft, such as welding or printing.
During the 1930s, activists within the AFL began demanding that it organize workers not by craft but by industry.
John L Lewis, head of the United Mine Workers union, became one of the strongest supporters of this idea.
In 1935, Lewis helped form a group within the AFL to organize workers in mass-production industries.
The AFL suspended Lewis's group in response to its industry-wide organizing.
The CIO’s success, aided by New Deal laws supporting labor, helped swell union membership.
By 1940, union membership would climb to almost 28 percent of the total labor force.
Her experience working with the poor gave her insight into the needs of factory workers, tenant farmers, and others hit hard by the Depression.
She traveled the country, meeting people, assessing their needs, and reporting back to the president.
She especially encouraged him to place more women in government positions.
Under FDR, the government hired an unprecedented number of women— more than in any previous administration.
Talented women, such as Frances Perkins, reached high positions in government for the first time.
Perkins, FDR’s secretary of labor, proved to be an outstanding adviser to the president.
The first female member of the cabinet, she worked tirelessly to shape and administer such programs as Social Security and the Fair Labor Standards Act.
Another prominent figure, Mary McLeod Bethune, served as a special adviser to the president on minority affairs.
She also worked in the National Youth Administration , where she fought to increase opportunities for young African Americans.
As the Depression deepened, women were pressured to leave the workforce to free up jobs for men with families to support.
The Economy Act of 1932 prohibited a husband and wife from both working for the federal government.
Labor unions often supported the exclusion of women from the workforce.
A Disappointing Deal for African Americans The New Deal offered some hope for black Americans, a group hit especially hard by the Depression.
Competition for jobs, along with discrimination in hiring, pushed the unemployment rate for blacks well above that for white Americans.
Direct government relief as well as work-relief programs such as the CCC and the WPA helped many poor African Americans survive.
At the same time, more educated African Americans got jobs in government.
A lawyer named William Hastie rose from a position as an adviser to the president on race relations to become the first African American to serve as a federal judge.
Even New Deal agencies practiced racial segregation, especially in the South.
FDR himself failed to confront the evil of lynching, which claimed the lives of some 60 blacks between 1930 and 1934.
In 1935, a federal antilynching bill came before Congress, but FDR declined supporting it for fear of offending powerful southerners in Congress.
Roosevelt arranged for her to sing outdoors, on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial.
A crowd of 75,000 people, including many members of Congress, attended Anderson’s performance.
In 1939, artist Millard Owen Sheets was commissioned to create four murals depicting the influence of African Americans in art, science, education, and religion.
Federal efforts to assimilate them into mainstream America had trampled on their cultures and traditions.
FDR's commissioner of Indian affairs, John Collier, hoped to repair some of the damage with an Indian New Deal.
Collier ended the policy of forced assimilation, replacing government-run boarding schools with public schools on reservations.
He also encouraged greater cultural awareness about American Indians and improved health care for them.
As well, he tried to give Indian tribes more control over policies that affected their lives.
Under the terms of the Indian Reorganization Act of 1934, Indian communities received the right to set up their own tribal governments.
The Indian New Deal did not lift Indians out of poverty or bring back traditional Indian ways.
But it did reverse some harmful federal policies and restore some pride and hope to Indian communities.
A Tough Deal for Mexican Americans Like other ethnic minorities, Mexican Americans faced poverty and unemployment during the Depression.
As the economy shrank, jobs dried up in the Southwest, where most Mexican Americans lived.
The AAA, which paid farmers to cut back on planting, led to even more unemployment among farmworkers.
Mexican laborers who were not American citizens could not enroll in work relief.
More than a third returned to Mexico, many with their American-born children.
The Emergence of a New Deal Coalition in Politics Although the New Deal failed to bring concrete gains for many women and minorities, for most Americans its benefits outweighed its shortcomings.
The belief that government could make a difference in voters' lives inspired many people to become more involved in politics.
For example, in the 1936 election, over 70 percent of African American voters cast their ballots for Roosevelt.
This marked a major shift for the black population, which had traditionally supported Republicans as the party of Lincoln and Emancipation.
The 1936 election signaled the emergence of a new political partnership known as the New Deal Coalition.
Besides women and minority groups, the coalition included industrial workers, farmers, immigrants, reformers, southern whites, and city dwellers.
Even though unemployment remained high, FDR easily won a second term in 1936.
His decision to run for an unprecedented third term in 1940 stirred up a national controversy.
By 2006, some 48 million people were receiving Social Security benefits.
That number is expected to rise rapidly as baby boomers move into retirement Several plans have been put forward to help the system meet the needs of aging boomers.
If you live and work in the United States, you should have a Social Security card and Social Security number.
This is the number that the federal government uses to keep track of you, your earnings, and your future benefits.
It also had a lasting impact on American government and society, leaving a legacy that affects all Americans today.
Life, Liberty, and Economic Security One major legacy of the New Deal is the idea that Americans have a right to economic security.
As our Nation has grown in size and stature, however— as our industrial economy expanded— these political rights proved inadequate to assure us equality in the pursuit of happiness.
We have come to a clear realization of the fact that true individual freedom cannot exist without economic security and independence. —Franklin Roosevelt, January 1 1 , 1944 FDR went on to list a number of rights that emerged from the New Deal, including the right to a job, adequate wages, a decent home, medical care, and a good education.
We also accept that the government is responsible for guaranteeing these rights.
Before the New Deal, private charities bore the burden of caring for the needy.
The crisis was so severe that it could be tackled only by using the enormous resources of the federal government.
Americans began to accept the idea that many people could not survive without public assistance.
Most New Deal programs offered short-term relief to cope with the immediate effects of the Depression.
This milestone legislation established long-term assistance for those in need.
A welfare state is a social system in which the government takes responsibility for the economic well-being of its citizens.
Critics at the time grumbled that government assistance undermined the American principles of self-reliance and individualism.
It now includes a wide array of programs, from health insurance for older Americans to food stamps for the poor and parity price supports for farmers.
These are known as entitlement programs, as people who meet eligibility requirements are entitled to receive certain benefits from them.
A Larger Role for Uncle Sam in People's Everyday Lives Another notable legacy of the New Deal is the expanded role of government.
Each federal program required a new agency to administer it, which enlarged the government bureaucracy.
To meet the expense, FDR reluctantly resorted to deficit spending, or spending more than the government receives in revenues.
Conservatives reacted strongly to this growth in the size and power of government.
In 1936, one critic wrote that FDR had transformed government “into a highly complex, bungling agency for throttling business and bedeviling the private lives of free people.
Conservatives complain that big government leads to burdensome regulations, higher taxes, and less local control.
Liberals, however, defend the expanded role of the federal government as essential to creating a good and just society.
These and many more benefits of big government are all legacies of the New Deal.
Federal revenues grew faster than spending during the 1920s, creating budget surpluses.
The early programs of the First New Deal emphasized economic recovery and financial reform.
These programs greatly expanded the role of the federal government in American life.
National Industrial Recovery Act The N1RA was aimed at shoring up the free enterprise system by helping businesses, workers, and the needy.
Agricultural Adjustment Administration The AAA sought to boost agricultural prices by paying farmers to plant fewer crops, thus reducing supply and increasing demand.
Wagner Act This law strengthened the labor movement by supporting the right of workers to organize and join unions.
Works Progress Administration The WPA organized and funded public works projects that provided jobs and wages to unemployed workers.
Social Security Act Social Security was designed to provide economic security to unemployed and retired Americans.
New Deal Coalition A diverse group of Americans came together to support FDR and the New Deal.
This coalition helped insure FDR’s reelection and the continuation of his programs.
The New Deal Franklin Roosevelt's administration designs dozens of programs to relieve suffering and to put people back to work.
WORLDS HIGHEST STtNDARPaf The Assassination of Huey Long Huey Long and his ""Share the Wealth"" program die together.
The American Economy Collapses Breadlines grow, and unemployment reaches 25 percent.
When a war engulfed Asia and Europe in the late 1930s, most Americans hoped to remain neutral.
Once at war, men and women of all backgrounds joined together to fight a common foe.
Instead they found their nation locked in a new kind of conflict with the Soviet Union.
This ""cold war"" defined United States foreign policy for decades to come.
Introduction The Great Depression in the United States led to a worldwide depression.
This depression and the effects of World War I had left the German economy in tatters.
In the 1930s, a German dictator, Adolf Hitler, took advantage of Germany’s troubles to stir up German nationalism.
He rearmed the country, violating the Treaty of Versailles, and began to threaten his neighbors.
In 1936, German troops occupied the Rhineland, a German region on the border with France.
Although the Versailles Treaty banned military activities in this region, the League of Nations did nothing in response.
Hitler demanded that the Sudetenland, a German-speaking region of Czechoslovakia, be turned over to Germany.
At this point, many Europeans feared that Hitler was pushing Europe toward war.
France and Great Britain still bore the scars of World War I and would go to great lengths to prevent another conflict.
In September 1938, British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain flew to Germany to talk with Hitler.
At the meeting, Chamberlain asked Hitler if he would be satisfied with the Sudetenland and leave the rest of Czechoslovakia alone.
Hitler convinced Chamberlain that his aims were peaceful and that he had no desire to control other countries.
Yet they had already decided on a policy of appeasement— yielding to an enemy’s demands in order to maintain peace.
Germany would get the Sudetenland, despite Czechoslovakia’s objections.
Chamberlain told the British people that it did not make sense to go to war over such a small territory.
Chamberlain and Hitler then worked out the details of what became known as the Munich Pact.
Together with the leaders of France and Italy, they signed the agreement in Munich, Germany, on September 29, 1938.
Mandeville Special Collections Library, UC San Diego Theodore Geisel, known as Dr.
His cartoon ""The Appeaser"" shows a man offering candy to monsters bearing the swastika, the symbol of Hitler's Germany.
They also objected to the war-guilt clause, which blamed them for World War I The nationalistic feelings aroused by the treaty allowed Hitler to seize control and turn Germany into a dictatorship.
In the Soviet Union, however, dictatorship emerged from a different source— communism.
In 1922, the communists formed the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics , commonly known as the Soviet Union.
By the early 1930s, Stalin had established a totalitarian dictatorship.
Totalitarianism is a system in which the government totally controls all aspects of a society, including the economy.
The two goals were linked, in that increased exports of food would bring in cash to finance industrialization.
This plan called for taking private land from farmers and forcing them to move onto huge collective farms.
Many farmers did not want to resettle on these cooperative, state-owned farms.
But those who resisted were shot or forced to do hard labor in prisonlike concentration camps.
Millions of others died in the famine that followed the shift to collective farms.
Stalin could have diverted food to starving farmers, but instead he sold it abroad to earn cash.
By the early 1930s, modernized factories were churning out machinery, iron and steel, and consumer goods.
In 1934, he started to purge party officials by having them arrested, put on trial, and executed.
By 1936, the Soviet secret police were rounding up and killing enormous numbers of party leaders, military officers, industrial managers, and others.
This Great Purge, which claimed millions of lives, ensured that remaining officials would be loyal to Stalin.
Mussolini Establishes a Fascist Dictatorship in Italy Serious problems plagued Italy after the First World War.
Inflation and labor strikes hurt the Italian economy, and communists threatened to take over the democratic government.
In addition, Italians felt insulted by the Versailles Treaty, because its grant of territory to Italy fell far short of their expectations.
Benito Mussolini, a veteran of the war, took advantage of conditions in Italy to emerge as a national figure and eventually form a dictatorship.
They favor military values, the use of violence, and a leader who is strong and ruthless.
Fascism often arises during a time of crisis, promising to revive an earlier era of glory.
Mussolini used his extraordinary skill at public speaking to promote fascism.
He did not speak with the calm, soothing voice of Franklin Roosevelt in a fireside chat.
Instead, Mussolini agitated crowds with emotional outbursts and dramatic gestures.
At these rallies, tough young men wearing black shirts provided security.
These supporters also formed violent Blackshirt squads that broke up political meetings and labor strikes, assaulted socialists and communists, and terrorized local populations.
By 1922, fascists dominated several areas of Italy, and Mussolini prepared to take control of the whole country.
In October, he and thousands of Blackshirts threatened to march on Rome.
Influential business and army leaders persuaded Italy’s king, Emmanuel III, that Mussolini might be able to solve the nation’s problems.
He banned labor unions, outlawed opposing political parties, and censored the press.
Mussolini wanted to build Italy’s economy, and his industrial development and public works programs had some success.
He also hoped to turn Italy into a great European power, using the Roman Empire as a model.
The Nazis held mass rallies to motivate the German army and to inflame nationalist spirit.
Under his leadership, this party would direct a mass movement based on a form of fascism known as Nazism.
Nazis believed that Germans and other Nordic peoples— Hitler called them Aryans— were physically and morally superior to other races.
Nazis wanted to purify Germany by removing other races, especially Jews.
He started the book in 1924, while spending a year in prison for trying to overthrow the government of the German state of Bavaria.
In Mein Kampf, Hitler said that the superior Aryan race was locked in a struggle with other races.
He introduced the idea of Lebensraum , or “living space,” declaring that Germany needed land on which Aryan settlers could raise large families.
Those families, in turn, would conquer more territory, expanding the German empire.
Hungry, unemployed Germans began looking for a leader who could save the nation from ruin.
Hitler addressed large crowds, blaming the Jews for nearly every German problem, from the world war to the depression.
He moved quickly to dissolve the republic, replacing German democracy with a totalitarian government.
The Nazis called this government the Third Reich— the successor to two earlier German empires.
They passed new laws targeting Jews, barring them from certain jobs and exposing them to persecution.
Hitler also centralized the government, placing Nazis in the main positions of authority.
The Military Takes Control of the Government in Japan Like Germany, Japan had a mixed history of military rule and democracy.
Lacking raw materials for industry, it relied on a strong military to obtain natural resources from other countries.
It also signed the Kellogg-Briand Pact joining 14 other nations in a pledge to resolve disagreements peacefully.
Civilians gained more power in the government, although Japan’s emperor continued to play a strong role.
In the 1930s, however, the worldwide economic depression undermined civilian rule and caused Japan to move toward a policy of militarism.
The Japanese military began to increase its power and to play a greater role in politics.
Japan’s growing militarism was combined with an extreme form of nationalism.
Many Japanese turned away from Western influences and embraced traditional values and culture.
Radical nationalists also called for more aggressive military action abroad to acquire territory and raw materials.
Like Hitler, they wanted to expand Japan’s “living space” and acquire oil and other vital resources.
Some nationalists joined with a group of army officers in efforts to overthrow the civilian government.
Nevertheless, civilian politicians, fearing for their lives, gave up more power to the military.
Japanese militarism got another boost in 1941, when General Hideki Tojo became prime minister, replacing a civilian leader.
Tojo, an aggressive militarist, continued to develop the military and prepare the nation for war.
Military Aggression Meets a Weak Response During the early 1930s, Americans still strongly favored isolationism.
With the bitter memory of the first world war and the challenge of economic problems at home, they did not want the nation to become entangled in another war.
President Franklin Roosevelt took no direct action against aggressive dictators in Asia and Europe.
In his 1933 inaugural address, Roosevelt vowed that the United States would be a “good neighbor” who “respects the rights of others ” This pledge was meant to send a message to aggressor nations.
But it also reflected his desire to end United States intervention in Latin America and improve relations with that region.
Over the next few years, the United States would encourage Japan, Germany, and Italy to abide by this principle, but it still would not back up its words with action.
Militarists Expand Japan's Empire One of the first examples of blatant aggression came in 1931 , when Japan seized a portion of China.
Japan and other imperialist powers had previously established spheres of influence in China, where they exploited the country’s land and resources.
Japan's sphere of influence was Manchuria, a region in northeastern China.
When China’s nationalist government threatened to expel foreign powers, the Japanese army invaded Manchuria and took control of the region.
In addition, it began an era in which the military dominated the Japanese government.
In 1932, the League of Nations ordered Japan to withdraw its army from the region.
Throughout the 1930s, Japan's quest for raw materials drove its imperial expansion.
Japan's militarists began eyeing the Dutch East Indies, which had abundant oil supplies.
In July, the Japanese army clashed with Chinese forces outside Beijing, China’s capital.
The Chinese army pulled back, but the Japanese caught up with them at the city of Nanjing.
After capturing the city, Japanese soldiers went on a six-week rampage known as the Rape of Nanjing.
They massacred as many as 300,000 Chinese civilians and brutally raped about 20,000 Chinese women.
By the end of the year, Japan’s military occupied China’s main cities and much of its fertile land.
By 1941 , Japan had added French Indochina to its Asian empire to go along with Formosa (now called Taiwan), Korea, large areas of China, and several small Pacific islands.
Europe's Dictators Test the League of Nations Japan’s aggression tested the League of Nations.
The League was intended to serve as an instrument of international law.
In theory, it could impose boycotts and other economic sanctions or use the combined military force of its members to keep unruly nations in line.
In practice, however, it was a weak organization, partly because the United States was not a member.
Throughout the 1930s, Germany and Italy would also test the League’s will.
In 1935, he announced the formation of an air force and the start of compulsory military service.
The League of Nations Jod^ed a formal protest, but it refused to consider sanctions against Germany.
This was another test of the League’s resolve to stand up to aggression.
In October 1935, the Italian army invaded the African nation of Ethiopia.
Ethiopia appealed to the League of Nations, which voted to impose economic sanctions on the aggressor.
The sanctions were mild, and few League members seriously applied them.
In October, he and Mussolini joined in a treaty of friendship that forged an alliance, known as the Rome-Berlin axis, between their countries.
Led by General Francisco Franco, the Spanish military and its rightwing allies, known as the Nationalists, sought to overthrow Spain’s democratic republic.
Italy and Germany backed the rebels with supplies, weapons, and troops.
Various left-wing As part of Mussolini's plan to create a New Roman Empire, Italy invaded and occupied Ethiopia in 1935.
Emperor Haile Selassie fled Ethiopia just before Italy annexed his country.
Selassie had pleaded with the League of Nations to take strong action against Italy.
Although some 3,000 Americans volunteered, the United States government stayed out of the conflict.
Franco and the Nationalists won and established a rightwing dictatorship.
Great Britain and France Seek to Appease Hitler Encouraged by events in Italy and Spain, and by his own successful occupation of the Rhineland, Hitler continued his campaign of expansion.
During this time, Britain and France did little to stop him, choosing instead to follow a policy of appeasement.
Hitler next set his sights on neighboring Austria, the country of his birth.
The following day he proclaimed Anschluss , or “political union,” with Austria.
Britain and France remained passive spectators to this German expansion.
By signing the Munich Pact in September 1938, he acquired the Czech region of the Sudetenland.
The United States Congress Legislates Neutrality During this period, the United States did little to thwart aggression.
When Mussolini invaded Ethiopia, for example, the League of Nations considered establishing an oil embargo, or suspension of trade, against Italy.
The League asked the United States, a major oil supplier, if it would join the embargo.
Roosevelt said no, pointing out that he had just signed the Neutrality Act of 1935.
This act prevented the United States from supplying “arms, ammunition, or implements of war” to nations in conflict.
Because the law said nothing about oil, Roosevelt chose not to block oil shipments to Italy.
Congress passed additional neutrality acts in 1936 and 1937, all designed to keep the country out of conflicts brewing in Europe, such as the Spanish Civil War.
Like Europeans, they recalled the horrors of World War I and wanted to avoid getting drawn into a new conflict.
He wrote letters to the aggressors and to League members, urging them to settle their differences through negotiation.
Hitler Plunges Europe into War Great Britain and France chose to avoid war with Germany by allowing Hitler to behave as he pleased.
But Hitler had no interest in avoiding war and grew bolder with every aggressive step he took.
In March 1939, he broke the Munich Pact by invading Czechoslovakia and seizing control of Prague, the Czech capital.
As Churchill suspected, appeasement only made Hitler more eager to conquer new territory.
The takeover of Czechoslovakia finally caused Britain and France to draw a line in the sand.
They declared that if Germany made any further attacks on small states, then they would declare war.
Communists and Nazis despised each other and had little reason to cooperate.
Yet Hitler sought an agreement with Stalin to keep the Soviet Union neutral in the coming war.
The German-Soviet Nonaggression Pact, signed in August 1939, served the interests of both leaders.
Hitler planned to attack Poland, an action that was likely to ignite a broader war in Europe.
Hitler could not afford to fight a war on two fronts, east and west, at the same time.
Hitler secretly promised to give Stalin part of Poland and grant him a sphere of influence in Eastern Europe.
But Hitler already had plans to attack the Soviet Union, which had vast, fertile farmlands that were a key to fulfilling the quest for Lebensraum.
Hitler also understood that Nazi Germany could not coexist for long with the communist USSR to its east.
Two days later, France and Britain— the Allied powers— declared war on Germany.
Without any warning, German bombers launched attacks on railroads, airfields, communications networks, military bases, and other strategic sites.
These attacks helped prevent Polish mobilization, the assembling of troops and equipment for war.
Meanwhile, waves of infantry, supported by tanks and artillery, pushed toward key cities.
By the first of October, Germany and the USSR had complete control of the country.
Germany's blitzkrieg tactics were designed to avoid the stalemate and trench warfare of World War I.The objective was to break through enemy lines at the weakest points and then rush forward to spread fear and confusion behind the lines.
Paratroopers disrupt communications and slow the movement of enemy reinforcements.
Except for neutral nations, nearly all of Europe fell under Axis control.
He moved soldiers to Germany's border with France and the Low Countries— Belgium, the Netherlands, and Luxembourg.
France relied for its main defense on the Maginot Line, a string of heavily armed fortresses along the German border.
Most French troops massed here, while others gathered along the border with Belgium.
British forces crossed the English Channel, prepared to aid France and the Low Countries.
Within a few weeks, Germany had conquered these two Scandinavian countries.
Using blitzkrieg tactics, the main German force burst through Luxembourg and southern Belgium into France in just four days.
Skirting the Maginot Line, the Germans sped westward, encircling defenders.
Hundreds of thousands of French and British troops found themselves trapped in a shrinking pocket of French countryside.
They retreated toward the port of Dunkirk on the northwest coast of France.
Britain sent every boat it could find across the English Channel to evacuate the soldiers.
Under the terms of the armistice, Germany would occupy three fifths of the country.
A puppet government is one that is run by citizens of a conquered country who carry out the policies of the conqueror.
Britain Fights on Alone Britain, now led by Prime Minister Winston Churchill, stood alone against the Axis powers.
After the evacuation from Dunkirk, Churchill had vowed to fight Germany and defend Britain with every resource at his disposal.
We shall fight . . . on the seas and oceans; we shall fight with growing confidence and growing strength in the air.
We shall defend our island whatever the cost may be; we shall fight on the beaches, landing grounds, in fields, in streets and on the hills.
We shall never surrender. — Speech before the House of Commons, June 4, 1940 Hitler wanted to conquer Britain, but he knew that the large and powerful British navy could keep his army from crossing the English Channel.
He set up air bases in conquered lands from France to Norway and moved in some 2,800 bombers and fighter planes.
German planes flew raids throughout the summer of 1940 and into the fall.
They attacked British ships, ports, airfields, radar stations, and industrial centers.
To counter this onslaught, the British sent up the fighter pilots of the Royal Air Force in an engagement known as the Battle of Britain.
The RAF pilots, flying their Spitfires and Hurricanes, proved effective against the German air campaign.
For the next several months, bombing attacks devastated sections of London and other large cities.
That victory gave the Allies reason to believe that Hitler could be stopped.
Many Londoners who stayed in the city took shelter in the subway, or the Underground, during air raids.
The United States Enters World War II After war broke out in Europe, isolationism lost some of its appeal for Americans.
Hoping to keep the United States out of the war, Hitler sought to expand his alliance.
In September 1940, Germany, Italy, and Japan signed the Tripartite Pact, making Japan a member of the Axis powers.
The three nations agreed to provide mutual support in the event of an attack by a country not yet in the war.
If the United States entered the war, it would have to fight on two fronts— Asia and Europe.
Hitler hoped that the threat of a twofront war would ensure American neutrality for a while longer.
Roosevelt Inches Away from Neutrality The start of war put the United States in a risky position.
Americans feared getting drawn into the fighting, but they wanted to help the Allies.
Yet the neutrality acts banned the sale of arms to belligerent nations.
In November 1939, Roosevelt pushed a bill through Congress that repealed the arms embargo.
Nations had to pay cash for materials and carry them away in their own ships.
After the fall of France, the United States finally began rearming itself in earnest.
In September 1940, Congress enacted the first peacetime military draft in United States history.
A month later, the Selective Training and Service Act had enrolled 16 million men.
Roosevelt was determined to provide Britain “all aid short of war"" and urged Congress to adopt a plan to lend, not sell, arms to Britain.
This legislation, the Lend-Lease Act, passed in March 1941 , but only after heated public and congressional debate.
In June 1941 , Hitler broke the Nonaggression Pact by attacking the Soviet Union.
Great Britain announced its support for the USSR, and the United States began sending supplies to the besieged country under the Lend-Lease Act.
In August, Churchill and Roosevelt met in secret aboard a warship in Canadian waters of the North Atlantic.
There they prepared a declaration of common principles known as the Atlantic Charter.
They promised not to use the war to expand their own territory, and they asserted the right of all peoples to self-government.
Congress voted to allow American merchant ships to arm themselves and sail to Britain.
Although the Japanese inflicted major damage, they failed to destroy the fuel depot that served the fleet.
They also failed to sink any aircraft carriers, which were not in Pearl Harbor at the time.
Japan Attacks the United States From 1940 to 1941, Japan continued seeking raw materials through conquest.
It occupied French Indochina, in Southeast Asia, and set its sights on the Dutch East Indies.
The United States tried to undercut Japan’s aggression in several ways.
It sent loans and other aid to Japan's enemy, China, and froze Japanese assets in American banks.
It also blocked the export of vital resources, including oil, to Japan.
By 1941 , American intelligence officers had managed to intercept and decode secret messages from Japan to its foreign offices.
Late in the year, officers learned of a coming attack on American territory in the Pacific Ocean.
They thought the attack might target an American base in the Philippines.
Instead it was aimed at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii— the home of the United States Pacific Fleet.
In a little more than two hours, the Japanese sank or damaged 18 American ships.
In all, the raid left more than 2,400 Americans dead and nearly 1 ,200 wounded.
Americans began to prepare for a conflict that would test the nation’s strength and courage. z Navy sailor Dorie Miller, a ship's cook, manned an antiaircraft gun during the attack on Pearl Harbor.
In 1941, the United States entered the war as one of the Allied powers.
Totalitarianism In 1924, Joseph Stalin became the dictator of the communist Soviet Union.
Nazi dictator Adolf Hitler gained power by promising to restore German strength.
Similar actions took place in Italy under dictator Benito Mussolini and in Japan under Japanese militarists.
In the Munich Pact, they agreed to give him part of Czechoslovakia in return for peace.
Neutrality Acts A series of neutrality acts in the 1930s kept the United States from being drawn into European conflicts, including the Spanish Civil War.
As World War II began, however, Franklin Roosevelt and Congress revised the acts to allow arms trading with the Allies.
Lend-Lease Act Germany quickly occupied most of Europe and threatened to invade Great Britain.
As German bombers ravaged British cities, the United States decided to help Britain by passing the Lend-Lease Act.
This law allowed the United States to lend arms to Britain and, later, to the Soviet Union.
Attack on Pearl Harbor On December 7, 1941 , Japan attacked the United States Pacific Fleet at Pearl Harbor.
Introduction After the shock of the Pearl Harbor attack, many Americans wondered what would happen next.
As it turned out, the United States was not immediately endangered by an enemy invasion.
If the Allies failed to stop the Axis powers, then one day Americans could personally experience the horrors of war in their own land.
Roosevelt knew the war effort would require the enthusiastic backing of the American people in order to succeed.
Many others would help on the home front by working to expand the output of war materials.
They would have to accept rationing— a system for limiting the distribution of food, gasoline, and other goods— so the military could have the weapons, equipment, and supplies it needed.
In March 1942, the government announced rules aimed at saving more than 40 million pounds of wool a year.
Men’s suits could no longer be sold with a vest or an extra pair of pants.
The new rules also restricted the type and amount of fabric in women’s clothes.
Designers cooperated by using more synthetics, such as rayon, and by making skirts shorter and dresses simpler.
During the war, the entire country would endure hardships, many extending far beyond being forced to wear plainer clothes.
Civilians contributed to the war effort when they took part in the rationing system.
The key to the system was the ration book, which contained coupons that allowed consumers to buy rationed items, such as canned goods, sugar, coffee, and dairy products.
Organizing the American Economy for War Gross Domestic Product, 1940-1944 As the war effort got underway, the government spent billions of dollars on military supplies and equipment War industries worked night and day to satisfy this demand.
So did the national debt, as the government borrowed heavily to cover war expenses.
As with the War Industries Board of World War I, the WPB’s main task was to manage the conversion of industries to military production.
Automobile manufacturers, for example, switched from making car engines to making airplane and tank engines.
For example, a soft drink company might retool its machinery and retrain its workers to pack artillery shells with explosives.
All across the country, businesses mobilized their resources to serve the needs of the military.
A Wartime Production Boom Ends the Depression The huge demand for military supplies revived the economy.
As the economy moved into high gear, the gross domestic product rose rapidly.
GDP is the total value of goods and services produced in a country in a year.
From 1940 to 1944, this basic measure of national output increased by 1 16 percent.
During the same four years, the total personal income of American workers rose by more than 1 10 percent.
During the New Deal, the government had taken an active role in stimulating the economy.
The WPB successfully mobilized businesses behind the war effort, leading to closer relationships between the government and large corporations.
As also happened during World War I, a National War Labor Board was set up to mobilize labor.
The main task of the NWLB was to settle labor disputes before they disrupted the production of war goods.
Immediately after the attack on Pearl Harbor, union leaders agreed to a no-strike pledge.
The wage limits and no-strike pledge left labor leaders with very little bargaining power.
In exchange, the NWLB guaranteed unions that all new employees at companies with union contracts would automatically become union members.
Financing the War Effort with Taxes and Bonds During the war, government spending rose to new levels.
More than $175 billion worth of defense contracts went out to businesses from 1940 to 1944.
The government met these costs the same way it had during World War I-through taxes and borrowing.
Taxes provided about 45 percent of the revenue needed to pay for the war.
To make tax collection easier, Congress devised a system of withholding.
Employers held back a certain amount from every paycheck and sent it directly to the government.
It also borrowed from the American people through the sale of war savings bonds.
As during World War I, war bonds not only provided the government with cash but also gave people a way to show their support for the war effort.
Government agencies and private companies once again produced advertisements urging Americans to buy war bonds.
Campaigns to sell bonds involved a variety of Americans, from schoolchildren to glamorous celebrities.
Government Attempts to Curb Inflation and Consumption Inflation became a serious problem during the war.
Americans had money to spend, but the focus on military production meant that few consumer goods were available.
Congress gave the job of curbing inflation to the Office of Price Administration.
The OPA instituted price controls— a system of legal restrictions on the prices charged for goods.
From 1940 to 1945, consumer prices rose only 35 percent, instead of doubling or tripling as some officials had feared.
The OPA also rationed about 20 basic consumer products, including gasoline, tires, sugar, meats, and processed foods.
Each month, consumers received books of coupons that they turned in to the grocer when they bought rationed foods.
When they ran out of coupons, they could buy no more until they received a new book the next month.
This program succeeded in reducing the overconsumption of scarce goods and ensured that everyone would have fairly equal access to those goods.
One old shovel, Americans were told, contained enough iron to make four hand grenades.
They also peeled the foil off cigarette packages and gum wrappers and rolled them into balls for recycling.
In 1943, more than 20 million gardens yielded one third of all the vegetables eaten in the country that year.
Victory gardens and recycling campaigns not only boosted war production but also raised the morale of Americans on the home front.
People understood they were making an important contribution to the war effort.
Warplanes and tanks were critical items for the United States military during the war.
Production of both types of equipment increased rapidly during the early years of the war.
Warplane production continued to grow through 1944, while the production of tanks was in decline.
National Manpower Council, Womanpower, 1957 Selective Sen'ice and Victory, 1948.
Members of these groups often faced racism or other forms of discrimination.
Within each combat unit, however, a bond often emerged that crossed ethnic lines.
American GIs Go to War Many young Americans left the comforts of home to join the military.
While they were in the service, the government provided all of their food and supplies.
For that reason, they began referring to themselves as GI soldiers, or simply GIs.
The name stuck, and fighting men in all the armed forces used it proudly.
Assembling a Fighting Force In 1940, more than 16 million men between the ages of 21 and 35 had registered for the draft.
Later registrations expanded the age limits to include men from 18 to 44.
By the time of the attack on Pearl Harbor, they had swelled the army's ranks from 300,000 to a fighting force of more than 1 . million troops.
After the attack on Pearl Harbor, volunteers swamped military recruiting stations throughout the nation.
They represented a broad range of American society, from miners and mill workers to professors and politicians.
By the end of the war, nearly 6 million had enlisted, mainly in the navy or the army air corps.
For draftees and volunteers alike, the war offered an opportunity to show their patriotism by fighting for their country.
Most willingly packed their bags and boarded buses and trains, not knowing whether they would ever return.
Immigrants and ethnic minorities saw joining the military as an opportunity to show that they were truly Americans.
Preparing the Troops to Fight Draftees and recruits reported first to an army reception center within a huge complex, such as at Fort Dix, New Jersey, or Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
They slept in barracks with no privacy and traded their civilian clothes for uniforms.
The main goal of the reception center, however, was to determine where each recruit should go for training.
Most of these young men had little experience with life outside their hometowns.
Suddenly they found themselves thrown into an unfamiliar environment with fellow soldiers from all over the country.
The trainers, or drill instructors, had as little as eight weeks to prepare men for combat.
The job of the trainers was to turn soft civilians into rugged fighting men.
They got up at 6, washed, dressed, ate, and made the long march to the training site by 8m.
Instruction included tent pitching, map reading, guard duty, sanitation, weapons care, and endless physical training.
Later, trainees took part in parachute jumping and live-ammunition exercises, which called for soldiers to crawl through the dirt while real machine gun bullets whizzed above their heads.
Hardships and Opportunities Training could only do so much to prepare a GI for combat.
The deafening blasts of artillery or grenades, the squeal and clatter of tanks on the move, and the billowing clouds of smoke all combined to create a surreal atmosphere.
Soldiers knew they could die at any time, especially --V if they were crossing an open field or storming a beach under heavy enemy fire.
New soldiers, especiallyTended to freeze at the first sign of danger— and they saw danger everywhere.
Experienced soldiers learned to distinguish the real dangers, such as the sound of an enemy tank or incoming artillery fire, from the din of war.
Yet even battle-hardened veterans often felt a heart-pounding sense of doom in the battle zone, where uncertainty ruled.
At night, they would try to put their thoughts and experiences down on paper for girlfriends, wives, or parents.
Under the stress of war, soldiers developed strong bonds of friendship.
Those who survived the war often found their lives significantly changed.
Many returned physically, mentally, or emotionally wounded by their combat experiences.
Amid the horrors of war, though, many gained a greater appreciation for such American ideals as liberty and came home with a new sense of pride in themselves and in their country.
Most United States soldiers went off to fight in World War II with a strong commitment to the Allied cause.
Combat was grueling and traumatic, and many soldiers came home with a new respect for the horrors of war.
Most of the detainees were Japanese Americans, however, and relocation violated their rights as United States citizens.
The Internment of Japanese Americans When the attack on Pearl Harbor occurred, there were about 150,000 Japanese Americans living in the Hawaiian Islands.
Some people questioned their loyalty, even accusing them of helping plan the surprise attack.
Fearing sabotage, the War Department recommended the mass evacuation of Japanese Americans from Hawaii.
But the American military governor of Hawaii urged everyone to stay calm.
They noted that losing so many workers would ruin the islands 1 economy.
The press backed this position and worked hard to keep false rumors from circulating.
In the end, nearly all of the Japanese Americans in Hawaii stayed there.
Dealing with the Fear of Potential Collaborators On the mainland, concerns about disloyalty extended to people of German or Italian ancestry.
They were seen as potential collaborators— people who work with an enemy to undermine a nation’s security.
These orders affected more than 314.000 people of German ancestry, 690,000 people of Italian ancestry, and 47.000 people of Japanese ancestry.
All “enemy aliens” had to register with the government and carry special identification cards.
They had to turn in all firearms and cameras, as well as shortwave radios, which might be used to send information to the enemy.
They also needed a travel permit to go more than 5 miles from their homes.
However, the task of relocating all the German and Italian aliens posed huge problems.
Also, politically influential groups of German Americans and Italian Americans resisted such a measure.
The government did round up several thousand German and Italian aliens and sent them to internment camps in the middle of the country.
An internment camp is a center for confining people who have been relocated for reasons of national security.
Roosevelt Authorizes the Removal of Japanese Americans The people of Japanese ancestry, in contrast, were a much smaller group with much less political power.
They faced more racial discrimination than did people of German or Italian ancestry because they were of nonwhite, non-European ancestry.
They had not assimilated into American culture as well as other immigrant groups had.
They kept largely to themselves, in ethnic communities outside the American mainstream.
In addition, they lived mainly on the West Coast, where fear of a Japanese invasion was strongest.
Unlike in Hawaii, the mainland press whipped up that fear by accusing Japanese Americans of spying or of being more loyal to Japan than to the United States.
All these factors made it easier for the government to act against people of Japanese ancestry.
This order declared that large military zones could be set up to exclude current residents who were believed to be a threat to security.
The order to “move out and stay out” applied not only to Japanese “enemy aliens” but also to Japanese American citizens.
Of the 127,000 people of Japanese ancestry living in the mainland United States, 80,000 were nativeborn American citizens.
As such, they were entitled to the same constitutional rights as all citizens.
This was the main argument made by a Japanese American named Fred Korematsu, who did not obey the order because it would mean leaving his non-Japanese girlfriend.
After two months, Korematsu was arrested and convicted with remaining in a restricted military area.
In the case Korematsu United States, the Court upheld his conviction on the grounds that a group’s civil rights can be set aside in a time of war.
Three of the nine justices dissented from this opinion, including Justice Robert H Jackson.
Life in the Internment Camps More than 100,000 Japanese “enemy aliens” and Japanese American citizens were forced to evacuate.
Families collected their belongings in a few pieces of luggage and left their homes.
Then, in the summer of 1942, they boarded trains for internment camps scattered throughout the western states.
The typical camp, officially known as a relocation center, was in a desert region far from any town.
In this setting, internees endured extreme heat in the summer and cold in the winter.
The single-story, wooden barracks contained several one-room apartments.
They shared toilets with others in the barracks and used common bathing and dining facilities.
Despite these hardships, most of the internees worked to make camp life more bearable.
As early as 1942, while the camps were still filling up, the government realized that the threat of a West Coast invasion had passed.
Officials began allowing certain groups of Japanese Americans to leave the camps.
Starting in 1943, thousands of young men left the camps to join the army.
This all-volunteer Japanese American unit became famous for its bravery in battle.
In fact, it earned more medals than any other unit of its size in American history.
In 1944, the government began letting the remaining internees return to the West Coast.
They were set up in desert areas away from the coast and far from population centers.
The government referred to these camps as relocation centers, but critics called them concentration camps.
Several thousand Japanese American GIs fought with the 442nd Regimental Combat Team.
This unit won many medals during the war, including the Congressional Medal of Honor.
In 1946, President Harry Truman told the 442nd, ""You fought for the free nations of the world.
For example, Women Air Force Service Pilots flew bombers, fighter planes, and new jet aircraft, though not in combat.
Their main job was to fly planes from factories to air bases, but they also tested aircraft and trained pilots.
She’s making history, Working for victory, Rosie the Riveter. —“Rosie the Riveter,” by Redd Evans and John Jacob Loeb, 1942 One of the country’s most popular artists, Norman Rockwell, put his own version of Rosie on the cover of a national magazine.
The fictional Rosie the Riveter came to represent all the real women who worked to support the war effort.
New Opportunities for Women in the Workforce The demand for workers skyrocketed during the war, as men left their jobs to serve in the armed forces.
About 18 million women took jobs outside the home during the war, up from 12 million before the war.
Most women continued to work in occupations that were traditionally female, such as service, clerical, and sales work.
They became welders, mechanics, and lumberjacks, as well as lawyers, physicists, and architects.
Many toiled as riveters on the thousands of airplanes built during the war.
One woman used a heavy mechanical gun to shoot a rivet through a pair of metal sheets.
The other woman stood on the opposite side to buck, or flatten, the rivet.
Tough physical labor like this increased women’s self-confidence and independence, as well as their income.
As one riveter explained, ‘The war years had a tremendous impact on women.
They often faced hostility on the job, especially in male-dominated industries.
Another issue was that women’s wages did not increase as much as men’s pay.
Even labor unions, whose female membership soared during the war, rarely challenged unfair wage rates.
During the war, most working women were married and were expected to keep up with their family responsibilities.
They spent a full day at the plant or office and another full day cooking, cleaning, and performing other domestic duties.
By the end of the war, the typical working woman was over the age of 35.
Those who did usually arranged for their children to stay with relatives or friends during the day.
As a result, rates of juvenile delinquency and school truancy increased.
Many teenage boys dropped out of school, lured by high-paying war-production jobs.
During the war, posters and magazine ads encouraged women to fill jobs left by men who joined the armed forces.
Millions of women responded — some for patriotic reasons, some for higher pay.
New Opportunities for Women in the Military Soon after the war started, military leaders realized that women could do much of the clerical and secretarial work done by male soldiers, freeing up the men for combat duty.
In 1942, it passed legislation creating a civilian support unit for the army known as the Women’s Army Auxiliary Corps.
On the first day of registration, more than 13,000 women volunteered to serve in this unit.
Women in the WAC became members of the military and underwent rigorous army training.
In 1942, the navy and the coast guard also established their own branches for women.
Women in all the armed forces quickly moved beyond clerical work into jobs such as truck driver, mechanic, radio operator, air traffic controller, and parachute rigger.
A select few became pilots, mainly to ferry aircraft from factories to bases.
Only WACs, however, served on the battlefield, working behind the lines in various support roles, including nursing.
African Americans Fight for Two Victories The United States was fighting in the name of democracy against Nazi Germany, which embraced an extreme form of racism based on the idea of Aryan supremacy.
No one was more keenly aware of this contradiction than African Americans.
After all, their participation in World War I had not helped their struggle against racism at home.
They wanted all citizens to join in the fight for a “double victory”— a victory for democracy both at home and abroad.
This Double V campaign forced many white Americans to rethink their attitudes toward black Americans.
Confronting Segregation in the Military With the establishment of the draft in 1940, thousands of African Americans lined up to join the armed forces.
They faced many hardships, beginning with their segregation in training camp.
They ate in separate mess halls from the white troops and slept in separate barracks.
Camps that had a single movie theater even made black trainees sit together in the last row.
In the early buildup to war, the marines and army air corps refused to take any African Americans.
The navy limited African American duties to cooking, cleaning rooms, and shining shoes.
One such “mess man” aboard the USS Philadelphia sent a letter to a newspaper hoping to discourage other black men from joining the navy.
The GIs served in segregated units led by white officers, often working in construction, supply, or other service groups.
In time, the armed services gave more black soldiers the opportunity to engage in combat and to become officers.
Known as the Tuskegee Airmen, these pilots and their support crews showed that African Americans could handle the most demanding assignments.
They served mainly as bomber escorts, engaging in direct In 1941, the army air corps brought African Americans from around the country to train at a flying school in Tuskegee, Alabama.
They were the only fighter group never to lose a bomber to enemy planes.
Seeking Opportunity and Equality on the Home Front Black leaders were also working to improve conditions at home.
In June 1941 , A Philip Randolph, head of a powerful all-black railroad union, met with President Roosevelt at the White House.
The government had done little to end discrimination in defense-related jobs.
Roosevelt sympathized with black Americans, but the war in Europe had kept him from paying much attention to civil rights— until Randolph's visit.
Randolph focused Roosevelt's attention by threatening to lead a massive march on Washington to protest discrimination.
On June 25, 1941 , Roosevelt signed Executive Order 8802, outlawing discrimination by defense contractors.
This executive order helped pave the way for nearly a million African Americans to work for defense industries during the war.
It also triggered a migration of African Americans out of the rural South and into the industrial cities of the North and the West.
From 1940 to 1945, some 500,000 black Americans, attracted by higher-paying jobs, left the South.
In the process, they escaped the Jim Crow laws that legalized segregation and kept many of them from voting.
In the cities, however, black Americans faced other hardships, including a lack of housing and social services, as well as ongoing racial discrimination.
Race riots broke out in many cities across the country as black migrants competed with white residents for housing and jobs.
A fistfight and other minor incidents ballooned into a widespread conflict.
Mobs of rioters burned automobiles, looted stores, and engaged in bloody battles in the streets.
Challenging Racism at Home The Double V campaign's call for an end to racism and segregation received support from several African American organizations.
One group, the National Urban League, had been helping black migrants since its founding in 1910.
It opposed discrimination in defense plants, fought to integrate labor unions, and pushed federal officials to ensure equal opportunity for African Americans in housing and employment.
The National Urban League and the NAACP did not want to undermine the war effort, so they avoided making strident demands.
Another organization, the Congress of Racial Equality , took a tougher stance.
Founded in 1942, CORE believed in confronting discrimination through nonviolent protest.
Its efforts, along with the work of the NAACF and the National Urban League, helped set the stage for the postwar civil rights movement.
In 1943. thousands of African Americans moved to Detroit, Michigan, to find work.
The competition with whites for jobs and housing stirred up racial tensions.
In June, those tensions boiled over in a race riot that left 34 people dead.
In 1942, someone wrote to the Pittsburgh Courier, black America's leading newspaper, suggesting that African Americans should seek victory not just abroad but also at home.
Jewish Americans and the War The war brought special hardships for Jewish Americans.
They not only made sacrifices like other Americans did, but they also suffered from knowing that millions of Jews were being imprisoned and murdered in Europe.
Growing Alarm at Nazi Persecution of Jews American Jews started hearing reports of Nazi persecution in Germany shortly after Hitler took power in 1933.
Two years later, the German parliament stripped Jews of their citizenship.
Shortly after taking over Austria in March 1938, Hitler began persecuting Austrian Jews.
Then, on November 9, 1938, the Nazis instigated a night of anti-Jewish rioting known as Kristallnacht, or the “night of broken glass/’ Mobs smashed the windows of thousands of Jewish-owned shops, burned nearly every Jewish synagogue in Germany, and killed more than 90 Jews.
After Kristallnacht , thousands of Jews wanted to flee to the United States.
But the 1924 National Origins Act placed severe limits on the number of immigrants from any one nation.
Besides, very few Americans wanted to open the country to a flood of immigrants, especially during the Depression.
These factors, combined with widespread anti-Semitism, led to incidents such as the voyage of the steamship St.
With food and water running low, the captain decided to return to Europe.
A number of passengers ended up in France and the Low Countries or back in Germany.
During the war, reports trickled out of Europe about mass killings of Jews by the Nazis.
Accounts from Poland told of concentration camps that had gas chambers for killing Jews.
Few American news sources passed this information along to the public, however.
Editors failed to tie these stories together or explain that they represented a Nazi campaign to exterminate European Jews.
Jewish Americans Urge the Government to Help Jews in Europe Jewish Americans, however, were painfully aware of the mass murder of European Jews.
Many had relatives and friends in Europe but felt helpless to save them.
Others took action, such as boycotting German products, raising money for refugees, and holding public demonstrations.
Jews urged officials to send food packages to concentration camps and to set up prisoner exchanges to free Jews.
Jewish groups pleaded with legislators and the president to change immigration laws.
The passengers, all Jews fleeing Nazi Germany, were refused entry to Cuba and to the United States.
They ended up back in Europe, where many died at the hands of the Nazis.
Several factors kept the government from offering refuge to victims of the Nazis.
Polls showed that most Americans, their views colored by anti-Semitism, were unwilling to admit large numbers of European Jews.
Even many American Jews worried that massive immigration might intensify anti-Semitic feelings.
Advisors insisted that any stream of Jewish refugees into the United States would include Nazi agents.
By the end of 1942, the government knew that Hitler was slaughtering Jews in a systematic way.
Still, it was not until 1944 that Roosevelt issued an executive order creating the War Refugee Board.
This agency arranged for Jewish refugees to stay at centers in Italy and North Africa, as well as in former army camps in the United States.
Henry Morgenthau Jr., the only Jew in Roosevelt’s cabinet, later recalled the mission of the War Refugee Board.
Jewish American GIs Go to War Like other Americans, Jews did what they could to support the war effort.
More than 500,000 Jewish Americans went to war, including half of all Jewish men aged 18 to 44.
The opportunity to serve in the armed forces transformed the lives of many Jewish American soldiers.
Many had previously been unaware of life outside their urban neighborhoods.
As GIs, they often trained in the rural South and then journeyed overseas.
In the armed forces, Jewish American GIs often felt the sting of prejudice.
A frustrated corporal, after two years in the marines, sent a letter to the editor of a Jewish magazine.
Other Jewish soldiers had a different experience, however, that affirmed their faith in their country and its ideals.
Many received medals for bravery in combat Some of these GIs were Mexican nationals — citizens of Mexico living in the United States.
Service in the armed forces gave them a better chance to gain United States citizenship.
In June 1943, groups of sailors and marines attacked young Mexican Americans in East Los Angeles — in part because the teenagers were wearing zoot suits.
In general, the police left the servicemen alone and arrested the victims instead.
Mexican Americans Leave the Fields for War Work During the war. many Mexican Americans faced discrimination in their daily lives.
Like African Americans, some wondered whether joining the armed forces made sense.
Despite such doubts, many Mexican Americans enlisted in the armed forces, while others left their traditional farm jobs or segregated urban neighborhoods to join the industrial workforce.
As this suggests, many saw the war as an opportunity to prove their loyalty and become part of the mainstream.
A higher proportion of Mexican Americans fought in combat units than any other ethnic group.
In addition, Mexican American soldiers suffered heavy casualties in comparison with other ethnic groups.
Fourteen Texans received the Congressional Medal of Honor for heroism in the war.
It has shown them what the Mexican American will do, what responsibility he will take, and what leadership qualities he will demonstrate.
The Chicano Movement, 1989 Before the war, discrimination had barred most Mexican Americans from many high-paying industrial jobs.
Thousands of Mexican Americans left their rural, agricultural lives behind and migrated to industrial centers to work in the defense industry.
To replace Mexican American farm labor, the government looked south of the border.
In August 1942, the United States and Mexico devised the Bracero Program.
Bracero is the Spanish term for “manual laborer ” Under the program, Mexican citizens received short-term contracts to come to the United States to work.
By 1944, about 120,000 Mexican braceros were performing farm labor in 21 states.
Prejudice Against Mexican Americans Erupts in Zoot Suit Riots Mexican Americans in major cities lived apart from whites.
Their barrios, or neighborhoods, were nearly self-sufficient, with their own shops, churches, and schools.
Like many immigrant communities, barrios tended to develop in poor, rundown parts of cities, where crime rates were often high.
Mexican Americans there had little regular contact with white Americans.
Many Mexican American teenagers, or pachucos , in East Los Angeles began dressing in this flashy style and wearing their hair long in the back, in the ducktail fashion.
White Americans tended to associate the zoot suit with Mexican American street gangs, many of whom also adopted the style.
Thus, many people saw the outlandish zoot suit as a symbol of lawlessness.
Those small-scale clashes escalated in June 1943 into the Zoot Suit Riots.
For several nights, mobs of sailors and marines roamed the streets of the barrio, attacking not just gang members but also anyone wearing a zoot suit.
Meanwhile, newspapers whipped up the mobs with headlines such as “Zoot Suiters Learn Lesson in Fights with Servicemen/’ Military police finally stepped in to end the violence.
Later, an investigating committee found that the main causes of the Zoot Suit Riots were racial prejudice, police discrimination, and inflammatory articles in the press.
Opportunities to serve For many young Americans, World War II provided an opportunity to fight for their country and its ideals.
Members of minority groups also saw the war as an opportunity to show that they deserved the respect of white Americans.
New job opportunities Millions of workers left their jobs to join the military.
The resulting labor shortage opened the doors of industry to many who had once been shut out.
Women, African Americans, and Mexican Americans all found jobs in war-related industries.
Broader worldviews The war sent soldiers far from home and many to foreign lands.
They came back with a broader view of the world and a new perspective on what it meant to be an American.
Many civilians moved to industrial centers, where they lived and worked with different groups of people.
Hardships of war Most Americans knew little about the real hardships of war.
GIs, however, faced those hardships every day as they risked their lives in battle.
Continued prejudice Racial and ethnic prejudice continued to plague American society.
African Americans and Mexican Americans faced harassment at home and in the service.
American Jews struggled against anti-Semitism that limited efforts to save European Jews from Nazi extermination.
Hardships at home Women often worked “double shifts” at a paying job and domestic jobs at home.
Introduction After the attack on Pearl Harbor, the United States began mobilizing troops for war.
Some of these soldiers would end up in Europe, fighting the German army.
First, though, they had to cross the Atlantic Ocean on troop ships, braving attacks by Germany’s deadly U-boat fleet.
Since the start of the war, in 1939, German U-boats had been working to disrupt and destroy Allied shipping in the Atlantic.
During this phase of the war, known as the Battle of the Atlantic, U-boats sank thousands of ships carrying vital war supplies.
When the United States entered the war, its Atlantic coastal waters were relatively unprotected.
Freighters and oil tankers sailed along the coast without military escort.
U-boats began to prowl the area, sinking ships on the East Coast and in the Gulf of Mexico.
Nor, at this point, did it require coastal cities to observe nighttime blackouts.
The city lights made it possible for U-boats to spot ships as they entered or left American ports, thus making them easy prey for German torpedoes.
During the first several months of 1942, U-boats sank dozens of American ships off the Atlantic Coast.
At night, coastal residents could hear the hum of U-boats just off shore.
They could even see ships burning at sea. v Oil spills and debris from wrecked ships washed up on beaches all along the East Coast.
As in World War I, the Allies reduced their losses by using the convoy system.
Destroyers and other naval vessels would surround and protect unarmed ships.
In addition, the United States began a feverish period of shipbuilding.
By 1943, it was churning out enough ships to replace lost vessels and to defend against U-boat attacks.
In 1939, German U-boats began attacking Allied shipping in the Battle of the Atlantic.
Eventually the convoy system, as well as increased American shipbuilding, helped turn theTide against the Germans.
Their purpose was to devise a strategy to help the Allies defeat the Axis powers.
They knew they could not afford to fight an offensive war on two fronts— Europe and the Pacific— at the same time.
They would concentrate most of their forces on winning back Europe, while initially fighting a defensive war against Japan in the Pacific.
I The Axis powers controlled much of Europe and North Africa at the start of 1942.
The size of Axis-controlled territory suggests the huge task facing the Allies as they considered strategies for fighting the war.
Axis Powers Roll Across Europe into North Africa By the time the United States entered World War II, the Axis powers controlled most of Europe.
Great Britain had saved itself by fighting off an intense German air attack during the Battle of Britain.
On the eastern front, the Nazis had invaded the Soviet Union, using blitzkrieg tactics to overcome Soviet troops massed at the border.
One large German force nearly reached Moscow before the onset of winter froze it in its tracks.
Another force marched toward the Soviet Union's oil-rich Caucasus region.
Hitler already controlled oil fields in Romania, but he sought more oil to keep his war machine running.
But first he had to secure North Africa by pushing the British out of Egypt.
In 1941, Hitler sent Field Marshal Erwin Rommel and his Afrika Korps, a tank-based German army division, to join the Italian army already in North Africa.
By June 1942, Rommel’s force had taken much of the region and had driven deep into Egypt.
War in Europe and North Africa, January 1942 □ Axis powers before World War II □ Extent of Axis control as of January 1942 I I Allies Neutral nations Nurlh St a ,Wofsaw POLAND Auschwitz ATLANTIC j OCEAN Stolmgrad GERMANY Ukraine ROMANIA ► VICHY FRANCE Black Sea SPAIN SYRIA MOROCCO SAUDI ARABIA Europeans Suffer Under German Occupation In German-occupied Europe, many people were suffering.
The SS treated Russians, Poles, and other Slavs with special contempt, partly because Hitler claimed the Slavs were subhuman.
The Nazis worked them to death and killed large groups of them outright.
Hitler had long been obsessed with the “Jewish question”— how to rid Germany of Jews.
He had stripped Jews of their civil rights, had them beaten or killed, and confined them to concentration camps.
The largest ghetto established by the Nazis was the Warsaw Ghetto in Poland.
Mobile killing squads rounded up and murdered thousands of Soviet Jews at a time.
Jews, many from ghettos, were shipped to these camps by rail, often packed into cattle cars.
Unlike regular concentration camps, these death camps were equipped with gas chambers.
Camp operators sealed groups of Jews and other prisoners inside these rooms and turned on the poison gas, usually carbon monoxide.
Pregnant women, young children, the elderly, and the sick were killed soon after they arrived.
Able-bodied prisoners were kept alive as long as they could work, often at a nearby factory.
In addition to Jews, the Nazis also gassed homosexuals, disabled people, captured Soviet soldiers, and Gypsies, among others.
The largest and most lethal of these camps was at Auschwitz, in Poland, where the Nazis used poison gas to murder more than a million people.
This photograph shows bones piled up at Majdanek, another camp in Poland.
For a few months at least, while the United States gathered troops and war materials, the Allies would have to focus on defending territory against the Axis powers.
Occupied France was a possibility, because the French people would support such an invasion.
Also, nearby Britain could serve as a staging area for the massing of troops and resources before the assault.
But the German army had a strong presence in France that would make such an invasion extremely difficult.
The Italian army was fairly weak, and Italy would provide a good base for securing the rest of Europe.
Sailing through the U-boat-infested waters of the Mediterranean, however, would be dangerous.
Others wanted to launch the Allied offensive in North Africa, which was not as well defended and could serve as a gateway to Europe.
But it was also far from the ultimate target, Germany, so it would test the Allies’ ability to transport and maintain their forces.
Another plan called for moving troops into the Soviet Union to help the Soviet Red Army push back the Germans.
But transporting and supplying forces so far from home would require a massive effort.
British Prime Minister Winston Churchill and President Franklin Roosevelt met several times during the war to plan strategy.
War in Europe, 1942-1945 Britain’s choice of strategy in early 1942 was clear.
Already caught up in the battle against Rommel’s forces, Churchill wanted the Allies to strike North Africa first.
In contrast, the Soviet leader, Joseph Stalin, wanted an invasion of France to take pressure off his weakened army.
First, the United States Army did not have enough trained combat forces.
That meant the exhausted British army would have to do most of the fighting.
Second, German U-boats were sinking ships at an alarming pace in the North Atlantic.
Transporting masses of soldiers and supplies to a staging area in Britain would be a dangerous, perhaps disastrous, process.
The ultimate focus of the Allied thrust was the German capital of Berlin, where Hitler had his headquarters.
War in Europe and North Africa, 1942-1945 Allies Invade North Africa and Italy In November 1942, Allied forces made sea landings in Morocco and Algeria.
Led by the American general Dwight D Eisenhower, they swept east into Tunisia.
Rommel’s Afrika Korps retreated west toward Tunisia, with the British in hot pursuit.
American soldiers did their first fighting of the war in a series of battles in the winter of 1942-1943.
The United States II Corps, which saw much of the action in North Africa, benefited from the leadership of two generals— first George Patton and then Omar Bradley.
They helped the combined Allied armies launch a final offensive in May 1943.
Axis resistance in the region collapsed, leaving about 250,000 German and Italian soldiers in the hands of the Allies.
Using North Africa as a staging area, the Allies crossed the Mediterranean into Sicily, a large island in southern Italy.
The massive Allied assault in July 1943 met little opposition at first.
The success of the invasion put a scare into Italy’s political leaders.
Mussolini’s North Africa campaign and several other failures had caused them to lose faith in II Duce.
The Fascist Grand Council met on July 24 and voted to restore the king and parliament.
Its government signed an armistice in September and declared war on Germany the next month.
As the Allies marched north, the Germans battled them every inch of the way.
By October, the Allied army had taken about a third of the Italian peninsula, but they did not get much farther that year.
Soviets Fight Alone at Stalingrad The decision to invade North Africa had left the Soviets on their own.
Hitler now had the chance to crush the USSR with a new summer offensive.
Starting in June 1942, Axis troops thrust farther into Soviet territory.
Hitler split his forces so they could seize the rest of the Caucasus and also take Stalingrad, a large city on the Volga River.
At Stalingrad, German firebombs set most of the city on fire, but Stalin forbade his sold iers t o retreat.
By mid-September, Axis troops had a large Soviet force trapped in a strip of the city along the Volga.
Then, in November, the Soviet Red Army began a counteroffensive, launching its defensive forces against the Nazi assault.
Hitler insisted that his soldiers fight to the death, which most of them did.
In January 1943, the remains of the German force, starving and frozen, surrendered to the Soviets.
The Battle of Stalingrad cost Germany more than 200,000 troops, while more than a million Soviet soldiers died.
Nevertheless, the USSR had forced the Germans to retreat, giving up all they had gained after June 1942, including the Caucasus.
The Allies' strategy for winning the war included destroying vital German facilities.
Through this strategic bombing, they hoped to destroy Germany's capacity to wage war.
Taking the War to the Germans by Air With the loss of the Caucasus, Hitler had only one major source of oil — Romania.
The Romanian oil fields became a prime target of Allied strategic bombing.
Strategic bombing involves hitting vital targets to destroy the enemy’s war-making capacity.
American pilots in B-24 Liberator and B-17 Flying Fortress bombers typically launched daytime raids.
Flying at high altitude to avoid antiaircraft fire, they dropped bombs on oil refineries, rail yards, factories, and U-boat bases.
By the end of the war, Germany’s infrastructure and economy were in ruins.
British pilots relied mainly on saturation bombing, the rapid release of a large number of bombs over a wide area.
The strategy behind the bombing of cities, with its appalling loss of life, was to destroy civilian morale and force a surrender.
This strategy turned German cities like Dresden and Hamburg into rubble-strewn graveyards, but it did not bring an early end to the war.
In August 1944, American planes dropped more than a thousand bombs on an oil-production facility in Poland.
Jewish organizations, the War Refugee Board, and others urged the government to bomb Auschwitz.
If the gas chambers or nearby rail lines were destroyed, they said, thousands of lives could be saved.
They said they could not afford to divert resources from military targets.
Elie Wiesel, who had been a prisoner at Auschwitz, said he would have welcomed the bombs anyway.
To meet that objective, the military focused most of its efforts in 1944 on the invasion of France.
Troops would cross the English Channel by ship and land on the beaches of Normandy, in northern France.
The landing craft unloaded Allied troops on Normandy’s five beaches, while warships provided covering gunfire from offshore.
German gun batteries took aim at the mass of invading soldiers, who by now were wading ashore, crawling along the sand, and climbing the dunes and cliffs.
As we went in, we could see small craft from the 1 16th Infantry that had gone in ahead, sunk.
There were bodies bobbing in the water, even out three or four miles. — Lt.
The Voices of D-Day After the chaos of the landing, the soldiers regrouped.
By the end of the first day, the Allies held the entire 59-mile section of the Normandy coast.
In July, the American army, under General Bradley, and the British army, under General Bernard Montgomery, began a rapid sweep across France.
At least 2,500 American, British, and Canadian soldiers died in this effort.
Their sacrifices helped turn the tide of the war and end Nazi hopes for world domination.
SS officials frantically tried to hide evidence of concentration camps in Poland.
They cleared out many of the forced-labor camps, marching prisoners westward and shooting any who fell behind.
They also tried to dismantle some of the death camps, quickly killing the remaining prisoners.
With the Red Army closing in on Auschwitz, the Nazis crowded about 60,000 Jews and others onto freight trains and shipped them west into Germany.
Allied soldiers fighting their way through Germany stumbled upon concentration camps.
These camps, though not as grim as the death camps of Poland, shocked the soldiers.
Many of these “living skeletons,” too sick to even eat, died in the weeks after they were liberated.
At Dachau, the smell of rotting flesh led GIs to 28 railway cars packed with dead bodies.
SS doctors at the camp had carried out inhumane experiments on more than 3,500 prisoners.
The Nazis had committed crimes so reprehensible that no word existed to describe them.
In 1944, a Polish Jew coined the term genocide to refer to the systematic killing of a racial, political, or cultural group.
The Nazis killed some 6 million Jews, or about 40 percent of the world’s Jewish population.
An existing word that meant “sacrifice by fire”— holocaust— was capitalized and applied to this massive slaughter.
The Holocaust was the systematic, state-sponsored persecution and murder of Jews and other minority groups by the Nazis.
The War in Europe Ends with Germany's Surrender When the Allies crossed from France into Germany, they met fierce resistance.
Hitler made plans to burst through the Allied lines in the wooded Ardennes region of Belgium, where the American forces were weakest.
Eight German armored divisions smashed into the surprised Americans, creating a huge bulge in the American line.
Allied air support and quick action by Patton’s Third Army forced the Germans to withdraw by mid-January.
The Battle of the Bulge was the last German offensive on the western front.
By April 1945, the Red Army had fought its way through Poland and into Germany to the outskirts of Berlin.
On April 30, with advancing Soviet soldiers just half a mile from his Berlin bunker, Hitler killed himself.
German forces quickly began surrendering, and at midnight on May 8, the war in Europe officially ended.
President Roosevelt did not live to celebrate Victory in Europe Day, or V-E Day.
The new president, Harry S Truman, dedicated the victory to Franklin Roosevelt.
The prisoners struggled to their feet shuffled weakly out of the compound.
Preparing for War in the Pacific World War II took a very different course in Asia and the Pacific.
After the shock of the Pearl Harbor attack, American forces in the Pacific needed several months to regroup.
During this time, Japan took control of much of the region's natural resources, including oil and rubber.
Through conquest, Japan formed what it called the Greater East Asia Co-Prosperity Sphere.
The “Co-Prosperity” in the title had nothing to do with sharing the wealth.
Instead, Japan’s goal was its own economic self-sufficiency, along with expanded political influence. i65 yj MONGOLIA War in the Pacific, 1942 By mid-1942, Japan had taken Southeast Asia and much of the Central and South Pacific.
Japan even captured the westernmost islands of Alaska's Aleutian chain.
In August 1943, Allied troops finally pushed the Japanese out of the Aleutians.
The Japanese Advance in Asia and the Pacific Japan’s attack on Pearl Harbor was just the first in a series of strikes against Allied territory in the Pacific.
By the end of March 1942, the Japanese had captured British Hong Kong and Singapore, the American islands of Guarrvand Wake, and the oil-rich Dutch East Indies.
Japan had also invaded several larger possessions of the Allies, including the American-held Philippine Islands and the British colony of Burma.
In the Philippines, Americans and Filipinos under General Douglas MacArthur resisted a fierce Japanese onslaught.
On the largest island, the Japanese rounded up 70,000 starving, exhausted American and Filipino prisoners and marched them up the Bataan Peninsula near Manila to a prison camp.
During the brutal 63-mile march, Japanese soldiers beat jmd bayoneted many of the prisoners.
The fall of the British colony of Burma, in May 1942, had serious consequences for China.
Japan already controlled most of coastal China, including the main ports.
China relied on British and American supplies carried in from India over the Burma Road.
If Japan defeated China, hundreds of thousands of Japanese soldiers would be free to fight elsewhere.
To help China keep fighting, the Allies set up an airborne supply route over the Himalayas.
I — Hi — 1 0 1,000 km Equator 0‘ — INDIES Indian • j f i i ■ “■ i OCEAN ; | — | Areas under 1 1 Japanese control, 1942 Greatest extent of Japanese naval power, 1942 AUSTRALIA The Pacific War Begins in the Air and at Sea Japan’s string of victories in the Pacific hurt American confidence.
To boost morale, Roosevelt urged his military chiefs to strike directly at the Japanese home islands.
The B-25 could make a short takeoff and also had the range to presumably reach Japan and then land at Allied airfields in China.
Led by pilot Lieutenant Colonel James Doolittle, the bombers hit Tokyo and other Japanese cities.
Although the bombs did little damage, this surprise attack thrilled Americans as much as it shocked the Japanese.
Japan reacted by putting more precious resources into defending the home islands.
It also decided to try to destroy the remaining American fleet, a plan that would prove disastrous.
Japan was moving into position to isolate Australia, a key American ally.
To stop the Japanese, Admiral Chester Nimitz sent two aircraft carriers, several cruisers, and a few destroyers— all he could spare at the time.
The resulting B attle ofjhe Cor al Sea , in early May 1942, was fought entirely by carrier-based aircraft.
It was the first naval battle in history in which the enemies’ warships never came within sight of each other.
They blocked Japanese expansion to the south, and they learned a valuable lesson— the Japanese navy could be beaten.
Until the war in Europe was over, they had limited resources for fighting the Japanese.
They had to devise a strategy to hold Japan in check until more soldiers and supplies became available.
Military Leaders Consider Their Options in the Pacific The “Europe First” strategy put Pacific commanders at a disadvantage.
Because they had fewer ships, planes, and soldiers than the Japanese, a defensive strategy made sense.
American naval forces would try to contain the Japanese, stopping their expansion in the Central and South Pacific.
Critics in the navy pointed out that this strategy allowed the Japanese to strengthen their hold on newly won territories, making those lands harder to win back later.
As part of the defensive strategy, these critics advised keeping the Japanese off balance with occasional attacks.
Some navy officials wanted to go on the offensive, and they debated different strategies.
One idea was to build air bases in the Aleutian Islands, the part of Alaska that extends westward toward Japan.
But pilots and their crews would have had to deal with the snow, wind, and fog that afflicted this region.
Also, all supplies would have had to be shipped in from the United States mainland.
China’s coast would have made an ideal staging area for an air assault on nearby Japan.
However, the fuel, bombs, and parts needed to keep bombers in the air could best be delivered by sea, and the Japanese controlled China’s ports.
Inland air bases might have worked, but they would have had to be supplied by planes flying over the Himalayas from India.
A third offensive option called for liberating Japanese-held territory in the Pacific.
By first freeing islands far from Japan, American forces could gradually move closer to get within B-29 striking distance.
This would take time, though, and Japanese resistance would stiffen the closer the Americans got to Japan.
Many of the islands were well fortified, so American casualties would be high.
War in the Pacific, 1942-1945 The United States Marines recruited 29 Navajos to become code talkers.
American forces in the Pacific used a leapfrogging strategy to move steadily toward Japan.
Along the way, the fighting grew more vicious as Japanese resistance increased.
War in the Pacific, 1942-1945 The Americans led the Allied forces in the Pacific and did most of the fighting.
When they went on the offensive, they chose a strategy of liberating Japaneseheld islands in the Pacific and using them as stepping-stones.
Each captured island served as a base for assaults on other islands as the Allied forces moved closer to Japan.
One of the keys to Allied success in the Pacific was the use of secret codes.
The United States trained a special group of Navajo Indian “code talkers” for this task.
Because Navajo is not a written language and is understood by very few people, it made an excellent basis for a code to transmit vital information.
The Japanese Offensive Ends at the Battle of Midway Before the Allies could go on the offensive, they had to stop Japanese expansion.
The Americans intercepted a Japanese message telling of plans for a major offensive.
They figured out that the target was the United States base at Midway, a pair of islands about 1 ,200 miles northwest of Pearl Harbor.
At Midway, Japanese naval strategists hoped to destroy the United States Pacific Fleet, which had been their plan since Doolittle's raid on Tokyo.
Japan never recovered from the loss * of the carriers and so many experienced pilots.
Liberating the Pacific Islands Proves Costly A strategy known as leapfrogging enabled the Americans to go on the offensive with limited resources.
They would often leapfrog, or bypass, a heavily defended island and then capture a nearby island that was not well defended.
The captured island was then used as an airbase to bomb the Japanese-held island and prevent ships from resupplying it.
Cut off from reinforcements and supplies, the Japanese forces would be left to wither.
Despite the success of leapfrogging, many of the island invasions came at a terrible cost.
Thousands of soldiers died in the jungles of Guadalcanal, New Guinea, Tarawa, and Saipan.
In October 1944, MacArthur made his triumphant return to the Philippines, where his forces would battle the Japanese until the end of the war.
It gave the Allied Pacific force secure bases from which long-range B-29s could make strategic bombing raids on Japan.
The Final Push Toward Japan Brings Heavy Losses The Allied push through the Pacific steadily shrank the defensive perimeter that Japan had established around the home islands.
That perimeter would all but disappear if the Allies could capture the key islands of Iwo Jima and Okinawa.
Iwo Jima’s airfields would offer a place for B-29s to land in an emergency.
They would also serve as a base for fighter planes escorting bombers over Japan.
To meet these threats, Japanese military leaders moved their best army units from Japan and China to defend the two strategic islands.
On the small volcanic island of Iwo Jima, the defenders dug caves, tunnels, and concrete-lined bunkers.
Three months of Allied bombardment before the February 1945 invasion did little to soften the defense.
Nearly all of the 22,000 Japanese troops followed their commander’s orders to fight to the death.
Admiral Nimitz noted that on Iwo Jima, “uncommon valor was a common virtue/’ To take the much larger island of Okinawa, the Allies mounted a huge amphibious, or sea-to-land, invasion in April 1945.
More than 1 ,200 American and British ships, including 40 aircraft carriers, supported a combined armymarine force of 182,000.
As on Iwo Jima, the 120,000 troops defending Okinawa strongly resisted the American invaders.
The bloody combat at the Battle of Okinawa, much of it hand-to-hand, continued for two months.
It claimed the lives of some 12,000 American soldiers and more than 100,000 Japanese soldiers.
Meanwhile, another kind of combat was taking place in the surrounding waters.
Earlier in the Pacific war, the Japanese had introduced a new weaponkamikaze pilots.
Hundreds of men flew their bomb-filled planes directly into the vessels of the Allied fleet.
But they failed to sink any aircraft carriers, which were their main targets.
New antiaircraft guns, radar, and other military technology enhanced combat operations.
Improved medicines and blood products also helped save lives on the battlefield.
The Battle of Midway in 1942 marked a turning point in the war in the Pacific.
The American victory in this air-and-sea battle halted Japan's advance and forced it to go on the defensive for the rest of the war.
Survivors suffered from severe burns, radiation sickness, and, later, cancer.
The Manhattan Project Develops a Top Secret Weapon The stage was now set for an invasion of Japan.
In 1939, German American scientist Albert Einstein had written to President Roosevelt explaining that scientists might soon be able to turn uranium into a new form of energy.
Einstein expressed his fear that Germany was already engaged in experiments to create such an atomic bomb.
The power of this explosive weapon comes from the energy suddenly released by splitting the nuclei of uranium or plutonium atoms.
Three years after Einstein sent his letter, the government established the Manhattan Project, a top-secret program to develop an atomic weapon.
A team of scientists, many of whom had fled fascist nations in Europe, carried on the research and development.
By the summer of 1945, their efforts had produced the first atomic bomb.
On July 16, that test bomb was exploded on a remote air base in the New Mexico desert.
Physicist J Robert Oppenheimer witnessed the blinding flash of light, intense heat, and violent shock wave that the bomb produced.
Truman Faces a Decision to Drop the Bomb After the successful test of the atomic bomb, or A-bomb, President Truman had to decide whether to drop the bomb on Japan or to launch an invasion.
After Iwo Jima and Okinawa, Truman knew an invasion would produce enormous casualties.
The number of Allies killed and wounded might reach half a million, he was told.
American B-29s were already destroying Japan with conventional bombs, including incendiaries.
These firebombs killed hundreds of thousands of people and turned large areas of major Japanese cities, with their masses of wooden buildings, into cinders.
At the same time, a naval blockade cut off the supply of raw materials to Japan.
The bombing and blockade had left many Japanese starving, and many of the country’s leaders realized that Japan could not possibly win the war.
Yet the Japanese refused to accept the unconditional surrender Truman demanded.
In fact, they seemed ready to fight to the last man, woman, and child, in the spirit of the kamikaze.
Oppenheimer and others believed only the shock of an atomic bomb would end the Japanese resistance.
General Curtis LeMay insisted that his B-29 bombing campaign would soon bring Japan's surrender.
Others maintained that the Japanese would give up if Truman would agree to let them keep their beloved emperor.
The United States Bombs Hiroshima and Nagasaki Truman stuck to his demand for an unconditional surrender.
On August 6, 1945, a B-29 named the Enola Gay dropped an atomic bomb on Hiroshima, Japan, a city of 300,000 people.
The blast’s shock wave toppled nearly 60,000 structures, and hundreds of fires consumed the rest of the city.
This one obliterated the city of Nagasaki, killing some 40,000 people instantly.
As many as 250,000 Japanese may have died from the two atomic bombs, either directly or as the result of burns, radiation poisoning, or cancer.
Truman received this informal surrender on August 14, Victory over Japan Day, or V-J Day.
The terms of the surrender allowed the emperor to keep his office but only in a ceremonial role.
The Allies officially accepted the surrender aboard the American battleship Missouri in Tokyo Bay.
Millions celebrated V-J Day, which marked the end of the Second World War.
The Soviet Union paid the highest human cost, with more than 20 million of its people killed.
Most Americans believed strongly that those soldiers, sailors, airmen, and others had died for a noble cause.
The United States played a major role in both main fronts of the war— Europe and the Pacific.
To retake Europe, the Allies invaded North Africa, Italy, and France, and then moved on to Germany.
To retake the Pacific, they fought island by island, until they closed in on Japan.
Allies versus Axis powers The Allies' strategy of “Europe First” set the United States, Britain, and the USSR against the Axis countries of Germany and Italy.
Battle of Stalingrad Hitler’s effort to conquer the USSR ended at Stalingrad, where the Red Army forced the Nazis to retreat.
Holocaust Moving through Poland and Germany, Allied forces liberated Jews and others from Nazi concentration camps and began to uncover the horrors of the Holocaust.
Battle of Midway The United States stopped Japanese expansion in the Pacific at the Battle of Midway.
It then went on the offensive, using tactics like leapfrogging to overcome Japanese resistance.
Battle of Okinawa After the Battle of Okinawa, the Allies were poised for an invasion of Japan.
Given the losses at Okinawa, however, they knew it would be a long and costly struggle.
Manhattan Project Scientists with the Manhattan Project developed an atomic bomb and tested it in July 1945.
Factories and offices shut down, and Americans poured into the streets to celebrate.
With hugs and smiles and joyful cheers, they expressed their relief that World War II had finally ended.
The war’s end brought jubilation in the United States, but it also ushered in a period of uncertainty for the nation.
Many people recalled that after World War I, the economy had collapsed.
Along with inflation and unemployment, crime and social tensions had increased.
After World War I, the Senate had refused to ratify the Treaty of Versailles, and therefore the United States did not join the League of Nations.
President Franklin Roosevelt had realized the importance of these questions as early as 1943.
In January of that year, he declared, “Victory in this war is the first and greatest goal before us.
Roosevelt did not live to see either victory, but his hard work and realistic vision of the world helped prepare the United States to meet its postwar obligations.
After the war, millions of servicemen were eager to return to civilian life.
However, the transition from wartime to peacetime also brought challenges for many Americans.
But it also takes a firm stand on issues such as human rights and social and economic development.
If the Senate had ratified the Treaty of Versailles and the United States had become a member of the League of Nations, perhaps the League might have stood up to Germany and helped prevent the actions that led to another world war.
The United States Leads the Creation of New World Organizations In the years leading up to World War II, Roosevelt had quietly fought against isolationism.
After Pearl Harbor, more and more Americans realized the United States could no longer stand alone in the world.
This shift in attitude allowed Roosevelt to move toward a policy of internationalism.
Late in the war, he pushed for the creation of new worldwide organizations to help prevent future wars by promoting stronger economic and diplomatic ties between nations.
In July 1944, representatives of the United States and 43 other nations met at Bretton Woods, New Hampshire.
Together, they founded the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, or the World Bank.
The bank was designed to provide loans to help countries recover from the war and develop their economies.
The same group of nations also created the International Monetary Fund.
The IMF’s goal was to stabilize the world monetary system and establish uniform exchange rates for foreign currency.
Making exchange rates more predictable would help international banking and trade.
Three years later, 23 nations took another step to encourage trade by signing the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Member nations of GATT agreed to lower tariffs and to eliminate barriers to international trade.
The United States also worked closely with its allies to design a replacement for the League of Nations.
In seeking approval for the League of Nations, President Wilson had worked hard to win public support and thought he did not need the support of Republicans in the Senate.
In seeking support for the United Nations, Roosevelt did not make the same mistake.
He not only spoke to the public about the need for nations to “learn to work together” for peace and security but also worked to persuade Republican senators.
In July 1945, three months after Roosevelt’s death, the Senate ratified United States membership in the United Nations by a vote of 89-2.
The United Nations Gets Organized The United States played a leading role in founding the United Nations.
He had first identified those Four Freedoms in a speech in January 1941.
In that speech, he depicted a world in which all people would have freedom of speech and expression, freedom of worship, freedom from want, and freedom from fear.
In August 1941 , Roosevelt and Winston Churchill had incorporated the Four Freedoms into the Atlantic Charter, which was a major expression of the Allies’ postwar goals.
Four years later, the framers of the UN Charter looked to the Atlantic Charter and the Four Freedoms when devising the framework for the United Nations.
To reinforce these principles, the United Nations adopted the Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948.
This document affirms basic human rights, including the rights to life, liberty, and equality before the law, as well as to freedom of religion, expression, and assembly.
Eleanor Roosevelt, who was the chair of the committee that drafted the declaration, compared it with the United States Bill of Rights and other similar documents.
In addition to listing principles, the UN Charter lays out the structure of the United Nations.
The General Assembly is the main body of the United Nations and consists of all member states.
The Security Council, a much smaller but more powerful body, consists of just 15 member states.
Five of these members are permanent— the United States, Britain, France, Russia, and China.
The Security Council focuses on peace and security issues, and it can use military power to enforce its decisions.
It was drawn into a crisis in Palestine, a region on the eastern edge of the Mediterranean Sea.
Jews, many of whom had migrated to the area to escape the Nazis, wanted to establish their own nation.
The United Nations decided to partition Palestine, dividing it into Arab and Jewish territories.
The first of several Arab-Isracli wars followed, and tensions continue in the region to this day.
A wreath of olive branches, which symbolizes peace, embraces the globe.
After the war, she played a key role in drafting the Universal Declaration of Human Rights for the United Nations.
The tribunal rejected these claims, saying that the defendants made a moral choice to carry out orders from their superiors.
A generation earlier, the victors in World I had imposed a harsh peace on Germany.
The Treaty of Versailles, with its war-guilt clause and excessive reparations, had caused bitter resentment among Germans.
Looking back at the mistakes made after World War I, Roosevelt was determined not to let history repeat itself.
War Crimes Trials Allied demands at the end of World War II were much less harsh than those in the Versailles Treaty.
Germany and Japan did have to disarm and give up the territory they had taken.
Instead, reparations took the form of industrial equipment and other goods and services.
Roosevelt had explained this approach in his last address to Congress, in March 1945.
After World War II, Allied leaders did not want to punish the people of Germany and Japan.
They wanted to leave those countries enough resources to remain independent.
They sought only to punish the German and Japanese leaders who had committed war crimes.
A war crime is a violation of internationally accepted practices related to waging war.
Roosevelt made his statement shortly after returning from Yalta, a Soviet city on the Black Sea, where he had met with Churchill and Joseph Stalin.
Five months later, at a meeting near Potsdam, Germany, the new president, Harry Truman, agreed with the other Allies on a plan.
The trials took place at Nuremberg, Germany, in front of an international military tribunal.
The judges and chief prosecutors of this tribunal, or court, came from the United States, the Soviet Union, Great Britain, and France.
The wrongs which we seek to condemn and punish have been so calculated, so malignant, and so devastating that civilization cannot tolerate their being ignored, because it cannot survive their being repeated.
On October 1 , 1946, twelve defendants were condemned to death by hanging, seven received prison terms, and three were acquitted.
Those convicted of war crimes included officials who ran concentration camps and doctors who carried out gruesome medical experiments on inmates.
A separate tribunal met in Tokyo in 1946 to try Japanese war criminals.
Seven were sentenced to death by hanging, including Hideki Tojo, Japan’s leader for much of the war.
Rebuilding Germany and Japan The Allies also set out to restructure Germany and Japan after the war.
At Yalta, they had decided to divide Germany into four military occupation zones, one each for the United States, the USSR, France, and Britain.
Although Berlin lay entirely within the Soviet zone, it also was divided in four parts— one for each occupying power.
It was more concerned with dismantling German factories to eliminate any war-making capacity.
Only later would American policy focus on restoring Germany’s economic health.
They put an American general, Douglas MacArthur, in charge of the country.
Allied soldiers occupied Japan, but they did not control the country directly as they did in Germany.
Instead, the Japanese government carried out the political reforms that MacArthur and his staff prescribed.
After dissolving Japan’s empire and disbanding its military, the Allies worked to bring democracy to Japan.
It set up a parliamentary government, based on the British model, with a strong legislature and an independent judiciary.
Women as well as men could elect representatives to the parliament, and a lengthy bill of rights ensured civil and political liberties.
At first, as in Germany, the United States sought to weaken Japan’s industrial economy.
By 1948, however, United States officials had decided to promote economic growth.
In 1951, Japan, the United States, and 47 other countries signed a peace treaty.
The treaty restored Japan to full sovereignty, or independent authority.
After the war, the United States promoted political, economic, and social reforms in Japan.
It also provided aid to the Japanese people, including food and other goods.
Here, Japanese workers hand out rations of wheat flour from the United States in 1946.
It paid up to $500 a year for college costs, enough to cover full tuition at many schools.
Demobilization of millions of soldiers made the unemployment problem even worse.
After World War II, American leaders took steps to try to ease the difficult transition from a wartime economy to a peacetime economy.
The Impact of the Gl Bill In September 1942, three years before the end of the war.
In a radio broadcast heard by American soldiers abroad, Roosevelt spoke of the economic crisis that followed World War I He promised, “When you come home, we do not propose to involve you, as last time, in a domestic economic mess of our own making ” One year later, Roosevelt asked Congress to pass the Servicemen's Readjustment Act, better known as the Gl Bill of Rights.
This bill provided federal funds to help returning GIs make the transition to civilian life.
Those funds would make it easier for many war veterans to continue their education and to buy a home.
Five months after the war ended, the armed services had released 8. million men and women from duty.
Many veterans took advantage of the Gl Bill to enhance their prospects in civilian life.
With the bill’s help, some 2. million veterans attended college and 7 million received vocational or on-the-job training.
The middle class expanded, as veterans became doctors, lawyers, teachers, and other professionals.
Veterans also took advantage of low-interest federal loans to buy homes.
By 1955. the government had granted 4. million home loans through the Gl Bill.
These loans enabled millions of Americans to move out of central cities into outlying neighborhoods.
They could also take out cheap federal loans to start farms or businesses.
The effect of this legislation was not limited to the individuals it helped.
America During World War II, 1984 African Americans Seek New Opportunities The Gl Bill raised the expectations of all GIs, including African Americans.
Discrimination often prevented African American veterans from buying a home, even if they had the money.
Still, in the years following the war, many African Americans did become homeowners through the GI Bill.
Thousands more received a college education, mainly by attending historically black institutions.
The end of the war did not stop the migration of African Americans from the South.
By 1947, some 75,000 black GIs had left the South in search of jobs and a better life.
A total of 2. million black Americans migrated from the region in the 1940s and 1950s.
In general, the lives of African Americans did improve in the postwar years.
From 1947 to 1952, the median income, or average pay, for nonwhite families rose 45 percent.
In national elections, most African Americans backed Truman, who in turn supported progress in the area of civil rights.
In the South, however, discriminatory state regulations kept many African Americans from voting.
From Factory Jobs to the Service Sector By 1947, nearly all war industries had been shut down.
The women who had stepped forward to work in shipyards, aircraft plants, and other war-related jobs had received their last paychecks.
This set up a potential conflict, pitting men and women against each other for the same jobs.
In the postwar period, most female workers felt a duty to step aside for men.
Yet many women enjoyed the independence and self-esteem that came from holding a paying job, and they wanted to keep working.
Instead, many women moved into jobs in the booming service sector, the segment of the economy that does not produce goods.
They became teachers, nurses, librarians, bank tellers, and social workers.
At these jobs, they earned, on average, just over half of what men earned.
For the most part, though, women accepted their new roles and economic status.
From 1940 to 1944, the number of women in the workforce jumped 37 percent, to more than 19 million.
United States Census Bureau, Historical Statistics of the United States, 1970.
Holding Leaders Accountable for Their Actions In August 1945, Allied officials met in London to discuss how to bring war criminals to justice.
There they drafted the Nuremberg Charter, which spelled out three categories of crime in international law.
The first, crimes against peace, included planning and waging a war of aggression.
The second, war crimes, involved violating the traditional laws of war.
The third, crimes against humanity, included persecution, enslavement, and mass murder.
The Allies’ goal was to hold individual leaders accountable, in a court of law, for their nation’s actions.
These trials paved the way for today’s ongoing prosecution of war criminals.
The Khmer Rouge government, led by Pol Pot, carried out mass murder in Cambodia during the 1970s.
The current government of Cambodia has put the bones of victims on display as a reminder of this horrendous crime.
The Geneva Conventions The Nuremberg Charter was not the first attempt to define war crimes.
In 1864, the first in a series of conventions, or international agreements, was signed in Geneva, Switzerland.
Called for by the Red Cross, the first of the Geneva Conventions set rules for proper conduct toward sick and wounded enemy soldiers and the civilians who took care of them.
The first three deal with wounded and sick soldiers and sailors, along with prisoners of war, all of whom are to receive humane treatment.
The United States and nearly every other nation in the world have signed the 1949 Geneva Conventions.
By defining war crimes, the Geneva Conventions are meant to prevent people from committing those crimes.
For five years in the 1970s, the communist dictator Pol Pot controlled Cambodia.
Another dictator, Idi Amin of Uganda, also committed war crimes during a period of civil unrest in the 1970s.
To hold on to power, he ordered soldiers to execute anyone who criticized him or opposed his rule.
Between 300,000 and 500,000 Ugandans were killed under Amin’s brutal dictatorship.
The UN International Criminal Tribunal Pol Pot and Idi Amin never faced an international war crimes tribunal.
For decades after the Nuremberg and Tokyo trials, no such organization existed.
The tribunal set a precedent by trying an active head of state, Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic.
It accused him of carrying out a “campaign of terror and violence” against civilians.
Milosevic died in his jail cell in 2006, before the ICTY could pass judgment on him.
Up to a million people died, most of them ethnic Tutsis, who were killed by rival Hutus in a massive murder spree.
The United Nations set up a second court, the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda , in 1996.
Ten years later, it had tried 27 people for genocide-related crimes, such as extermination and murder.
Of those, the ICTR found 24 guilty, including Rwanda’s former prime minister, Jean Kambanda.
The ICC has the power to try individuals accused of genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes, and the crime of aggression.
More than half the nations of the world have joined the ICC, but not the United States, China, Russia, or Japan.
American officials have voiced fears that the ICC might undermine United States national sovereignty by claiming the right to try American citizens.
Slobodan Milosevic, the ex-president of Yugoslavia, was charged with committing crimes against humanity during a civil war in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s.
He was tried by the UN’s International Criminal Tribunal in The Hague, Netherlands.
Congress passed legislation to help returning veterans rejoin postwar society.
Four Freedoms In 1941 , Franklin Roosevelt expressed the wish that all people should have freedom of speech and expression, freedom of worship, freedom from want, and freedom from fear.
United Nations Before the war was over, 50 nations cooperated to form the United Nations.
The United States played a strong role in founding this international organization.
The goals of the United Nations include world peace, security, and respect for human rights.
Nuremberg War Crimes Trials Instead of punishing all Germans, the Allies held Nazi leaders responsible at the Nuremberg Trials.
Later, temporary international tribunals, as well as a permanent International Criminal Court, were formed to deal with war criminals.
Geneva Conventions To catalog war crimes, many nations of the world met at Geneva, Switzerland, in 1949.
The Geneva Conventions prescribed the proper treatment of the wounded, prisoners of war, and civilians.
GI Bill of Rights The United States sought to prevent economic and social problems at home after the war.
One measure designed to accomplish this goal was the GI Bill of Rights, which provided unemployment benefits, college funds, and housing loans to veterans.
Introduction In spring 1945, as World War II wound down in Europe, a historic encounter took place between United States and Soviet troops in Germany.
Up until that time, the Americans and Soviets had been allies in the war but had not actually fought together.
Now the two forces prepared to meet as they moved into Germany, pressing in on the Nazis from both west and east.
As the United States Army advanced eastward, it sent small patrols ahead of the main force to search for Soviet troops.
Lieutenant Albert L Kotzebue, a 21 -year-old officer from Texas, led one such patrol.
On April 25, as his men approached the Elbe River near the German city of Torgau, they spotted a Soviet patrol on the opposite bank.
Shouting and waving their arms, they caught the Soviet soldiers’ attention.
The men on the other side screamed, “Americanski, Americanski,” pointing and waving back.
Lieutenant Kotzebue found a small boat near the shore and made his way across the river.
Later, the senior commanders of the two armies exchanged more formal visits.
Photographers recorded the historic occasion, capturing an image of a GI and a Soviet soldier shaking hands.
Working together, the Allies would soon bring an end to the war in Europe.
Furthermore, the friendly meetings on the Elbe suggested that an ongoing partnership between the United States and the Soviet Union was possible.
However, the days of United States and Soviet soldiers hugging and shaking hands would not last.
Before long, the United States and the Soviet Union would engage in a grim struggle for world power known as the Cold War.
The red star and the hammer and sickle were symbols of the Soviet Union.
The hammer was for industrial workers and the sickle was for agricultural workers.
These symbols were featured on the Soviet flag and on propaganda designed to win support for Soviet communism.
It was Roosevelt's last meeting with his World War II allies, as he died shortly afterward.
Forming an Uneasy Peace During the war, the United States and the USSR formed an alliance based on mutual interest.
Although they had differences, the two nations set these aside to focus on the shared goal of defeating Germany.
The differences resurfaced, however, as the war ended and the Allies began to plan for the postwar era.
A Wartime Alliance Begins to Erode In February 1945, Franklin Roosevelt, Joseph Stalin, and Winston Churchill met in the Soviet city of Yalta for the Yalta Conference.
In mostly amicable talks, they agreed to collaborate in shaping postwar Europe.
They decided to divide Germany into four occupation zones, each controlled by a different Allied country.
They also declared their support for self-government and free elections in Eastern Europe.
Roosevelt returned from Yalta with hope that the wartime allies could maintain friendly relations.
In July, with Germany defeated, the Allied leaders met again in Potsdam, near Berlin.
Harry S Truman now represented the United States, having become president after FDR's death three months earlier.
Churchill, later replaced by new prime minister Clement Attlee, and Stalin also attended.
At the Potsdam Conference, the Allies finalized their postwar plans for Germany, including the division of Berlin into occupation zones.
During the conference, Truman learned that the United States had tested its first atomic bomb.
He hinted to Stalin that the United States had a powerful new weapon, but he did not name it.
The Soviet army still occupied much of Eastern Europe, and Truman was suspicious of Soviet intentions.
The Soviet leader had promised to allow free elections in Eastern Europe but had not yet fulfilled that promise.
In fact, in Poland the Soviets had helped rig elections to ensure a communist win.
Truman and Stalin clearly held very different visions of postwar Europe.
Germany had attacked the Soviet Union in two world wars, using Poland as its invasion route.
Viewing control of Eastern Europe as critical to his nation's security, he claimed the region as a Soviet sphere of influence.
Truman, on the other hand, wanted to allow Eastern European nations to determine their own form of government.
As many as 20 million Soviet citizens died in the war, including at least 7 million soldiers.
Others starved when Nazi invasion forces stripped the Soviet countryside of crops, farm animals, and equipment and torched farms and villages.
In addition, the Nazis leveled several Soviet cities, including Stalingrad and Kiev.
Approximately 290,000 United States soldiers died, but civilian casualties were limited to those killed or wounded at Pearl Harbor.
By 1945, the United States was producing more than half of the world’s total industrial output.
The United States had spent at least $320 billion financing the war, but most Americans felt the money was well spent.
Like the rest of Europe, the Soviet Union hoped for aid to rebuild after the war.
It asked the United States for a loan, but Truman, angered by Stalin’s broken promises and disregard of the Yalta agreements, decided on a “get tough” policy toward the Soviets.
Shortly after Germany fell, Truman stopped all lendlease shipments to the Soviet Union.
Even American ships already traveling to the Soviet Union returned home.
The survivors endured hunger, loss of land, and shortages of basic goods.
The table shows the steady decline in availability of household goods as the war progressed.
For example, in 1942 the Soviet Union produced only 10 percent as much clothing as it had in 1940.
Differing Ideologies Shape the United States and the USSR The differences between the United States and the Soviet Union resulted from more than just wartime experiences.
They also represented sharp differences in ideology, or the set of beliefs that form the basis of a political and economic system.
The United States system centered on a belief in democratic government and capitalist economics.
In capitalism, individuals and private businesses make most of the economic decisions.
Business owners decide what to produce and consumers decide what to buy.
The United States hoped to see capitalist democracy spread throughout Europe.
The USSR also hoped European countries would accept its system, which was communism.
Communists regard capitalism as an unjust system that produces great social inequalities and denies the proletariat, or working class, a fair share of society’s wealth.
Communism revolves around single-party rule of politics and government control of the economy.
The state owns and runs most businesses and decides what goods will be produced.
In this type of system, small farms are often joined together in collectives, which the state and the farmers own together.
Forced to leave in March 1946, they were never able to return because of the radiation caused by the bomb.
Adjusting to a Postwar World By 1946, the balance of power in the world was shifting.
Two global wars and the destruction of economic infrastructure had greatly weakened formerly strong countries such as Britain, France, and Germany.
The United States and the Soviet Union now stood alone as leading powers in the world.
Their size, economic strength, and military prowess enabled them to dominate global affairs.
They became known as superpowers— nations that influence or control less powerful states.
Most nations chose or were forced to align with one superpower or the other.
Tensions Rise Between Two Superpowers In February 1946, Stalin gave a speech attacking capitalism.
George Kerman, a United States diplomat at the American Embassy in Moscow, studied Stalin’s speech and sent a long reply to the United States secretary of state.
To prevent this outcome, he said, the Soviet Union must be “contained” within its present borders.
After he returned to the United States, Kennan expanded on this notion in an article for a foreign policy journal.
Kennan later pointed out that he viewed the policy of containment— the restriction of Soviet expansion — as a political strategy, not a military one.
He felt that in time, containment would lead to either communism’s collapse or its transformation into a milder, less hostile system.
They feared that the USSR planned to spread communism beyond Eastern Europe to other parts of the world.
These concerns deepened in March 1946, when the Soviets refused to withdraw troops from northern Iran.
During the war, Britain and the Soviet Union had shared control of Iran.
In refusing to leave, the Soviets ignored a 1942 agreement with Britain stating that both countries would withdraw within six months of the war’s end.
It ended peacefully after the USSR gave in to United States pressure and withdrew.
New NuclearTechnologies Raise the Stakes for Both Sides Conflicts between nations have always prompted fears of war.
In the new age of the atomic bomb, the possible effects of a superpower conflict became even more frightening.
The threat of a nuclear attack compelled both countries to show restraint in their use of force, but it also fueled the race to develop nuclear weapons.
After World War II, the United States continued to test and improve its nuclear capability.
In the summer of 1946, American scientists conducted tests of two atomic bombs at Bikini Atoll in the Marshall Islands of the Pacific Ocean.
Scientists studied the impact of atomic bombs on naval vessels, using a fleet of more than 90 battleships and aircraft carriers as targets.
For three years, the United States was the only country with an atomic bomb.
But Soviet scientists were working hard to develop their own atomic weapon.
Turning to the United Nations to Mediate Conflicts Truman and his advisers knew the damage an atomic bomb could do, and they sought ways to control this powerful new weapon.
They asked the United Nations to help limit the development and use of atomic energy’, the power released by a nuclear reaction.
In June 1946, Truman sent a key adviser, Bernard Baruch, to the United Nations to explain United States goals to the UN Atomic Energy Commission.
He told the panel that the United States wanted the United Nations to enact strict controls on raw materials used in bomb making and a ban on the making of any future bombs.
Baruch’s proposal, known as the Baruch Plan, would allow the United States to retain its small nuclear stockpile for the time being.
However, it would deny the Soviet Union and other nations the right to build bombs.
The plan called for UN inspections of nuclear plants and stiff sanctions on nations found making such weapons.
Under the plan, UN Security Council members would not be allowed to use their veto power to prevent UN sanctions.
Soviet delegate Andrei Gromyko asked why the United States should be allowed to keep its atomic bombs while denying the Soviet Union the right to develop its own weapons.
He declared that further talks on international control of atomic weapons could take place only after the United States destroyed all of its atomic weapons.
He also declared that the Soviet Union would not give up its veto power in the Security Council.
Because neither side would budge, this early effort at nuclear arms control came to an end.
At the United Nations in 1946, presidential adviser Bernard Baruch proposed a plan for international control of atomic energy.
Confronting the Communist Threat On March 5, 1946, Winston Churchill warned of the growing Soviet threat in a speech at Westminster College in Fulton, Missouri.
Having known Stalin for years, he worried about the Soviet dictator’s plans for Eastern Europe.
In his speech, Churchill cautioned that Stalin was cutting the region off from the rest of Europe.
The term Iron Curtain came to symbolize this growing barrier between East and West.
In 1946, civil war broke out in Greece between j communist rebels and the Greek government.
The United States backed the government in an effort to halt the spread of communism.
Greek commandos like the one pictured here played a crucial role in the fighting.
The Iron Curtain Divides Europe By the time Churchill gave his speech, Stalin was already setting up Soviet-controlled governments in Poland and other countries of Eastern Europe.
In Romania, for example, the Soviets forced the king to appoint a procommunist government.
When the United States and Britain protested, the Romanian government promised early elections.
But its officials manipulated the electoral process to make sure it won a majority.
Backed by the Soviets, local communists used threats or violence to get rid of political leaders who opposed them.
Police charged the opposition party leader with plotting to overthrow the government.
A similar pattern of communist takeovers occurred later in Hungary and Czechoslovakia.
Growing Prospects of Communism in Greece and Turkey Concerns about communist expansion were not limited to Eastern Europe.
After the war, both Greece and Turkey also faced potential communist takeovers.
In the fall of 1946, civil war began in Greece when communist rebels tried to overtake the Greek government.
Britain also tried to help Turkey, which faced growing pressure from the Soviet Union.
The USSR sought control of a vital Turkish shipping channel, the Dardanelles, which linked Soviet ports on the Black Sea with the Mediterranean.
In 1947, while facing severe economic problems of its own, Britain told the United States that it could no longer afford to help Turkey or Greece.
The physical barrier consisted of fences that stopped the movement of people across borders.
Communist leaders worked hard to block the flow of foreign ideas into their countries.
Border fences made unauthorized travel into and out of Iron Curtain countries difficult and dangerous.
In the divided capital of Berlin, the Iron Curtain was a wall that sealed free West Berlin off from communist East Berlin.
In that speech, he outlined a policy that became known as the Truman Doctrine.
We must keep that hope alive. — Harry S Truman, from a speech to Congress on March 12, 1947 In this American political cartoon, the octopus stretching its tentacles around the globe represents the Soviet Union.
In the late 1940s, many Americans began to believe that the USSR was set on dominating the world.
With United States aid and military equipment, the Greek government defeated the communist rebels.
Turkey also resisted pressure from the Soviet Union and maintained control of the Dardanelles.
The Truman Doctrine committed the United States to a foreign policy based on Kennan's strategy of containment.
Truman hoped to stop the spread of communism, limiting the system to countries in which it already existed.
Underlying his policy was the assumption that the Soviet Union sought world domination.
The United States believed it had to fight this effort, with aid as needed and with force if necessary.
Scholars still debate how well each side understood the aims and motives of the other.
United States leaders viewed communist takeovers in Eastern Europe as brutal efforts to suppress democracy.
They saw their own attempts to control nuclear weapons through the United Nations as a noble effort to keep the peace.
The Soviets, on the other hand, saw the United States and its allies as hostile powers committed to destroying communism and threatening Soviet security.
They viewed efforts to restrict nuclear weapons as a way to maintain a United States monopoly on atomic energy.
Each side talked past the other, and as one superpower acted, the other reacted.
In 1947, Truman asked Congress to reorganize the government's security agencies in light of the Soviet threat.
The CIA collects and analyzes intelligence gathered, in part, by agents operating in foreign countries.
Rebuilding European Economies On both sides of the Iron Curtain, Europe was in terrible shape after the war.
Times were hard in Britain, too, which was nearly bankrupt after the war.
Conditions worsened during the frigid winter of 1946-47, when Britons faced grave shortages of food, fuel, and electricity.
In Italy, France, and many other European countries, conditions were even worse.
During the war, bombing raids targeted such cities as London, Dresden, and Cologne.
These raids sometimes produced firestorms with heat so intense that everything in their path was incinerated.
European Nations Face Widespread Devastation The challenge of rebuilding war-torn Europe was enormous.
Warfare had devastated numerous cities, leaving many of the inhabitants homeless and unemployed.
It had destroyed schools, hospitals, churches, and factories, knocked out communications systems, and ruined ports.
Without a usable transportation system, carrying raw materials to factories and crops and goods to market was impossible.
In the hardest-hit areas, deadly diseases like tuberculosis spread rapidly.
United States leaders feared that conditions in Europe would give rise to political and social unrest.
In some countries, workers staged strikes and demonstrations to protest the hardships of daily life.
Some poor and jobless people began to look to communist ideology for answers to their problems.
Many recalled how local communist groups had resisted the Nazis’ rise to power.
In these stressful and difficult times, communism quickly gained appeal in Italy and France.
The United States Provides Aid Through the Marshall Plan As with Greece and Turkey, Truman reasoned that rebuilding shattered economies and supporting freely elected governments would be the best way to stop communism from spreading.
Truman also knew that, as the strongest economic power in the world, the United States had the money and resources to help Europe rebuild.
With these factors in mind, Truman and his advisers developed a plan for European recovery.
Bureau of Public Affairs, April 1987 During the four years of the Marshall Plan, the United States provided over SI 2 billion in aid to 16 European countries.
This amount was less than Congress had authorized, but the funds still gave an enormous boost to Western European economies.
It offered all European nations, including the Soviet Union, generous funding to rebuild their economies as long as the money was spent on goods made in the United States.
Those who supported it hoped to promote democracy in Europe and oppose the spread of communism, thus reinforcing the Truman Doctrine and the policy of containment.
They also wanted to open markets for American goods and further boost the economy of the United States.
Some Republicans in Congress did initially oppose what they called a “New Deal” for Europe.
Congress approved over $13 billion in aid, to be spent over a four-year period, from 1948 to 1952.
This aid would play a crucial role in stimulating economic growth and prosperity in Western Europe.
The USSR Responds with the Molotov Plan Although the United States painted the Marshall Plan as a generous effort to aid European recovery, Soviet leaders questioned its motives.
They believed that its real purpose was to create a United States sphere of influence in Western Europe.
Stalin viewed the Marshall Plan as an attempt to interfere in Soviet internal affairs.
The Soviets knew that to receive aid, they would have to share information about their economy and resources with the United States and even allow United States inspectors into the country to see how the aid was being used.
Stalin also felt that his government, in accepting American aid, would have to cede some control over economic planning and decision making.
They explained that two thirds of the raw materials Czechoslovakia needed for manufacturing came from Western countries.
In the end, at the urging of the Soviets, no Eastern European nations took part in the Marshall Plan.
To compete with its rival, in 1949 the Soviet Union created the Molotov Plan, named after Foreign Minister Vyacheslav Molotov.
To do this, it established a new organization, the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.
Initially, COMECON’s main task was to create two-way trade agreements between the Soviet Union and other COMECON members.
It worked to integrate Eastern European economies by encouraging member states to specialize in goods and services not produced in other states.
A Cold War Has Begun By 1949, the wartime alliance of the United States and the Soviet Union had turned into a relationship of mutual distrust and suspicion.
The United States wanted to promote the growth of independent, capitalist democracies, while the Soviet Union wanted to surround itself with communist states that followed its lead.
They had confronted each other over Iran and, less directly, in Greece and Turkey.
They had argued over atomic energy and plans for postwar economic recovery in Europe.
Although the hostility between the two superpowers and their allies often heated up, it never led to armed conflict between the United States and the Soviet Union.
It was for that reason that this postwar struggle became known as the Cold War.
During the Cold War, Europe and much of the world divided into two hostile camps.
The United States and the Soviet Union waged a war of words, using propaganda, diplomacy, economic and military aid, and espionage as weapons.
Each superpower viewed its own motives and actions as right and good, while it cast its rival’s behavior in a bad light.
As the conflict grew, compromise and cooperation became greater challenges.
These problems worsened with the development of atomic weapons, which in turn raised fears of a deadly arms race.
Both sides knew that if the Cold War turned hot, it could result in another world war, potentially the most destructive in human history.
During the Cold War, the United States and the USSR engaged in a tug-of-war over power and influence in the world.
In the postwar period, clear differences between the United States and the Soviet Union soon emerged.
Communist ideology and the creation of Soviet-backed states in Eastern Europe alarmed the United States government.
The United States responded with efforts to support European democracy and limit Soviet expansion.
As the rivalry intensified, Europe divided into communist-controlled Eastern Europe and mostly democratic Western Europe.
Yalta and Potsdam Conferences At Yalta, the Allied leaders met to shape postwar Europe.
They divided Germany and Berlin into four occupation zones each and declared their support for self-government and free elections in Eastern Europe.
Iron Curtain In a 1946 speech, Winston Churchill accused the Soviet Union of dividing Europe into East and West and drawing an “iron curtain,” or barrier, across the continent.
UN Atomic Energy Commission At the United Nations, the United States offered a plan to limit the development of atomic weapons.
The Soviet Union, working on its own atomic bomb, rejected United States efforts to retain a monopoly on atomic energy.
Truman Doctrine President Truman adopted a policy of containment as part of the Truman Doctrine.
The doctrine aimed to limit the spread of communism and support democracy.
It provided aid to European nations to help them recover from the war, promote stability, and limit the appeal of communism.
Cold War The postwar struggle for power between the United States and the Soviet Union became known as the Cold War.
Although this was largely a war of words and influence, it threatened to heat up and produce armed conflict between the superpowers.
Introduction By the late 1950s, the United States and the Soviet Union were deeply involved in the Cold War.
Both sides used spies and secret agents— along with hidden cameras, listening devices, and other spy gear— to gather information about the enemy.
The plane was a U-2, a high-altitude, black aircraft known as the Black Lady of Espionage.
Special cameras aboard the U-2 could photograph Soviet military installations from heights of 60,000 feet or more.
By the time of the U-2’s downing, United States pilots working for the CIA had been flying deep into Soviet airspace for nearly five years.
They had taken photographs of Soviet missile bases, airfields, rocket-engine factories, and other military facilities.
Like all U-2 pilots, he carried a deadly poison that he could take if the enemy captured him.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev reacted to the U-2 incident with outrage, accusing the United States of conducting a vicious spying campaign against the Soviet Union.
President Dwight D Eisenhower first denied the charge, but later admitted that Powers had been on an intelligence-gathering mission.
The spy plane incident set back efforts to improve U.S .-Soviet relations.
It occurred just weeks before Eisenhower and Khrushchev planned to meet in Paris.
At that meeting, Khrushchev demanded that the United States stop its U-2 flights and asked the United States to apologize for them.
Eisenhower agreed to end the flights but insisted on the United States’ right to defend its interests.
The talks ended almost as soon as they began, and the Cold War intensified.
Soviet forces recovered the wreckage of a U-2 spy plane shot down over the Soviet Union in May 1960.
The U-2 incident enraged Soviet leaders and caused a further chilling in U.S.Soviet relations.
It also focused world attention on the espionage taking place during the Cold War.
Europe Feels the Heat of the Cold War The U-2 incident came at the end of a decade marked by increasingly tense U.S.Soviet relations.
Like players in a chess game, leaders on each side studied the other’s moves.
Each was alert to threats to its national security and stood ready to respond to such challenges.
The Soviet Union tried to consolidate its control of Eastern Europe, while the United States tried to contain the ySSR and limit its power.
The USSR Protests the Unification of West Germany One of the main issues causing Cold War tensions was the status of Germany.
After the war, the Allies had divided Germany and its capital, Berlin, into four occupation zones.
When three of the Allies took a step toward reunification, it prompted a Cold War crisis.
In March 1948, the United States, Great Britain, and France announced plans to merge their occupation zones to form a new country, the Federal Republic of Germany.
The three Allies agreed that this reunited Germany would have a democratic government and a capitalist economy.
Their decision angered the Soviets, who controlled both eastern Germany and access to the former German capital Berlin, which lay within the Soviet occupation zone.
On June 24, the Soviet Union imposed a blockade on Berlin, halting all land travel into the city from the Allied occupation zones.
The Soviets believed that the Berlin Blockade would force the Allies to give up either Berlin or their plans for a West German state.
Instead, General Lucius Clay, the commander of United States forces in Germany, called for resistance to the Soviet blockade.
President Harry Truman agreed, fearing that the loss of Berlin would cause the fall of Germany to the communists.
He ordered a massive airlift of food, fuel, and other vital supplies to defeat the Berlin Blockade.
Over the next ten and a half months, pilots made more than 270,000 flights into West Berlin, carrying nearly 2. million tons of supplies.
The Berlin Airlift kept the hopes of the city’s 2 million residents alive and became a symbol of the West’s commitment to resisting communist expansion.
The Iron Curtain Falls on Czechoslovakia By the time of the Berlin crisis, the Soviet Union controlled most of Eastern Europe.
Poland, Romania, Bulgaria, and Hungary had all established pro-Soviet communist governments.
Just weeks before the Berlin crisis, Czechoslovakia became the last major country to fall.
After World War II, the Czechs had formed an elected government dominated by communists but also including noncommunist parties.
In February 1948, Joseph Stalin amassed Soviet troops on the Czech border and demanded the formation of an all-communist government.
Shortly afterward, communists seized control, ending the Czech experiment in postwar democracy.
It showed that Stalin would not accept a government in which power was shared with noncommunists and that he was prepared to use force to achieve his ends.
The Czech coup d’etat brought drastic changes to the country’s political and economic life.
Czechoslovakia was now a one-party state, and communist leaders arrested, tried, and jailed all those who opposed them.
They suppressed basic rights, including freedom of the press and free speech, as well.
They also forced farmers to give up their land and work on state-owned collective farms.
NATO Versus the Warsaw Pact Czechoslovakia was not the only country to feel Soviet pressure.
In the late 1940s, the USSR tightened its grip on all its satellite nations, or countries under one nation’s control.
As divisions increased in Europe, the superpowers also formed new military alliances.
The founding European members of NATO were France, Luxembourg, Belgium, the Netherlands, Iceland, Italy, Britain, Denmark, Norway, and Portugal.
Greece and Turkey joined NATO in 1952, and West Germany followed in 1955.
They pledged to consider an attack on any member as an attack on all and formed a standing army to defend Western Europe in the event of a Soviet invasion.
The United States played a key role in NATO, providing money, troops, and leadership.
By joining this alliance, the United States took another step away from isolationism.
The creation of NATO prompted the Soviet Union to form its own security alliance in 1955.
Under the Warsaw Pact, the Soviet Union, Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Romania joined forces for mutual defense.
By 1955, two military alliances — the Warsaw Pact and NATO — had further divided Europe.
In November 1956, the Soviet Union invaded Hungary and crushed the rebellion.
In 1958, the communist government put reform leader Imre Nagy on trial and then executed him.
Hungary Tests the Limits of Containment Not long after the signing of the Warsaw Pact, upheaval in Hungary tested the West’s anticommunist resolve.
In October 1956, thousands of Hungarians took part in a brief revolt against the communist government.
The leaders of the revolt formed a government led by Imre Nagy, a reformminded communist.
He boldly declared that Hungary would withdraw from the Warsaw Pact and become a neutral country, and he appealed to Western nations to help stave off Soviet aggression.
This fight is the fight for freedom . . . against the Russian intervention and it is possible that I shall only be able to stay at my post for one or two hours.
Today it is Hungary and tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow, it will be the turn of other countries because the imperialism of Moscow does not know borders. —Imre Nagy, November 4, 1956 Soviet leaders moved quickly to crush the revolt by sending and tanks and Red Army troops into Budapest.
After killing thousands of protesters, the troops put Soviet-backed leaders back into power in Hungary.
Nagy stood trial before the county’s communist leaders, who then put him to death Hungarians had counted on help from the United States.
Before the revolt, many had listened faithfully to United States -sponsored radio broadcasts beamed into the country from Europe.
There they heard speakers urging them to resist the spread of communism.
Many Hungarians believed that the United States would support its bid for independence by sending troops and weapons to aid them in their fight against the Soviet Union.
Eisenhower, however, was unwilling to risk war with the Soviet Union to free one of its satellites.
The Cold War Turns Hot in Asia The superpowers did not confine their rivalry to Europe.
By the 1950s, both China and Korea had become arenas in the Cold War struggle.
The ""Fall of China"" to Communism During World War II, Chinese communists led by Mao Zedong and the Nationalists led by Chiang Kai-shek had joined forces to fight Japan.
With Japan’s surrender in 1945, however, the two groups turned on each other and waged a civil war for control of China.
The United States backed the Nationalists, even though Chiang was not a popular leader.
At times, both allies and adversaries saw him as corrupt or ineffective.
Chiang and his followers fled to Formosa, an island off the coast of China, which they renamed Taiwan.
The fall of China to the communists ended United States hopes that the country would become a powerful, noncommunist ally in Asia.
Some Americans reacted to the event with anger and looked for a scapegoat.
United States Secretary of State Dean Acheson denied that the administration held responsibility for China's acceptance of communism.
Many China scholars agreed, noting the unpopularity of Chiang and the broad public support for Mao Zedong.
Many United States leaders feared that China and the Soviet Union would form an alliance and pose an even greater threat to United States interests around the world.
Most Americans viewed communist China as similar to the Soviet Union both in its attitude toward the West and its desire to spread communism around the world.
Nevertheless, although China remained a key ally of the Soviet Union for years, it pursued its own interests and rejected Soviet control.
The communist takeover of China prompted the United States to seek a new ally in Asia, and Japan was the logical choice.
Eventually, Japan became an economic powerhouse and a strong United States partner in the region.
In October 1949, the Chinese communist Red Army defeated Nationalist forces and took control of China.
The new People's Republic of China, led by Mao Zedong, established communist rule in China.
The United States remained a staunch ally of Chiang's government, however, and worked to isolate communist China.
The United States Ends Relations with China Meanwhile, the United States adopted a stern policy toward China.
When Mao formed the People's Republic of China in 1949, the United States refused to recognize the new state.
Instead, it continued to refer to the Nationalists in Taiwan as China’s legitimate government.
The United States also cut off all trade with China and opposed its admission to the United Nations.
The United States government meant for these steps to contain China by isolating it from the world community.
Some felt that improving United States relations with China might weaken China’s ties to the Soviet Union.
But United States officials faced strong pressure from Congress and the public to treat China as an enemy.
The United States did not resume formal relations with China until 1979.
The Korean War Like China, Korea was freed from Japanese control when World War II ended.
At that time, Soviet troops occupied the Korean Peninsula north of the 38th parallel, while United States troops held the area to the south.
In the north, the Soviet Union put a pro-Soviet communist government in power.
In the south, United States officials supported the existing anticommunist government.
However, this arrangement masked deep tensions, which erupted in June 1950 in the Korean War.
The war began when North Korean troops armed with Soviet weapons invaded South Korea.
Truman, viewing the invasion as a test of American will, ordered United States forces to help South Korea repel the invaders.
A UN resolution condemned the North Korean invasion and called on member states to aid South Korea.
Troops from 15 nations joined the UN force, with the vast majority of the soldiers coming from the United States.
Officials selected American general Douglas MacArthur to lead the troops.
Under his command, the army invaded North Korea and fought its way northward, nearly reaching the Chinese border along the Yalu River.
The Korean War was the first major conflict to take place during the Cold War.
Several million Koreans died, along with some 54,000 American soldiers.
Korea remained divided between the communist north and the noncommunist south.
Advance by Chinese and North Korean troops, Nov 1950-Jan 1951 Advance by South Korean.
UN, and United States troops, Jan-Jun 1951 — Demilitarized zone, established Jul 1953 JAPAN For much of the Korean War, the fighting seesawed back and forth across the 38th parallel, the dividing line between North and South Korea.
Alarmed by the approach of UN forces, China sent tens of thousands of soldiers streaming over the border into North Korea.
An army of more than 400,000 Chinese and North Korean troops forced the UN army back to the 38th parallel.
He wanted to blockade China's ports and bomb major Chinese industrial centers.
In fact, once China entered the conflict, the president began looking for a way out of it.
When MacArthur publicly questioned the president's decision, Truman fired him.
The final two years of the war became a stalemate, with most of the fighting taking place near the 38th parallel.
The agreement left the Korean Peninsula divided along the 38th parallel and created a buffer zone, called the demilitarized zone , between the two countries.
It destroyed homes, factories, roads, hospitals, and schools throughout the peninsula.
About 3. million North Korean and South Korean soldiers died or suffered injuries.
North Korea turned inward, becoming increasingly isolated from the rest of the world.
South Korea, in contrast, continued to develop strong economic and political ties with the United States.
As the economic gap between the two Koreas widened, hopes for a “unified, independent and democratic Korea"" faded away.
One of its most effective forms of propaganda was radio broadcast The anticommunist messages of Radio Free Europe aimed to stir up anticommunist sentiment in Eastern Europe.
Here, a young Czech refugee speaks during a 1952 broadcast beamed into communist Czechoslovakia.
Poor, developing nations in Latin America, Africa, and Asia made up the final group, called the Third World.
Many Third World nations had recently gained freedom from colonial rule.
Influencing Hearts and Minds In the Cold War, nations used words and persuasion as weapons.
Both superpowers utilized propaganda to exert influence over their allies and to persuade others to join their side.
The United States designed its propaganda to raise fears of communism and highlight the benefits of capitalist democracy.
This propaganda took many forms, from books and news articles to films and radio broadcasts.
To carry out this war of words, the government created the United States Information Agency, or USIA, in 1953.
One of the USIA’s main jobs was to beam radio broadcasts into the Soviet bloc.
Radio Free Europe broadcast to Eastern Europe in Czech, Polish, and other local languages.
Many of the staff members of these services had fled Eastern Europe to escape communist rule.
The families they left behind often faced harsh treatment from communist governments due to their relatives' ties to the radio networks.
Soviet and Eastern European leaders tried to isolate their citizens from Western news and ideas by banning radio programs from the West.
They disrupted the broadcasts by jamming the signals and filling the airwaves with mechanical shrieks, howls, and other loud noises.
Supporting Friendly Governments Nations also used foreign aid as a Cold War weapon.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union gave money and assistance to other countries to gain new allies.
However, much of it took the form of military assistance to friendly Third World governments.
Pro-American states such as Turkey, Pakistan, and South Korea received help, while more independent nations often did not.
In some countries, such as Nicaragua and Haiti, the United States gave support to anticommunist dictators.
These leaders used the aid to tighten their grip on power— often at the expense of their people.
Many citizens in those countries bitterly resented the aid, which seemed to contradict the United States goal of promoting democracy.
At times, the United States withheld aid to punish nations that failed to support its policies.
In the 1950s, Egyptian leader Gamal Abdul Nasser began building trade ties with communist nations.
In 1956, Egypt bought tanks and other weapons from communist Czechoslovakia, in defiance of United States wishes.
In response, the United States and Britain withdrew their offers to help Egypt finance the building of the much-needed Aswan Dam on the Nile River.
This led Britain, France, and Israel to invade Egypt, hoping to regain control of the canal.
To prevent war, the United States stepped in, persuading all sides to withdraw and thus ending the crisis.
Containing Communism Through Covert Action In the 1950s, the CIA played a growing part in the Cold War.
During this period, it expanded its role from intelligence gathering to covert action.
A covert action is a secret political, economic, or military operation that supports foreign policy.
Agents try to shape events or influence affairs in foreign countries while hiding their role in those events.
During the Cold War, both superpowers used spies, satellite photography, wiretapping, and other covert methods to gather information about or influence events in other countries.
At times, CIA agents also bribed foreign leaders, supported political parties, or funded supposedly independent radio stations.
The United States often used covert action to overthrow unfriendly or leftist governments.
For example, in 1953 it helped topple Mohammed Mossadegh, Iran’s premier.
Mossadegh had nationalized a British oil company, establishing government control over the formerly private company.
CIA agents worked with Iran’s military leaders to overthrow Mossadegh and reinstate the Iranian monarch, Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi.
As absolute ruler with close ties to the United States, the shah ruled Iran for almost 30 years.
In Central America, the United States also relied on covert action to achieve its goals.
In 1954 in Guatemala, for example, CIA agents helped overthrow the elected president, Jacobo Arbenz Guzman.
Both United States economic interests and Cold War concerns motivated this action.
The United Fruit Company, a United States firm with operations in Guatemala, opposed certain social reforms laid out by the Guatemalan government.
United Fruit objected to a government plan to hand over thousands of acres of company ** — And His Father Lives L’p There* During the Cold War, many people believed that the best way to fight communism in the Third World was to provide aid for social and economic development.
According to this theory, extreme poverty gave rise to unrest and revolution.
Others, like the 1965 rebellions in Indonesia, were struggles between competing factions in a country.
Concerned that Guatemala might turn communist, the United States ordered the CIA to support a military coup.
It returned United Fruit lands, shelved other reforms, and jailed many of its critics.
The United States role in Guatemala caused many Latin Americans to view the United States as an enemy of social reform.
Set Hungary Hungarian Revolution, 1956 China Communist victory over Nationalists.49 PACIFIC OCEAN Mediterranean Seif* East China -Sea Lebanon United States intervention, 1958 Taiwan U.S.-China conflict, 1954 Indochina French Indochina War, 1946-1954 Arabian Sea Egypt Suez Canal Crisis, 1956 South' China , Sea j Congo United States -supported coup, 1960-1961 Indonesia Civil War, 1965 INDIAN OCEAN 0 1,000 2.000 km Robinson projection Sometimes the United States intervened more aggressively.
In 1962, voters in the Dominican Republic elected a noncommunist reformer, Juan Bosch, as president.
Fearing that many of his supporters were communists, the United States sent troops to crush the revolt and keep Bosch from regaining power.
An Arms Race Threatens Global Destruction During the Cold War, the superpowers engaged in a costly and deadly arms race.
Now that the Soviets had one as well, the United States felt the need to develop weapons with even greater destructive force.
Soon the two superpowers were locked in a deadly arms race, or a competition to achieve weapons superiority.
The Race to Develop Weapons of Mass Destruction Shortly after the Soviet atomic test, American scientists began discussing plans for a new type of bomb.
It would be based not on splitting atoms— the technology used in the atomic bomb— but on fusing them.
Known as a hydrogen bomb, or H-bomb, this weapon would be far more powerful than an atomic bomb.
In a report to the Atomic Energy Commission, they warned that the H-bomb was “not a weapon which can be used exclusively” for military purposes, since it would have a far greater effect on civilian populations than an atomic bomb would.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff, the nation’s top military leaders, disagreed.
By 1960, the arms race had also led to the development of nuclear missiles and submarines.
First, the United States and the Soviet Union built long-range, intercontinental ballistic missiles, or ICBMs, which could deliver nuclear warheads to distant continents.
Next, the United States developed nuclear-powered submarines that could launch up to 16 nuclear missiles from the water.
The In the late 1950s, the United States began building nuclear-powered submarines that could also launch nuclear missiles.
The USS Patrick Henry, which took to sea in 1959, was the second of these submarines to be built It carried 16 Polaris missiles and could stay submerged for more than two months at a time.
With these new weapons, citizens of both nations faced the frightening prospect of enemy warheads raining down on their cities from far away.
Deterring Attack by Threatening Mutual Assured Destruction As the threat of nuclear war continued, Dulles developed a new strategy to reinforce brinkmanship and ensure American nuclear superiority.
The strategy, called deterrence, revolved around developing a weapons arsenal so deadly that the Soviet Union would not dare to attack.
Dulles also believed that warning the Soviets that any attack on the United States would be met with an even deadlier counterattack would reduce the threat of war.
It meant that either side would respond to a nuclear attack by launching its own missiles, with devastating results for both sides.
Fear of a nuclear conflict made the United States and the Soviet Union more likely to step back from all-out war.
However, while MAD may have helped prevent the Cold War from turning hot, it also kept the world in a state of heightened anxiety.
Using the Threat of War to Contain Communism The threat of nuclear war carried with it the prospect of utter annihilation, a threat the United States tried to use to its advantage.
In the 1950s, the government developed a foreign policy known as brinkmanship— a willingness to go to the edge, or brink, of war.
According to Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, the Soviets had to believe that the United States would use its nuclear weapons if pushed too far.
In a speech, Dulles declared, “You have to take chances for peace, just as you have to take chances in war.
It implied that the Soviets only understood force and assumed that they would back down if faced with the prospect of nuclear war.
But Dulles believed that the United States had to be ready to go to war to keep the peace.
In China, both communists on the mainland and Nationalists in Taiwan claimed to be the nation’s legitimate rulers.
In 1954, Mao decided to assert China’s claim to Taiwan and ordered his troops to fire on the nearby islands of Quemoy and Matsu.
The Nationalist government claimed these islands and feared that their loss to the communists would prompt an invasion of Taiwan.
Eisenhower saw the shelling of Quemoy and Matsu as a challenge to American influence in Asia.
As a result, the United States signed a treaty with the Nationalist government promising to protect Taiwan in case of attack.
This time the United States threatened to launch a nuclear attack on China, causing China to back off.
In the eyes of the United States, this result was a victory for brinkmanship.
The Cold War arms race frightened many Americans, and people everywhere, with the prospect of nuclear destruction.
Cartoonist Rube Goldberg conveyed this threat in his prize-winning cartoon of 1948, which shows American life balanced precariously on the atomic bomb.
Looking at MAD Today When Dulles first discussed MAD in the 1950s, tensions between the superpowers were very high.
In the United States, schools prepared for possible nuclear attacks by holding classroom air-raid drills.
Some families built backyard bomb shelters and stocked them with supplies.
Eventually, however, fears of an attack diminished as both sides sought more productive ways to resolve Cold War conflicts.
The Superpowers Step Down from MAD Starting in the 1960s, the United States and the Soviet Union took steps to slow down the arms race.
In 1963, they signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, prohibiting aboveground testing of nuclear weapons.
In 1972 and 1979, after negotiations known as the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks , the two sides signed treaties setting limits on the numbers of nuclear missiles and missile-launching sites.
These treaties marked the start of nuclear disarmament, or the reduction of weapons.
During the 1980s, United States leaders began to look for alternatives to MAD as the only response to a nuclear attack.
President Ronald Reagan called on the military to build a missile defense system that would keep enemy missiles from ever reaching the United States.
Nicknamed Star Wars, his plan called for a network of landand space-based missiles that would intercept and ^Jestroy incoming missiles while still in flight.
Reagan’s plan never got off the ground, but work on a more a limited missile defense system was begun under the administration of President George W Bush.
In 1987, in Washington, D.C., the superpowers took another step away from MAD by signing the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.
Under the INF Treaty, both sides agreed to reduce the total number of nuclear arms in their arsenals.
By the early 1990s, the Soviet Union had collapsed and the Cold War was over.
Facing economic and political problems, the new Russian state agreed to further reductions in nuclear weapons.
Various countries possess nuclear weapons today, with the five nations shown on the graph having the most.
As you can see, the United States and Russian stockpiles are far larger than those of other countries.
The administration of President George W Bush has referred to some of these countries, such as North Korea and Iran, as “rogue states/’ This term is meant to describe countries that have weapons of mass destruction, such as nuclear and chemical weapons, and that sponsor terrorism.
Many analysts fear that these countries might sell bombs or nuclear technology to terrorist groups.
Many political analysts doubt that the policy of Mutual Assured Destruction can deter nuclear terrorism.
Nuclear threats may come from small terrorist groups that have no fixed location and that often move from place to place.
In addition, such groups would be unlikely to stage a conventional military attack, using fighter bombers or long-range missiles.
Under these circumstances, Americans may be debating how to keep the United States safe from nuclear weapons for years to come.
Berlin Blockade In 1948, the Soviet Union set up a blockade around Berlin to force the Allies to either abandon the city or cancel plans for the creation of West Germany.
The Allies launched an airlift to bring supplies into Berlin and break the blockade.
NATO and the Warsaw Pact In 1949, the Western powers formed the North Atlantic Treaty Organization as a military alliance to counter Soviet aggression.
The Soviets responded by forming their own military alliance, the Warsaw Pact, with Eastern European countries.
In 1950, North Korean communists invaded South Korea, prompting a war with United States and UN forces.
Third World During the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union tried to win friends and allies in the Third World— the developing nations of Latin America, Africa, and Asia.
This battle for “hearts and minds” involved propaganda, aid, covert action, and military intervention.
Mutual Assured Destruction The invention of the H-bomb fueled a deadly arms race.
In response, the United States developed various policies, including brinkmanship and deterrence, to manage the nuclear threat.
In the end, it relied on the policy of Mutual Assured Destruction to limit the chances of all-out war.
Introduction Norman Finkelstein wore the “dog tag” that hung around his neck proudly.
It was similar to the identification tags that members of the military wore— if soldiers were killed or injured, their dog tags revealed their name and which military outfit they belonged to.
In many towns and cities during the early Cold War years, children wore dog tags like Finkelstein’s, with their name and address imprinted on them.
Authorities hoped the tags would help them deal with a nuclear attack if one took place.
Finkelstein recalls, “In case of a nuclear attack, my body could be easily identified— that is, if the dog tag survived and there were others still alive to receive the information.
Children growing up during the Cold War lived with the fear that Soviet bombers— and later guided missiles — armed with nuclear weapons could attack the United States at any moment.
No one could predict when a nuclear attack would occur, so people tried to remain constantly prepared.
In addition to wearing dog tags, children practiced duck-and-cover drills at school.
During these drills, when their teachers gave a signal, students ducked under their desks and covered their heads with their hands.
It also raised concerns about how to keep the nation secure from external threats and unseen enemies within the country while also maintaining civil liberties.
As in past wars, finding the right balance between freedom and security posed a challenge.
These tags were designed to identify children in the aftermath of a nuclear attack.
Americans also took other precautions, such as holding emergency drills and stockpiling goods, out of fear of nuclear war.
Communists Come Under Suspicion at Home Not all Americans agreed with the government's definition of communism.
Some people believed that communism offered a much fairer way of organizing a society than capitalism did.
Under communism, everyone would share equally in what society produced.
The result, supporters maintained, would be a great increase in human happiness.
During the Depression, this vision had attracted many followers in the United States.
Others became communist sympathizers, or people who believed in communist ideology but did not join the party.
Still, as the Cold War heated up, so did fears of communist subversion, or plots to overthrow the government and replace it with a communist dictatorship.
To calm public anxiety, in 1947 President Truman established the Federal Employee Loyalty Program.
It required government employers to take loyalty oaths, or pledges of loyalty to the United States.
It also called for background investigations of employees who had possible connections to subversive groups.
After 5 million investigations, hundreds of government workers lost their jobs for being “potentially” disloyal.
HUAC Hunts for Communists in Hollywood and Beyond Meanwhile, Congress began its own investigation.
It was led by the House Un-American Activities Committee , which had been formed in 1938 to investigate subversive organizations.
In 1947, HUAC turned its attention to communist influence in the film industry.
The committee called on writers, actors, and directors to testify about their political beliefs.
The committee disagreed and charged them with contempt of Congress, or willful failure to obey the authority of Congress.
The heads of Hollywood movie studios grew concerned about the impact the HUAC investigation would have on their industry.
Anyone whose name appeared on this blacklist could no longer find work making films.
In 1954, it called on labor organizer John Watkins to testify about communist influence in labor unions.
When Watkins refused to answer certain questions, HUAC convicted him of contempt of Congress.
Watkins appealed his conviction, arguing that the Constitution does not give Congress unlimited power to investigate the private lives of citizens.
The Alger Hiss case involved a State Department official who had served as an adviser to President Roosevelt at the Yalta Conference.
A former Communist named Whittaker Chambers accused Hiss of passing secrets to the Soviet Union.
In 1950, a federal grand jury convicted Hiss of perjury, or lying under oath.
However, secret documents made public in 1995 indicate that Hiss probably had spied for the Soviet Union.
Just as shocking were charges that Americans had helped the Soviet Union test its first atomic bomb in 1949.
The information Fuchs passed along to Soviet scientists may well have helped to speed their development of atomic weapons.
From Fuchs, a trail of espionage led investigators to Ethel and Julius Rosenberg, whom the United States charged with passing atomic secrets to the Soviet Union.
The Rosenberg trial concluded with death sentences for both defendants.
At the time, many people protested the verdict and sentences, arguing that the evidence against the suspects was inconclusive.
Nonetheless, the Rosenbergs were executed in 1953, becoming the only American civilians to be put to death for spying during the Cold War.
The House Un-American Activities Committee held thousands of hearings in its hunt for subversives in American society.
Here the committee questions a Hollywood executive about alleged communist influence in the film industry.
Ethel and Julius Rosenberg were tried, convicted, and executed for passing atomic secrets to the Soviet Union.
Such wellpublicized spy cases raised fears that the federal government was riddled with traitors.
Soviet documents opened in the 1990s indicate that Julius had spied for the Soviet Union.
Ethel was probably guilty only of keeping quiet about her husband's activities.
Others condemned him for publicly accusing people of disloyalty without much, if any, evidence.
The more reckless Senator McCarthy's accusations became, the less believable they were.
The Rise and Fall of Joseph McCarthy About two weeks after Fuchs confessed to spying.
He asked his audience how communists had been so successful in taking over Eastern Europe and China.
The answer, he said, could be found in ""the traitorous actions” of Americans working in high government posts.
Still, he launched a crusade against subversives that rapidly gained momentum.
As a result, McCarthy was named head of the Government Committee on Operations of the Senate.
Over the next two years, McCarthy used his newfound power to search for subversives.
Although he never made a solid case against anyone, his accusations drove some people out of their jobs.
For example, under hostile questioning by McCarthy’s chief lawyer, Roy Cohn, Army Signal Corps employee Carl Greenblum broke down and cried.
Such reckless persecution of innocent people became known as McCarthyism.
Today, this term signifies the practice of publicly accusing someone of subversive activities without evidence to back up the charges.
Lawmakers refused to enact reforms that might be viewed as moving the country toward communism.
Schools asked teachers to sign loyalty oaths, and those who objected to doing so lost their jobs.
Citizens became reluctant to speak out about injustices for fear of being labeled subversive.
When graduate students at a university circulated a petition asking for a vending machine in the physics department, some students refused to sign.
They feared having their names on a list with other allegedly radical students.
In the nationally televised Army-McCarthy hearings, spellbound Americans watched as McCarthy’s brutal tactics were exposed for all to see.
The climax of the hearings came when McCarthy attacked a young man who worked for Joseph Welch, the lawyer who represented the Army.
Little did I dream you could be so reckless and so cruel as to do an injury to that lad.
It is, I regret to say, equally true that I fear he shall always bear a scar needlessly inflicted by you.
If it were in my power to forgive you for your reckless cruelty, I would do so.
I like to think I’m a gentle man, but your forgiveness will have to come from someone other than me. —Joseph Welch, addressing Senator Joseph McCarthy, June 9, 1954 Public opinion quickly turned against McCarthy.
Late in 1954, the Senate passed Resolution 301, which censured, or formally scolded, McCarthy for his destructive actions.
Mommy, where are you?” —Pat Frank, A las, Babylon , 1959 Like many novels written in the 1950s, Pat Frank’s Alas, Babylon portrayed a world engulfed in World War 111— an imagined conflict fought with weapons powerful enough to destroy all life on Earth.
During these early Cold War years, the destruction caused by the atomic bombs dropped on Japan remained fresh in Americans’ minds.
People were terrified to think of such bombs raining down on American cities— yet by 1949, such an attack seemed all too possible.
Despite such fears, the promise of atomic power also excited Americans.
The media ran glowing stories predicting atomic-powered cars, ships, airplanes, and power plants.
Atoms in an amount of matter spread out the size of a fingernail, say the scientists, could supply sufficient energy to propel an ocean liner across the sea and back.
An automobile, with a microscopic amount of matter from which atomic energy could be released, could be driven around for a lifetime if it didn’t wear out, never stopping at a gas station. — Milwaukee Journal August 7, 1945 Businesses jumped on the atomic bandwagon as well.
A French fashion designer named his new two-piece bathing suit the ""bikini” in honor of the testing of an atom bomb on Bikini Atoll in the Central Pacific.
The mushroom cloud produced by an atomic blast became a popular symbol during the Atomic Age.
This image from the film shows Bert the Turtle hiding in his shell from a dynamite blast.
The film compares this situation to how children should react to an atomic bomb explosion.
Many Americans built fallout shelters to shield themselves in the event of a nuclear attack.
Notice the canned food, canned water, and other items the family thought it might need while living in the shelter for a period of weeks.
In Las Vegas, the Chamber of Commerce promoted atomic tourism, publishing a schedule of tests and the best places to view them.
Creating a Civil Defense System As the atomic arms race took off, the federal government began planning for civil defense— the organization and training of citizens to work with the armed forces and emergency services during a war or natural disaster.
The head of FCDA warned Americans that the ""back yard may be the next front line” The agency distributed millions of civil defense manuals to help people prepare for a nuclear attack.
These publications made it clear that Americans could not rely on the military to protect them from a surprise attack.
People would have to be prepared to protect themselves as best they could.
Stocked with emergency food and water supplies, these shelters offered people refuge during an attack.
Across the country, tests of warning sirens and emergency radio stations were carried out every week.
Civil defense workers called block wardens trained their neighbors on how to Fight fires and provide first aid after an attack.
The FCDA developed a film and booklet featuring a character called Bert the Turtle, who taught children how to survive an atomic explosion.
Bert led the children through duck-and-cover drills to prepare them for how to react if they ever heard an emergency siren.
Some families took preparedness a step further by burying an underground shelter in their backyard.
Several companies sold prefabricated ""fallout shelters” for single-family use.
The shelters were designed to shield families not only from an atomic explosion, but also from the radioactive dust that ""falls out” of the sky afterward.
Authorities advised families to remain sealed in their fallout shelters for several weeks after an attack to let this toxic dust settle.
Preparedness Versus Peace These early civil defense preparations were based on the expected impact of an atomic bomb attack.
Faced with this new threat, the FCDA concluded that the only practical way to protect large numbers of people during an attack was to evacuate them from target cities.
The FCDA created a large-scale civil defense drill called Operation Alert to test how quickly cities could be evacuated.
However, for a growing number of Americans, the drills became an opportunity to speak out against the nuclear arms race.
The Federal Civil Defense Administration worked to protect the country from the effects of a nuclear attack.
But such efforts would probably have made little difference in an actual attack.
Fearful of attacks from within, the government sought to root out communist subversion.
Faced with the threat of nuclear attack from the Soviet Union, it promoted civil defense and preparedness planning.
House Un-American Activities Committee HUAC investigated the loyalty of people in many areas of life.
Its probe of the movie industry led movie studio heads to blacklist anyone thought to be a communist or communist sympathizer.
Spy trials Fears of subversion deepened with the AJger Hiss case and the Rosenberg trial.
McCarthyism Senator Joseph McCarthy launched a well-publicized crusade against subversives in government.
The term McCarthyism came to refer to personal attacks against innocent people with little or no evidence to support the charges.
Atomic Age Americans greeted the Atomic Age with a mixture of fear and excitement.
Federal Civil Defense Administration Congress established the FCDA to help Americans survive a nuclear attack.
The FCDA published civil defense manuals and promoted drills and other measures to protect Americans from harm.
As the power of nuclear weapons increased, however, the usefulness of such precautions came into question.
The economy booms, ending the Great Depression and creating new opportunities for women and some minorities.
United Nations Founded Representatives of 50 nations meet in San Francisco to draw up the United Nations Charter.
Aid is sent to Greece to help that country defeat a communistled rebellion.
United States Fights the Korean War More than 54,000 Americans die in a war to keep South Korea from being overrun by communist troops from North Korea.
Food and fuel shipments funded by the plan help avert widespread suffering.
While most people saw their standard of living rise, hidden pockets of poverty remained.
African Americans' long battle for equality matured into a civil rights movement that would not be ignored.
Waldie grew up in the 1950s in Lakewood, California, a community located 15 miles south of Los Angeles.
A year later, houses were rising out of the farm fields at a rate of 50 homes a day.
By 1953, some 90,000 people lived in Lakewood, making it the fastest-growing housing development in the world.
Once the war ended, however, millions of soldiers returned home to marry and start families.
The developers of Lakewood were betting that those families would soon be looking for a place to live.
Some local businesspeople predicted that Lakewood would be an instant slum— or worse, a ghost town.
A Suburban Memoir, 1996 For these white, middle-class homebuyers, owning a house in Lakewood was a symbol of their new affluence, or prosperity.
Aided by the GI Bill of Rights, veterans could buy a home with no money down.
All they needed was a steady job and a promise to keep up with the house payments.
Suburbs like Lakewood, California, made it possible for many people to buy their first home.
Every house came with upto-date features like stainless-steel kitchen counters and an electric garbage disposal.
In this photograph, prospective buyers walk along a street of model homes in 1951.
Inflation is a general rise in the price of goods and services over an extended period of time.
If a worker’s wages stay the same but prices go up, the worker can afford to buy fewer things.
As the graph shows, inflation spiked after wartime price controls were lifted in 1946.
Prices also rose because the demand for consumer goods after the war far outstripped the supply.
The day after he learned of Franklin Roosevelt's death on April 12, 1945, he told reporters, Boys, if you ever pray, pray for me now.
I don't know whether you fellows ever had a load of hay fall on you, but when they told me yesterday what had happened, I felt like the moon, the stars, and all the planets had fallen on me. —Harry Truman, 1945 Truman's first task was to bring the war to an end.
Once that was done, he faced the enormous challenge of leading the country back to a peacetime economy.
A Rocky Transition to Peace Truman welcomed the war's end by announcing a package of reforms that later came to be known as the Fair Deal.
He called on Congress to increase the minimum wage, increase aid to agriculture and education, and enact a national heath insurance program.
Complaining that Truman was “out-New Dealing the New Deal,” Republicans in Congress did their best to stall his reforms.
Meanwhile, the economy was going through a difficult period of adjustment.
As the war came to a close, government officials canceled billions of dollars' worth of war contracts.
In addition, once wartime price controls were lifted, prices skyrocketed.
When employers refused to meet these demands, labor unions triggered the largest strike wave in United States history.
In 1946, nearly 5 million workers walked off the job, many of them in such key industries as steel production, coal mining, and oil refining.
In a speech to Congress, he warned, “Food, raw materials, fuel, shipping, housing, the public health, the public safety— all will be dangerously affected"" if the strike were allowed to continue.
Truman Battles a Republican Congress The labor unrest was still fresh in voters’ minds as the 1946 congressional elections drew near.
For the first time since the 1920s, Republicans gained control of both houses of Congress.
One of the first actions of the new Republican Congress was passage of the Twenty-second Amendment in 1947.
The Republican sponsors of the amendment did not want to see another liberal president like Franklin Roosevelt seek four terms as president.
They argued that without term limits, a popular president might seek to become “president for life,"" much like a dictator.
The amendment was overwhelmingly ratified by the states and was added to the Constitution in 1951.
Congress also took aim at the labor unions by passing the Taft-Hartley Act in 1947.
A closed shop is a workplace in which the employer agrees to hire only members of a particular union.
To resolve such strikes, President Harry Truman appointed factfinding boards to hear workers' complaints.
Usually, the boards recommended wage increases. strikes, in which workers of one union walk off their jobs to show their sympathy with another striking union.
It also allowed the president to impose an 80-day “cooling off’ period before a union could strike in certain industries.
Late in 1946, he established the President’s Committee on Civil Rights to investigate racial inequality in the United States.
The committee issued a report calling for an end to segregation and discrimination in voting, housing, education, employment, and the military.
In 1948, Truman sidestepped Congress and desegregated the armed forces by executive order.
An Upset Victory in 1948 As the election of 1948 drew near, Democrats were filled with gloom.
Truman, who had been unable to get any of his reforms passed by the Republican Congress, looked like a weak candidate.
Fearing that Truman’s hard-line containment policy could lead to World War III, he advocated friendlier relations with the Soviet Union.
The Dixiecrats nominated Strom Thurmond, the governor of South Carolina, for the presidency.
Dewey was heavily favored to win, despite his lackluster campaign style.
On election night, some newspapers printed the next day's edition before the results were final.
A gleeful Truman holds up the morning edition of the Chicago Tribune, which had predicted the wrong outcome.
Once Dwight D Eisenhower's ""I like Ike"" campaign got rolling, it never stopped.
The 1952 presidential campaign was the first to make extensive use of television ads.
A whistle-stop is a small town where a train would stop only if signaled to do so by a whistle.
In one of the biggest electoral upsets in history, Truman narrowly won reelection.
For the next four years, Truman regularly presented his Fair Deal programs to Congress.
However, a coalition of conservative southern Democrats and midwestern Republicans blocked most of his reform efforts.
It also agreed to increase the minimum wage and support slum clearance.
The Republicans nominated the immensely popular war hero Dwight D Eisenhower.
Moreover, people loved Eisenhower’s winning smile and agreeable manner.
Richard Nixon, a young senator from California, was chosen to be Eisenhower’s running mate.
A strong anticommunist, Nixon had gained prominence as a member of the House Un-American Activities Committee.
Four years later, he again defeated Stevenson to win a second term as president.
He promised to be “conservative when it comes to money and liberal when it comes to human beings ” He resisted calls by conservatives to roll back the New Deal.
By doing so, he ensured that this popular New Deal program would survive no matter which party controlled the White House.
At the same time, Eisenhower presided over a massive peacetime arms buildup.
Economic Growth Creates an Age of Affluence In 1940, Dick and Mac McDonald opened a drive-in restaurant in San Bernardino, California.
The restaurant was popular, but customers sometimes had to wait as long as 20 minutes for their food.
Customers weren’t demanding it, but our intuition told us they would like speed.
The supermarkets and dime stores had already converted to self-service, and it was obvious the future of drive-ins was self-service. — Dick McDonald So the brothers decided to streamline every aspect of their business.
Instead of offering hamburgers, hot dogs, and sandwiches, they narrowed the menu to hamburgers.
Instead of serving food on plates and glasses that needed washing, they used paper wrappers and cups.
When they reopened their restaurant as McDonald’s Famous Hamburgers in 1948, the country was entering one of the greatest economic booms in its history.
By the end of the 1950s, middle-class families were enjoying a level of affluence beyond anything their Depression-era parents and grandparents could have imagined.
Consumer Demand Spurs Economic Growth During World War II, Americans had saved billions of dollars.
Flush with cash, they were ready to go on a spending spree as soon as factories could convert from war production to consumer goods.
This surge in consumer demand encouraged businesses to expand production.
By 1955, the United States, with only 6 percent of the world’s population, was producing almost half of the world’s goods.
Real income is income measured by the amount of goods and services it will buy, regardless of inflation.
By the mid1950s, the average American family had twice as much real income to spend as the average family of the 1920s had.
The McDonald brothers developed an assembly-line process to speed service and lower costs.
At the original McDonald's, shown here, customers could receive their meal in as little as 15 seconds after placing an order.
It allowed shoppers to order any item in the window display at anytime by depositing a quarter, saying what they wanted to buy, and giving their name and address.
Not only were Americans spending more money than ever before, they were also spending it in different places.
In the past, most people had bought their goods in stores lining the main street of town.
By the mid-1950s, however, suburban shopping centers were luring consumers away from downtown shopping districts.
Shopping centers offered customers easy parking and a wide array of shops to browse, often in air-conditioned comfort.
By 1964, there were more than 7,600 shopping centers across the United States.
Businesses used methods pioneered during the 1920s to encourage consumers to keep on spending.
By 1955, businesses were spending $8 billion a year on ads that encouraged consumption.
Another method was to offer consumers easier ways to buy now and pay later.
Large stores issued charge cards that allowed their customers to charge goods to an account rather than pay cash.
By I960, Sears Roebuck had more than 10 million accounts, or one for every five families.
In 1958, American Express launched the first all-purpose credit card that could be used in stores, hotels, restaurants, and gas stations.
A third method used to encourage consumption was called planned obsolescence.
Businesses using this method looked for ways to make what a consumer bought today seem obsolete, or out-of-date, after a fixed period of time.
As they did so, last season’s garments, although still usable, looked dated.
Automobile companies did the same thing by changing the styling of their cars every year.
The Economy Begins to Shift from Goods to Services When the 1950s began, the United States economy was dominated by industries that produced such goods as steel, appliances, and cars.
By the end of the decade, industries that provided services, rather than manufacturing goods, were growing in importance.
The biggest and best-known manufacturing company was the automaker General Motors.
In 1955, GM became the first United States corporation to earn more than $1 billion a year.
It accomplished this feat by producing and selling as many cars as all of its competitors produced combined.
An important factor in GM’s success was an improved relationship with its workers.
In 1948, GM signed a historic agreement with the United Auto Workers union.
The agreement guaranteed that GM workers would receive regular wage hikes tied to a cost-of-living index.
A cost-of-living index measures differences in the price of goods and services over time.
If inflation pushes prices up, the index measures by how much prices went up.
As the economic boom continued, new service industries began to compete for the consumer’s dollar.
In 1954, a go-getter named Ray Kroc visited McDonald’s Famous Hamburgers in San Bernardino.
An hour before lunch, there was already a long line of customers waiting to be served.
In addition, the burgers tasted good, and it was not necessary to tip anyone.
Kroc convinced the McDonald brothers to hire him as a franchising agent.
A franchise is an agreement to operate a business that carries a company’s name and sells its products.
The next year, he opened his own franchise restaurant in Des Plains, Illinois.
It was especially attractive to families with young children who did not feel comfortable in more formal restaurants.
Under Kroc’s leadership, hundreds of McDonald’s soon dotted the landscape.
Another new service industry, the motel chain, was inspired by a summer driving trip.
Day after day, he faced the problem of finding a decent place for his family to spend the night.
A frustrated Wilson finally turned to his wife and announced he was going into the motel business.
Other chains, such as Best Western and Howard Johnson s, also began to expand.
By the 1960s, the motel chain had become a fixture on America’s highways.
Gross National Product, 1945-1960 At the end of World War II, many economists feared the economy would once again fall into a depression.
Instead, consumer spending helped spur a long period of economic growth.
The Workforce Shifts from Blueto White-Collar Jobs As the economy grew and changed, the kinds of work people did also changed.
When the 1950s began, blue-collar workers made up the largest part of the workforce.
Blue-collar workers are people who work in factories or at skilled trades, such as plumbing or auto repair.
The name comes from the durable blue shirts that manual workers often wore to work.
For the first time in history, white-collar workers outnumbered blue-collar employees.
White-collar workers include professionals such as doctors and lawyers, engineers, salespeople, managers, and office staff.
Because white-collar employees worked in offices, they could wear white shirts to work without fear of getting them dirty.
As blue-collar workers moved up into the middle class, they began to dress, act, and consume like their white-collar neighbors.
During the 1950s, the number of people holding white-collar office jobs grew rapidly.
White-collar workers were far less likely to belong to labor unions than their blue-collar neighbors.
Marriage, Families, and a Baby Boom The year 1946 was one second old when a navy machinist’s wife gave birth to a baby girl in Philadelphia.
In Chicago, seconds after the new year began, a son was bom to the wife of an army trombone player in Chicago.
For both sets of parents, these births may have been long-awaited and happy events.
But for demographers who study the growth of human populations, these births marked the beginning of the largest population boom in United States history.
A Marriage Boom Leads to a Baby Boom During the Depression, marriage rates and birthrates had dropped as worries about the future caused people to postpone decisions that would change their lives.
In 1946, there were almost 2. million marriages in the United States, an increase of more than 600,000 from the year before.
More people were marrying— and at younger ages— than during the war years.
The average age of marriage in the 1950s was 20 for women and 22 for men.
Older couples who had delayed having children also began to start families.
The result was a baby boom, a large increase in the number of babies born in proportion to the size of the population.
At the peak of the baby boom, in 1957, 4. million births were recorded.
By 1964, the last baby boom year, four Americans in ten were under the age of 20.
The babies overflowing maternity wards boosted sales for diaper services and baby food bottlers.
Home sales boomed as young families flocked to the suburbs in search of living space.
Factories worked overtime to fill these new homes with furniture and appliances and to put a car in every garage.
Schools had trouble finding room for the millions of children reaching school age each year.
During the 1950s, California opened new schools at the rate of one a week to make room for the baby boomers.
Other schools handled the flood by running two shifts of classes, one in the morning and another in the afternoon.
Despite these efforts, large classes with two students to a desk were common during the 1950s.
Working Dads and Stay-at-Home Moms The majority of baby boomers grew up in so-called traditional families, with dads who went to work each day and moms who stayed home.
The importance of marriage and family was driven home in marriage manuals of the day.
By 1966, the birthrate had dropped below the lowest level seen during the Depression years.
The belief that mothers should not work outside the home unless they had to for economic reasons was promoted by Dr.
Spock advised mothers to devote themselves full-time to raising their children.
Any distraction from that task, such as a job or hobby, he argued, could damage a young child.
Magazines, movies, and advertisements portrayed the ideal family as one in which the husband was the breadwinner while the wife stayed home.
A mom became a teacher, doctor, nurse, cook, adviser, decorator, housekeeper, manager, and chauffeur all in one A new medium called television brought this ideal family to life on screen.
In Leave It to Beaver, June Cleaver was a stay-at-home mom who wore high heels and pearls while working in the kitchen.
Jim Anderson, the sensible dad in Father Knows Best , calmly solved his family’s problems when he got home from work.
In one episode, he advised his tomboy daughter Kathy to act helpless around boys.
Such television shows taught children the roles they would be expected to play as adults.
Toy stores were filled with dolls and tea sets for girls and toy guns for boys.
Girls were given miniature hope chests to encourage them to dream of one day getting married.
The strong emphasis on marriage led many young women to forgo a college education.
And although some women pursued careers after college, many others dropped out early to get married or headed from graduation straight into marriage.
A professor at Smith College complained of having to cancel a Final class with female senior honors students because it conflicted with too many bridal showers.
In the ""traditional"" 1950s family, the father worked, and the mother stayed at home raising the children.
In this photograph, the mother looks happy with her role as wife and mother.
Buyers could choose from five models that differed in color, roofline, and window placement.
Population Shifts to Suburbs and Sunbelt States In 1941 , Bill and Alfred Levitt won a government contract to build thousands of homes for war workers in Norfolk, Virginia.
Then they hired and trained 27 teams of workers, each of which specialized in just one step.
By the time the project ended, they had revolutionized the process of building homes.
Middle-Class Families Move to the Suburbs No industry had suffered more during the Depression and war years than the homebuilding industry.
Housing starts had dropped from more than 1 million new' homes a year to fewer than 100.000.
The GI Bill was ready to assist them with home loans at low interest rates.
The Levitt brothers knew exactly how to help those veterans use those loans.
In 1947, they began work on Levittown, the first planned community in the nation.
They would go on to build two more Levittowns, in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, by 1960.
One team specialized in white paint while another one only applied red paint.
By mass-producing their homes in this way, the Levitts greatly sped up production.
Although a commute could be tiring, countless young families jumped at the chance to live in a clean, safe, childfriendly suburb.
Between 1950 and 1956, the number of Americans living in suburban communities increased by 46 percent.
Weather and Wages Spur Migration to the Sunbelt Americans were not only on the move from cities to suburbs.
They were also moving from the northern half of the country to the Sunbelt.
This ""belt” of warm-weather states stretched across the southern third of the United States from Florida to California.
After World War II, manufacturers and other businesses began locating in the Sunbelt.
In addition, unions were less entrenched in the Sunbelt states than in the older industrial regions of the North.
The Sunbelt tourist industry also grew, as families flocked to sunny beaches and new attractions like Disneyland.
Between 1950 and 1960, California’s population grew by 50 percent, from about 10. million to more than 15. million people.
The first was the design and construction of massive water projects in the arid Southwest.
These projects involved building dams on major rivers to capture precious water in huge reservoirs.
This water was then distributed through a system of canals and aqueducts to fast-growing cities such as Phoenix, Arizona; Las Vegas, Nevada; and Los Angeles, California.
The second key technology was the development of room air conditioners designed for home use.
Air conditioning made summers bearable in Sunbelt states like Florida and Arizona.
Annual sales of room air conditioners jumped from around 30,000 in 1946 to more than a million by 1953.
The rapid growth in housing starts was made possible by a revolution in home construction techniques.
Using assembly-line methods pioneered by Henry Ford, homebuilders like the Levitt brothers were able to mass-produce homes at an astonishing rate.
Each of the Big Three grew by more than 13 million people between 1950 and 2000.
The Steady Four grew at about the same rate as the rest of the country.
The Triumph of the Automobile On September 4, 1957, a new car called the Edsel appeared in Ford showrooms around the country.
The Edsel had been designed to be the biggest, flashiest, most luxurious Ford ever.
For most of the decade, automobile sales stayed strong as the growth of suburbs increased the demand for cars.
Two Cars in Every Garage Life in the suburbs depended on access to an automobile.
Because most suburbs lacked public transportation, fathers commuted by car to their jobs in nearby cities.
Mothers needed cars to drive to supermarkets and suburban shopping centers.
After school, children depended on the family car to get to their music lessons or little league games.
Suburban families began to find they needed not just one, but two cars in their garage.
Automakers encouraged car owners to trade in last year’s models for new ones to keep up with their neighbors.
Buyers were also urged to “move up’’ to ever-more-expensive cars to show that they had become a success in life.
Its precedent-breaking beauty fully deserves all the applause owners are giving it.
Men and women who have just recently moved up to a ’58 Oldsmobile from another make are the loudest in their praise . . . proudest of their new possessions.
First, each year, they made changes to the style, so that each year's models looked different from those of the year before.
Second, they introduced new features every year, designed to make driving more pleasurable.
The combined effect was to make last year's car look and feel old long before its useful lifetime was over.
Two years later, the census reported that 65 percent of all working people drove cars to work.
The Interstate Highway System As the majority of Americans came to depend on cars for transportation, they demanded more and better roads.
State and federal lawmakers responded by funding new highway construction programs.
The most ambitious was a program authorized by Congress in 1956 to construct a nationwide interstate highway system.
The goal of this system was to connect major cities around the country by a network of super highways.
President Eisenhower strongly supported federal funding of the interstate highway system.
With the United States engaged in the Cold War, a system of superhighways was seen as an important aid to the nation’s defense.
Both troops and weapons could be transported easily and quickly with such a network of high-speed highways in place.
By 1960, about 10,000 miles of interstate highway had been constructed.
Today, the system has about 45,000 miles of highway, all built to the same high standards.
Interstate highways are divided, with at least two lanes in either direction.
The flow of traffic is not interrupted by traffic lights or railroad crossings.
It created economic opportunities as new roadside businesses, such as gas stations, motels, and restaurants, sprang up at interstate exits.
By improving access to all parts of the country, the system gave people more choices as to where to live, work, shop, and vacation.
For better or worse, the highways also increased Americans’ dependence on cars and trucks as their main form of transportation.
Jonas Salk, shown here on the left, announced the development of a trial polio vaccine.
He refused cash awards, however, and continued working to improve the vaccine.
Technological Advances Transform Everyday Life In 1953, Charles Mee was a 14-year-old high school football player in Barrington.
Advances in Medicine Extend Life Expectancy It would have been small comfort to Mee to know that he was not alone.
Polio, or infantile paralysis, was one of the most feared diseases of the 20th century.
The first polio epidemic in the United States, in 1916, left 27,000 people paralyzed and 9,000 dead.
Over the next 40 years, polio epidemics struck every summer across the country.
The worst year was 1952, when almost 60,000 new polio cases were reported.
President Franklin Roosevelt was perhaps the most famous victim of polio.
In 1938, he established the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis to seek a cure for polio.
Over the next 17 years, the foundation funded research to create a vaccine against polio.
People who took the vaccine developed antibodies that protected them from infection by the actual polio virus.
In 1954, some 2 million schoolchildren took part in trials of the vaccine.
Statistics showed the vaccine to be as much as 90 percent effective in preventing polio.
The first openheart surgery and the first kidney transplant were performed.
The first pacemaker, a device designed to regulate the beating of a patient’s heart, was developed.
A number of diseases once viewed as killers were routinely cured in the 1950s through the use of antibiotic drugs.
Penicillin, streptomycin, and other “wonder drugs” attacked bacteria that caused everything from earaches to pneumonia and tuberculosis.
These advances in medicine contributed to a rise in life expectancy during the 1950s.
Peaceful Uses for Nuclear Energy During the 1950s, scientists explored peaceful uses for nuclear energy.
Three years later, the first fullscale nuclear power plant opened in Shippingport, Pennsylvania.
Radioactive isotopes were used in the diagnosis and treatment of disease.
The use of X-rays as a diagnostic tool became a general practice in the 1950s.
At the same time, specialists in nuclear medicine began to use radioactive iodine to treat thyroid cancer.
Called ENIAC , it contained nearly 18,000 vacuum tubes and took up about 1 ,500 square feet of floor space — almost as much as two Levittown homes.
Five years later, the same team introduced the first commercially successful computer.
In 1952, a UNIVAC proved its power by accurately predicting the election of Eisenhower just 45 minutes after the polls closed.
The invention of the transistor in 1947 led to dramatic improvements in computer design.
By 1959, transistors had replaced the bulky and unreliable vacuum tubes.
As computers shrank in size, they began to appear in more and more workplaces.
They sped up the work of record keepers, such as librarians and tax collectors.
But as the decade ended, few people could foresee a time when there would be a personal computer on almost every desk.
As the economy boomed, fears of a return to depression conditions faded.
During the 1950s, millions of working-class families became affluent enough to move up into the middle class.
Fair Deal President Harry Truman guided the transition from a wartime to a peacetime economy.
But he was unable to get his Fair Deal reform program approved by a Republican Congress.
Taft-Hartley Act Immediately after the war, a series of labor strikes threatened to cripple the economy.
In response, Congress passed the Taft-Hartley Act, which limited the power of unions.
Baby boom As the economy improved, Americans married and had children at record rates.
Levittown Suburbs like Levittown attracted homebuyers by offering inexpensive houses on small lots.
Suburban life revolved around the so-called traditional family, with a working dad and stay-at-home mom.
Sunbelt Besides leaving cities for suburbs, Americans were also moving from northern states to the Sunbelt.
Interstate highway system A federally funded network of high-speed roads linked the nation as never before.
Better roads encouraged the growth of suburbs and suburban shopping centers.
Polio vaccine Medical advances such as antibiotics increased life expectancy in the 1950s.
This vaccine ended a decades-long battle with a much-dreaded disease that caused paralysis and death among its victims.
It could add, subtract, multiply, divide, and find square roots at amazing speeds.
Like most women in Rockville Center, Goodwin's mother was a full-time homemaker.
When she and her friends were not in school, they rode their bicycles or roller skates around the block, played hopscotch, and set up lemonade stands in front of their homes.
Life in Rockville Center seemed idyllic until Goodwin became a teenager.
Then, like other teens in the 1950s, she began listening to the radio to a new kind of loud, fast music called rock V roll.
She discovered that beyond her suburb lay a universe rather different from the safe and predictable world she had grown up in.
Goodwin began to question the expectation in her social world that she should think and behave like everyone else.
The 1950s are widely viewed as an age of conformity — a time when everyone behaved and thought in socially expected ways.
But for Doris Kearns Goodwin and many other young people coming of age in these years, it was also a time of rebellion against those same expectations.
In the 1950s, rebellious teens were looking for a new kind of movie hero.
Brando's role in The Wild One , a controversial 1953 film about motorcycle gangs, established him as a symbol of youthful rebellion against authority.
The Culture and Critics of Suburbia During the 1950s, novelist and poet John Updike gained fame writing about life in suburbia— a term used to describe the nation's suburbs and the people who lived there.
In one poem, he wrote, I drive my car to supermarket The way 1 take is superhigh, A superlot is where I park it, And Super Suds are what I buy.
In trains, I like the Super Chief. — Superman , 1954 This cartoon pokes gentle fun at conformity in suburbia.
The identical husbands going home to their identical houses look upset by the man carrying a gift.
Perhaps they are wondering if they should be bringing home gifts as well, if only to be keeping up with their neighbors.
Updike's mocking of the “super"" suburbs did not discourage families from moving there.
Critics Condemn Life in the Suburbs Not everyone viewed this enormous population shift with enthusiasm.
Critics saw suburbia as a wasteland of conformity and materialism, or preoccupation with the pursuit of wealth.
In their eyes, little good could be said about the suburbs or the people who lived in them When social critic Lewis Mumford looked at a suburb, he saw only bland people in bland housing leading bland lives.
These “organization men"" were employees of large corporations or government bureaucracies.
In his book The Lonely Crowd , he wrote that a middle-class suburban child “learns to conform to the group almost as soon as he learns anything/’ Such children grow up valuing “fitting in” with their peers far above thinking for themselves or striving for individual achievement.
In the early 1950s, television brought high culture— works of art, such as plays and concerts, that are held in high esteem— into United States homes.
In Defense of Suburbia To many Americans, these attacks on suburban life seemed unfair.
Where critics saw only conformity, people who actually lived in suburbs were often struck by their diversity.
Although most suburbs excluded African Americans, they often had a broad mixture of religious and ethnic groups.
Malvina Reynolds sang a song called ""Little Boxes"" to describe America's new suburbs.
While spectators sipped European-style coffee and listened, beat writers read their latest works and jazz musicians added freeflowing riffs.
Beat novelist Jack Kerouac wrote in a style called stream of consciousness.
He taped together 12-foot rolls of paper like this one, slid them into a typewriter, and wrote whatever came to mind, hardly ever stopping.
It took him only 20 days to write On the Road, the most famous beat literary work.
Currents of Nonconformity Beneath the surface of widespread conformity, there were many currents of nonconformity, or rebellion against conventional behavior, in the 1950s.
It could mean beaten down, but it was also short for “beatific ” or blissfully happy.
Herb Caen, a San Francisco newspaper columnist, called members of the movement beatniks, and the name stuck.
Beatniks rejected all forms of convention, or customary ways of living.
They shunned traditional nine-to-five jobs and the materialism of American life.
In contrast to clean-cut suburbanites, many beats wore beards, berets, and dark clothes.
They turned away from conventional Western faiths to study Eastern religions, such as Hinduism and Buddhism.
They grooved on African American music, especially a new form of jazz called bebop.
Their subject matter consisted primarily of their own feelings and adventures.
They often used stream of consciousness, a writing technique in which thoughts are presented randomly, as if flowing directly from a character’s mind.
Their vivid, image-filled sentences could go on for pages without stopping.
The first period in Allen Ginsberg’s poem Howl , for instance, does not appear until line 221.
While many literary critics praised beat writings, more conventional readers were sometimes offended by it.
In 1957, police raided a San Francisco bookstore on the grounds that Howl was obscene, or morally offensive.
With cash earned from part-time jobs and allowances, teenagers had more money to spend than ever before.
The most enduring element of this new youth culture was a new style of music that drove many parents crazy.
A Cleveland, Ohio, disc jockey named Alan Freed popularized this new sound.
After hearing from a record storeowner that white teenagers were buying records by black rhythm and blues artists, Freed began to play black music on his popular radio show.
Unlike traditional blues music, rhythm and blues uses amplified instruments, such as electric guitar.
Before long, white musicians began blending rhythm and blues with country music and popular songs.
The confluence of these musical styles resulted in a brash new sound called rock V roll.
At one time, parents might have stopped their children from hearing this new sound by controlling the family radio and record collection.
With the use of transistors in the 1950s, radios and record players became so cheap that teenagers could afford to buy their own.
Despite, or perhaps in part because of, their parent’s objections, young people embraced rock V roll as the sound of their generation.
The most popular early rock ’n’ roll performer was a young singer from Memphis, Tennessee, named Elvis Presley.
At a time when most teenage boys sported trim crew cuts, Presley wore his hair slicked back with long sideburns.
He swivelled his hips in a sexually suggestive way, while his upper lip curled in a defiant sneer.
But to teenagers, Presley represented a rebellion against the music and manners of their elders.
Teenagers often gathered at “sock hops” to dance to the latest hit records.
Held in school gyms where street shoes were not allowed, sock hops were a place where teenagers could learn dances their parents had never heard of.
Hollywood catered to restless teenagers by creating movies featuring moody young people who were misunderstood by adults.
In Rebel Without a Cause , James Dean played an intense, brooding young misfit.
The Wild One featured Marlon Brando as a rebellious motorcycle gang leader.
Teenagers also developed their own language so that “big daddies” (older people) would not understand them.
Phrases like “I’m on cloud nine,” “cool it,” and “don’t have a cow” all started as 1950s’ slang.
New series like Crime Suspense Stories , Tales from the Crypt , and Frontline Combat were notable for Rock 'n' roll singer Elvis Presley was idolized by teens in the 1950s.
He blended African American rhythm and blues with white country music and gospel to create a new sound.
Although tame by today's standards, Presley's sexually suggestive dancing offended many adults.
JAMES DEAN NATALIE WOOD SAL MINEO CiNimaSooPE To reach young audiences, Hollywood made films featuring angry young men misunderstood by adults.
When he died in a car crash in 1955, many teenagers mourned his passing.
Many adults feared the subject matter of these comics would corrupt the minds and morals of young readers.
He and other painters of the 1950s worked quickly and impulsively to create abstract art that said more about their emotions than their thoughts. their gruesome covers and violent storylines.
A new comic called Mad poked fun at just about everything, from other comic books to popular television shows to foreign policy and espionage.
Their concerns were given voice by psychologist Fredric Wertham in a 1954 book called Seduction of the Innocent.
Wertham complained that values such as “trust, loyalty, confidence, solidarity, sympathy, charity, compassion are ridiculed” in comic books.
He also argued that comics had become how-to books for future criminals.
In response to the fears raised by Wertham ’s book, comic book publishers created the Comics Code Authority.
This organization screened comics to make sure they complied with its Comic Code.
The code prohibited depictions of gore, sexuality, and excessive violence.
To escape the restrictions of the code, the creators of Mad converted their comic book into a magazine in 1955.
Artists Rebel with Paint In the art world, rebellion against convention took other forms.
Like beat writers, some painters were creating art that was vivid, unstructured, and not bound by any rules.
Although their individual styles were very different, these painters formed a school of art known as abstract expressionism.
Abstract expressionists rebelled against highly realistic styles of painting.
They drew much of their inspiration from psychology, believing that art could go beyond rational thought to reach deeper emotional truths.
He placed a blank canvas on the floor and dripped paint onto it from above.
Pollock said of this method, “I can walk around it, work from the four sides, and literally be in the painting ” Abstract expressionist works could perplex viewers.
The paintings often had no coherent theme or central subject to focus on.
Some paintings were so cluttered and detailed it was hard to make out what was in them.
Others were so spare and simple that it seemed a child could have painted them.
Nonetheless, abstract expressionism quickly gained acceptance from art lovers.
Some social critics worried that the suburbs had become wastelands of cultural conformity and materialism.
However, many currents of nonconformity also swirled through this decade.
Critics like Lewis Mumford predicted that the sameness of suburban homes would lead to a social uniformity.
But for many families, a move to the suburbs was the fulfillment of the American dream.
The Organization Man Sociologists William Whyte and David Riesman explored conformity in their widely read books.
They argued that large corporations, suburbs, television, and peer pressure were robbing Americans of their individuality.
Beat movement A group of nonconformists called beats rejected all forms of convention.
Youth culture Teenagers created their own culture of nonconformity by embracing comic books, movies, music, and slang that annoyed or appalled their parents.
It was rooted in African American rhythm and blues and featured simple melodies, basic chords, and a strong, danceable beat.
Many parents hated rock V roll, which made it even more attractive to teenagers.
Abstract expressionism Painters like Jackson Pollock broke with realism in art to create a new form known as abstract expressionism.
Abstract expressionist paintings appealed to viewers’ emotions rather than their rational thought.
Introduction In September 1 956, Vice President Richard Nixon gave a speech in which he predicted a prosperous next few years for the United States.
In the ‘‘not too distant” future, he said, a four-day workweek would become the norm.
Booming economic growth since World War II had led many government officials and leading intellectuals to believe that poverty would soon be eradicated.
Although some voiced concern that not all Americans shared in the general prosperity, most of the public ignored the existence of poverty in the United States.
Time magazine went so far as to forecast “the elimination of poverty as a fact of human life ” In 1962, a new book called The Other America jolted the nation out of its complacency.
It is celebrated in speeches and advertised on television and in the magazines.
In the 1950s ... the familiar America began to call itself “the affluent society” . . . there existed another America.
In it dwelt somewhere between 40,000,000 and 50,000,000 citizens of this land.
The Other America generated a national discussion about the responsibility of government to address gross inequalities in American society.
The Other America Poverty in the United States by Michael Harrington The booh that sparked the War on Poverty jlj a Penguin Special ®5c Michael Harrington was a social and political activist who became best known for writing The Other America.
This book stunned readers with its portrayal of poverty in the midst of American affluence.
It helped inspire a government antipoverty program — called the War on Poverty — in the 1960s.
The Persistence of Poverty in an Affluent Society Distribution of Wealth, 1958 Source; Miciiael Harrington.
The Other America Greenwood, Mississippi, was one of countless towns in which the two Americas existed side by side.
During the 1950s, playwright Endesha Ida Mae Holland grew up there, raised alongside her three siblings by a hardworking single mother.
Holland later wrote a memoir about her childhood in which she described the contrast between poverty and prosperity in Greenwood.
The roof leaked, the walls were plastered with newspaper, and the packed earth showed through between the floorboards.
During the 1950s, the United States prospered, but all Americans did not benefit.
This graph shows that in 1958, the top fifth of American families received almost half of the nation's income.
Different Ways of Defining Poverty Most people understand poverty as the lack of means— money, material goods, or other resources— to live decently.
There has never been a single standard for measuring economic deprivation.
For much of United States history, many Americans felt poverty to be as much a moral condition as an economic problem.
They looked down on people, known as paupers, who did not work and who lived on public charity.
Many viewed pauperism, or dependency on public assistance, as a moral failing.
At the same time, society recognized that poverty could result from misfortune.
People who could not work — such as the elderly, the disabled, and children— could not help being poor.
Many Americans also realized that most poor people did work, but their wages were too low to lift them out of poverty.
Although the working poor hold a more respectable place in society than did paupers, economically, there is little difference between the two.
In the late 1800s, social scientists began examining poverty more objectively, viewing it in economic rather than moral terms.
They used the term poverty line to refer to the minimum amount of income one would need to meet basic needs.
However, scholars disagreed about exactly where to draw the poverty line.
In 1949, the Subcommittee on Low-Income Families proposed a poverty line of $2,000 per year for families of all sizes.
This unofficial line was widely used until 1958. when the government began to adjust the amount based on family size.
It was determined by calculating a minimal family food budget and then tripling that figure, because food typically made up about one third of a family’s total budget.
An Invisible Class By the end of the 1950s, about one in four Americans lived below the poverty line.
Middle-class readers of Michael Harrington’s book were shocked to discover the extent of the country’s poverty.
The growing availability of cheap clothing and consumer goods helped create this impression.
But a closer look might show telltale signs of poverty, such as poor health, a rundown home, and a decaying neighborhood.
He sees the hills, the streams, the foliage— but not the poor. —Michael Harrington, The Other America, 1962 Harrington contended that the movement of middle-class families to the suburbs after World War II was one reason for the general lack of knowledge about America’s poor.
Middle-class workers commuting to urban business districts seldom encountered the poor people left behind in old city neighborhoods.
The availability of inexpensive clothing also helped hide the poor from view.
Elderly poor people seldom strayed from their rented rooms or homes in older urban neighborhoods.
According to critics, this resulted in the loss of many poor but vibrant neighborhoods.
The Landscape of Poverty in a ""Land of Plenty"" The “other America,” the land of the poor, had no geographic or cultural boundaries.
Its “inhabitants” belonged to every racial, ethnic, and age group in the country.
In 1959, more than one fourth of the nation’s poor were children, and one third were elderly.
Left Behind in the Inner Cities As middle-class whites moved out of cities in the 1950s, poor people moved in.
From 1945 to 1960, about 5 million African Americans left the South for northern cities.
In the West, large numbers of Mexican immigrants moved to Los Angeles and other cities.
Black and Latino populations became concentrated in decaying, inner-city areas that were being abandoned by whites.
These blighted neighborhoods turned into overcrowded slums with high rates of poverty and unemployment.
Its goal was to provide “a decent home ... for every American family” by funding public housing and urban renewal programs.
Under urban renewal, the government demolished many slums and replaced them with high-rise apartments, offices, and civic buildings.
Despite its lofty-sounding goal, however, the Housing Act of 1949 made urban poverty worse.
Hundreds of thousands of poor people lost homes when their neighborhoods were bulldozed.
The government intended low-income public housing projects to provide an alternative, but not enough housing was built to accommodate all the displaced households.
In many cities, the overcrowded and impoverished “projects” became the new' slums.
After World War II, new agricultural technology contributed to the growth of agribasiness— the industry of food production by large corporations or wealthy individuals.
Agribusiness holdings were vast in size and produced huge quantities of food very efficiently by applying industrial production techniques to farming.
Agribusiness was profitable, but its earnings accumulated at the expense of the rural poor.
Small farmers could not compete with the giant corporate farms, and many sank into poverty.
As a result, thousands of poor rural whites and blacks moved off the land and into cities in search of work.
On large corporate farms, migrant workers endured low pay and wretched living conditions.
Many were Mexican braceros who came to the United States between 1942 and 1964.
In 1954, the government organized Operation Wetback to expel undocumented Mexican immigrants.
Of the Mexican immigrants who remained in the United States in the 1950s, one in three lived below the poverty line.
They struggled to make ends meet through subsistence farming or by working low-wage jobs.
The living conditions shown here were typical of the region's severe poverty.
Appalachia, a mountainous region in the South, was another rural outpost of poverty.
Because of the steep terrain there, living off the land by farming was difficult.
Coal mining, the region’s once-dominant industry, declined after World War II, as the demand for coal fell.
The decrease in demand and the mechanization of mining led to job losses for miners.
America's Poorest Citizens Perhaps the poorest United States citizens were American Indians.
Indeed, those living on reservations seemed the most invisible poor of all, so much so that Michael Harrington omitted them— “quite wrongly” he later wrote— from The Other America.
In 1934, the Indian Reorganization Act had affirmed American Indians’ right to govern themselves.
This meant the government held responsibility for protecting their lands and providing them with economic aid and social services.
As a practical matter, “getting out of the Indian business” would save money.
Many people also thought that releasing American Indians from federal supervision would allow them to assimilate and become economically self-reliant.
Others believed American Indians were not ready to be self-sufficient and would be vulnerable to exploitation.
They feared that the tribes would be “freed” of the few assets— mainly land— they had left.
In 1953, Congress voted to terminate the government’s responsibility for American Indians.
The termination policy ended federal aid to tribes, withdrew federal land protection, and distributed tribal land among individuals.
The Voluntary Relocation Program encouraged American Indians to move to cities.
It provided transportation and initial help with finding housing and a job.
Destitute tribes were forced to sell their land, resulting in the loss of more than 1 million acres of land.
Termination eventually proved to be a failure, and in 1963, the policy was abandoned.
Termination agreements signed during the 1950s ended federal support for many American Indian tribes.
Relocation centers were established in cities such as Chicago, Denver, and Los Angeles to encourage Indians to migrate to urban areas.
Many who made the move either joined the urban poor or later returned to their tribal area.
In 2007, the Department of Housing and Urban Development estimated the number of homeless people at between 444,000 and 842,000.
The Changing Face of Poverty in America More than 40 years have passed since The Other America drew attention to poverty in the United States.
Despite decades of economic growth and government programs to help the poor, the “other America” has not disappeared.
Today’s poor are younger and more diverse than were the poor of the 1960s.
Those who are homeless are also more visible and are readily seen in cities and suburbs across the country.
The graphs in this section show how poverty affects various United States populations today.
Poverty by the Numbers Since the publication of The Other America, the United States has made progress in reducing poverty.
By 2000, the overall poverty rate, or percentage of people living in poverty, had decreased by almost half.
But following a recession that began in 2001 , the poverty rate began to inch upward again.
Two tenths of a percent may not sound like much, but that increase represents 1. million people who became impoverished that year.
An estimated 37 million Americans lived in poverty in 2005— a figure not all that different from the number in 1960.
Poverty by Age and Education The age groups most likely to be poor have changed over the past half century.
Thanks largely to rising Social Security payments, the poverty rate among the elderly dropped to less than one in ten by 2005.
Among working-age adults, the poverty rate has not changed dramatically since 1965.
Poverty by Ethnic Group and Country of Origin As was true when Michael Harrington wrote The Other America, whites make up the largest group of poor Americans.
Among all ethnic groups, African Americans have made the most dramatic gains since Harrington’s time.
Even so, African Americans’ poverty rate is almost three times higher than that of whites.
Beginning in the late 1960s, immigration into the United States increased rapidly.
By 2005, the poverty rate for all foreign-bom people in the United States was somewhat higher than that for native-born Americans.
In fact, naturalized citizens have a lower poverty rate than native-born Americans.
Although people's views and understanding of poverty have changed over time, the problem persists.
People below the poverty line do not have enough income to live decently.
An invisible class In The Other America, Michael Harrington argued that the poor were “invisible” for many reasons.
Urban poverty Impoverished minorities became concentrated in decaying cities when the middle class moved out.
The Housing Act of 1949 launched urban renewal programs to clear out slums and build new housing.
Migrant workers on corporate farms were not paid enough to lift them out of poverty.
One of the poorest rural regions, Appalachia, suffered from poor farming conditions and a declining coal industry.
American Indian policy Efforts by the federal government to “terminate” its responsibility for Indian tribes led to increased poverty among Native Americans.
The Voluntary Relocation Program helped Indians move to cities, but many had trouble adapting to urban life.
The “other America” today Despite government efforts, poverty is still a significant problem in the United States.
Introduction For as long as she could remember, Melba Pattillo had wanted to ride the merry-go-round at Fair Park in her hometown of Little Rock, Arkansas.
But whenever she asked her mother or grandmother to take her, they said it was not possible.
While the grownups were setting up tables of food, Melba made her escape.
When she pointed out that Prancer’s saddle was empty, the man got angry.
She noticed other angry faces glaring at her as though she had done something wrong.
In the 1940s, when this event took place, African Americans throughout the South suffered under a harsh system of racial discrimination.
Jim Crow segregation laws not only kept blacks out of amusement parks like Fair Park.
They also separated blacks from whites in most public facilities, including schools, libraries, and hospitals.
In this chapter, you will learn what life was like for African Americans in the postwar years in the South and the rest of the country.
Throughout the segregated South, African Americans were required to use separate waiting rooms, water fountains, and bathrooms.
Facilities for blacks and whites were supposed to be equal, but often were not.
Segregation in American Life Many southern whites strongly supported segregation.
When a church in a white neighborhood of Fort Worth, Texas, was sold to a black congregation in 1956, white residents protested.
In the 1940s, state governments in the South spent twice as much to educate white children and four times as much on white school facilities.
Many black students had to make do with poor, unheated classrooms and few books or supplies.
They were expected to accept their lesser status in society and act accordingly.
But around whites, they put on a “mask,” hiding their true feelings and acting meek and inferior.
In practice, this meant that most blacks avoided looking white people in the eyes.
A black male could not look at a white woman or touch her accidentally.
If charged with inappropriate attention to while females, a black male might face a lynch mob in many states throughout the nation.
Blacks had to accept white insults and degrading names such as “boy,” “girl,” “auntie,” or “uncle,” regardless of their age.
This code of rules and behavior was the product of a long history of racial discrimination in the United States.
It was most evident in the South, but it extended throughout American society.
Segregation in Public Accommodations Segregation was common in public places, especially in the South.
This ruling gave rise to many state laws legalizing segregation in public accommodations, including theaters, restaurants, libraries, parks, and transport services.
Jim Crow laws established separate facilities for whites and blacks across the South.
In waiting rooms and rest rooms, train cars and buses, theaters and restaurants, and even on park benches, blacks and whites were kept apart.
And in some places there was a bathroom for whites but none for blacks.
Segregation in Schools Jim Crow laws for schools began to appear shortly after the Civil War.
By 1888, school segregation had been established in almost every southern state, along with some northern and western states. m imsm L W 1 1 31 1 I am IV Ifl I mm. vs (HI 1 * Ih I ' H L JJ li K 4 | Although the Plessy decision stated that separate accommodations for the races must be equal, the reality was often quite different.
Teachers in black schools got lower salaries and worked under more difficult conditions.
They often lacked books and supplies, and their school facilities were frequently substandard.
In some schools, students had to gather firewood to heat their classrooms in the winter.
Although white schools had bus systems, black students often had to walk miles to get to school.
Segregation in Housing African Americans also experienced housing segregation.
One was de facto segregation, which was established by practice and custom, rather than law.
When large numbers of African Americans began moving north in the 1900s, many white residents used informal measures to keep blacks out of their neighborhoods.
This was an agreement among neighbors not to sell or rent to African Americans or other racial minorities.
Restrictive covenants often forced blacks into poor neighborhoods that were farther from jobs, public transport, or good schools.
In the 1930s and 1940s, the federal government supported racial zoning.
In 1951, however, the Supreme Court declared racial zoning unconstitutional.
Yet segregated neighborhoods remained the norm in many southern cities.
Segregation in Marriage Between 1870 and 1884, eleven southern states passed laws against miscegenation, or interracial marriage.
Many laws against miscegenation prohibited marriage not only between African Americans and whites but also between whites and Asians or whites and American Indians.
Segregation in the Workplace Employment and working conditions reflected widespread segregation in American society.
Few blacks held white-collar jobs, or jobs that do not involve manual labor.
In 1940, for example, the median income level of black men was less than half that of white men.
Discrimination in employment was a direct result of racism, but it was also the product of poor schooling for African Americans.
Illiteracy and a lack of education helped trap blacks in low-level jobs, especially in the South.
From the end of the Civil War through the 1940s, various states passed laws imposing segregation in public schools and accommodations.
Although these laws were most common in the Jim Crow South, some northern and western states enforced segregation as well.
Enactment of Interracial Marriage Laws, 1849-1943 More than half of all states banned interracial marriage in the 1940s.
In 1967, however, the Supreme Court ruling in the case Loving Virginia declared that laws against mixed marriage are unconstitutional.
In the years after Reconstruction, poll taxes and literacy tests kept many blacks from voting.
Many southern states also disenfranchised blacks through use of the white primary.
The Democrats excluded blacks from party membership and thus denied them the right to vote in party primaries.
As a result, the Democrats had no need to court black voters, and blacks had no political representation.
Between 1923 and 1944, Texas Democrats used it to limit black participation in politics.
In 1944, however, the Supreme Court declared white primaries unconstitutional.
As a result, more African Americans began voting in Texas, and the number of registered black voters rose substantially.
Gerrymandering was another method used to discriminate against black voters and render their votes meaningless.
Gerrymandering is the practice of redrawing the lines of a voting district to give one party or group of voters an advantage.
If the majority of voters in a particular voting district are African Americans, they may be able to elect a candidate who represents their interests.
But if the voting district lines are gerrymandered to break up that population and place African Americans in white-majority districts, the black vote gets diluted and becomes less effective.
Through gerrymandering, black voters were often denied political influence.
These methods were unlike the violent methods used in the early years after Reconstruction, when blacks were sometimes forcibly prevented from voting.
But they were equally effective in denying blacks voting rights and limiting black representation in government.
This graph shows the difference between white and nonwhite income in five major American cities.
Half of people have incomes below the median income, and half have incomes above it.
Jessie C Smith and Carrell R Horton, eds., Historical Statistics of Black America.
Small Steps Toward Equality Jackie Robinson would become one of the greatest baseball players in the history of the game.
In 1944, however, he was a lieutenant in the army, stationed at Fort Hood, Texas.
Leaving the base one day, he got on a military bus and took a seat up front.
Later, he would achieve fame on the baseball diamond and become a role model for millions of Americans.
Over the course of his life, Robinson came to represent both the struggles of African Americans and their gradual advances in white-dominated society.
At the time, baseball was divided by the color line, a barrier created by custom, law, and economic differences that separated whites from nonwhites.
In 1945, Robinson crossed the color line when Brooklyn Dodgers general manager Branch Rickey hired him.
After briefly playing for a minor league team, Robinson took the field in a Dodgers uniform in 1947.
Fans taunted him, and some of his own teammates resented playing with a black man.
Players on opposing teams sometimes tried to “bean"" him with the ball or spike him with their cleats.
As he later recalled, “Plenty of times I wanted to haul off when someone insulted me for the color of my skin, but 1 had to hold to myself.
Robinson overcame these challenges and eventually led his team to six league championships and one World Series victory.
Around the same time, other professional sports began to open up to black athletes.
Football became integrated in 1946, when four black players joined the professional leagues.
Four years later, the National Basketball Association accepted its first African American players.
By the 1950s, the color line in professional sports was gradually disappearing.
When Jackie Robinson signed a contract with the Brooklyn Dodgers in 1945, he became the first African American to cross the color line in professional baseball.
He credited his black fans with helping him get through his first difficult years in the major leagues.
Desegregation of the Armed Forces Another area of American life in which the color line would soon fall was the armed forces.
Despite the valuable contributions of African American soldiers during World War II, the military remained segregated after the war.
Many GIs returning from combat continued to face segregation at home, especially in the Jim Crow South.
In 1946, army veteran Isaac Woodard was traveling by bus from North Carolina to Georgia.
At one stop, the driver threatened Woodard for taking too much time in the “colored"" bathroom.
Police officers then beat him so badly that he was permanently blinded.
When President Truman learned of the incident, he was appalled and vowed to do something about segregation in the military.
Like many Americans, he recognized that it was hypocritical to fight Nazism and anti-Semitism abroad while maintaining a color line at home.
Likewise, he saw that continued segregation in the United States could undermine efforts to promote freedom and democracy overseas as part of the Cold War struggle with the Soviet Union.
As the Cold War intensified in the late 1940s, political leaders began to discuss the need to rebuild the armed forces.
Many African Americans said they would refuse to fight in a segregated army.
Although many leaders in the armed forces opposed desegregation, Truman believed that discrimination in the military must end.
On July 26, 1948, Truman signed Executive Order 9981, which stated, “It is hereby declared to be the policy of the President that there shall be equality of treatment and opportunity for all persons in the armed services without regard to race, color, religion, or national origin.
Civil Rights Organizations Challenge Discrimination The fight to end segregation would never have succeeded without the determined efforts of civil rights activists.
Many Americans worked tirelessly for various organizations dedicated to achieving equal rights.
Founded in Chicago in 1942 by a group of students, CORE was committed to nonviolent direct action as a means of change.
Its first action — a peaceful protest at a segregated coffee shop in Chicago in 1943— gained national attention and helped CORE spread to other northern cities.
It went on to assist in the desegregation of many public facilities in the North and then turned its attention to the South in the late 1950s.
Another key group, the National Urban League, formed in response to the Great Migration of blacks to northern cities in the early 1900s.
The Urban League focused on helping African Americans achieve success in the North.
It also promoted educational and employment opportunities for African Americans.
The National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, the oldest major civil rights organization, also remained active in the struggle for equal rights.
Founded in 1909, the NAACP continued its efforts to promote civil rights legislation.
In 1939, the group established a legal arm for civil rights actions, the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund.
The Legal Defense and Educational Fund focused on defeating segregation through the court system.
Its main weapon was the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
This clause prohibits states from denying any person equal protection of the laws.
Since the clause does not allow states to discriminate, it is crucial to the protection of civil rights.
The Courts Begin to Dismantle Segregation In 1951, getting to school every day was hard for Linda Brown, a seven-yearold in Topeka, Kansas.
First she had to walk a mile, passing through a railroad yard on her way to the bus stop.
All of this made no sense to Linda because there was a good school only seven blocks from her house.
Early Court Decisions Make Big Strides In the 1930s and 1940s, the Supreme Court began to strike down Jim Crow laws.
Later it declared white primaries unconstitutional and barred segregation on interstate transport.
In Shelley Kraemer, the Court ruled that states could not enforce restrictive covenants.
Over the next few years, for example, thousands of black families in Chicago moved into areas that had previously been restricted to whites.
In 1950, the Court handed down strong rulings against discrimination in education.
In two cases, the Court declared that segregation in graduate schools and law schools was unconstitutional.
It began to look as if all “separate but equal” education was on the way out.
Beginning in the 1930s, the Supreme Court began to strike down laws mandating segregation in public facilities.
The map below shows four key education cases decided by the Supreme Court between 1938 and 1950.
The Court demanded that McLaurin receive “the same treatment ... as students of other races"" while attending a statesupported school.
Mills Board of Education of Anne Arundel County Anne Arundel County, Marytand, 1939 Walter Mills, a black schoolteacher, sued the board of education over salaries, citing the minimum annual salary as $1,250 for white teachers and $765 for black teachers.
The Court ordered that salary discrimination based on race be stopped, but refused to order the board not to pay black teachers less than white teachers.
P§S Week an Ettenhoaer Bar* Report alUWW The Supreme Court's ruling in Brown Board of Education was big news across the nation.
DBS Corp. and National Center for Education Statistics, reported in Gary Orfield and JohnT.Yun, Resegregation In American Schools , June 1999.
In the first 10 years after the Brown ruling, slow progress was made in school desegregation.
Brown Board of Education Meanwhile in Topeka, Oliver Brown, Linda's father, had contacted the NAACP, which in turn gathered 12 other parents to join in efforts to desegregate the city's schools.
First the parents tried to enroll their children in white schools, but all were denied admission.
The NAACP appealed the case, and it went all the way to the Supreme Court.
Brown Board of Education was actually a set of cases from Kansas, South Carolina, Virginia, Delaware, and Washington, D.C., that had moved up through the court system at the same time.
The Court decided to combine the cases because the plaintiffs were all looking for the same legal remedy.
The Brown case was a class-action lawsuit, a lawsuit filed by people on behalf of themselves and a larger group who might benefit.
He supplied evidence showing how segregation harms African American children.
In the test, 16 black children had been shown a white doll and a brown doll.
During this time, a new chief justice, Earl Warren, was appointed to the Court.
Believing that a unanimous decision in the Brown case would carry more weight than a divided one. he worked hard to convince all the judges to rule in favor of the plaintiffs.
We conclude that in the field of public education the doctrine of “separate but equal"" has no place.
Therefore, we hold that the plaintiffs and others similarly situated for whom the actions have been brought are, by reason of the segregation complained of, deprived of the equal protection of the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth Amendment. —Brown Board of Education , 1954 The Brown decision dismantled the legal basis for segregation in schools and other public places.
It was one of the most important judicial decisions in the nation's history.
It was also one of many key rulings on civil rights made by the Court under Earl Warren, who served as chief justice from 1953 to 1969.
In fact, the Warren Court became known for its activism on civil rights and free speech.
The justices wanted desegregation to go forward as quickly as possible, but they also recognized that many obstacles stood in the way.
They wanted to allow states some flexibility in desegregating their schools in accordance with Brown.
For example, in 1955 a white citizens’ council in Mississippi published a handbook called Black Monday, referring to the day the Supreme Court handed down the Brown decision.
Despite such opposition, the Brown decision inspired hopes that African Americans could achieve equal rights in American society.
It served as a catalyst for the civil rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s, a time when many individuals and groups dedicated themselves to promoting equality, opportunity, and rights.
Some southern states had begun to integrate their schools by the mid-1950s.
This photograph of an integrated classroom in Louisville, Kentucky, was taken in 1956.
In the 1940s and 1950s, desegregation began in sports and the military.
The landmark Supreme Court ruling Brown Board of Education heralded the beginning of the modem civil rights movement.
Segregated society Segregation affected every aspect of life in the Jim Crow South.
De jure segregation was defined by law, while de facto segregation was determined by custom.
Blacks in the North and West also experienced de facto segregation, especially in housing.
Breaking the color line Professional sports began to be integrated in the late 1940s.
Executive Order 9981 President Truman was determined to integrate the armed forces.
His executive order, issued in 1948, ended segregation in the military.
Civil rights groups Civil rights organizations gained strength in the postwar years.
The National Urban League tried to help African Americans who were living in northern cities.
The NAACP began a legal branch and launched a campaign, led by Thurgood Marshall, to challenge the constitutionality of segregation.
Brown Board of Education The NAACP’s legal campaign triumphed in 195^, when the Warren Court issued the Brown Board of Education decision.
This ruling declared segregation in public schools to be unconstitutional and undermined the legal basis for segregation in other areas of American life.
Introduction Four decades later, Cardell Gay still remembered the day— May 3, 1963— when hundreds of young people marched through the streets of Birmingham, Alabama, to protest segregation.
It was the second day of marches by young people in Birmingham that spring.
More than a thousand young people, some as young as five, marched on May 2, the first day of the protest.
The following day, an even larger force of young blacks turned out to march.
As the youngsters fled, policemen chased them down with clubs and dogs.
The Birmingham protests showed that African Americans were not going to back down in their struggle for civil rights.
In this chapter, you will learn about key events in the early years of the civil rights movement.
The years from 1955 to 1965 witnessed efforts to desegregate buses, schools, lunch counters, and other public places.
During these years, civil rights activists also worked to secure voting rights for African Americans.
Hundreds of child marchers were arrested in a Birmingham park in May 1963.
Today that park features monuments honoring those children and their fight against segregation.
In 1955, however, activists in Montgomery, Alabama, organized a successful bus boycott and achieved integration on city buses.
Rosa Parks was arrested for refusing to give up her seat on a bus to a white man.
A Boycott in Montgomery Inspires a Movement Although the 1954 Supreme Court ruling in Brown Board of Education outlawed segregation in public schools, segregation continued in much of the South.
Law and custom still required blacks and whites to use separate facilities, like drinking fountains and waiting rooms, and to sit separately in restaurants and on buses.
In 1955, however, a boycott in Montgomery, Alabama, began to shake up the Jim Crow South.
Protesting Unfair Bus Laws In the 1950s, public buses in Montgomery were segregated, as they were throughout the South.
If the bus was full, they were required to give up their seats to white riders.
On December 1 , 1955, Rosa Parks, a 43-year-old African American woman, refused to give up her seat on a bus to a white passenger.
Parks, a seamstress, had been active in the Alabama chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
Leaders of the Montgomery chapter of the NAACP had been looking for a test case to Fight segregation.
Parks, who was well-spoken and had a solid reputation in the community, seemed perfect.
Nixon, a local activist, asked Parks if the NAACP could build a case around her arrest, and Parks agreed.
The following evening, a group of African American ministers met to plan a strategy.
Black ministers announced the boycott at Sunday services, and activists distributed leaflets asking African Americans to take part.
On December 5, a sign at a Montgomery bus stop read, “People, don't ride the bus today.
On that day, 90 percent of African Americans who usually rode the bus honored the boycott.
A Young Minister Becomes a Leader The one-day boycott was so successful that the organizers, who called themselves the Montgomery Improvement Association , decided to extend it.
To lead the Montgomery Bus Boycott, the MIA chose a 26-year-old minister, Martin Luther King Jr.
My friends, I want it to be known that we’re going to work with grim and bold determination to gain justice on the buses in this city.
And we are determined here in Montgomery to work and Fight until justice runs down like water and righteousness like a mighty stream.
Many of Montgomery's white leaders did everything they could to stop the boycott and preserve segregation.
Some radical segregationists, including members of the Ku Klux Klan, attacked protesters and even set off bombs at the houses of boycott leaders.
In November 1956, the Supreme Court upheld an Alabama court’s ruling that segregation on buses was unconstitutional.
As a result of the Montgomery Bus Boycott, Martin Luther King Jr. earned a national reputation as a civil rights leader.
King worked with other ministers and civil rights leaders to form the Southern Christian Leadership Conference in 1957.
With King as its president, the SCLC would play a major role in the civil rights movement.
Nonviolent resistance is peaceful protest or noncooperation with authorities that is designed to achieve social or political goals.
Reverend Martin Luther King Jr. quickly established himself as a leader in the struggle for civil rights.
King's use of nonviolent protest — which he learned from studying the great Indian leader Mahatma Gandhi — helped shape the civil rights movement.
Nonviolence is not a symbol of weakness or cowardice, but as Jesus demonstrated, nonviolent resistance transforms weakness into strength and breeds courage in the face of danger.
This would prove to be a powerful tactic in the struggle for civil rights.
School Desegregation In 1957, nine black students, including Elizabeth Eckford , challenged segregation by enrolling at Central High School in Little Rock, Arkansas.
The governor and a mob of angry citizens tried to stop them, but the federal government backed them up.
Governors of several southern states staunchly maintained their opposition to integration.
The governors of Arkansas and Mississippi, for example, aggressively intervened in an effort to prevent blacks from attending all-white schools.
The battle to integrate public schools proved to be long and difficult.
Nine Teenagers Integrate Central High School In 1957, a federal judge ordered public schools in Little Rock, Arkansas, to begin desegregation.
The Little Rock school superintendent, Virgil Blossom, hoped to postpone the change as long as possible.
Citing public opposition to integration in Arkansas, Governor Orval Faubus declared that he would not support desegregation in Little Rock.
On September 4, 1957, the day the nine students were to begin classes, the troops appeared at Central High as a show of force and to prevent the students from entering the building.
They moved closer and closer ... 1 tried to see a friendly face somewhere in the crowd— someone who maybe would help.
I looked into the face of an old woman and it seemed a kind face, but when I looked again, she spat on me. —Elizabeth Eckford, in an interview with NAACP official Daisy Bates Another white woman later emerged from the crowd and helped to shield Eckford from harm.
But Eckford and her fellow black students were kept out of school that day and for days afterward.
Finally, on September 23, the Little Rock Nine returned to Central High.
This time, though, the mayor of Little Rock sought help from President Eisenhower.
Although Eisenhower did not believe that integration should be accomplished by force, he could not allow defiance of federal authority.
The president issued Executive Order 10730, sending in federal troops to maintain order and enforce the integration of the school.
The students rode to school in a convoy led by army jeeps with guns mounted on their hoods.
They also had military bodyguards to protect them— at least for part of the school year.
Despite this protection, the black students were subjected to insults and acts of violence from white students.
Acid was thrown in her eyes, and only the quick action of her bodyguard saved her eyesight.
Eight of the nine African American students finished out the year at Central High.
Governor Faubus closed all the Little Rock schools rather than allow another year of integration.
It was not until September 1959 that integration continued in Little Rock.
The university had traditionally been all white, and Meredith knew he would be taking a stand to integrate it.
When his application was rejected, Meredith turned to the NAACP to help him take his case through the courts.
On appeal, however, a higher court ruled that the university had to admit Meredith.
Refusing him admission, the court said, amounted to the state of Mississippi maintaining segregation.
Mississippi governor Ross Barnett vowed that no black student would attend Ole Miss while he was in office.
On September 20, Barnett, acting as university registrar, personally refused to enroll Meredith.
But President John F Kennedy, also known as JFK, and Attorney General Robert Kennedy were determined to uphold the law as Brown had defined it.
Although JFK was concerned about losing Democratic support in the South, he was sympathetic to the civil rights movement.
On Sunday, September 30, 1962, James Meredith secretly arrived on campus.
President Kennedy sent armed federal marshals to protect Meredith so he could attend classes.
Meredith survived verbal taunts and threats against his life and the lives of his parents.
President Eisenhower ordered federal troops into Little Rock, Arkansas, to maintain order and enforce integration at Central High School.
Members of the 101st Airborne Division are shown here on a Little Rock street in September 1957.
Sit-Ins and Freedom Rides W ; H'£ is Across the South, protesters held sit-ins to integrate lunch counters.
The demonstrators remained nonviolent, even when local residents taunted them.
The campaign to integrate public facilities in the South continued through the 1960s.
During this time, a growing student movement influenced the direction of the civil rights struggle.
They sat down in “whites-only” public places and refused to move, thereby causing the business to lose customers.
And they rode interstate buses that many whites in the South tried to keep segregated.
Sitting Firm to Challenge Segregated Facilities On February 1, 1960, four African American students from North Carolina's Agricultural and Technical College sat down at a lunch counter in the Woolworth’s drugstore in Greensboro.
They ordered food, but the waitress refused to serve them, saying that only white customers could eat at Woolworth’s.
One of the four, Franklin McCain, explained later that the group did not like being denied “dignity and respect;' They decided to return the next day, and about 20 other people joined them.
During the 1960s, sit-ins like this one captured nationwide attention for the civil rights movement.
As news of the Greensboro action spread, protesters began sit-ins in towns and cities across the South.
In April, the city’s blacks organized a boycott of Woolworth’s and another local store with a segregated lunch counter.
On July 25, 1960, the first African American ate at the Woolworth's lunch counter in Greensboro.
Black students also mounted a large sit-in campaign in Nashville, Tennessee.
As in Greensboro, Nashville’s African American community followed up with a boycott of downtown businesses.
On May 10, 1960, Nashville became the first major city in the South to begin integrating its public facilities.
Students Organize to Make a Difference The sit-ins and boycotts began to transform the segregated South and change the civil rights movement.
College students took the lead in the sit-ins, and many became activists in the movement.
In April 1960, Ella Baker, a leader with the SCLC, called a meeting of student civil rights activists in Raleigh, North Carolina.
Although Baker herself was 55 years old and no longer a student, she believed it was important for students to organize and run their own organization.
SNCC leaders emphasized that protesters must not use violence, even if they were physically attacked.
SNCC members planned and participated in direct action throughout the South.
Direct action refers to political acts, including protests of all types, designed to have an immediate impact.
SNCC members played a major role in various campaigns of nonviolent direct action over the next several years.
Freedom Riders Face Violence One direct action targeted the interstate bus system in the South.
In 1960, the Supreme Court ruled that segregation in interstate transport was illegal.
In the spring of 1961, the civil rights group Congress of Racial Equality organized Freedom Rides to test whether southern states were complying with the ruling.
On May 4, 1961 , seven blacks and six whites boarded two buses in Washington, D.C., and headed south.
When the first bus reached Anniston, Alabama, on May 14, a white mob attacked the Freedom Riders.
The mob followed the bus as it left town, threw a firebomb through the window, and then beat the passengers as they fled the bus.
Passengers on the second bus were also beaten when they arrived in Alabama.
CORE abandoned the Freedom Rides, but SNCC continued them Finally, Attorney General Robert Kennedy sent federal marshals to ensure safe passage for the riders to Jackson, Mississippi.
When the Freedom Riders arrived, however, ^ Jackson officials arrested them.
They suffered physical abuse while in jail, but most became even more committed to ending segregation.
In late 1962, the Interstate Commerce Commission issued clear rules stating that buses and bus terminals involved in interstate travel must be integrated.
A Campaign in Birmingham In the early 1960s, Birmingham, Alabama, was a steel-mill town with a long history of bigotry.
Martin Luther King Jr. called it the most segregated city in the country.
Taking Aim at the Nation's Most Segregated City Black residents of Birmingham experienced segregation in nearly every aspect of public life.
Virtually no public facility in Birmingham allowed blacks and whites to mix.
Between 1956 and 1963, there were 18 unsolved bombings in black neighborhoods.
The SCLC stepped directly into this violent climate in the spring of 1963.
King and the SCLC joined forces with local Birmingham activists, led by Reverend Fred L Shuttlesworth.
Together they carefully planned a series of nonviolent actions against segregation.
Hundreds of people were arrested and jailed during mass demonstrations in Birmingham in 1963.
This photograph of protesters at the jail was taken through the bars of a paddy wagon.
King Advocates Nonviolence in ""Letter from a Birmingham Jail"" The protests began on April 3 with lunch-counter sit-ins followed by street demonstrations.
Thirty protesters were arrested for marching at Birmingham City Hall without a permit.
King realized that he would most likely go to jail and stay there for a while.
On April 12, King and 50 others demonstrated and were quickly arrested.
Instead, the clergy urged African Americans to abide by the law and to negotiate with whites to achieve integration.
In “Letter from a Birmingham Jail,” King explained why African Americans were using civil disobedience and other forms of direct action to protest segregation.
Concerning the charge that protesters were being “impatient,” King wrote.
Frankly, I have yet to engage in a direct-action campaign that was “well-timed” in the view of those who have not suffered unduly from the disease of segregation.
The force of such a blast can tear the bark from a tree and knock a grown man to the ground.
Events that day horrified many Americans and helped win support for the civil rights movement The Nation Watches in Horror By late April, Birmingham’s black leaders realized their protests were running out of steam.
Few members of the black community were willing to carry out more direct action at the risk of going to jail.
On May 2, 1963, more than 1 ,000 African American youths marched from Birmingham’s Sixteenth Street Baptist Church into the city center.
The city’s public safety commissioner, Bull Connor, had most of them arrested.
On May 3, more students gathered at the church, preparing to march again.
When some students tried to leave, the police used attack dogs and high-pressure fire hoses on them.
News photographers captured scenes of peaceful protesters being knocked down by blasts of water or attacked by snarling dogs.
The images in newspapers and on television shocked Americans, many of whom had never imagined that southerners would go to such brutal lengths to maintain segregation.
The protests and the national attention they attracted marked a turning point.
At the urging of local business leaders, the city stepped back from confrontation, and on May 10 civil rights leaders announced a historic accord in Birmingham.
Their agreement with the city called for a number of changes, including the desegregation of public facilities within 90 days.
The Ku Klux Klan held a rally, and bombs later went off at a motel where black leaders had been staying.
President Kennedy sent federal troops to a nearby military base, promising to deploy them if necessary to keep the peace.
Birmingham remained calm for several months after that, but then another violent attack occurred.
On September 15, during Sunday services, a bomb exploded at the Sixteenth Street Baptist Church, killing four African American girls.
Birmingham police official Bull Connor also ordered the use of attack dogs against peaceful demonstrators.
But his tactics backfired by promoting sympathy for civil rights protesters across 45.
Achieving Landmark Civil Rights Legislation Some 250,000 people marched in Washington, D.C., on August 28, 1963.
Despite the success of the Birmingham campaign, the city did not change overnight, nor did the events there bring immediate equality for African Americans.
More Americans came to identify with the movement’s emphasis on rights, freedom, equality, and opportunity.
There they demonstrated for “jobs and freedom” and urged the passage of civil rights legislation.
Thousands March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom The 1963 March on Washington was a long time coming.
His goal was to protest unequal treatment of African Americans in the war industries.
He called off that rally, however, in deference to President Roosevelt’s call for unity in the war effort.
In 1963, however, the time was ripe for the long-delayed march, which was organized by leaders of the country’s major civil rights organizations.
The quarter of a million protesters included about 60,000 whites as well as union members, clergy, students, entertainers, and celebrities such as Rosa Parks and Jackie Robinson.
King Inspires the Nation with His Dream The most notable event of the day was Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I have a dream"" speech, delivered from the Lincoln Memorial.
Thank God Almighty, we are free at last!” — Martin Luther King Jr., “I have a dream” speech, August 28, 1963 At the time of the march, a civil rights bill cautiously supported by President Kennedy was making its way through Congress.
After Kennedy’s assassination in November, President Lyndon B Johnson continued to push for the bill.
It stalled in the Senate, however, when senators opposed to the bill filibustered, speaking at great length to prevent legislative action.
Nevertheless, the bill Finally passed and was signed into law on July 2, 1964.
The landmark Civil Rights Act of 1964 banned discrimination on the basis of race, sex, religion, or national origin— the most important civil rights law passed since Reconstruction.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 transformed race relations in the United States.
It outlawed racial discrimination in voter registration, public accomodations, public facilities, public schools and colleges, labor unions, and employment.
The effects of this landmark legislation were both widespread and long term.
Educational Attainment by African Americans Age 25 and Older 1968 1970 1975 1980 27.2% 33.7% 42.5% 51.2% 4.7% | 4.5% ■■I 6.4% ■■■ 7.9% Migration The Civil Rights Act forced southern states to dismantle their segregation laws.
For most of the 20th century, blacks migrated out of the South in search of better lives.
Since then, blacks have increased their political participation as both voters and officeholders.
African Americans Living in Poverty High school graduate Four or more years of college Education The Civil Rights Act the federal government the power to enforce school desegregation.
Income With more education and better job opportunties, African American incomes rose.
Median income is the middle income in a series of incomes ranked from least to greatest.
Median Income of African Americans 1967 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2004 $20,728 $23,372 $24,813 S26,173 $27,563 $32,541 S30,134 1959 1980 2005 Poverty By banning racial discrimination in labor unions and Employment, the Civil Rights Act helped pull many black families out^of poverty.
Regaining Voting Rights In January 1964, the Twenty-fourth Amendment to the Constitution was ratified.
Some southern states had used poll taxes to prevent blacks from voting.
The Twenty-fourth Amendment was a key victory in the African American struggle for voting rights.
But there was more to be done to ensure that black citizens could actually vote.
Registering African American Voters in a Freedom Summer In the spring of 1964, CORE and SNCC organized Freedom Summer, a campaign to register black voters in Mississippi.
At the time, Mississippi was one of the most segregated states in the country, and voting rights for blacks were severely restricted.
Although they made up nearly half of the state’s population, only a few African Americans were registered to vote, due in large part to restrictions imposed by state and local officials.
They were given training in voter registration and were told to expect violent opposition to their efforts.
On June 21 , three student activists disappeared in Neshoba County, Mississippi, after visiting the site of a burned black church.
Marching for the Right to Vote Undeterred by the violence of Freedom Summer, activists continued their registration campaign.
Early the following year, the SCLC began to register black voters in Selma, Alabama.
For weeks, civil rights protesters held daily marches at the Dallas County Courthouse.
At that point, the SCLC called for a march from Selma to the state capital at Montgomery.
The marchers planned to present the governor with a list of grievances.
They came at us like a human wave, a blur of blue uniforms, billy clubs, bullwhips and tear gas; one had a piece of rubber hose wrapped in barbed wire.
Once again, televised images of the violence that day outraged many Americans.
The civil rights movement continued to gain support around the country.
The act outlawed literacy tests and other tactics used to deny African Americans the right to vote.
The act also called for the federal government to supervise voter registration in areas where less than half of voting-age citizens were registered to vote.
Federal intervention would ensure that eligible voters were not turned away.
In 1964, less than 7 percent of Mississippi’s eligible black voters were registered to vote.
In Alabama, the numbers rose from about 20 percent to 57 percent during the same four-year period.
Overall, the number of African American voters in the South increased from 1 million to 3. million between 1964 and 1968.
The civil rights movement had made great strides in the years since the Montgomery Bus Boycott.
African Americans lined up to vote for the first time throughout the South after passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965.
The number of registered black voters grew dramatically in the late 1960s.
African Americans made great progress in their struggle for rights and equality.
Montgomery Bus Boycott In 1955, blacks in Montgomery, Alabama, began a lengthy boycott of the city’s segregated bus system.
SCLC and SNCC These two groups helped organize nonviolent civil rights actions.
The Southern Christian Leadership Conference was led by Martin Luther King Jr.
The Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee organized sit-ins and engaged in other forms of civil disobedience.
Freedom Rides In 1961 , black and white Freedom Riders rode buses through the South.
They were testing southern compliance with laws outlawing segregation in interstate transport.
The riders were subjected to violence and eventually received federal protection.
March on Washington A quarter of a million people marched in Washington, D.C., in August 1963 to demand jobs and freedom.
The highlight of this event was Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I have a dream” speech.
Freedom Summer In the summer of 1964, activists led voter registration drives in the South for African Americans.
Landmark legislation The Civil Rights Act of 1964 banned discrimination on the basis of race, sex, religion, or national origin.
The Voting Rights Act of 1965 outlawed literacy tests, enabling many African Americans to vote.
Along the way he hoped to encourage the African Americans he met to stand up for their rights by registering to vote.
A number of civil rights leaders stepped up to complete Meredith's march.
Carmichael prepared to retaliate, only to be stopped by other marchers.
Rather than thanking Carmichael, King scolded him for straying from the strategy of nonviolence.
When they reached Greenwood, South Carolina, Carmichael was arrested while trying to set up a tent for the night.
Carmichael’s speech and the crowd’s response reflected a turning point in the civil rights movement.
For more than 10 years, the movement’s leaders had favored nonviolence as their main strategy and integration as their primary goal.
With his talk of black power, Carmichael was signaling a change in what many blacks wanted and how they would achieve these new goals.
The Nation's Black Ghettos Explode In 1963, the African American writer James Baldwin published an essay on what it was like to be black in the United States.
Baldwin reminded his readers that blacks had waited far too long for equality.
If the United States did not live up to its ideals soon, he warned, the result could be an eruption of violence.
God gave Noah the rainbow sign, No more water, the fire next time ! —James Baldwin, The Fire Next Time , 1963 Fire did indeed erupt, as anger increased over the slow pace of progress and the federal government’s weak support for civil rights.
Beginning in 1964, African Americans lashed out in violent protests in cities across the country.
In 1965, Watts, a black neighborhood in Los Angeles, exploded in six days of rioting.
Riots in the Streets By the 1960s, almost 70 percent of African Americans lived in large cities.
A ghetto is a part of a city where people belonging to a single ethnic group live.
Sometimes people live in an ethnic ghetto because they want to be among people who share their culture.
But often people live in such neighborhoods because social and economic conditions prevent them from moving elsewhere.
Because of job discrimination, many could not afford to live anywhere else.
Even those with good jobs found it almost impossible to buy houses in white neighborhoods.
In August 1965, a race riot exploded in Watts, an African American ghetto in Los Angeles.
The more long-term cause was African Americans’ festering frustrations about poverty, prejudice, and police mistreatment.
Rioters burned and looted whole neighborhoods, causing $45 million of property damage.
The rioting did not end until 14,000 members of the National Guard were sent to Watts to restore order.
In Detroit, Michigan, 43 people died and more than 1 ,000 were wounded in an urban upheaval.
Eventually the army quelled the riots by sending in tanks and soldiers with machine guns.
Riots in Newark, New Jersey, lasted six days and resulted in many deaths and injuries.
Moving Toward Two Societies It was not until 1967, in response to the rioting that summer, that President Lyndon Johnson, also known as LBJ, established the National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders to examine what had caused the riots.
The commission came to be known as the Kemer Commission after its leader, Illinois governor Otto Kerner.
Negroes had completed fewer years of education and fewer had attended high school.
Negroes were twice as likely to be unemployed . . . and were more than twice as likely to be living in poverty.
Although housing cost Negroes relatively more, they had worse housing— three times as likely to be overcrowded and substandard. —National Advisory Commission on Civil Disorders, 1968 The report pointed to “unfulfilled expectations” raised by the civil rights movement.
The commission called on the country to address the inequalities that the riots had laid bare.
The murder of Martin Luther King Jr. in 1968 triggered the worst violence of the decade.
Later he broke with the Black Muslims and made a broad, nonracial appeal for human rights.
The Rise of Black Power and Black Pride After the Watts riot, Martin Luther King Jr. visited Los Angeles to find out what had happened and why.
While touring Watts, King was booed by residents who had lost faith in his strategy and goals.
But these victories had taken 10 years, and many urban blacks were impatient for change.
They were also not sure they wanted to be integrated into a white society that they viewed as racist and corrupt.
As activism spread beyond the South, the civil rights movement was changing.
Malcolm X Advocates Black Nationalism One of the leaders of this change was a former convict named Malcolm X Bom in 1925 as Malcolm Little, Malcolm X drifted into a life of crime during his teenage years.
In prison, he was introduced to the teachings of Elijah Muhammad, the leader of a religious group known as the Nation of Islam, or Black Muslims.
Muhammad taught that blacks were Earth’s first people but had been tricked out of their power and long oppressed by evil whites.
In 1959, he was featured in a weeklong television special called The Hate That Hate Produced , which brought widespread attention to Malcolm and the Nation of Islam.
As a Black Muslim, Malcolm X rejected the goals of the early civil rights movement.
Rather than seeking integration, the Nation of Islam promoted black nationalism, a doctrine that called for complete .separation from white society.
Black Muslims worked to become independent from whites by establishing their own businesses, schools, and communities.
Malcolm X also rejected nonviolence as a strategy to bring about change.
If black people alone are going to be the ones who are nonviolent, then it’s not fair.
During a pilgrimage to the Muslim holy city of Mecca in 1964, he had met Muslims of all races, including “blonde-haired, blued-eyed men I could call my brothers/’ On his return home, Malcolm X converted to orthodox Islam and began to reach out to people of all races, making a broader call for human rights.
SNCC Stands Up for Black Power A year after Malcolm X’s death, SNCC leader Stokely Carmichael introduced the idea of black power to the civil rights movement.
Black power had a variety of meanings, such as political power, economic power, and pride in being black.
In a speech on black power, Carmichael observed that, This country knows what power is.
If that does not happen, brothers and sisters, we have no choice but to say very clearly, “Move over, or we’re going to move on over you.” — Stokely Carmichael, speech in Berkeley, California, 1966 Carmichael went on to convert SNCC from an integrated organization to an all-black organization.
Black Panthers Work for Self-Determination Among the many African Americans influenced by Malcolm X were Bobby Seale and Huey Newton.
An early supporter explained, “The black panther was a vicious animal, who, if he was attacked, would not back up.
The Black Panthers, who were militant black nationalists, called for economic and political equality for African Americans.
They dressed in military-style clothing and often carried guns as a symbol of black power.
It also led to increased numbers of African Americans being elected to Congress.
When it was founded in 1969, the Congressional Black Caucus had 13 members.
In 1968, Shirley Chisholm became the first black woman elected to Congress.
Chisholm was one of a growing number of African Americans elected to political office as a result of the civil rights movement.
The Black Panthers provided many services for blacks in their community, such as free breakfast programs for children, and medical clinics.
But they were probably best known for their efforts to end police mistreatment of blacks.
They sent observers onto the streets to watch interactions between police and black citizens.
The observers carried a law book to provide information about people’s rights, a tape recorder to document what was said, and a shotgun to show that they were prepared to defend themselves.
Because Black Panthers carried weapons and were willing to stand up to the police, they were viewed as dangerous radicals by law enforcement agencies.
Local police and FBI agents often raided the Panthers' offices and homes.
When confrontations with the police turned violent, the Panthers involved were arrested and jailed.
Black Power at the Polls Brings Political Gains For many African Americans, black power meant the power to shape public policy through the political process.
Supported by the Voting Rights Act of 1965, civil rights groups organized voterregistration drives across the South.
Between 1964 and 1968, the number of southern blacks registered to vote rose from 1 to 3. million.
Across the nation, African American candidates successfully competed for both black and white votes.
In 1969, the African American members of the House of Representatives started the Congressional Black Caucus.
Over the years, the caucus has worked to address legislative concerns of African American citizens.
Black politicians were also successful at winning state and local elections.
Six years later, Tom Bradley became the first black mayor of Los Angeles.
Bradley won by forging a powerful coalition that included inner-city blacks, the Jewish community, and business and labor leaders.
Thurgood Marshall, who had argued the Brown Board of Education case as the NAACP's lead attorney, was named the first black Supreme Court justice in 1967.
The Growth of Afrocentrism For many African Americans, black power meant taking pride in their African heritage.
This focus on African history, African culture, and the achievements of African peoples and their descendants in the United States came to be known as Afrocentrism.
Afrocentric scholars argued that the accounts of history taught in most schools ignored the many contributions of African peoples.
In their view, Afrocentrism helped to balance the Eurocentric, or European-centered, view of the past that had long been presented to American schoolchildren, both black and white.
College students pushed for the establishment of African and African American studies classes.
On a more day-to-day basis, many blacks began to dress in traditional African clothing, wear their hair in African styles called Afros, and exchange their Eurocentric names for Afrocentric ones.
During Kwanzaa, black Americans celebrate seven principles of African American culture, including faith, creativity, and unity.
Black writers also expanded Afrocentric culture as they wrote about their experiences.
Poets like Nikki Giovanni and playwrights like Amiri Baraka and August Wilson brought the struggles of African Americans into their poems and plays.
Novelists like Maya Angelou, Toni Morrison, and Alice Walker wrote widely read novels about African American life, both past and present.
In 1977, a 12-hour television miniseries on African American life called Roots became one of the most highly rated shows in television history.
Based on a historical novel by Alex Haley, Roots told the story of several generations of an enslaved black family.
Based on a novel by Alex Haley and starring actor LeVar Burton , the series told the story of several generations of an enslaved black family.
TV executives feared that a show focused on African American history would be a ratings failure.
To their surprise, Roots became the most-watched television show in history.
In 1971, the Supreme Court approved the use of busing to end de facto segregation in large urban districts.
The hour has come for everybody, for all institutions of the public sector and the private sector to work to get rid of racism. —Martin Luther King Jr., “Remaining Awake Through a Great Revolution,” 1968 That hour never came for King.
Four days later he was assassinated in Memphis, Tennessee, where he had gone to support a sanitation workers’ strike.
As dawn broke on April 6, 1968, a thick pall of smoke hung over the nation's capital.
In the wake of these tragedies, the federal government increased its efforts to end racism and discrimination in public life.
As part of this campaign, he took on the issue of racial discrimination in housing.
In many United States cities, landlords in white neighborhoods refused to rent to blacks.
African Americans also found it difficult to buy houses in many neighborhoods.
Even when African Americans found a home to buy, they discovered that banks were reluctant to make loans to black borrowers.
Under King’s leadership, the black community joined with realtors and bankers to encourage open housing in Chicago.
This law included a fair-housing component that banned discrimination in housing sales and rentals.
Desegregating Public Schools In 1954, the Supreme Court had ruled in Brown Board of Education that school segregation was unconstitutional.
But a decade later, only 1 . percent of black children in the South attended integrated schools.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 gave the federal government new powers to promote school desegregation.
Government officials pushed school districts to integrate their schools by threatening to cut oft* federal funds if they did not.
By 1968, the proportion of African American students in the South attending schools with whites had risen to 32 percent.
By this time, however, the Supreme Court was losing patience with school districts that were slow to act.
There are many places still in this country where the schools are either “white” or “Negro” and not just schools for all children as the Constitution requires.
I would do away with that phrase completely. — Alexander Holmes County Board of Education , 1969 Three years later, the Supreme Court took another look at school segregation in Swann Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education.
This case raised the question of whether de facto segregation caused by housing patterns was constitutional.
This was the situation in North Carolina’s Charlotte-Mecklenburg School District.
Because most children in the district lived in predominantly white or black neighborhoods, they also attended all-white or all-black schools.
In 1970, a federal judge ordered the district to use busing to integrate its schools.
Under the judge’s desegregation plan, some students, including very young ones, would be bused to schools outside their neighborhoods to create more racially balanced schools.
The school district appealed to the Supreme Court, arguing that the judge had gone too far.
In a unanimous decision delivered in 1971 , the Court supported the judge’s busing plan.
Using Busing to Achieve Racial Balance in Schools The Court's approval of busing to achieve racial balance in schools was controversial.
Supporters argued that busing was useful for ending school segregation.
They quoted studies showing that black children got higher test scores when attending integrated schools.
NAACP leader Ruth Baston explained that she favored busing because schools in white neighborhoods were better than schools in black neighborhoods.
She observed that where ""there were a large number of white students, that's where the care went.
White families fled the city, resulting in a school population composed mostly of minority students.
However, many parents, both black and white, felt strongly that their children should attend schools close to home.
They worried about the effects of long bus rides, especially on young children.
They also feared for the safety of children bused into unfamiliar neighborhoods.
Nowhere was resistance to busing stronger than in the city of Boston, Massachusetts.
In 1974, a judge ordered the busing of 17,000 Boston school children to desegregate the city’s schools.
Resistance was especially strong in South Boston, a mostly white neighborhood.
When school began at South Boston High School that fall, 90 percent of its white students boycotted classes.
Black students leaving the school to board buses back to their neighborhoods were pelted with rocks.
Later that fall, a white student was stabbed in a racial confrontation at the school.
Over the next two years, an estimated 20,000 white students left Boston’s public schools to avoid busing.
As a result, by 1976, blacks and Hispanics made up the majority of Boston’s school population.
Despite public resistance, the courts continued to enforce the Brown decision.
By 1976, almost half of black students in the South attended schools with a majority of white students.
In the Northeast, only 27. percent of black students attended integrated schools.
Fighting Racism in the Workplace Through Affirmative Action The Civil Rights Act of 1964 had outlawed discrimination in hiring based on race, religion, gender, or national origin.
However, many argued that simply “leveling the playing field” in hiring was not enough.
This policy called on employers to actively seek to increase the number of minorities in their workforce.
In 1961, he issued an executive order that called on contractors doing business with the federal government to “take affirmative action” to hire minorities.
Equalizing Opportunities Through Preferential Treatment Many Americans agree with the goals of affirmative action.
However, the practices used to carry out this policy have been controversial.
An affirmative action plan may set specific goals, such as numbers of minority or women workers to be hired.
This means giving preference to a minority or female job applicant because of that person’s ethnicity or gender.
To many people, preferential treatment looks like unfair discrimination against white males.
During the 1960s, many colleges and universities adopted affirmative action plans to attract more minority students.
Members of minority groups were often given preferential treatment over white students who were equally qualified or more qualified.
Such treatment was necessary, admissions officers argued, to open opportunities for minorities and to create a diverse student body.
In the late 1970s, a white male named Allan Bakke challenged preferential treatment in university admissions.
At the same time, minority candidates with lower grade point averages and test scores were admitted under a special admissions program.
Bakke concluded that he had been refused admission because he was white, and he sued the school for reverse discrimination.
After hearing arguments on both sides, the Court was left deeply divided.
Four justices were firmly against any use of race in university admissions.
The Court’s ruling narrowly upheld affirmative action by declaring that race could be used as one of the criteria in admissions decisions.
However, it also said that racial quotas were unconstitutional — that race could not be used as the only criterion.
Therefore, the Court ordered the university to admit Bakke to medical school.
The ruling, however, did not end the debate over affirmative action and preferential treatment for women and minorities.
Affirmative action increased the number of minority students attending United States colleges and universities.
In 2006, Steele received the Bradley Prize for his contributions to the study of race in the United States.
The Supreme Court narrowly approved affirmative action in the 1978 Bakke case.
In 1996, these questions were put before California voters in the form of Proposition 209, which stated.
The state shall not discriminate against, or grant preferential treatment to, any individual or group on the basis of race, sex, color, ethnicity, or national origin in the operation of public employment, public education, or public contracting.
In other states, however, the debate over affirmative action continues.
Affirmative Action Hurts African Americans African American scholar Shelby Steele has studied the benefits and drawbacks of affirmative action programs.
Under affirmative action, the quality that earns us preferential treatment is an implied inferiority.
In integrated situations in which blacks must compete with whites who may be better prepared, these explanations may quickly wear thin.
Like implied inferiority, victimization is what justifies preference, so that to receive the benefits of preferential treatment one must, to some extent, become invested in the view of oneself as a victim.
In this way, affirmative action nurtures a victim-focused identity in blacks and sends us the message that there is more power in our past suffering than in our present achievements.
This logic overlooks a much harder . . . reality, that it is impossible to repay blacks living today for the historic suffering of the race.
Affirmative Action Promotes Justice During the debate over Proposition 209, Coretta Scott King, the widow of Martin Luther King Jr., wrote an article opposing the measure.
He did indeed dream of a day when his children would be judged by the content of their character, instead of the color of their skin.
But he often said that programs and reforms were needed to hasten the day when his dream of genuine equality of opportunity— reflected in reality, not just theory— would be fulfilled.
Those who say that affirmative action is no longer necessary rarely cite statistics to support their argument, for the evidence of continuing pervasive discrimination against minorities and women is overwhelming.
Indeed, statistics . . . testify to how precarious our hold is on equal opportunity and how discrimination in our society persists.
Black power In 1966, civil rights activists began calling for black power.
They wanted African Americans to have economic and political power, as well as pride in their African heritage.
Watts riot In the summer of 1965, the Watts section of Los Angeles exploded in violence.
Kerner Commission This commission, established by Lyndon Johson to study the riots, concluded that their fundamental cause was pent-up resentment over historic inequalities.
Nation of Islam Also called Black Muslims, the Nation of Islam advocated black nationalism.
Its members believed that blacks should live apart from whites and control their own communities.
Unlike nonviolent civil rights leaders, the Black Panthers were prepared to fight to realize their goals.
Civil Rights Act of 1968 The most important clause in this law bans discrimination in the sale, rental, and financing of housing based on race, religion, national origin, or sex.
Swann Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education In this decision, the Supreme Court ruled that busing is an acceptable way to achieve school integration.
Huerta had grown up in the valley and knew about the hardships endured by farmworkers and their families.
Huerta liked teaching, but she wanted to do more to help the farmworkers.
Together with farm labor organizer Cesar Chavez, Huerta formed the National Farm Workers Association.
As a small union for migrant farmworkers, the NFWA seemed powerless next to the large corporations that ran farming operations in the San Joaquin Valley.
Nevertheless, in 1966 it won a major victory by negotiating a collective bargaining agreement with the Schenley Wine Company.
It was the first time a farmworkers’ union had signed a contract with an agricultural corporation.
Many groups of Americans experienced discrimination in the 1950s and 1960s.
Some of these, like farmworkers, were mounting their campaigns for equal rights while the black civil rights movement was growing in the South.
That movement inspired many groups to carry on with their own struggles.
This chapter continues the story of the civil rights movement as it expanded to include more Americans.
Following the example of African Americans, other groups — including women.
Latinos, American Indians, and Asian Americans— fought for their rights.
Disabled, gay, and older Americans began to organize for equal treatment, too.
Dolores Huerta helped to found the United Farm Workers with Cesar Chavez and other labor activists in the late 1960s.
Women Demand Equality Like Dolores Huerta, many women who fought for civil rights and workers’ rights later became active in the movement for women’s rights.
More than a century before, in the 1830s and 1 840s, many women abolitionists had followed a similar path.
In fighting to end slavery, they had come to recognize their own status as second-class citizens.
These early advocates of women’s rights held the 1848 Seneca Falls Convention and launched the women’s suffrage movement.
In the same way, many women who were inspired by the black civil rights movement of the 1960s and 1970s went on to forge the women’s movement.
One Half of America Although women make up half the American population, in the early 1960s many women felt they were being treated like a minority and denied their rights.
In 1963, author Betty Friedan exposed the unhappiness of many middleclass women in her book The Feminine Mystique.
She described women who had the things they thought they wanted— marriage, home, family— but were still dissatisfied.
As she made the beds, shopped for groceries, matched slipcover material, ate peanut butter sandwiches with her children, chauffeured Cub Scouts and Brownies, lay beside her husband at night— she was afraid to ask even of herself the silent question— “Is this all?” — Betty Friedan, The Feminine Mystique , 1963 Many middle-class wives had attended college, but few had entered professions.
They were secretaries or bank tellers, for example, while men might work as lawyers, doctors, or business executives.
In 2004, women earned about 76 cents for every Highlights of the Struggle for Women's Rights 1869 Stanton and Susan B Anthony found the National Women's Suffrage Association and campaign for a constitutional amendment for women's suffrage.
Meanwhile, relatively few women have been promoted to upper management.
The invisible barrier to women’s professional advancement has been called the glass ceiling.
Organizing for Action In the early 1960s, Congress passed two laws banning sex discrimination, but neither had much impact.
The first, the Equal Pay Act of 1963, outlawed “wage differentials based on sex” in industries that produced goods for commerce.
Since women and men generally did different types of work, the law had little effect on women’s wages.
The second law, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, also prohibited discrimination based on sex.
This law set an important precedent, but it brought few immediate benefits for women.
To advance women’s rights, Betty Friedan and other activists formed the National Organization for Women in 1966.
Like the more moderate organizations of the civil rights movement, NOW placed much of its focus on legal reforms and workforce discrimination, demanding equal opportunity for women.
The date marked the 50th anniversary of the ratification of the Nineteenth Amendment, which granted women the right to vote.
The strikers urged women not to do their usual domestic tasks that day.
Altogether, more than 100,000 people around the country took part in the strike, making it the largest action for women’s rights in American history.
It was made up of younger women who had worked in the civil rights movement.
They coined the term sexism to describe oppression of women in the workplace and home.
They wanted to emancipate women from customs and laws that kept them subordinate to men.
Supporters continue to rally 1960 The number of women in the workforce is rising, but women are still earning substantially less than men.
She argued that the ERA would devalue traditional roles for women and harm the American family.
Some opponents also feared that women would have to serve in the military and take on other roles normally associated with men.
Despite the growing prominence of the women’s movement, many Americans at the time opposed feminism, the movement for women’s equality.
They believed that feminism posed a threat to traditional values and would undermine marriage and weaken the American family.
They claimed that traditional roles for women gave them a strong and respected place in society and argued that feminists wanted to make women more like men.
At first it seemed certain that three fourths of the states would ratify the ERA and it would become law.
Some Americans feared that the ERA would devalue the roles of mother and homemaker.
Some also believed it would lead to requiring women to serve in the military.
As a result, the ERA failed to achieve ratification by the 1982 deadline set by Congress, falling 3 states short of the required 38 states.
Despite that loss, women’s efforts to attain equal rights succeeded on many fronts.
Between 1969 and 1973, the number of women law students nearly quadrupled, while the number of women medical students almost doubled.
By 1997, women made up the majority of college students and earned the majority of master’s degrees.
Women’s opportunities in education were enhanced by federal legislation.
A law called Title IX of the Educational Amendments of 1972 prohibited discrimination on the basis of sex in any school program receiving federal funds, including school athletics.
The Fight over Birth Control and Abortion The struggle for women’s rights also focused on birth control and abortion.
Many feminists believed that to control their lives, women must be able to control when, or if, they had children.
The development of the birth control pill was a major step in this direction.
In 1960, the Food and Drug Administration approved the pill, and by 1965, five million women were using it.
The pill had a tremendous impact on women’s lives, and on society, by allowing women greater control over reproduction.
They favored abstinence as a form of birth control and argued that family-planning centers should not advise couples on other methods to avoid pregnancy.
But in 1965, the Supreme Court ruled that married couples had a “right to privacy in marital relations” that included access to counseling on birth control, including use of the pill.
Several years later, the Supreme Court extended this right of privacy to the question of abortion.
Feminists considered this ruling a major advance in the struggle for women’s civil rights, but the ruling has remained controversial.
Opponents argue that life begins at conception and see abortion as murder.
Supporters say women have the right to control their bodies and that abortion should remain legal.
The poem describes the difficulty of retaining a Mexican identity while living in American society.
Central and South American IF* Latinos by Group, 2000 I am Joaquin . . . lost in a world of confusion, caught up in the whirl of a gringo society, confused by the rules, scorned by attitudes, suppressed by manipulation, and destroyed by modem society.
They saw it as a cultural and politPeople of Mexican ancestry make up the largest share of the United States Latino population.
In 2000, about two thirds of all Latinos in the country fell into this group.
Gonzales was one of many Spanish-speaking Americans who cried out for equal rights in the 1960s.
Diverse People Speaking One Language Latinos, or Hispanics, are a diverse group.
They include Mexican Americans, Cubans, Puerto Ricans, and people with origins in Central and South America.
Despite their different backgrounds, however, most share some similar cultural traits, including the Spanish language.
Many also struggled with language problems in school, where most classes were taught in English.
At the same time, the various Latino groups had their own distinct concerns and perspectives.
In the mid-1960s, many Mexican Americans began to identify themselves as Chicanos.
This term had originally been used as an insult, but young Mexican Americans embraced the name as an expression of pride in their culture.
Cuban Americans in the 1960s differed in many ways from Mexican Americans.
Most lived in Florida, and they tended to be better educated and more affluent than other Latino groups.
Most had fled their homeland after the Cuban Revolution and were recent arrivals in the United States.
Puerto Ricans were already U.S citizens when they came to the mainland because Puerto Rico is an American commonwealth, an unincorporated territory of the United States.
However, they suffered some of the same injustices as other Spanish speakers.
They sought better education and improved conditions in the cities where they lived.
Boycotting Grapes for Recognition One of the most notable campaigns for Latino rights in the 1960s was the farmworker struggle in California.
Cesar Chavez, a farmworker bom in Arizona, was one of the principal leaders of this effort to improve the lives of migrant workers.
Cesar Chavez was a major figure in the struggle for farmworkers' rights.
Having grown up in a family of migrant workers, he understood the hardships they faced.
A skilled organizer and leader, Chavez headed the United Farm Chavez helped found the United Farm Workers, along with Dolores Huerta and other labor activists.
In 1965, the union— then known as the National Farm Workers Association— joined a strike against grape growers.
During this time, Chavez organized a national boycott of table grapes that won widespread support.
Finally, in 1970, grape growers agreed to a historic contract that granted most of the workers’ demands, including union recognition and higher wages and benefits.
Like Martin Luther King Jr., Chavez relied on nonviolence in the struggle for equal rights.
He fasted several times over the years to draw attention to the plight of farmworkers and to pressure employers to improve working conditions.
They used the term la raza, meaning “the people” or “the race,” to identify themselves and connect with their roots in ancient Mexico.
They claimed this heritage, particularly their links to the Aztec people, as a common bond among Chicanos.
La Raza Unida became a political party in 1970 and ran candidates in state and local elections across the Southwest.
A key issue for Chicano activists was bilingual education, or teaching in two languages.
In 1968, President Johnson signed the Bilingual Education Act, legalizing instruction in languages other than English.
The courts later ruled that schools must address the needs of non-English speakers, including teaching in students’ native languages.
In 1968 and 1969, Chicano students throughout the Southwest boycotted classes to protest poor education in their schools.
Founded in East Los Angeles, this group modeled itself on the Black Panthers.
It worked to improve housing and employment and instill pride in Chicano culture.
As Mexican Americans fought for civil rights, so, too, did other groups of Latinos.
Gradually, Cuban Americans, Puerto Ricans, and other Latinos began to find greater opportunity in American society.
However, Indians made up 70 percent of the prisoners in the city’s jails.
Local activists believed that this imbalance reflected police harassment of Indians.
For much of 1968. they monitored police radios and responded to calls that involved Indians, often arriving at the scene before the police.
According to AIM, the number of Indians in jail in Minneapolis decreased by 60 percent that year.
One People, Many Nations Indians come from many tribes, which they often call nations.
In the late 1960s, some Indian activists believed that the Indian nations had much in common, including a shared identity as native peoples.
And although they lived in different ways and different places— some on reservations, others dispersed throughout society— they shared many of the same problems.
They suffered greater economic hardship than any other ethnic group in the country.
Unemployment was 10 times higher than the national average and was especially high on reservations.
The average annual family income was $1,000 less than for African Americans.
The federal government had tried to help American Indians, but with little success.
It guaranteed Indians protection under the Constitution, while recognizing the authority of tribal laws.
In practice, American Indians still lacked equal rights and opportunity in American society, and many were losing patience.
Most American Indians, including Alaska Natives, live in the western United States.
As this map shows, the number of native peoples in each state, as a percentage of state population, varies considerably.
Note that Alaska Natives made up nearly one fifth of that state's population in 2000.
The 2000 census reported 2. million American Indians and Alaska Natives in the United States, or 1.5% of the total population.
They demanded Indian ownership of the island and funding for an Indian university and cultural center.
Radicals Make the Cause Known On November 20, 1969, eighty-nine Indians took over Alcatraz Island in San Francisco Bay, occupying the island’s deserted prison.
In addition to the land, the group demanded that the government fund cultural and educational centers.
But for the Indian rights movement, also called Red Power, the occupation was a success.
A caravan of protesters left the West Coast and traveled to Washington, D.C., to draw attention to Indian concerns.
The proposal focused on restoring federal recognition of Indian tribes and Indian control on reservations.
When the caravan arrived in Washington, some protesters occupied the offices of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
After six days, they agreed to leave, on the condition that no one be prosecuted and that the federal government agree to respond to the 20 points.
After studying the AIM document, however, the Nixon administration rejected its demands.
Tensions increased in February 1973, when AIM protesters occupied the town of Wounded Knee on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation in South Dakota, the site of an 1890 massacre of American Indians.
They also demanded that the United States government honor the Indian treaties it had signed over the years.
Two Indians were killed, and one federal marshal was seriously injured.
In 1978, American Indian activists continued their actions with a five-month protest they called the Longest Walk.
Its purpose was to bring attention to the many times American Indians had been forced off their land.
Courts and Legislation Bring Victories Although the actions of groups like AIM failed to bring dramatic improvements in the lives of most American Indians, they did draw attention to Indian rights and help promote some reforms.
In 1975, Congress passed the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Acr.
It also placed more American Indians in jobs at the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
The government returned control of Blue Lake in New Mexico to the Taos Pueblo tribe, which considers the site sacred.
Congress also passed the Alaska Native Land Claims Settlement Act in 1971.
In 1980, Penobscot and Passamaquoddy Indians in Maine were awarded $8 1 . million in exchange for giving up claims to their land.
In fact, the farmworkers’ strike against California grape growers was launched by Asian American activists.
Larry Itliong, one of the leaders of a largely Filipino farmworkers’ union, played a key role in this strike.
He and other Filipino activists also helped form the United Farm Workers.
The ""Model Minority"" Like Latinos, Asian Americans are a diverse group.
They have ties by birth or culture to the countries of eastern and southern Asia.
Asian groups with a longstanding history in the United States include Chinese, Japanese, Filipinos, and Koreans.
Starting in the 1870s, the United States government set limits on Asian immigration.
The Immigration Act of 1965 removed those limits, and the number of Asian immigrants increased greatly.
In recent decades, people from such countries as India, Vietnam, and Cambodia have added even more diversity to the Asian American population.
From the 1960s to the 1980s, many Asian Americans thrived in the United States.
They were sometimes called the “model minority” because they were seen as working hard and succeeding without protesting or making demands.
Some people even pointed to their progress as proof that ethnic differences were no barrier to success in American society.
But these arguments, along with the “model minority” label, aroused resentment among other minorities, who sometimes felt that Asian Americans received favorable treatment.
These states have a very high cost of living, a measure that includes the price of food, housing, and other essentials.
Also, many Asian American households include several adult wage earners, a fact that was reflected in higher family incomes.
Furthermore, although many Asian Americans had attended college and entered professions, others had not.
Many Asian immigrants had low-paying jobs, limited English language skills, and little education.
Like other minorities, they faced discrimination because they were not white.
Chinese Americans have traditionally been the largest Asian group in the United States.
Since the 1960s, however, immigrants from other parts of Asia have been arriving in increasing numbers.
As a result, Asian Indians, Vietnamese, and others are making up a growing share of the Asian American population.
Although Asian Americans live throughout the United States, many are concentrated in traditional ethnic neighborhoods.
In recent years, it has also become home to other Asian groups, including Burmese, Filipinos, and Vietnamese.
On some college campuses, student activists organized a political movement.
Their stated aim was to end racial oppression “through the power of a consolidated yellow people/” Yellow Power became their slogan.
They also called for academic programs that focused on ethnic and racial issues.
At the time, minority perspectives played little role in university education.
In 1969, San Francisco State started the country’s first school of ethnic studies.
Between 1968 and 1973, many other colleges and universities also set up Asian American studies programs.
Helen Zia, a Chinese American, recalled, “In college, I learned that I was an Asian American.
What Zia and many others learned about their heritage gave them a new understanding of their identity and rights in American society.
Executive Order 9066 had forced many into internment camps, and the Supreme Court’s 1944 ruling in Korematsu United States had upheld the order.
Thirty years later, many people began to demand reparations for this historic injustice.
In the 1970s, a younger generation of Japanese Americans inspired by the Black Power movement spoke out against the discrimination their families had suffered.
Meanwhile, the Japanese American Citizens League , which was formed in 1929 to defend the rights of Japanese Americans, sought legal remedy.
In 1978, it began to pursue compensation for the suffering in the internment camps.
Although the sum was relatively small compared to individual losses, this official response helped to make up for a historic wrong.
In 1988, the government apologized and offered $20,000 to each survivor.
Roberts had a severe disability, an impairment that limited his daily activities.
California’s vocational rehabilitation agency had told Roberts that he would be too disabled to work.
As a disability-rights activist, Roberts changed the way many Americans viewed people with disabilities.
He helped disabled people gain the right to participate in life at the university.
His achievements encouraged other disability activists around the country.
Many disabled Americans were inspired by the African American civil rights movement.
So, too, were other groups, including gay Americans and older Americans.
Starting in the 1960s, these groups made their own claims for equal rights.
In the 1970s, disability-rights activists began to demand equal rights and opportunity.
Disabled Americans Demand Equal Access to Opportunities Disabilities can be both physical and mental.
Physical disabilities include blindness, deafness, and impaired movement.
According to the 2000 census, nearly 20 percent of Americans over the age of five have some type of disability.
The first groups of disabled Americans to fight for their rights were deaf and blind people.
Decades before the civil rights movement, they set up organizations to provide education and other services to those who needed them.
In the early 1970s, after graduating from UC Berkeley, Ed Roberts started a program to make it easier for physically disabled students to attend the university.
He and fellow activists pressed the school to improve accessibility on campus, making it easier for the physically disabled to enter university facilities.
Ramps and curb cuts, for example, made the campus more accessible to people in wheelchairs.
In 1973, Congress passed the Rehabilitation Act, which some supporters compared to the 1964 Civil Rights Act.
It took four years, however, for government officials to decide how to enforce the law.
In 1975, Congress passed the Education for All Handicapped Children Act.
Wherever possible, students with disabilities were to be mainstreamed, or included in classrooms with nondisabled students.
The most important civil rights victory for disabled Americans came years later.
Changes included braille signs on elevators and accessible public transportation.
Every year, activists hold gay pride marches to mark the anniversary of the Stonewall riots of 1969.
Gay Americans Stand Up for Their Rights Gay men and lesbians also began to demand equal rights in the 1960s.
At the time, the police often harassed gay men and lesbians in public places.
An employee could be fired for being gay or even for being perceived as gay.
Many gays and lesbians felt they had to hide their sexual orientation to avoid discrimination.
A gay rights movement had begun to emerge in the late 1950s and early 1960s.
By the late 1960s, gay rights activists in Philadelphia were holding an annual Fourth of July protest.
Neatly dressed gays and lesbians gathered at Independence Hall, where the Constitution was signed.
They pointed out to visitors that gay Americans did not enjoy many of the rights that most Americans took for granted.
It was not until the Stonewall riots, however, that the gay pride movement became highly visible.
Since then, the anniversary of Stonewall has prompted annual gay pride events in cities around the world.
By 1980, the group— now known as Parents and Friends of Lesbians and Gays, or PFLAG— had members around the country.
Another key event in the history of gay rights occurred in 1977, when Harvey Milk was elected to the board of supervisors in San Francisco.
Milk was the first openly gay candidate to win office in a major American city.
In 1972, Maggie Kuhn and some fellow retirees in Philadelphia formed the Gray Panthers.
The Gray Panthers called this treatment ageism, or discrimination against people on the basis of age.
The largest was the American Association of Retired Persons, founded by Ethel Percy Andrus in 1958.
At the time, many older Americans had no health coverage, either because it was too expensive or because private insurance companies would not insure them.
They were considered too much of a risk because of their age and potential health problems.
It also helped pay prescription drug costs and other medical expenses for seniors.
This law made it illegal for employers to use age as a factor in hiring or promotion.
In 1978, the Gray Panthers helped persuade Congress to push back the required retirement age from 65 to 70.
Seniors could now work longer and continue to enjoy the benefits of employment.
Most of the Panthers, like cofounder Maggie Kuhn , were older Americans, but they believed that many young people suffered from discrimination, too.
The civil rights movement inspired many Americans to stand up for their rights.
During the 1960s and 1970s, various groups sought equal treatment under the law and in society.
Women The National Organization for Women and other feminist groups worked for women’s rights.
They wanted reforms to ensure greater equality and opportunity for women.
Latinos Various groups of Latinos struggled for their rights and identity in American society.
The United Farm Workers organized migrant farmworkers and helped increase their wages and benefits.
The 1968 Bilingual Education Act required public schools to provide bilingual instruction.
American Indians The American Indian Movement protested unfair treatment of American Indians.
Asian Americans Asian American students asked for university programs in ethnic studies.
Other groups Disabled Americans fought for equal access and won passage of the Americans with Disabilities Act.
After the Stonewall riots, gay Americans gained greater visibility in their fight for equal rights.
Older Americans countered ageism by working through such groups as the Gray Panthers.
The Supreme Court orders the desegregation of public schools, a change resisted by many white parents.
The Civil Rights Movement Broadens Women, Latinos, American Indians, Asian Americans, the disabled, gays and lesbians, and older Americans all organize to demand equal rights and an end to discrimi A Black Power Movement Develops Ghetto riots reveal frustration over the slow pace of progress toward equality.
Some groups focus more on gaining power for black people than on achieving integration.
Over the next two decades, the nation would endure assassinations, an unpopular war, urban riots, political scandals, and an energy shortage.
Introduction In 1961 . when John F Kennedy, the youngest man elected to the presidency, replaced Dwight Eisenhower, one of the oldest presidents, the atmosphere in the White House changed.
The handsome, charming young president and his graceful wife, Jacqueline, made the house inviting and exciting to visit.
On others, noted actors read scenes from plays or ballet dancers performed classic works.
These social events made the White House a showcase for arts and culture.
At the time of Kennedy’s inauguration, a new musical called Camelot had recently begun its long run on Broadway.
Its main character is the legendary King Arthur, who ruled Camelot, an enchanted kingdom.
Dedicated to doing noble deeds, the order attracts the best and bravest knights in the realm.
As Kennedy began his administration, fans of the ideals that were portrayed in Camelot hoped Kennedy would prove to be an equally gifted leader.
Sadly, Kennedy’s life ended before most people could decide whether he had lived up to expectations.
Others felt less sure that the young president had behaved with true greatness.
As the cover of this Life magazine suggests, many Americans associated the White House during the Kennedy years with the mythical kingdom of Camelot.
It became an overnight hit when the public learned that the cast album was one of President Kennedy's favorite records.
Let every nation know, whether it wishes us well or ill, that we shall pay any price, bear any burden, meet any hardship, support any friend, oppose any foe, in order to assure the survival and the success of liberty. —John F Kennedy, inaugural address, January 20, 1961 The young president's dedication to the ideal of liberty touched the hearts and minds of many Americans.
He closed with an appeal to his listeners’ sense of idealism, urging them to make a personal commitment to public service.
Even before Kennedy had won the race for president, people had started to talk about his charisma— a combination of charm and personal magnetism that caused others to like and support him.
At campaign stops, young people had cheered him as if he were a movie star.
During the campaign, Kennedy and his opponent, Richard Nixon, had expressed similar views on many issues.
Both had vowed to get a sluggish economy moving again and to halt the spread of communism.
Kennedy, however, had attacked the Eisenhower-Nixon administration for allowing a “missile gap” to open up between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The most obvious difference between the two candidates was their personal style.
This contrast became clear on September 26, 1960, when they met in the first live, televised presidential debate in history.
More than 70 million viewers tuned in, while others listened on the radio.
For many Americans, this was their first close look at the candidates— especially Kennedy, who was less known.
Nixon, weakened by a serious knee injury and a bout of the flu, appeared nervous and uneasy.
His face was pale, all the more so because he had refused to wear any stage makeup.
Most of the people who watched the debate on television thought Kennedy had won.
On election day, Kennedy barely squeaked by Nixon in the closest election since 1888.
This lack of a strong go-ahead from voters would put the new president at a severe disadvantage in his dealings with Congress.
Kennedy set out to surround himself with “the best and the brightest” advisers he could find.
Some, like National Security Adviser McGeorge Bundy, had attended elite universities.
Others, such as Secretary of Defense and former president of Ford Motor Company Robert McNamara, were top executives.
To the surprise of many people, Kennedy selected his brother Robert, only 35 years old, to be attorney general.
Kennedy's inaugural call to service attracted many talented young people to Washington.
Those who joined his administration found public service to be exciting, even glamorous.
Kennedy's ""New Frontier"" Challenges the Nation While running for president, Kennedy had already begun to lay out his vision for changing the world.
Beyond that frontier are the uncharted areas of science and space, unsolved problems of peace and war, unconquered pockets of ignorance and prejudice, unanswered questions of poverty and surplus. —John F Kennedy, July 15, 1960 Once in office, Kennedy worked to translate his New Frontier rhetoric into a list of concrete goals.
To expand opportunity, he called for an increase in aid to education, new programs to end poverty, and a tax cut to stimulate economic growth.
To promote equality, he sought to raise the minimum wage, fund medical care for the elderly, and make cities more livable.
To guarantee civil rights, he hoped to enact legislation banning racial discrimination.
To protect liberty and democracy, he called for a large increase in defense spending.
Kennedy had trouble getting his legislative agenda, or list of programs to enact, through Congress, even though Democrats held a majority of seats.
He did succeed in raising the minimum wage and enacting some urban development programs.
However, a coalition of conservative southern Democrats and Republicans, who voted to block change, stalled much of Kennedy’s agenda.
By this time, Kennedy knew that the “missile gap” he had referred to in his campaign was not real.
In fact, the United States had far more weaponry than the Soviet Union had.
This was a supposed difference in the number of nuclear missiles the United States and the Soviet Union held in their defense arsenals.
In actuality, the United States was ahead of, not behind, the USSR in missile strength.
The young couple and their two playful children made the family media favorites.
On August 28, 1963, after the massive March on Washington, Kennedy invited civil rights leaders to meet with him at the White House.
Over the next few years, the government pumped billions of dollars into the economy while increasing the nation’s stockpile of missiles and other high-tech weapons, such as nuclear submarines.
The second part of Kennedy’s plan was to pass a major tax cut, which he hoped would put more money in people’s pockets and stimulate economic growth.
Conservatives in Congress opposed any tax cut that would lead to an unbalanced federal budget.
Even some liberal Democrats opposed cutting taxes when so many of the nation's needs were still unmet.
As the liberal economist John Kenneth Galbraith observed, ""I am not quite sure I see what the advantage is in having a few more dollars to spend if the air is too dirty to breathe, the water too polluted to drink, the streets are filthy, and the schools so bad that the young, perhaps wisely, stay away.” — in James T Patterson, America in the Twentieth Century , 1976 Even without the tax cuts, the recession did end.
By the close of 1961 , the economy had begun a period of growth that would last throughout the decade.
A Cautious Approach to Civil Rights On civil rights legislation, Kennedy had even less success with Congress.
While campaigning, Kennedy had called for an end to racial discrimination.
When authorities in Atlanta jailed Martin Luther King Jr., Kennedy had responded by asking his brother Robert to arrange King's release.
Widely reported in the press, news of the brothers' work on King’s behalf had helped Kennedy win the African American vote.
But for his first two years in office, Kennedy did not propose new laws.
It is as old as the scriptures and is as clear as the American Constitution.
The heart of the question is whether all Americans are to be afforded equal rights and equal opportunities, whether we are going to treat our fellow Americans as we want to be treated.
A week later, the president submitted a broad civil rights bill to Congress.
Once again, however, a coalition of Republican and conservative southern Democratic lawmakers blocked Kennedy’s proposed legislation.
Kennedy Proposes Landing a Man on the Moon Kennedy's most exciting New Frontier challenge— space exploration— developed out of a Cold War embarrassment.
In 1957, the Soviet Union had surprised the world by launching the first artificial satellite into orbit around Earth.
Called Sputnik , or “Little Traveler” in Russian, the unmanned satellite traveled at 18,000 miles per hour.
In contrast, delays and failed launches had plagued American efforts to send rockets into space.
By the time Kennedy took office, NASA had launched its first communication and weather satellites into space.
But on April 12, 1961 , the Soviet Union stunned the world again by sending the first human, astronaut Yuri Gagarin, into space.
I believe that this nation should commit itself to . . . landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to the earth.
No single space project in this period will be more impressive to mankind, or more important for the long-range exploration of space; and none will be so difficult or expensive to accomplish. —Speech to a Joint Session of Congress, May 25, 1961 NASA moved rapidly to meet the challenge.
On July 20, 1969, just eight years after Kennedy had set the goal of a moon landing, Neil Armstrong, Michael Collins, and Edwin “Buzz” Aldrin Jr. reached the moon as part of the Apollo space program.
After stepping onto the lunar surface on July 20, 1969, Neil Armstrong and Edwin ""Buzz"" Aldrin Jr. erected a United States flag.
The two astronauts also collected soil and rock samples and left behind scientific instruments.
He is seen here with Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev, who once told Western diplomats, ""Whether you like it or not, history is on our side.
Khrushchev provided aid and guidance to Castro in hopes of helping make that boast come true.
Havana * Battle site As president, Kennedy’s greatest triumphs— but also his most disastrous mistakes— were in foreign affairs.
United States relations with Cuba proved to be especially troublesome for the president.
A crisis over Soviet missile sites in Cuba brought the United States and the Soviet Union to the brink of nuclear war.
Fidel Castro Establishes a Communist Regime in Cuba In 1959, communist revolutionaries, led by Fidel Castro, had ousted Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista.
As a result, the United States suddenly found that it had a communist regime, or government, for a neighbor, just 90 miles off the Florida coast.
With this Soviet help, Castro transformed Cuba into a communist country with a planned economy.
The government took control of United States oil refineries and farms on the island and seized private businesses and properties from wealthy Cubans.
Reluctant to live under a communist regime, many Cubans fled the island.
Most of these exiles, or people who live outside their home country, settled in southern Florida.
Shortly after taking office, Kennedy learned that the CIA had begun training some of these Cuban exiles in Florida and Guatemala as guerrilla fighters.
The clandestine mission of these exiles was to return to Cuba and lead a popular uprising that would topple Castro and his regime.
The Bay of Pigs Fiasco Fails to Dislodge Castro The CIA officials who briefed Kennedy on the invasion plan assured the new president that the invasion would inspire Cubans to rise up and rebel against Castro.
Eager to show he was a strong Cold War president, Kennedy allowed the plan to move forward.
On April 17, 1961 , a small army of Cuban exiles sailed into the Bay of Pigs in southern Cuba.
CIA trainers had told the exiles they would come ashore on an empty beach, but their boats ran aground on a coral reef.
Once the exiles reached land, Cuban troops quickly killed or captured them.
A few officials tried to persuade Kennedy to send United States warplanes to back up the exiles, but Kennedy did not want to involve the United States further in this poorly executed fiasco.
After the Bay of Pigs invasion, people throughout Latin America criticized Kennedy for interfering in another country’s affairs.
Escalating Cold War Tensions in Berlin In June 1961 , not long after the Bay of Pigs disaster, Kennedy and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev held a summit meeting in Vienna, Austria.
West Berlin, although surrounded by East Germany, remained under the control of the wartime Allies.
Before the wall's construction, 2. million East Germans had escaped into West Germany.
Their loss put severe strains on the East German economy and embarrassed the Soviets by showing just how unpopular communism was.
In time, the border between Eastern and Western Europe was closed everywhere except in Berlin.
As a result, Berlin became the only escape route for people trapped behind the Iron Curtain.
Hundreds of thousands of East Germans took advantage of this opening to flee their country.
By 1961 , approximately 25,000 East German refugees were crossing into West Berlin each day.
During the Vienna summit, Khrushchev warned Kennedy that he would not allow the flow of refugees into West Berlin to continue.
Kennedy responded that he was prepared to defend West Berlin, even at the risk of war.
At this point, Khrushchev decided that the only option left to East Germany was to wall itself off from West Berlin.
On August 13, 1961 , East German workers began building a barbed wire fence between East and West Berlin.
The Berlin Wall made it all but impossible for East Germans to escape to freedom in West Berlin.
The United States and other Western European nations reacted with outrage to the building of the Berlin Wall.
There are many people in the world who really don't understand, or say they don't, what is the great issue between the free world and the Communist world.
And, therefore, as a free man, I take pride in the words “Ich bin ein Berliner."" —John F Kennedy, June 26, 1963 Nonetheless, Kennedy was not willing to risk war to tear down the wall.
In October 1962, a U-2 spy plane flying over Cuba discovered that the Soviet Union was building missile-launching sites on the island.
From these sites, missiles carrying nuclear warheads could easily reach most major cities in the United States.
To discuss ways to respond to this new threat, Kennedy brought together a group of his 12 most trusted advisers.
Called the Executive Committee for National Security , its members all agreed that the United States must halt construction of the Soviet missile sites.
It would also make the United States look weak to its European allies and to anti-Castro forces in Latin America.
The ExCom did not, however, agree on how to deal with the Cuban missile crisis.
Some advisers urged the president to bomb the missile sites before they could be completed.
Others suggested blockading Cuban ports to prevent Soviet ships from bringing missiles to the island.
They called the blockade a “quarantine,"" because under international law, establishing a naval blockade is an act of war.
On October 22, Kennedy announced to the nation the discovery of the missile sites and his decision to quarantine the island.
He warned that the United States would view any nuclear missile launched from Cuba as an attack on the United States by the Soviet Union.
He also demanded that the Soviets remove all offensive weapons from Cuba.
Fearing that the nation could be on the brink of nuclear war, Kennedy put the United States military on high alert.
Then, on October 24, Khrushchev ordered Soviet ships approaching Cuba to slow down or turn around.
A few days later, Khrushchev sent a note to Kennedy agreeing to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba.
In exchange, he demanded that Kennedy end the Cuban blockade and promise not to invade Cuba.
Kennedy had already decided to remove the United States missiles from Turkey, because they were outdated.
The information revealed in photographs like this one helped trigger the Cuban missile crisis.
The map shows the range of Soviet missiles that could be fired from bases in Cuba.
Privately, he sent Robert Kennedy to the Soviet embassy to agree to the second deal as well.
On October 28, Khrushchev agreed to remove all Soviet missiles from Cuba.
About three months later, the United States removed its missiles from Turkey.
Easing Cold War Tensions The Cuban missile crisis led Kennedy and his advisers to rethink the doctrine of '‘massive retaliation” adopted during the Eisenhower years.
Instead, Kennedy began to talk about the need for a flexible response to local Cold War conflicts.
When communists seemed on the verge of taking over Vietnam, a small country in Southeast Asia, the president tested this new approach.
He sent money and military advisers to Vietnam to build noncommunist forces in the country.
By the end of 1962, more than 9,000 American military advisers were helping defend Vietnam from communism.
The missile crisis also left Kennedy and Khrushchev frightened by how close they had come to nuclear war.
As a result, both men began looking for ways to ease tensions between the superpowers.
This line of communication would be kept open at all times so they could contact each other instantly during a crisis.
The hotline still exists today and has been tested once an hour since 1963.
Later the same year, the superpowers took another step in establishing more amicable relations.
This agreement banned nuclear testing in the atmosphere, while allowing underground nuclear weapons tests to continue.
By signing, the United States and Soviet Union showed that they could cooperate on important issues.
Aiding Development in Foreign Countries President Kennedy was deeply concerned about the spread of communism to developing countries.
Such countries are poorer and less industrialized than the wealthy developed countries of North America.
In a campaign speech in San Francisco, Kennedy spoke about his vision for helping the developing world.
To spread this “know-how ” Kennedy issued an executive order creating the Peace Corps.
This new government agency sent thousands of men and women to developing nations to support local communities in such areas as education, farming, and health care.
Peace Corps volunteers learned languages and skills they could use to build and help run schools and health clinics, teach farming methods, or plant crops.
Kennedy also launched an aid program for Latin America, called the Alliance for Progress.
Its goal was to provide economic and technical aid to Latin American nations while encouraging democratic reforms.
In time, most Alliance for Progress funds ended up in the pockets of anticommunist dictators for use in fighting communist rebels or others who opposed their rule.
President Kennedy often conferred with his younger brother, Attorney General Robert ""Bobby"" Kennedy.
In an effort to reduce tensions during the Cuban missile crisis, Bobby sometimes conferred secretly with Soviet diplomats.
Like this early volunteer in the African country of Togo, Peace Corps workers have sought to improve life for the poor in developing countries for more than 40 years.
Most share a strong commitment to the ideal of helping to create a free and peaceful world.
The Tragic and Controversial End to Camelot In late November 1963, President Kennedy and the first lady traveled to Texas.
Kennedy wanted to build support there for his reelection campaign, since the next presidential election was a year away.
Just before noon on November 22, the Kennedys joined Texas governor John Connally and his wife in a motorcade that drove through downtown Dallas.
It was a sunny day, and people eager to see the presidential couple crowded the streets.
Lee Harvey Oswald, a worker in the building, stood waiting on its sixth floor.
Doctors frantically worked to revive Kennedy, but at 1:00m., they declared him dead.
Vice President Lyndon B Johnson met Jacqueline Kennedy and the president’s coffin at the Dallas airport.
Before the plane took Bight, however, a local Texas judge swore Johnson in as the nation’s 36th president.
Dallas police quickly captured Oswald and charged him with the president’s murder.
Authorities knew Oswald strongly supported Fidel Castro and the Cuban revolution and had lived in the Soviet Union for three years.
However, before they could learn anything about his motives for assassinating Kennedy, Oswald too was killed.
This second murder occurred as police moved the prisoner from one jail to another, more secure one.
With scores of newspaper and television reporters looking on, a local nightclub owner named Jack Ruby jumped out of the crowd and fired at Oswald.
Television viewers watched in horror as live news cameras beamed Oswald’s murder into their homes.
Inside a crowded Air Force One— the presidential airplane — United States district judge Sarah Hughes swore in Lyndon B Johnson as president just two hours after Kennedy was shot.
A somber Jacqueline Kennedy stood at Johnson's side as he took the oath of office.
There, hundreds of thousands of people walked past his casket to pay their final respects.
The following day, as many as a million people lined the streets of Washington as the funeral procession carried the slain president to Arlington National Cemetery.
There, Kennedy’s brothers and wife lit an “eternal” gas flame on his grave.
Across the nation and around the world, people mourned Kennedy’s death.
To this day, most Americans old enough to remember it can recall exactly where they were when they heard the news of Kennedy’s assassination.
With Robert and Ted Kennedy at her sides, Jacqueline Kennedy and her children, Caroline and John Jr., watched President Kennedy's casket travel to Arlington National Cemetery for burial.
At the funeral, an ""eternal"" flame was lit that still marks Kennedy's grave today.
President Johnson created a special commission to investigate the assassination.
Headed by Supreme Court Chief Justice Earl Warren, it became known as the Warren Commission.
On the basis of the evidence before the Commission it concludes that Oswald acted alone.
Therefore, to determine the motives for the assassination of President Kennedy, one must look to the assassin himself.
Clues to Oswald’s motives can be found in his family history, his education or lack of it, his acts, his writings, and the recollections of those who had close contacts with him throughout his life. —Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President John F Kennedy , 1964 Many Americans questioned the Warren Commission’s findings.
In the years since Kennedy’s death, numerous conspiracy theories and assassination myths have emerged.
Others involve secret agents from Cuba, the Soviet Union, or other countries unfriendly to the United States at the time of Kennedy’s death.
However, because Oswald did not survive to speak for himself, the full story of the Kennedy assassination may never be known.
In 1997, visitors to the monument began taking a poll to determine which presidents are most popular.
In the case of John F Kennedy, we can only imagine what he might have achieved if he had lived longer.
It got tarnished somewhere around the Bay of Pigs and never recaptured its former glow.
That fiasco was followed by the failure of summit diplomacy at Vienna, the manipulation of public anxiety over Berlin, a dramatic jump in the arms race, the unnecessary trip to the brink during the Cuban missile crisis, timidity on civil rights, legislative stalemate in Congress, and the decision to send the first American troops to Vietnam.
Somehow everything went wrong, and increasingly the crusading knight gave way to the conventional politician who had no answers for us.
Few Presidents now considered great would be so regarded had they died in the third year of their first term.
If he had gotten a friendly Congress for his second term and somehow escaped disaster in Vietnam, his administration might have been above average.
Yet one cannot evaluate the Kennedy years solely in these practical terms.
Critics often complained that his dazzling style obscured the thin substance of his government.
The President’s style created its own reality, his dash its own momentum.
An Informal History of America in the 1960s , 1971 Robert Dallek: ""He Conveyed a Kind of Hope, a Kind of Promise"" In a recent biography of Kennedy, historian Robert Dallek analyzed the question of why many Americans still view Kennedy as having been a great president.
There seems to be a consistency in the public mind in regarding Kennedy as one of the great presidents in American history.
There is something about him that continues to command the loyalty, the approval, of the public.
I think he conveyed a kind of hope, a kind of promise to the public, the expectation of a better future.
His presidency began with great optimism and ended in tragedy, leaving many of his goals unfulfilled.
New Frontier Kennedy’s New Frontier focused on reviving the economy, winning the space race, building the nation’s defenses, and aiding developing countries.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration In 1961 , Kennedy pledged to put an American on the moon by the end of the decade.
Bay of Pigs invasion Kennedy’s first foreign policy initiative, the Bay of Pigs invasion, was an attempt to remove Fidel Castro from power in Cuba.
Berlin Wall In 1961 , a concrete barrier dividing communist East Berlin from noncommunist West Berlin became a symbol of the deepening Cold War divide.
Cuban missile crisis One of the most frightening confrontations of the Cold War occurred when the United States discovered Soviet nuclear missile sites in Cuba.
The crisis ended peacefully, partly due to Kennedy’s measured response and a willingness to take the nation to the brink of war.
Test Ban Treaty Kennedy and Khrushchev, both determined to reduce Cold War tensions, signed a treaty banning nuclear weapons tests in the atmosphere.
Peace Corps Kennedy’s Peace Corps gave thousands of American volunteers the chance to help people in developing nations improve their lives.
Introduction On November 22, 1963, the day that John Kennedy was assassinated.
Most Americans knew little about Johnson and doubted his ability to take Kennedy’s place as president.
Invoking the challenge Kennedy had laid out in his inaugural address, Johnson exclaimed.
On the 20th day of January, in 1961 , John F Kennedy told his countrymen that our national work would not be finished “in the first thousand days, nor in the life of this administration, nor even perhaps in our lifetime on this planet.
Today, in this moment of new resolve, I would say to all my fellow Americans, let us continue. — Lyndon B Johnson, Joint Session of Congress, November 27, 1963 Johnson echoed his “let us continue” message the following year, when he ran for a full term as president.
In contrast to Harvard-educated Kennedy, Lyndon Johnson was a rough-hewn Texan.
A master of the legislative process, Johnson had far more political experience than Kennedy.
That fall, the president's campaign issued a similar button in which Humphrey's head appeared to be larger than Johnson's.
Campaign officials replaced the offending button with one that showed Johnson larger than his running mate.
Debating the Role of Government Lyndon Johnson was a man of enormous energy and big ideas.
As president, he wanted to do far more than simply enact Kennedy’s programs.
Soon after taking office, he began developing an ambitious vision for his own presidency, should he win reelection the following year.
The Great Society is a place where every child can find knowledge to enrich his mind and to enlarge his talents.
It is a place where leisure is a welcome chance to build and reflect, not a feared cause of boredom and restlessness.
It is a place where the city . . . serves not only ... the demands of commerce but the desire for beauty and the hunger for community.
It is a place where man can renew contact with nature ... a place where men are more concerned with the quality of their goals than the quantity of their goods.
It is a challenge constantly renewed, beckoning us toward a destiny where the meaning of our lives matches the marvelous products of our labor. — Lyndon B Johnson, May 22, 1964 As the election campaign continued.
Democrats adopted the goals of the Great Society as their party platform.
In their eyes, Johnson’s vision continued a tradition of liberal reform that stretched back to Franklin Roosevelt and, before him, to the Progressive Era.
Like Progressives, these liberal Democrats believed the power of government should be expanded to promote social well-being.
Limiting Government to Preserve Liberty Senator Barry Goldwater of Arizona, the Republican candidate for president, held a very different view on government.
An outspoken conservative, he had rejected Eisenhower's modem Republicanism as “a dime-store New Deal""— that is, a cheap version of the Democrats' famous domestic program.
Yet, he observed, that was exactly what it had done since the time of the New Deal.
I have little interest in streamlining government or in making it more efficient, for I mean to reduce its size.
I do not undertake to promote welfare, for 1 propose to extend freedom.
It is not to inaugurate new programs, but to cancel old ones that do violence to the Constitution, or that have failed in their purpose, or that impose on the people an unwarranted financial burden.
I will not attempt to discover whether legislation is “needed” before I have first determined whether it is constitutionally permissible.
And if I should later be attacked for neglecting my constituents' “interests,” I shall reply that I was informed their main interest is liberty and that in that cause I am doing the very best I can. — Barry Goldwater, The Conscience of a Conservative , 1960 In 1964.
When more moderate Republicans warned that voters would reject Goldwater’s views as extremism, or radicalism, he answered, “Extremism in the defense of liberty is no vice.
But his book, The Conscience of a Conservative , sold 3. million copies and helped inspire a new generation of conservatives.
Some observers consider Goldwater to be the most influential losing candidate in the nation's history.
On September 7. the Johnson campaign aired “Daisy,” a television advertisement that quickly became famous.
Suddenly her voice was drowned out first by a nuclear countdown and then by a mushroom cloud.
Johnson beat Goldwater in a landslide, winning 44 states to Goldwater 's six.
Johnson won 61 percent of the popular vote, the greatest margin received by any president to that point.
However, the election gave rise to two developments that would eventually challenge the Democrats’ hold on power.
One was the modern conservative movement, which grew out of Goldwater’s ideas.
In 1964, for the first time since Reconstruction, five southern states voted Republican.
This shift marked the beginning of the transformation of the South from solidly Democratic to reliably Republican.
Implementing Johnson's Great Society Johnson took his decisive election victory as a mandate to move forward with his Great Society agenda.
Long before the election, he had begun work on civil rights and antipoverty programs.
Now he was ready to move forward with a broad range of proposals for improving life for all Americans.
The Johnson Treatment Gets Results in Congress In contrast to Kennedy, who had trouble getting his legislative program through Congress, many of Johnson’s bills passed.
Having served in Congress for more than two decades, Johnson knew how to deal with legislators.
Here Lyndon Johnson puts the ""Johnson treatment"" to work on Senator Theodore Green.
The president would lean in close, coming face to face with the person he addressed.
Energetic in his speech, facial expressions, and hand gestures, Johnson used this treatment to persuade legislators to vote in his favor.
Johnson . . . moved in close, his face a scant millimeter from his target, his eyes widening and narrowing, his eyebrows rising and falling.
The Exercise of Power, 1966 The “treatment,” along with a Democrat-controlled Congress after 1965, helped Johnson compile an extraordinary legislative record.
Ending Racial Injustice Johnson envisioned a society free of racial injustice.
One of his first priorities as president was passage of Kennedy’s civil rights legislation banning discrimination in public accommodations.
Several months later, Johnson signed the Civil Rights Act of 1964 into law.
The case known as Heart of Atlanta Motel United States arose when a motel owner refused to rent rooms to blacks.
He argued that the Civil Rights Act overstepped the power given to Congress to control interstate commerce.
He also claimed that it violated his rights under the Fifth and Thirteenth amendments by forcing him to use his property in ways he opposed.
It noted that much of the motel’s business came from out-of-state guests.
Hence, Congress had acted within its power to regulate interstate commerce.
In 1965, he signed the Voting Rights Act, which guaranteed voting rights to African Americans.
Three years later, he signed the Civil Rights Act of 1968, which prohibited housing discrimination.
These laws helped move the country toward Johnson’s vision of a color-blind society.
Spurred by Michael Harrington’s book The Other America, Kennedy had asked his advisers to develop strategies for attacking poverty.
Johnson expanded these ideas into an ambitious antipoverty program called the War on Poverty.
The centerpiece of the War on Poverty was the Economic Opportunity Act.
Passed by Congress in August 1964, the act created dozens of federal antipoverty programs and an Office of Economic Opportunity to oversee them.
One program, the Job Corps, worked to teach disadvantaged young people job skills.
Volunteers in Service to America, or VISTA, was modeled on the Peace Corps.
VISTA volunteers lived and worked in poor communities within the United States, providing job training or educational services.
President Johnson also hoped to reverse the decline of America's cities.
In 1965, he created the Department of Housing and Urban Development to manage federal programs aimed at revitalizing blighted urban neighborhoods.
Its head, Robert Weaver, was the first African American to join any president’s cabinet.
Improving Access to Health Care Also high on Johnson’s list of Great Society goals was helping needy Americans gain access to health care.
Liberals in Congress had tried for years to provide hospital insurance to retired workers as part of Social Security.
Medicare is a federal health insurance program that pays for hospital and nursing home services for citizens 65 years or older.
Medicaid is a health insurance program jointly financed by federal and state governments.
It covers low-income people as well as older Americans whose medical needs have exceeded their Medicare benefits.
With the creation of these programs, many Americans no longer had to forgo medical care for lack of health insurance.
Supporting Lifelong Learning and Culture Education, Johnson believed, was the key to a better life.
One was the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965, which provided federal aid to school districts nationwide.
Because the government allocated funds to needy students rather than to schools, the act helped finance both public and parochial, or faith-based, education.
Johnson also spearheaded passage of the Public Broadcasting Act of 1967.
The act established the Corporation for Public Broadcasting , which supports the development of public radio and television programs.
One of the first CPB-funded shows was Sesame Street , which first aired on public television stations in 1969.
President Johnson's wife, Lady Bird, helped promote his Great Society programs.
As part of the effort to beautify America, she helped coordinate the planting of wildflowers along highways.
Sesame Street is one of many public television programs that the Corporation for Public Broadcasting supports.
This educational show is designed to teach reading fundamentals to young children.
At more than 9 million acres, the Wrangell-Saint Elias Wilderness in Alaska is the nation's largest wilderness area.
Opening Doors for Immigrants Johnson also supported a major overhaul of the nation's immigration policy.
Since the 1920s, the government had placed quotas on immigration from every part of the world except Western Europe.
Johnson, who believed this quota system was rooted in prejudice, wanted to end it.
The Immigration Act of 1965 eliminated the old quotas based on national origin.
It made a person’s skills and ties to family in the United States the key criteria for admission into the country.
Preserving the Environment In striving toward the Great Society, Johnson hoped to improve the quality of the environment for all.
In 1962, the publication of the book Silent Spring , by Rachel Carson, had raised public interest in environmentalism, or protection of the environment.
The book showed how uncontrolled pesticide use was poisoning the environment.
The Clean Air Act of 1963 set emission standards for factories to reduce air pollution.
Other laws focused on cleaning up waterways, preserving wilderness, protecting endangered species, and beautifying the landscape.
Protecting Consumers Johnson also supported consumerism, or the protection of the rights of consumers.
The Cigarette Labeling Act of 1965 required cigarette packages to carry labels warning that smoking could cause health problems.
Other acts set standards for wholesome meat and poultry products, for truth in lending practices, and for honest labeling of food.
In 1965, the book Unsafe at Any Speed written by Ralph Nader, focused public attention on auto safety.
It showed how lax engineering standards in the automobile industry had put drivers at risk.
The book spurred Congress to pass the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966.
Directed the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to identify and protect plants and animals that are endangered or threatened with extinction.
By mid-2006, the FWS had listed 1,868 endangered or threatened species worldwide, of which 1,300 were in the United States.
The nationally registered F W Woolworth Building, Greensboro, N.C., is the site of the first civil rights lunch counter ""sit-in"" in 1960.
Created the National Register What it did: Created the National Wild and of Historic Places, a list of sites, structures, Scenic River System to preserve rivers of and objects worthy great scenic, recreational, wildlife, or The Middle Fork of the Salmon River was one of the original eight rivers designated as wild and scenic in 1968.
Debating the Great Society By the early 1970s, the impact of Johnson’s Great Society reforms could be seen in many areas of life.
The poverty rate had fallen from 22. percent of Americans in 1960 to just 12. percent in 1970.
In 1962, only about 42 percent of black students and 69 percent of white students completed high school.
By 1970, those rates had climbed to about 60 percent for blacks and 80 percent for whites.
By 1970, ten members of the House of Representatives and one Senator were black.
Left-wing opponents complained that its mix of programs was not the best approach to ending poverty.
In their view, poverty resulted from social and economic forces beyond the control of the poor.
The best way to help low-income people, they argued, was to give them money while trying to change the economy to create more jobs for them.
Critics on the right alleged that the War on Poverty was creating an underclass of people who were dependent on government welfare.
In their view, poverty’s main cause was a lack of individual responsibility on the part of the poor.
The best approach to ending poverty, they argued, was to find ways to change the behaviors that kept poor people poor.
At the heart of the debate over Johnson’s Great Society were age-old questions about the proper role of government in a democracy.
Liberal supporters applauded the scheme’s broad goals and multitude of programs aimed at improving American life.
Their main concern was that many of the programs were not funded well enough to achieve those goals.
Conservative critics, on the other hand, saw the Great Society as government run amok.
The high cost of the many Great Society programs confirmed their belief that government should not try to solve all of society’s problems.
Johnson’s presidency proved to be a high point for the liberal view of government as society’s problem solver.
After he left office, world events caused liberals to lose ground to more conservative politicians.
Few Americans today voice a desire to do away with Medicare, Sesame Street , or consumer protections.
Many such products of the Great Society have become fixtures of American life.
The Activist Warren Court ■ \^M*E Our \ 'Republic IMPEACH EARL Warren Earl Warren, a Republican, was governor of California when President Eisenhower named him Chief Justice.
Nicknamed the ""Superchief,"" Warren earned the ire of many conservatives with his strong leadership of the Court.
Scenes like this were common in public schools until the Supreme Court ruled in 1962 that state-sponsored school prayer violated the First Amendment The Supreme Court, led by Chief Justice Earl Warren, also played a role in reshaping American society during the 1960s, By reinterpreting much of what had been settled law, the Warren Court became known as an “activist” court.
Ensuring ""One Person, One Vote"" The Warren Court decided two important cases that changed the political landscape.
Baker u Carr began when Charles Baker, a Republican citizen of Tennessee, sued Joe Carr, the secretary of state of Tennessee, because the state had not redrawn its legislative districts in five decades.
Baker's urban district had many more residents than some rural districts, but the number of representatives did not reflect that increase.
The Supreme Court had treated reapportionment— redrawing voting district boundaries to reflect population changes— as a matter for state legislatures to decide.
But in 1962, after long deliberation, the Warren Court rejected that stance, ruling that reapportionment was a question for federal courts to consider.
Chief Justice Warren wrote, A citizen, a qualified voter, is no more nor no less so because he lives in the city or on the farm.
The equal protection clause demands no less than substantially equal state legislative representation for all citizens, of all places as well as of all races.
That is, each legislator would represent the roughly same number of people, allowing each person’s vote to count equally.
Ruling on Prayer in Public Schools In 1962, the Court considered the role of prayer in public schools.
Parents, led by Steven Engel, sued the state, claiming that the prayer violated the establishment clause of the First Amendment.
This controversial decision sparked efforts to amend the Constitution to permit prayers in public schools.
Protecting the Rights of the Accused Another series of Warren Court rulings reshaped the criminal justice system.
The case of Mapp Ohio involved a woman, Dollree Mapp, who had been convicted of a crime based on evidence found during an illegal police search of her home.
The Court ruled in 1961 that evidence obtained illegally may not be used in court.
In 1964, the Court ruled that Gideon’s Sixth Amendment right to an attorney had been violated.
As a result, courts now provide public defenders to people who are accused of a crime but who cannot afford a lawyer.
In another 1964 case, Escobedo Illinois, police had denied a murder suspect, Danny Escobedo, an opportunity to speak to a lawyer during questioning.
The Court overturned the conviction because Escobedo’s constitutional right to be represented by a lawyer after his arrest had been violated.
In a 1966 case, Miranda Arizona , the Court ruled that the police must inform suspects of their rights before questioning.
Johnson used this mandate to enact a broad program of reforms he called the Great Society.
War on Poverty Johnson’s Great Society grew out of the liberal tradition of the Progressive and New Deal eras.
Economic Opportunity Act This act created a number of antipoverty measures, including the Job Corps, Project Head Start, and VISTA, which all helped cut poverty rates almost in half.
Medicare and Medicaid As part of the Great Society, Congress amended the Social Security Act to include medical health insurance for the elderly and disabled.
Immigration Act of 1965 This measure ended the national origins quota system begun in the 1920s.
Entry to the United States was now based on criteria such as skills and family ties.
Silent Spring This influential book sparked a new interest in environmentalism.
Miranda rights In a series of controversial decisions, the Warren Court expanded the rights of the accused.
It ensured that people placed under arrest be informed of their rights before questioning.
Unlike many performers, Dylan was not showy or handsome, nor did he have a strong singing voice.
Accompanying himself on guitar and harmonica, Dylan sang about racial injustice, nuclear war, and other serious issues that engaged people living in a time of social change.
His lyrics held more in common with beat poetry than with the simple rhymes of teenage love songs.
Come mothers and fathers throughout the land And don’t criticize what you can’t understand.
For the times they are a-changin'. — Bob Dylan, “The Times They Are A-Changin’,” 1964 In the 1960s, the themes of Dylan’s lyrics resonated with millions of young people, as well as with many of their elders.
They considered the racial discrimination, riots, poverty, and political assassinations occurring in the United States and concluded that society had to change.
As some people experimented with new ways of living, they redefined old ideals, such as freedom and democracy, on their own terms.
They created a counterculture— a group with ideas and behaviors very different from those of the mainstream culture.
Bob Dylan, seen here playing his guitar, became a famous folk musician in the early 1960s.
In his first big hit, ""Blowin' in the Wind,"" he protested racial discrimination, which persisted in the United States despite the civil rights movement.
Baby Boomers Launch a Cultural Revolution The postwar baby boom created the largest generation of children in American history.
By the early 1960s, the oldest baby boomers were nearing their twenties.
However, some baby boomers felt guilty about growing up with advantages denied to many Americans.
They believed American society was deeply flawed— rife with materialism, racism, and inequality— but they also believed it could change.
Activists on College Campuses Form a New Left Responding to the plight of the poor, small groups of student activists formed a movement called the New Left.
Some members of the Depression-era “Old Left” had been radicals who supported a worldwide communist revolution.
Inspired by the civil rights movement, they were committed to more traditional American ideals, such as the democratic goal of allowing all people to take an active part in government.
During the first year, SDS membership grew to more than 8,000 students— a small fraction of all college students.
The Free Speech Movement developed in response to a university rule banning groups like SDS from using a plaza on campus to spread their ideas.
Thousands of students joined the Free Speech Movement, shutting down the campus for weeks.
The student uprising at Berkeley was the first of many protests at colleges across the country.
Others were reactions to the growing United States military presence in Vietnam.
Student activists called on college officials to ban military recruiters from campuses and to end weapons-related research.
In 1965, SDS held a rally in Washington, D.C., against the Vietnam War, attracting nearly 25,000 people.
Protests against the ban on political activity on campus lasted three months.
The students' success in overturning the ban is still seen as a victory for First Amendment rights on college campuses.
Known as hippies, they developed a counterculture seeking freedom of expression.
Shunning conventions, hippies dressed in jeans, colorful tic-dyed T-shirts, sandals, and necklaces called love beads.
Many lived on handouts from their parents, by begging, or by taking short-term jobs.
Although no organization united members of the counterculture, a number of beliefs did.
One was distrust of the Establishment, their term for the people and institutions who, in their view, controlled society.
Members of the counterculture also shared the belief that love was more important than money.
Led by Abbie Hoffman and Jerry Rubin, the yippies attracted media attention by carrying out amusing pranks.
As the money floated down, the stock traders below dropped their work to scramble for free cash.
Hippies dreamed of a world in which peace, love, and freedom were the dominant values.
Compared with mainstream Americans, they adopted more relaxed views regarding money, work, and the pursuit of pleasure.
A Generation Gap Opens Between Rebel Youth and Mainstream Parents Hippies were a minority of 1960s youth.
But media coverage made their values known to other young people, many of whom responded sympathetically.
To their parents’ distress, these youth let their hair grow long, wore hippie clothes, and criticized the Establishment, especially the war in Vietnam.
The result was a growing generation gap, or difference in attitudes and behaviors between youth and their parents.
Adults who had lived through the Depression and World War II often dismissed “long-haired hippies” as spoiled rich kids.
They resented the counterculture’s focus on hedonism, or pursuit of pleasure, and its lack of concern for their future.
Like their parents, they wanted a good education, a decent job, a successful marriage, and their own home.
Peggy Noonan, a presidential speechwriter and newspaper columnist, was one of those mainstream youth.
Mainstream Americans remained loyal to traditional values during the 1960s.
They believed in family ties, hard work, and respect for God and country.
They often viewed youth of the counterculture as irresponsible and immoral.
A Culture Clash Hippies experimented with new sounds in music and new styles of art.
Concert posters and album covers often sought to evoke the colorful visions that counterculture artists sometimes had while high on music or drugs.
Some members of the counterculture hoped to create a new society by creating communes.
Living together and sharing their labor and resources, they rejected both capitalism and materialism.
In San Francisco in January 1967, an event dubbed the “Human Be-In’'— a funloving twist on a sit-in— drew together various counterculture factions.
News reports showed young men and women holding one another, using drugs, and dancing to the music of rock bands.
For many young people, the gathering looked like an invitation to enjoy sex, drugs, and rock V roll.
For parents, stories about the Human Be-In confirmed their worst fears of a society in moral decline.
Changing Views of Love and Marriage The counterculture’s openness about sexual behavior took place amid rapidly changing views toward love and marriage.
The sexual revolution was a by-product of the introduction of the birth control pill early in the decade.
More couples were living together outside of marriage, and more marriages were ending in divorce.
Millions of Americans came to see a loveless marriage as worse than no marriage at all.
Between 1960 and 1970, the annual divorce rate rose from fewer than 10 couples per 1 ,000 to almost 15.
The number of children living in single-parent families rose along with the divorce rate.
While numbers of young people experimented with the freedom the sexual revolution brought, mainstream adults focused on problems it created.
They worried that young people were being pressured to engage in sexual behavior.
Adults also expressed alarm at the rapid rise in the number of children bom out of wedlock.
Hippies Experiment with Freer Lifestyles Many hippies created minisocieties in which they could live by their own values.
Some congregated in crash pads, free and usually temporary places to stay.
Others experimented with more permanent group-owned living arrangements, called communes.
During the 1960s, about 2,000 communes arose, most often in rural areas.
Some parents felt that by choosing such unconventional lifestyles, their children may have been limiting their prospects for future success.
The counterculture also held changing views on the recreational use of drugs.
The casual attitude of young people toward illegal mind-altering drugs appalled mainstream adults.
They pointed out that some drug users experienced “bad trips” that led to panic attacks, depression, violence, and death.
Government spending on antidrug programs increased from $65 million in 1969 to $730 million in 1973.
Rock 'n' Roll Gives Voice to the Counterculture Hippies also embraced the changing music scene.
Counterculture rock bands soon developed a new sound known as psychedelic rock.
They experimented with free-flowing songs that used elements of jazz and Indian music, sound distortion, and light shows to create vivid musical experiences.
Many mainstream adults worried this type of music promoted increased drug use.
About 400,000 people convened at the festival — far more than expected.
In August 1969, Time magazine reported, “The festival . . . may well rank as one of the significant political and sociological events of the age.
The mainstream culture pointed to this event as an example of the dangers of rock V roll.
The Impact of the Counterculture on Mainstream Media By the end of the 1960s, countercultural ideas and images appeared in mainstream magazines and movies and on television.
Pop art focused on everyday life, commenting on consumer culture by elevating mundane objects into high art.
Their values created a generation gap between themselves and older, mainstream Americans.
The New Left Politically active college students formed a movement known as the New Left.
Hippies Members of the counterculture, known as hippies, believed in peace, love, and individual freedom.
Sexual revolution As living together before marriage and getting divorced became more accepted in the 1960s, the divorce rate went up, as did the number of children living with a single parent.
Drug use Casual attitudes toward the use of illegal drugs shocked mainstream America.
Rock V roll Psychedelic rock combined musical styles with light shows to create vivid experiences.
The music festival Woodstock drew media attention to the counterculture.
Impact of the counterculture The media introduced countercultural values to mainstream America through television and radio, as well as art, music, and theater.
Introduction In Washington, D.C.’s Constitution Gardens, not far from the Lincoln Memorial, sits a long, sloping wall made of polished black granite.
Many simply stand in contemplation or quiet prayer, while others shed tears.
Some leave letters, flowers, or personal objects, including medals, at the base of the wall.
The Wall lists the names of United States soldiers killed or missing in action in the Vietnam War.
The first two men listed, Chester Ovnand and Dale Buis, were the first United States soldiers to die in Vietnam, according to official records.
They were noncombat troops killed in a surprise attack on their camp in 1959.
At the time, few Americans were paying any attention to this faraway conflict.
Later, reporter Stanley Karnow, who had written a brief account of the soldiers’ deaths, mentioned their names at a congressional hearing.
He said, “I could never have imagined that these were going to be at the head of more than 58,000 names on the Wall ” Today many young people visit the Wall.
Some of them wonder why a list of names carved in stone has such a strong impact on other, older visitors.
They wonder why the remembrance of this war provokes not only tears but also anger.
It has to do with painful memories of loss, with Cold War policies, and with social rebellion.
It has to do with American GIs fighting and dying in a war far from home, for reasons many did not entirely understand.
Before the United States entered the war, politicians and their advisers argued about the wisdom of getting drawn into the conflict.
The war divided the country more than any other issue since the Civil War.
The Vietnam Veterans Memorial lists the names of 58,253 Americans killed or missing in the Vietnam War.
Visiting the monument helps them come to terms with their experiences during the war, including the loss of close friends and family members.
Three Presidents Increase Involvement in Vietnam Ho Chi Minh was president of North Vietnam from 1945 to 1969.
At first he sought support from the United States, but his communist ideology aroused United States hostility.
From the 1880s up until World War II, Vietnam was part of French Indochina, a French colony in Southeast Asia that also included Cambodia and Laos.
During World War II, Japanese troops occupied part of French Indochina.
In 1941 , a Vietnamese communist, Ho Chi Minh, drew on that history to stir up nationalist feelings.
In northern Vietnam, he helped found a group to oppose foreign occupation.
On September 2, 1945, the same day that Japan formally surrendered to the Allies, Vietnam declared its independence.
In what seemed like a bid for United States backing, he began his speech with words from the Declaration of Independence.
Ho ended his speech with words that might have stirred the hearts of the original American patriots.
Ho’s followers would show their determination over the next three decades.
Later they would fight the United States, which saw them as a communist enemy.
In the early stages of the war, three presidents would set the pattern for deepening United States involvement.
Truman Chooses Sides in the First Indochina War The Viet Minh called their country the Democratic Republic of Vietnam.
The northern city of Hanoi was their capital, and Ho Chi Minh was their president.
France, however, refused to accept Vietnamese independence and set out to eliminate the Viet Minh.
First, French troops drove the rebels out of the southern city of Saigon, the French colonial capital.
Then the French launched attacks on Viet Minh strongholds in the north.
In November 1946, French warships opened fire on the port city of Haiphong, killing some 6,000 Vietnamese civilians.
Some American officials saw this conflict as a war between a colonial power and nationalists who aspired to govern themselves.
Others, including President Truman, held views of the conflict that were more colored by the Cold War.
They believed that the Viet Minh intended to create a communist dictatorship.
Although Truman suspected the French might be fighting to preserve their empire, he chose to see their efforts as a fight against communism.
For Truman, containing communism was more important than supporting a nationalist movement.
By 1951 , thousands of United States soldiers had already died in Korea trying to halt the spread of communism.
Truman was determined to — block any further communist advance in Asia.
For this reason, he called for an increase in military aid to French Indochina.
By 1954, the United States was paying 80 percent of the cost of the war in Indochina.
The French controlled the cities in both northern and southern Vietnam, but the Viet Minh dominated the countryside.
The Viet Minh took control of rural villages, often by assassinating local leaders with close ties to the French.
They gained the support of Vietnam’s peasants, who made up around 80 percent of the population, in part by giving them land taken from the wealthy.
The decisive battle of the war began in March 1954, when the Viet Minh launched a surprise attack on a large French military base at Dien Bien Phu', in the mountains of northern Vietnam.
By April, the more than 12,000 French soldiers at Dien Bien Phu appeared ready to give up.
Eisenhower briefly considered sending B-29 aircraft to bomb Viet Minh positions, but he did not want to act alone.
What he really wanted was a commitment from Britain and other allies to take unified military action to stop communist expansion in Vietnam and elsewhere in Indochina.
In the years to come, this domino theory would provide a strong motive for United States intervention in Vietnam.
But for now, just months after the Korean War had ended, neither the United States nor its allies were prepared to fight another ground war in Asia.
Other policymakers feared that direct military intervention might even trigger a war with Vietnam’s communist neighbor, China.
The key battle of the First Indochina War took place between March and May 1954, when Viet Minh troops attacked the French stronghold at Dien Bien Phu.
The French lost the battle and began to withdraw their forces from Vietnam.
The French moved into South Vietnam, and the Viet Minh moved into North Vietnam.
The Viet Minh left a political network in the south, however, in the hope of winning victory in the national unity election set for 1956.
On May 7. 1954, the Viet Minh finally overran the French base, ending the Battle of Dien Bien Phu and shattering French morale.
The French, lacking public support at home for the war, began pulling out of northern Vietnam.
The final act of the First Indochina War would be played out at a peace conference in Geneva, Switzerland.
Geneva Peace Conference Splits Vietnam in Two Representatives of France and the Viet Minh began talks in Geneva the day after the French loss at Dien Bien Phu.
The Viet Minh demanded that France leave the country completely and that the Democratic Republic of Vietnam be recognized as an independent nation.
As negotiations dragged on, China and the Soviet Union put pressure on the Viet Minh to compromise.
They did not want to antagonize the United States, fearing it would intervene militarily.
Finally, in July 1954 the French and Viet Minh signed the Geneva Accords.
Under this agreement, the fighting stopped, and Vietnam was split temporarily along the 17th parallel.
The Viet Minh moved north of that line, while the French withdrew to the south.
Under the accords, national elections to reunify Vietnam were scheduled for 1956.
As France prepared to leave Vietnam, the United States began moving in.
American officials believed they could form a strong noncommunist state in South Vietnam.
In 1955, the United States used its influence to put an anticommunist South Vietnamese leader, Ngo Dinh Diem, in charge.
Chester Ovnand and Dale Buis, the first United States soldiers killed in Vietnam, were military advisers.
Diem, with United States approval, blocked the national vote, thus rejecting the Geneva Accords, and held elections only in the south.
Diem began returning land to wealthy landlords and drafting young men from the countryside into his army.
He ruthlessly attacked opponents and jailed thousands of people without putting them on trial or charging them with a crime.
Viet Minh communists still living in the south launched a guerrilla war against Diem’s brutal government.
In 1960. the Viet Minh formed a group called the National Liberation Front and invited all opponents of Diem to join.
Diem referred to the group as Viet Cong, slang for “Vietnamese communists,” even though many of its members were noncommunists.
The stage was set for the Second Indochina War, also known as the Vietnam War.
Kennedy Tries to Prop Up South Vietnam The Viet Cong insurgency, or rebellion, threatened to overwhelm the South Vietnamese army.
Many army officers, like many leaders of South Vietnam’s government, were incompetent and corrupt.
When Kennedy became president in 1961 , he sent an inspection team to South Vietnam to evaluate the situation.
As the years passed, however, his ideas about the strategic importance of Vietnam shifted.
JFK called Vietnam “the cornerstone of the Free World in Southeast Asia, the keystone in the arch, the finger in the dike/' As president, he continued to favor a policy of containing communism.
When Kennedy's inspection team returned from Vietnam, they told the president that South Vietnam was losing the war.
They recommended more economic and military aid, including the use of United States combat troops.
However, some political advisers urged him to pull out of Vietnam completely.
JFK, unsure of the best course, opted to send more weapons and equipment and more technicians and military advisers.
By mid1962, the number of military advisers had soared to around 9,000.
Several Buddhist monks protested by publicly setting themselves on fire.
In November, a group of South Vietnamese generals staged a coup, with the tacit approval of United States officials.
United States Advisers in Vietnam, 1959-1962 1959 1960 1961 1962 Year The United States began sending military advisers to Vietnam to help the French in the early 1950s.
These advisers were not combat troops, but they played a key role in the military buildup in Southeast Asia.
In 1963, photographs of Buddhist monks burning themselves to death in South Vietnam shocked the world.
The monks were protesting the corruption and brutality of the Diem regime.
Diem had taken power with United States support, but his actions embarrassed the United States and led to his overthrow.
Johnson Inherits the Vietnam Problem rv I t fvipRTH t VIETNAM 'LAOS /l 7th parallel THAILAND CAMBODIA Three weeks after Diem's death, Kennedy was also assassinated.
The growing problem in Vietnam thus fell into the lap of a new president, Lyndon B Johnson.
LBJ knew that Vietnam was a potential quagmire that could suck the United States into protracted conflict.
In May 1964, he expressed his ambivalent feelings about Vietnam to an adviser.
During the 1964 campaign, his opponent, Barry Goldwater, insisted that the United States should take a more active role in the war.
Yet the president had already begun making plans to escalate, or increase, United States involvement in the war.
In March 1964, he asked the military to begin planning for the bombing of North Vietnam.
North Vietnam had been sending weapons and supplies south to the Viet Cong over the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
This network of footpaths, roads, bridges, and tunnels passed through the mountainous terrain of eastern Laos and Cambodia.
In mid1964, regular units of the North Vietnamese Army began heading south along this route.
Johnson knew' that South Vietnam’s weak and ineffective army would be hardpressed to stop this new offensive.
The United States had to do more, he believed, or risk losing Vietnam to communism.
In July 1964, Johnson approved covert attacks on radar statiomraTong North Vietnam’s coast.
The CIA planned the operation, but South Vietnamese in speedboats carried out the raids.
United States Navy warships used electronic surveillance, or close observation, to locate the radar sites.
They fired machine guns and torpedoes at a United States destroyer in the Gulf of Tonkin, off the coast of North Vietnam.
On the night of August 4, in stormy weather in the Gulf of Tonkin, American sailors thought their destroyer was again Ho Chi Minh Trail The Ho Chi Minh Trail was actually a network of some 12,000 miles of trails.
Soldiers and supplies traveled the route on foot and by bicycle, oxcart, and truck.
The trip south, through the rugged mountains of Laos and Cambodia into South Vietnam, could take as long as three months.
On August 2, 1964, North Vietnamese boats fired on a United States ship, causing little damage.
Two days later, false reports of a second attack prompted the United States to launch air strikes against North Vietnam. under attack.
Back in Washington, D.C., officials quickly studied accounts of the incident.
Based on erroneous evidence, these officials— and the president— concluded that a second attack had occurred.
LBJ immediately ordered air strikes against naval bases in North Vietnam.
The next day, August 5, he asked Congress to approve those air strikes and to give him the power to deal with future threats.
The Gulf of Tonkin Resolution was not a legal declaration of war, but it did, in effect, give the president permission to expand the United States role in the conflict.
Only two members of Congress, both in the Senate, voted against the resolution.
This resolution is a further authorization for escalation unlimited. —Senator Ernest Gruening, August 1964 The United States Reaches a Crisis Point in Vietnam The escalation that Senator Gruening feared began on February 7, 1965, after the Viet Cong attacked a United States air base in the south.
LBJ responded by ordering the bombing of barracks and military staging areas north of the 17th parallel.
By 1964, there were more than twice as many advisers in the country as there were two years before.
Here he is shown in a meeting with military experts, including Defense Secretary Robert McNamara (with arm outstretched), in 1965.
McNamara, like many of LBJ's advisors, was a hawk who favored sending more troops to Vietnam.
Other advisers, known as doves, urged the president to seek more peaceful means to resolve the Vietnam conflict.
Most of the president’s advisers believed that this action was needed to give a boost to the Army of the Republic of Vietnam and to avoid the collapse of South Vietnam.
Units of the ARVN rarely had success against the enemy forces that roamed the countryside.
Besides attacking staging areas, United States planes began intensive bombing of the Ho Chi Minh Trail, hoping to cut off supplies and soldiers streaming in from the north.
But the flow of men and materiel from the north continued, as did the war.
In light of these results, the Johnson administration decided to reexamine United States policy in Vietnam.
Johnson's Advisers Debate Increased Involvement President Johnson believed in a limited war to secure South Vietnam’s independence.
His foreign policy team debated what actions were necessary to reach that objective.
Most of LBJ's political advisers were hawks, people who favored expanding United States military involvement in Vietnam.
In their eyes, the defense of Vietnam was crucial in the wider struggle to contain communism.
In policy debates, the hawks— a group that included Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara and Secretary of State Dean Rusk, along with top military leaders— argued in favor of escalating the war by introducing United States ground troops.
The fall of Vietnam, they asserted, would trigger the collapse of Cambodia, Laos, and the rest of Southeast Asia.
Under this scenario, communism would spread across the entire region and beyond.
They said that allies must be able to rely on the United States, the leader of the free world, to stand by them in times of crisis.
Only then, the hawks claimed, could the United States count on allied support in the worldwide battle against communism.
They also argued that the United States had to make clear to the communists that it The Domino Theory The domino theory was a key rationale for increasing United States military involvement in Vietnam.
According to this theory, the fall of Vietnam to communism would lead to communist advances throughout Southeast Asia and the rest of the world.
Presidents Truman, Eisenhower, and Kennedy, along with Johnson, were all strongly influenced by the domino theory. would meet any challenge to its power.
During the Cold War, politicians were expected to take a hard line against the communist threat.
Some, such as Undersecretary of State George Ball, were doves— advocates of a peaceful solution in Vietnam through negotiation and compromise.
Now, in policy debates, they made the case against escalating the conflict further by sending in United States combat troops.
The doves contended that escalating the war would not guarantee victory, arguing that the war was unwinnable.
They pointed to the case of Korea, where United States troops had fought a costly war for three years but achieved little.
Fighting a guerrilla war in the unfamiliar jungle terrain of Vietnam, the doves predicted, would prove even more difficult and deadly.
In addition, the expense of such a war would undermine LBJ’s top priority, his Great Society programs.
The doves also argued that involvement in the war was not in the nation’s interest.
They said the United States had no business becoming entangled in someone else’s civil war.
In addition, they questioned the strategic value of Vietnam to the United States.
The huge investment the United States was making in Southeast Asia, they argued, was diverting attention from more important problems both at home and abroad.
Furthermore, the doves pointed out that direct United States involvement in Vietnam might draw China or even the Soviet Union into the conflict.
Both countries were supplying North Vietnam with military aid, and China was building an air base just inside its border with North Vietnam.
The doves feared that China might counter the entry of United States ground troops with combat forces of its own.
Increased United States involvement, they claimed, would not reassure its allies but instead make them more anxious that a major war could erupt in the region.
Some critics of the Vietnam War believed that the conflict could not be managed successfully.
This cartoon shows President Johnson clinging desperately to the tail of a tiger, representing Vietnam, as it whips him through space.
United States troop levels in Vietnam rose rapidly after the first soldiers arrived in 1965.
Four months later, the number of young men drafted into the armed forces doubled, to 35,000 a month, to meet the demand for new soldiers.
The first United States combat troops arrived in Vietnam on March 8, 1965, on a beach near Da Nang.
As the war became Americanized, the South Vietnamese played less and less of a role.
After weighing all the advice he received about American involvement in Vietnam, Johnson decided to send troops.
On March 8, 1965, about 3,500 United States marines waded ashore at a beach near Da Nang, South Vietnam.
This was the first time United States combat troops had set foot in Vietnam.
Several Vietnamese girls placed garlands of flowers around the soldiers’ necks.
They immediately began digging foxholes on the beach, preparing to defend against a Viet Cong attack.
The next day, they continued bringing equipment and supplies ashore, including tanks equipped with flamethrowers.
The marines’ job was to defend the air base at Da Nang, the home base for bombers taking part in Operation Rolling Thunder.
These search-and-destroy missions led to the first firefights with Viet Cong guerrillas.
Until the following month, LBJ kept this shift to combat status a secret from the American people.
Johnson Dramatically Increases Troop Levels By the end of April, President Johnson had approved the dispatch of 60,000 more combat troops to Vietnam.
In July, after conferring with advisers, he publicly announced that he was boosting United States troop levels dramatically, to 125,000 men.
LBJ’s actions and words revealed that the United States was about to undertake a full-scale war.
Yet the president did not officially declare war or ask Congress for permission to expand troop levels.
In the months that followed, the air war continued to intensify, and the pace of the ground war accelerated.
The first major assault by United States ground troops, called Operation Starlite, took place in August 1965, against 1 ,500 Viet Cong who were preparing to attack a United States air base near the coast.
The battle started with bomb and artillery attacks on Viet Cong positions.
Helicopters flew many of the 5,500 marines to the battle site, and others came ashore from ships.
Supported by tanks and fighter planes, the marines successfully smashed the enemy force.
This pattern of delivering troops by helicopter while battering the enemy with overwhelming firepower would continue throughout the war.
Although many United States and ARVN soldiers would die in Vietnam, four times as many enemy troops would perish.
Despite huge losses, however, the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese managed to produce enough new fighters to keep the war going.
By the end of 1965, United States combat soldiers numbered more than 184,000.
By late 1967, nearly half a million Americans were serving in Vietnam, and more were streaming into the country.
An American War Starting in 1965, with the landing of the first combat forces, the conflict in Vietnam changed.
The United States took over the main responsibility for fighting the war, adopting a two-pronged strategy.
First, United States marines would take key cities and other vital sites along the coast and transform them into modem military bases.
They would then use those bases to launch searchand-destroy missions against the Viet Cong.
From that time forward, the South Vietnamese would play only a supporting role.
This change in strategy represented the Americanization of the Vietnam War.
As one of LBJ’s advisers, Horace Busby, put it, “This is no longer South Vietnam’s war.
A 1954 agreement ending this colonial war split the country into communist North Vietnam and democratic South Vietnam.
When France pulled out the following year, the United States stepped in to prop up South Vietnam.
Over the years, American involvement grew and eventually led to the introduction of United States ground forces.
First Indochina War In this first phase of fighting, which lasted from 1946 to 1954, Ho Chi Minh led Viet Minh insurgents in the struggle to end French rule in Vietnam.
Geneva Accords The First Indochina War ended with a 1954 agreement known as the Geneva Accords.
The accords split Vietnam into north and south but called for elections to reunify the country.
Viet Cong Insurgents in the south, known as the Viet Cong, worked to overthrow the nominally democratic but corrupt government of South Vietnam.
Gulf of Tonkin Resolution An alleged attack on United States ships off the coast of North Vietnam led Congress to pass the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution.
This resolution gave President Johnson broad powers to expand the United States role in Vietnam.
Ho Chi Minh Trail By 1965, North Vietnamese Army troops were moving south along the Ho Chi Minh Trail to help the Viet Cong.
The United States feared that South Vietnam would fall without more direct support.
Americanization In March 1965, the United States began sending ground troops to fight the Vietnam War.
Introduction ""We seem to have a sinkhole,” the new secretary of defense, Clark Clifford, told President Johnson in March 1968.
For three years, the United States had been putting more troops, weapons, and money into Vietnam but was more bogged down than ever.
While Clifford described the conflict as a sinkhole, others called it a swamp, a quagmire, or a morass.
They now counseled Johnson to cut back on the bombing, reduce troop levels, and pursue negotiations.
One of LBJ’s closest friends in Congress, Senator Mike Mansfield, gave him similar advice.
When the president wanted to send 40,000 more troops to Vietnam, the senator objected.
And it’s going to cost you more if you don't change your opinion ” When Johnson became president in 1963, few Americans were paying much attention to the war because it did not involve United States combat troops.
Two years later, however, the war had escalated and had become front-page news.
Every day, the public learned more about United States soldiers fighting and dying in Vietnam.
Yet most Americans still supported the president’s efforts to contain communism in Southeast Asia.
By 1968, however, many of those Americans were blaming Johnson for a war that was out of control.
He had made great strides with his Great Society agenda for social reform.
But with public opinion shifting against his war policy, he feared that he would also lose public support for his civil rights and antipoverty programs.
The enormous pressures and frustrations of the Vietnam War were taking a toll on Johnson and his presidency.
Even before the United States introduced combat troops to Vietnam in 1965, some United States soldiers were dying in the conflict.
As the number of troops increased and the death count rose, more Americans turned against the war.
United States Troops Face Difficult Conditions United States soldiers spent much of their time on patrol, seeking to engage the enemy.
They trudged through dense vegetation, swamps, and other difficult terrain, carrying rifles, ammunition, and packs weighing 90 pounds or more.
The North Vietnamese Army supported the Viet Cong in South Vietnam with troops and materiel.
They also supplied military training to the largely peasant army of insurgents.
Initially, much of the pressure on LBJ came from hawks in Congress and from the military, who called for more troops in Vietnam.
The American public, he believed, would turn against him if he allowed troop levels— or casualties— to rise too high.
By 1968, most of the ground troops in Vietnam were not professional soldiers like the marines who first landed at Da Nang.
As the war progressed, more and more of the fighting was done by men who had been drafted into the army.
This attitude toward the war reflected the difficult conditions that United States soldiers faced in Vietnam.
Fighting in Unfamiliar Territory One set of difficulties had to do with the geography and climate of South Vietnam.
In some areas, temperatures rose above 90°F much of the year, and heavy monsoon rains fell from May to October.
One GI recalled his reaction upon landing in Vietnam, when the plane door first opened.
This uncomfortable tropical climate also gave rise to a host of insects and other pests, as well as diseases like malaria.
Perhaps the greatest geographic challenge for United States soldiers, however, was Vietnam’s rugged topography.
Troops had to march through soggy, lowland rice paddies and swamps and over steep, jungle-clad mountains.
The heavily forested terrain often made it difficult to locate the enemy.
Unlike United States soldiers, the Viet Cong and the North Vietnamese Army knew this land intimately and were skilled at concealing themselves in the dense tropical vegetation.
In an effort to deny the enemy its forest cover, the United States military sprayed chemical herbicides from the air.
These herbicides stripped the foliage from plants and killed many trees.
The favored herbicide was Agent Orange, named for the color of the barrels in which it was stored.
The military sprayed Agent Orange along the Ho Chi Minh Trail and in many other areas.
However, this spraying had a limited effect on enemy operations because the forest cover in Vietnam was so extensive.
It also contaminated the soil and water, destroyed civilian food sources, and exposed civilians and soldiers to toxins that posed long-term health risks.
Engaging an Elusive Enemy As the United States escalated its commitment to the defense of South Vietnam in 1965, the Viet Cong and NVA realized that they could not match superior United States firepower.
To win they had to engage in guerrilla warfare, relying on the element of surprise and their skill at disappearing into the landscape.
The ability of the insurgents to avoid detection frustrated United States commanders.
Besides concealing themselves in the jungle, Viet Cong and NVA soldiers often hid from their American pursuers in underground tunnels.
Others were even more elaborate, containing living areas, storage spaces, and even kitchens.
A South Vietnamese peasant tilling the soil by day might be a guerrilla killing Americans by night.
To counter these guerrilla war tactics, the commander of United States forces in Vietnam, General William Westmoreland, decided to fight a war of attrition — a military campaign designed to wear down the enemy’s strength.
The United States hoped to eliminate so many enemy troops that the Viet Cong and NVA could no longer fight the war.
The Viet Cong built underground tunnels to hide from United States troops and to serve as base camps for their forces.
These tunnel networks were sometimes quite extensive, with many rooms and passageways in all directions.
Small units of soldiers, called platoons, would search out insurgents and draw them into a fight.
Then they would call in an air strike by helicopter gunships or jet fighter-bombers to destroy the enemy force.
This search-and-destroy tactic appeared effective when measured by the enemy body count— the number of soldiers killed.
For Westmoreland, the body count became the key measure of United States progress in the war.
Search-and-destroy missions, however, made United States combat soldiers clear targets for enemy attack.
Insurgents frequently ambushed platoons as they marched through the jungle.
Snipers, or sharpshooters, sometimes picked off United States soldiers from concealed locations.
Soldiers also fell prey to land mines— explosive devices, buried just below ground, that blew up when stepped on.
Men on patrol also had to watch for booby traps, such as tripwires connected to explosives and sharpened stakes coated with poison.
They served with distinction and carried out their combat duties as required.
During their 12-month tour of duty in Vietnam, some soldiers focused solely on survival, avoiding combat when possible.
The communists laid many types of booby traps to injure or kill United States troops.
One type was the punji stake trap, made with bamboo stakes often coated with poison.
These stakes were sharp enough to pierce a soldier's boot when he stepped into the trap.
Another type was the cartridge trap, in which a bullet cartridge was rigged to fire into a soldier's foot when he stepped on it.
The Limited War Proves Ineffective The United States had reasons for pursuing a limited war.
First, General Westmoreland believed that a war of attrition could achieve victory.
The goal was to kill more enemy soldiers than North Vietnam or the Viet Cong could replace.
If the strategy worked, the communists would have to give up eventually.
Through limited war, Westmoreland thought, the United States could achieve its main goal of establishing a democratic South Vietnam.
Second, United States leaders saw grave dangers in pursuing a total war with no limits.
Total war calls for the complete mobilization of a nation’s resources to achieve victory.
This approach would have meant invading North Vietnam and forcing the communists to surrender.
Also, China and the Soviet Union, which were providing military aid to North Vietnam, might be provoked to intervene directly, potentially resulting in a nuclear confrontation.
The limited war proved ineffective, however, because the strategy of attrition failed.
Ho Chi Minh had once warned the French, “You can kill ten of my men for every one I kill of yours.
The war continued, and antiwar sentiments began to grow in the United States.
Most Americans could not tolerate a war, especially an undeclared war, that seemed to drag on endlessly at a growing cost in American lives.
The Viet Cong and North Vietnamese saw the United States as another colonial power that had to be expelled from their country.
They were determined to fight on, no matter how long the war took or how deadly it became.
Such actions were authorized if soldiers were fired upon or if the people in the village were known to support the Viet Cong.
The War Divides the People of South Vietnam The Vietnam War deeply divided the South Vietnamese people.
Some, especially in the countryside, joined the Viet Cong or supported their cause.
A third group, perhaps even the majority, remained neutral in the conflict.
Our people no longer want to take sides in this war that is gradually but inexorably destroying us.
We simply want to be a people— the Vietnamese people. — Ly Qui Chung, Saigon newspaper editor, 1970 Contending for the Loyalty of the Vietnamese People American leaders knew that gaining the trust and support of people like Ly Qui Chung was a crucial element in defeating the insurgency.
So, in addition to the “shooting war,"" the United States mounted a separate campaign to win over the Vietnamese people and undermine support for the Viet Cong.
The key to this “other war"" was pacification— a policy designed to promote security and stability in South Vietnam.
Pacification involved two main programs, both run by the Saigon government but organized by the United States Army and the CIA and funded by the United States.
Rural development projects ranged from supplying villages with food and other goods to building schools and bridges.
This program also spread propaganda designed to persuade the Vietnamese to support the government of South Vietnam.
In this way, the United States hoped to “win the hearts and minds"" of the Vietnamese people.
The second pacification program sought to undermine the communist insurgency by having the Army of the Republic of Vietnam remove the Viet Cong and their sympathizers from villages.
Napalm is a sticky gasoline gel that adheres to everything it touches and burns everything in its path.
About 10 percent of all bombs dropped on Vietnam contained napalm. the Saigon government.
First, the ARVN lacked the leadership, skills, and dedication to effectively provide security for villages being pacified.
Some ARVN units fought with distinction, but many lacked training or the will to fight.
The lack of security, in turn, made it difficult for rural development teams to carry out their mission of building roads, schools, and other basic infrastructure.
In some areas, they might make progress on a project only to see it disappear when a United States bomb destroyed their village.
During a seven-month period in 1966, the number of rural development team workers killed or kidnapped reached 3,015.
The Viet Cong Maintain Popular Support The Americanization of the war also undermined efforts to lure rural Vietnamese away from the Viet Cong.
Search-and-destroy missions often created more enemies than friends among the peasants.
We would go through a village before dawn, rousting everybody out of bed, and kicking down doors and dragging them out if they didn’t move fast enough.
They all had underground bunkers inside their huts to protect themselves against bombing and shelling.
Their homes had been wrecked, their chickens killed, their rice confiscated— and if they weren’t pro-Viet Cong before we got there, they sure as hell were by the time we left. — United States Marine William Ehrhart Several other aspects of the United States war of attrition hurt the pacification cause.
A village that had been secured by pacification workers might suddenly be bombed or shelled by United States forces trying to hit a Viet Cong target.
Missiles and bombs from United States planes leveled villages, killed thousands of civilians, and produced a steady stream of refugees.
But a different kind of weapon, napalm, may have brought the greatest agony to the Vietnamese people.
It was dropped from planes as an incendiary bomb designed to bum forests and destroy enemy installations.
When it hit the ground, it set fire to everything— and everyone— it touched.
The Viet Cong had significant popular support among Vietnamese nationalists.
By intimidating, kidnapping, or assassinating local leaders, including schoolteachers and religious figures, they eliminated voices of opposition.
These ruthless tactics helped the Viet Cong gain control of much of South Vietnam.
Growing Opposition to the War Before 1966, vocal opposition to the Vietnam War came mainly from college students, pacifists, and a few radical groups.
In 1966, however, criticism arose from within the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations.
The committee questioned several prominent witnesses, including former ambassador George Kennan, whose ideas in the late 1940s had inspired the containment doctrine.
United States leaders used this doctrine to justify their policies in Vietnam.
The War Comes to America's Living Rooms Americans might have paid little attention to the Fulbright hearings if they had not been televised by the three major networks.
Instead, millions of people across the country watched as Fulbright and other respected senators criticized Johnson administration policies.
From then on, more Americans would feel free to oppose the war in Vietnam.
Television continued to play an important role in how Americans perceived the war.
Night after night, news of the war was broadcast into their living rooms.
They described United States successes and told upbeat stories about the courage and skill of American soldiers.
As the war continued, however, television reports began to show more scenes of violence, suffering, and destruction— the human toll of the war.
The news media brought stark images of the Vietnam War into American homes.
As the war progressed, television news and the print media increasingly displayed the grim realities of war.
Escalating Costs Raise Questions The soaring costs of the war, both human and economic, began to trouble more Americans.
In 1968, troop levels rose to over 500,000 and the number of GIs killed in action exceeded 1 ,200 per month.
This huge expense led to increased inflation and higher taxes for the American people.
As Americans began taking a closer look at the war, some began to question LBJ’s policies.
They criticized the bombing of North Vietnam and the sending of combat troops without a declaration of war.
Television networks now focused most of their news coverage on the war.
Viewers saw graphic images of combat and rows of body bags containing dead United States soldiers.
Yet to many Americans, the administration’s optimistic assessments of the war now seemed overblown and even deceitful.
Television newscasts emphasized a credibility gap — the difference between the reality of the war and the Johnson administration’s portrayal of it.
In 1967, Martin Luther King Jr. aligned himself with the antiwar movement.
Here a member of the armed forces presents a petition supporting the men and women serving in Vietnam.
Hawks and Doves Divide the Nation Public opinion polls showed that by 1967 the American public was about evenly divided on the war.
The views of hawks and doves were pulling the nation in two directions.
They argued that the war was morally correct and could be won by giving the military a free hand to expand the fighting.
In their view, the war was a civil conflict in which the United States had no right to interfere.
The peace movement, or antiwar movement, blossomed on college campuses.
Sit-ins, borrowed from the civil rights movement, also became a popular way to protest the war.
Three students in Des Moines, Iowa, aged 13 to 16, wore black armbands to school to protest the war.
When the school suspended ThenTfoTBrealcn^ rules, they sued the school district and later took their case to the United States Supreme Court.
In 1969, the Court ruled in Tinker Des Moines that students have a right to engage in symbolic speech— actions that express an opinion in a nonverbal manner.
Some publicly burned their draft cards, while otherTto(5lrtff^^ step of refusing induction into the armed forces.
Other young men between the ages of 18 and 21 complained that they could be sent off to fight even though they had no right to vote against the war.
In 1971, it passed the Twentysixth Amendment to the Constitution, which lowered the voting age to 18.
Many young men took advantage of college deferment, a law that exempted college students from the draft.
However, they could be drafted after graduation, which is partly why many students opposed the war so strenuously.
Still, the draft fell disproportionately on poor Americans and minorities who were unable to attend college.
A Year of Crisis Tet Offensive, 1968 By 1967, antiwar protesters had turned on President Johnson.
Officials presented statistics and reports to show that the United States was winning the war.
They showed journalists captured enemy documents that implied the insurgency was failing.
LBJ visited military bases, where he touted United States prospects in Vietnam.
American support for the war effort increased— at least for a few months.
Then in January 1968, the Viet Cong and NVA started a campaign of their own, also aimed at influencing American public opinion.
LAOS Tet Offensive Changes Americans' View of the War In the summer of 1967, North Vietnamese military planners decided on a risky new strategy.
They would launch attacks on cities in South Vietnam, while staging an uprising in the countryside.
Communist leaders hoped this strategy would reveal the failure of pacification efforts and turn Americans even more against the war.
They planned the attack to coincide w ith the Vietnamese holiday known as Tet.
This holiday marked the lunar New Year, when many ARVN troops would be home on leave.
Like a shockwave rolling through South Vietnam, some 85,000 Viet Cong and NVA soldiers attacked cities, villages, military bases, and airfields.
In Saigon, North Vietnamese commandos blew a hole in the wall surrounding the United States embassy, but United States military police fought them off.
The North Vietnamese succeeded in holding the city of Hue for nearly a month, but that was their only real military success.
In fact, the brutality of the communist assault boosted rural support for the South Vietnamese government.
Although it was a military disaster for the communists, the Tet Offensive shocked the American people and became a psychological defeat for the United States.
On their TV screens, Americans saw enemy soldiers inside the walls of the United States embassy.
They heard journalists' startled reports about the enemy’s ability to penetrate American strongholds.
No amount of positive analysis from the administration could persuade reporters or the public that this was a United States victory.
Instead, many Americans saw these statements as another example of a widening credibility gap.
Viet Cong guerrillas did most of the fighting and suffered most of the casualties.
In fact, after Tet, the NVA had to handle most of the combat in the war.
Public opinion polls taken after Tet showed that many Americans had lost faith in the president and his handling of the war.
Johnson Decides Not to Run for Reelection As public confidence in Johnson fell, the president suffered another sharp blow.
This time it came from the nation's most respected television news anchor, Walter Cronkite.
Cronkite, who had traveled to Vietnam to cover the Tet Offensive, delivered an on-camera editorial expressing his view that Johnson had misled the American people.
After Tet, polls showed that only 26 percent of Americans approved of LBJ’s conduct of the war.
Eugene McCarthy of Minnesota, a fierce critic of the war, had already entered the race for the Democratic presidential nomination.
But General Westmoreland saw it as an opportunity to finish off the communists.
Secretary of Defense Clark Clifford told LBJ that even “double or triple that quantity’’ would not be enough to destroy the enemy forces.
LBJ decided to reject the increase, leaving United States troop levels at around 500,000.
He then removed Westmoreland as commander of United States forces in Vietnam.
The president also considered Clifford’s advice to try to open peace talks.
On March 31 , 1968, Johnson stood before national television cameras to make a momentous announcement.
The United States, he said, would try to “deescalate the conflict"" by cutting back on the bombing of North Vietnam and by seeking a negotiated settlement of the war.
The Chaotic Election of 1968 The war had exhausted the president, and he seemed to think he had lost his political influence.
Although LBJ might have won the nomination if he had chosen to run, he threw his weight behind his vice president, Hubert H Humphrey.
In June 1968, Humphrey became the likely nominee when his most experienced rival, Robert Kennedy, was assassinated on the campaign trail by a lone gunman. 1968 had already been one of the most turbulent years in recent American history.
The country was reeling from the combined effects of the Vietnam War, antiwar protests and other social unrest, and the assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.
Now it was stunned by yet another assassination, this time of one of its leading political figures.
In August, delegates gathered in Chicago for the Democratic National Convention.
Following a bitter debate, however, the convention endorsed a campaign platform that supported President Johnson’s Vietnam policy.
Under pressure from LBJ, Humphrey approved the platform and won the Democratic nomination.
Meanwhile, thousands of antiwar protesters rallied in parks near the convention center.
At times they confronted police and national guardsmen called in by Mayor Richard Daley.
Some protesters threw rocks and bottles at the police, and police fired tear gas and beat protesters and onlookers with batons and rifle butts.
Delegates chose Richard M Nixon, Eisenhower’s vice president, as their candidate for president.
When the strongest nation in the world can be tied up for four years in a war in Vietnam with no end in sight, when the richest nation in the world can’t manage its own economy, when the nation with the greatest tradition of the rule of law is plagued by unprecedented lawlessness . . . then it’s time for new leadership for the United States of America. —Richard M Nixon, August 8, 1968 Humphrey and the Democrats never quite recovered from their disastrous convention.
Nixon connected with voters by promising to maintain “law and order’’ at home and secure “peace with honor” in Vietnam.
In November 1968, Americans voted for change, electing Nixon as their new president.
Violence erupted at the 1968 Democratic National Convention in Chicago.
The police attacked antiwar protesters, and the protesters fought back.
Fighting an elusive enemy on unfamiliar terrain frustrated United States soldiers.
War of attrition The United States military waged a war of attrition, hoping to wear down the enemy by inflicting heavy losses.
Opposing Vietnamese armies Regular troops of the North Vietnamese Army joined forces with Viet Cong insurgents.
The United States trained the Army of the Republic of Vietnam to defend South Vietnam.
New weapons of war The United States sprayed the herbicide Agent Orange to clear forest vegetation and expose the enemy.
It dropped napalm firebombs that burned forests and buildings and caused widespread destruction.
Credibility gap The Johnson administration’s optimistic public assessments of the war did not match reality.
This created a credibility gap, and many Americans lost faith in the president.
Protest movement Antiwar protesters on college campuses and elsewhere held demonstrations and carried out acts of civil disobedience.
Tet Offensive Some 45,000 Viet Cong and NVA soldiers died after launching a major offensive in 1968.
But the Tet Offensive also boosted United States opposition to the war and undermined the Johnson presidency, helping to pave the way for Richard Nixon’s election in 1968.
Introduction In 1968, Richard Nixon had promised to end the war in Vietnam.
Seven years later, on April 29, 1975, all American personnel were ordered to leave South Vietnam immediately.
United States combat troops had pulled out two years before, and since then the South Vietnamese army had lost ground to the North Vietnamese.
By mid-April, most of South Vietnam had fallen to the communists, and the enemy was bearing down on Saigon.
The streets were filled with South Vietnamese trying to flee the invading communist army.
Some climbed into small boats and headed out to sea, hoping to board United States ships.
Others flocked to the United States embassy in the hope of getting a place on one of the helicopters ferrying American personnel to safety.
Several thousand Vietnamese were allowed to evacuate that day, but most were turned away for lack of space.
Even for those who did manage to get out, the experience was often traumatic.
When we got the signal that we could leave, my family divided into two.
We still aren’t over it . . . and probably never will be. — Anne Pham, in “Memories of the Fall of Saigon,” CBS News President Nixon had hoped to arrange a peaceful end to the Vietnam War that would leave South Vietnam free and independent.
This chapter examines the final years of the war and some views of lessons that emerged from the conflict.
Many South Vietnamese tried to flee Saigon during the evacuation of April 29, 1975.
Several hundred people were left at the United States embassy, for example, waiting for helicopters that never arrived.
In place of United States soldiers, ARVN forces took up the battle against the insurgents.
Better training programs and equipment helped, but low morale and poor leadership continued to hinder the South Vietnamese military.
Achieving ""Peace with Honor"" President Nixon entered the White House with a mandate to change the course of the Vietnam War.
To that end, he relied heavily on his national security adviser, Henry Kissinger.
First, they agreed that the war was not winnable, at least in the conventional sense.
The political costs, and the cost in American lives, would be too great.
An abrupt withdrawal from Vietnam would damage United States credibility by showing both friends and foes that the United States could not be trusted to stand by its allies.
He wanted to end the war in a way that left the reputation of the United States intact.
Using this approach, he hoped to persuade the North Vietnamese to accept a negotiated end to the war.
Peace Talks and Vietnamization Peace talks had begun in Paris in May 1968, but little progress had been made.
In 1969, Nixon sent Kissinger to Paris to reopen talks with North Vietnamese diplomats.
Kissinger proposed ending the bombing of the North— the “carrot”— in exchange for an agreement by both sides to withdraw their troops from South Vietnam.
When diplomacy failed to bring about “peace with honor,” Nixon decided to try another approach known as Vietnamization.
South Vietnam, he said, would gradually take over conduct of the war, while American GIs would steadily be withdrawn.
In this way, Nixon could offer the “carrot” of troop reductions to North Vietnam, while easing antiwar tensions at home.
Vietnamization was part of a broader Asian policy that called for each American ally to accept primary responsibility for providing soldiers for its own defense.
The number of United States troops in Vietnam peaked in March 1969 at 543,000.
By the end of the year, more than 60,000 of those soldiers would be withdrawn.
According to this plan, political reforms, including local elections, would increase popular participation in government and provide for essential public services.
Rural development would bring economic opportunity to the countryside, while pacification would create local self-defense forces to take charge of village security.
United States officials believed that strengthening South Vietnam's military forces was key to making Vietnamization work.
Widening the Air War and Invading Cambodia Vietnamization would be a long process, and many American officials were pessimistic about its prospects.
The “carrot’' offered by the United States— United States troop withdrawals and an end to bombing— did not satisfy the North Vietnamese.
Nixon considered several military options to pressure North Vietnam to negotiate, including bombing its industrial areas, mining its harbors, and invading its territory.
His strategy, which he called the “madman theory,” was to make North Vietnam's leaders and their allies, the Soviet Union and China, believe that he would do anything to win the war.
He even briefly put nuclear forces on alert as a bluff that he might use tactical nuclear weapons, small but highly destructive nuclear bombs.
In March 1969, he had secretly ordered B-52s to begin bombing Cambodia, a neutral nation on Vietnam’s western border.
For the next four years, United States bombers would strike communist base camps and supply lines in Cambodia.
With Vietnamization, United States ground forces began focusing more on intercepting supplies from the north and less on fighting guerrillas in the south.
The military goal of the invading United States force was to destroy enemy “safe havens” from which North Vietnamese Army and Viet Cong forces could launch assaults into South Vietnam.
The GIs destroyed enemy bases and relieved pressure on ARVN forces fighting in the south.
The communists boycotted the Paris talks until United States troops left Cambodia three months later.
In February 1971 , Nixon launched a similar invasion of Laos, another neighboring country, after years of bombing had failed to dislodge the communists.
By now, the steady withdrawal of GIs had left fewer than 175,000 United States combat soldiers in Vietnam.
ARVN troops carried out the ground fighting in Laos, with United States air support.
However, a large, well-equipped NVA force easily defeated the ARVN, forcing them to retreat.
So far, Vietnamization had failed to prove its worth on the battlefield.
In a television address on April 30, 1970, President Nixon announced the United States invasion of Cambodia, which he described as a haven for communist forces.
The Expanded War Sparks Increased Protest Vietnamization dampened antiwar protests for a while.
On November 12, 1969, journalist Seymour Hersh published an article describing a grisly killing spree at My Lai, a village in South Vietnam.
The My Lai massacre had taken place in March 1968 but had been covered up by the military.
United States soldiers, believing My Lai to be a Viet Cong stronghold, had gone there on a search-and-destroy mission.
To their surprise, they found no armed Viet Cong in the village, just women, children, and old men.
News of the massacre shocked Americans, though many doubted that such an atrocity could occur.
Others believed the soldiers were just following orders or that their actions were justified.
Enough Americans expressed outrage, though, that Nixon decided to accelerate the withdrawal of troops from Vietnam.
In the My Lai massacre, United States troops slaughtered hundreds of Vietnamese civilians.
Twenty or so officers were later charged with crimes, but only the unit leader, Lieutenant William Calley, was found guilty.
Escalation of the Vietnam War prompted renewed protests across the nation.
These protesters in Des Moines, Iowa, are calling for United States withdrawal from Vietnam.
Their posters also indicate a link between antiwar protests and the civil rights movement.
Demonstrations Increase on City Streets and College Campuses The news of My Lai added fuel to an already growing antiwar movement.
More than 2 million people — not only students but also older, middle-class Americans— responded in a day of dramatic and widespread protest.
They took part in rallies and marches, attended church services, and engaged in discussions.
In one of the protest activities, tens of thousands of them marched from the Washington Monument to the White House, where they held a candlelight vigil.
Nixon responded to this outpouring of antiwar sentiment with a televised speech on November 3.
He reminded viewers of his Vietnamization policy and his plan for withdrawing United States troops.
The invasion of Cambodia in 1970, however, brought another upsurge in protests.
Students held mass rallies and demonstrations, some of which turned violent.
After some students began chanting slogans and throwing rocks, the troops opened fire.
Ten days later, a similar incident took place at Jackson State College in Mississippi.
Protesters threw debris at police, and the officers responded with shotgun and machine-gun fire that left two students dead.
Many Americans were stunned, and protests erupted on college campuses and in cities across the nation.
Vietnam veterans took part in some of these protests, as did several labor unions.
Nevertheless, only a small percentage of Americans ever demonstrated publicly.
In fact, many Americans rejected antiwar protests, seeing them as unpatriotic and disruptive.
They carried American flags and voiced their support for President Nixon and the Vietnam War.
This study revealed how previous administrations had deceived Congress and the public about Vietnam.
Nixon feared that release of this document might lead to questions about his own policies and the secret actions he was taking in Vietnam.
United States , the Court ruled 6-3 against the government and in favor of free speech.
In their opinion, the government had not proved the need for prior restraint, the prevention of speech or expression before publication.
Congress Responds to Widening War After the invasion of Cambodia, antiwar members of Congress intensified their efforts.
By the end of 1970, they had repealed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which had allowed Johnson and Nixon to escalate the conflict without a formal declaration of war.
In February 1971 , Congress passed legislation forbidding United States troops from operating outside the borders of South Vietnam.
Two years later, when Congress learned that Nixon had secretly bombed Cambodia without congressional approval, it passed the War Powers Resolution.
This law placed strict limits on a president's power to use the armed forces in hostilities without congressional authorization.
By the war's end, the United States had dropped nearly 8 million tons of bombs.
By the time Nixon entered office in 1969, some 30,000 Americans had already died in Vietnam.
During his first year as president, 1 1 ,500 more died and 55,000 were wounded.
Over the next three years, however, Vietnamization drastically cut United States casualties, as more and more soldiers came home.
Their ARVN replacements, though, had not yet shown they could stand up to an NVA assault.
On March 30, North Vietnamese troops backed by tanks and artillery invaded South Vietnam.
The United States military, with just 6,000 soldiers left in the country, provided airpower to counter the invasion.
In April, for the first time since 1969, he unleashed United States bombers on North Vietnam.
He also ordered the mining of Haiphong and other North Vietnamese ports, where war supplies from the Soviet Union and China arrived.
By mid-June, the North’s offensive had been shut down, and ARVN forces had begun pushing the invaders back.
Nixon Declares ""Peace Is at Hand"" North Vietnam’s failed invasion caused it to soften its stand at the secret Paris peace talks.
North Vietnamese negotiators withdrew their demand that South Vietnam’s government share power with the Viet Cong.
For its part, the United States stopped its bombing and agreed that some NVA forces could stay in the south.
These compromises allowed Henry Kissinger to reach an agreement with Hanoi’s diplomats.
By that time, polls showed that Nixon already had a large lead over Democratic candidate George McGovern, an antiwar senator.
South Vietnam’s president, Nguyen Van Thieu, feared that the United States was abandoning his country to the communists.
Learning of the changes, Hanoi’s leaders backed out, and the peace talks collapsed.
On December 14, he ordered a series of B-52 and fighter-bomber attacks on Hanoi and Haiphong.
Known as the Christmas bombings, this aerial campaign reached an intensity not previously seen in the war.
He also wanted to show President Thieu that after peace came, the United States would use its might to enforce the terms of the treaty.
North Vietnam returned to the bargaining table, and South Vietnam agreed to the earlier proposals.
On January 27, 1973, representatives of the United States, South Vietnam, North Vietnam, and the Viet Cong signed the Paris Peace Accords.
To that end, it established a cease-fire and kept the dividing line between North and South Vietnam at the 17th parallel.
It also called for the withdrawal of all United States troops and the release of all United States prisoners of war.
Here, WAW members protest outside the 1972 Democratic National Convention in Miami.
Veterans and Prisoners of War Return Home By March 29, 1973, the United States had withdrawn all combat forces from Vietnam.
Arriving home, many soldiers were dismayed to find themselves the victims of their country’s bitter debate over the war.
Unlike soldiers returning from World War II, most Vietnam veterans were not treated like heroes.
Few communities welcomed their soldiers back with parades or celebrations.
Instead, Vietnam veterans were often shunned or simply ignored by the general public.
As a result, they did not receive the support and understanding they deserved for their service and sacrifices.
For combat veterans especially, the Vietnam War had been a harrowing experience.
Many soldiers were haunted by their fears in battle and by the death and destruction they had witnessed.
They rarely talked about their combat experiences, except with other veterans.
Of the 2. million Americans who served in Vietnam, nearly a half million suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder.
Symptoms of this mental illness include anxiety, irritability, nightmares, and depression.
POWs lived in miserable conditions, often in solitary confinement, and they faced regular interrogations and torture.
From the moment you enter a political prison, you arc told and forced to act as though you are subhuman— a dreg of society.
You are a worm. —Navy pilot James Stockdale, shot down in 1965 North Vietnam had released all POWs by April 1, 1973.
Senator John McCain, a former prisoner of war, revisited Hanoi's main prison with his son in 2000.
He and other POWs were released after the signing of the Paris Peace Accords in January 1973.
The War in Vietnam Comes to an End After the withdrawal of United States ground forces from Vietnam, President Thieu and the ARVN continued to depend on United States airpower.
American bombers and fighter jets had played a critical part in the war, and the South Vietnamese relied on Nixon’s promise to “respond with full force” if North Vietnam violated the cease-fire.
As South Vietnam fell to the communists in 1975, the United States tried to evacuate South Vietnamese who had worked for the United States government.
Here, personnel on a United States aircraft carrier push a helicopter overboard to make room for more evacuation flights.
South Vietnam Falls to the Communist North The cease-fire did not hold for long.
In 1973 and 1974, fierce fighting between insurgents and the ARVN left some 50,000 ARVN soldiers dead.
Meanwhile, North Vietnam readied a final invasion of the south by rebuilding its army and military apparatus.
As ARVN forces scattered in the face of the assault, Thieu pleaded with the United States for help.
President Gerald Ford, who succeeded Nixon in 1974, urged Congress to boost military aid.
In a speech on April 23, 1975, Ford said, “America can regain the sense of pride that existed before Vietnam.
As panic gripped the city, United States embassy personnel worked frantically to evacuate more than a thousand Americans and several thousand frantic South Vietnamese.
Helicopters airlifted most of them from the embassy rooftop to United States ships waiting offshore.
The Aftermath of the War in Southeast Asia The end of the war did not bring an end to suffering in Vietnam.
Nor did it end the suffering in Cambodia and Laos, where separate communist revolts had occurred.
Local communist insurgents took over in both of those countries and worked to convert the people to communism.
In Vietnam, communists seized private property and nationalized businesses.
Many anticommunists had feared a bloodbath, but instead the communists sent hundreds of thousands of people— including ARVN officers, government officials, scholars, and religious leaders— to “reeducation camps,” where they were subjected to hard labor.
They also relocated hundreds of thousands of city residents to rural “economic zones” to toil on collective farms.
The rest found refuge in other countries or returned to Vietnam. circumstances, more than a million South Vietnamese have fled the country since 1975.
A great majority of these refugees eventually settled in the United States.
The communist regime there, called the Khmer Rouge, immediately cleared out all urban areas, forcing about 3 million city dwellers to work at hard labor on farms.
Nearly 1 . million Cambodian officials, merchants, members of minority groups, and others were worked to death, starved to death, or killed outright.
The Aftermath of the War in the United States The Vietnam War left the United States in a state of shock.
More than 58,000 soldiers died in the war and another 300,000 were wounded, many of them losing limbs.
The United States, after all, had lost the war— a war that could have been avoided.
To others, failure to win the war suggested that the nation lacked the will to be a world leader.
For several years after the war, Americans tried to forget about Vietnam.
Also, because of the credibility gap fostered by government officials, Americans no longer automatically trusted what their leaders told them.
A monument erected in 1982 helped many Americans— especially Vietnam veterans— come to terms with the war.
The Wall, part of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., encouraged Americans to reflect on the conflict and thus heal some of the war’s wounds.
V * i^aVietavton.-,, The Vietnam Veterans Memorial attracts more than 4 million visitors a year.
As such, he played a crucial role in formulating United States policy in Vietnam.
He later came to regret his part in escalating the war, however, and offered lessons on how to avoid such conflicts in the future.
The effects of the Vietnam War linger in American society, especially in its foreign policy.
Many Americans are still wary of launching new military ventures abroad.
This reluctance to become involved in overseas conflicts for fear of getting stuck in another quagmire is called the Vietnam syndrome.
For many Americans, a major lesson of the war was that the United States should avoid unwinnable conflicts.
Robert McNamara As LBJ’s defense secretary until 1968, Robert McNamara helped formulate United States policy, including the escalation of bombing and the introduction of combat troops.
Twenty years after the war ended, however, McNamara reversed his position on the war.
These included underestimating the power of nationalism as a motivating force and failing to openly discuss and debate policies and tactics with Congress and the American people.
Above all else, the criteria governing intervention should recognize that . . . military force has only a limited capacity to facilitate the process of nation building.
At times United States military intervention will be justified ... on the basis of national security.
Certainly Vietnam taught us how immensely difficult it is to fight limited wars leading to United States casualties over long periods of time.
But circumstances will arise where limited war is far preferable to unlimited war.
They must be avoided, excepting only when our nation’s security is clearly and directly threatened.
Like many members of the military, he favored an aggressive approach to fighting the war.
He believed that American politicians should have listened more closely to the advice of military leaders.
He thought antiwar forces hurt the American cause by encouraging the enemy to persevere and by undermining the morale of United States troops.
He also thought the media swayed public opinion by heaping criticism on South Vietnam while failing to condemn the conduct of North Vietnam.
We overextended ourselves in the post-World War II period economically, militarily, psychologically, and politically.
Our foreign policy should be given a nonpartisan review at least every two years.
We must develop a bipartisan foreign policy, free of politics as far as possible.
When there is a threat of war, our military leaders deserve a stronger voice in policymaking.
When our political leaders commit us to war, the military voice should be given priority consideration.
When our national reputation and men’s lives are at stake, the news media must show a more convincing sense of responsibility.
He embraced leftist causes and wrote scathing critiques of United States policy.
After the war, however, he renounced his leftist views and became a conservative writer and activist.
David Horowitz As a radical antiwar activist and intellectual in the 1960s, David Horowitz influenced many on the political left.
Like Robert McNamara, however, Horowitz had a fundamental change of heart years after the war ended.
The atrocities committed by the communists in Southeast Asia gave him a new perspective on the war and on socialism.
Horowitz came to regret the role of antiwar activists, including himself.
In the process, he gained a new respect for the ideals at the heart of the United States political system.
Like today’s young radicals, we 1960s activists had a double standard when it came to making moral and political judgments.
We judged other countries and political movements— specifically socialist countries and revolutionary movements— by the futures we imagined they could have if only the United States and its allies would get out of their way.
As our opposition to the war grew more violent and our prophecies of impending fascism more intense, l had taken note of how we were actually being treated by the system we condemned.
By the decade’s end we had crossed the line of legitimate dissent and abused every First Amendment privilege and right granted us as Americans.
While American boys were dying overseas, we spat on the flag, broke the law, denigrated and disrupted the institutions of government and education, gave comfort and aid to the enemy.
Some of us provided a protective propaganda shield for Hanoi’s communist regime while it tortured American fliers; others engaged in violent sabotage against the war effort.
In any of the socialist countries we supported— from Cuba to North Vietnam — we would spend most of our lives in jail and, more probably, be shot.
Here and there our wrists were slapped (some of us went to trial, some spent months in jail), but basically the country tolerated us.
America itself became troubled about its presence in Vietnam, about the justice and morality of the war it had gone there to fight.
The lesson I learned from Vietnam was not a lesson in theory but a lesson in practice.
Observing this nation go through its worst historical hour from a vantage on the other side of the barricade.
I came to understand that democratic values are easily lost and, from the evidence of the past, only rarely achieved, that America is a precious gift, a unique presence in the world of nations.
He carried on peace talks with the North Vietnamese but also ordered massive bombing of North Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos.
He faced ongoing protests from the antiwar movement and criticism from Congress.
Vietnamization Nixon’s Vietnamization of the war allowed for the withdrawal of United States troops and prepared South Vietnam to take over responsibility for the war.
My Lai massacre In 1968, United States soldiers slaughtered hundreds of Vietnamese civilians in the village of My Lai.
Reports of the massacre shocked Americans and increased antiwar protests.
Kent State shootings The invasion of Cambodia in April 1970 sparked an increase in antiwar protests.
War Powers Resolution Congress reacted to Nixon’s activities in Cambodia by passing the War Powers Resolution.
This resolution limits a president’s ability to send armed forces into combat.
Boat people The North Vietnamese defeated South Vietnam and took control in 1975.
This prompted an exodus of refugees from Indochina, many of whom fled by boat.
Introduction On September 23, 1952, California senator Richard Nixon reserved time on national television to make the most important speech of his career.
He hoped to silence claims that he had accepted $18,000 in illegal political contributions to help cover personal expenses.
The Republicans had recently nominated Nixon to run for vice president, alongside Dwight D Eisenhower.
He did not drop Nixon from the ticket, but he also did not come to the defense of his running mate.
In his speech, Nixon told Americans, “Not one cent of the $18,000 or any other money of that type ever went to me for my personal use.
A man down in Texas heard [my wife) Pat on the radio mention the fact that our two youngsters would like to have a dog.
And, believe it or not, the day before we left on this campaign trip, we got a message from Union Station in Baltimore saying they had a package for us.
It was a little cocker spaniel dog in a crate he’d sent all the way from Texas.
And you know, the kids, like all kids, love the dog, and I just want to say this right now, that regardless of what they say about it, we’re gonna keep it. — Senator Richard Nixon, “Checkers” speech, September 23, 1952 Nixon’s “Checkers” speech was a high point in a tumultuous career that culminated in his election to the presidency in 1968.
President Nixon would engineer stunning successes in both domestic and foreign affairs.
This 1952 photograph shows vice presidential candidate Richard Nixon relaxing with his family and pet dog, Checkers.
In his famous ""Checkers"" speech, Nixon defended himself against charges that he had misused campaign contributions.
Richard Nixon's Rise to the Presidency Bom in California in 1913, Richard Nixon was one of five brothers.
After serving in the Navy during World War II, he was elected to the House of Representatives and, later, to the Senate.
Two years later, he ran for governor of California and lost that race as well.
In his concession speech, Nixon announced his retirement from politics.
In his 1968 presidential election campaign, Nixon reached out to moderate, middle-ofthe-road voters.
In a pamphlet titled ""The Nixon Stand,"" he outlined his position on five key issues facing the country.
He defined these issues as winning the peace, fighting rising crime, progress with order, preventing runaway government, and respect for America.
A Bumpy Road to the White House In 1968, Nixon made a spectacular political comeback by winning the Republican nomination for president.
In what had been a troubled election year, the choice of Nixon as a candidate was one of many surprises and shocks.
First, President Lyndon Johnson had unexpectedly decided not to run for reelection.
Soon thereafter had followed the stunning assassinations of Martin Luther King Jr. and Robert Kennedy.
During civil rights struggles in his state, Wallace had been an ardent segregationist.
His resistance to integration won him support from white voters in the South.
A final shock to the nation came with the outbreak of violence in Chicago, Illinois, during the Democratic National Convention.
Outside the convention, protesters opposed to the Vietnam War clashed with police, while inside.
Vice President Hubert Humphrey won the Democratic nomination on a prowar platform.
These troubling events left many Americans fearful that the country was falling apart.
As he put it, “We live in a deeply troubled and profoundly unsettled time.
For a running mate, he chose a southern governor, Spiro T Agnew, of Maryland.
Agnew was known for his tough stand against racial violence and urban crime.
Nixon also reached out to conservative southern voters with talk of respect for states’ rights and a smaller federal government, which were traditionally valued by southern Democrats.
In five Southern states, Wallace won a plurality of votes— not a majority but more than any other candidate.
Because Nixon lacked both a strong electoral mandate and a Republican majority in Congress, it was not clear whether he would be able to lead the country the way he wanted.
A Conservative and Liberal Blend Having won the presidency by a narrow margin, Nixon tried to appeal to conservatives and liberals once in office.
He reached out to conservatives with a plan, called New Federalism, to reduce the size and power of the federal government.
The centerpiece of Nixon’s New Federalism was a proposal called revenue sharing.
Under revenue sharing, the federal government distributed tax revenues to states and local governments to spend as they saw fit.
State and local leaders liked the practice because it gave them more funds as well as the power to spend those funds where most needed.
However, Nixon was less successful at shrinking the federal government.
He did do away with some of Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society bureaucracy, including the Office of Economic Opportunity.
At the same time, though, Nixon expanded several social benefit programs.
Nixon went on to increase the size and power of the government by signing new federal agencies into existence.
Under this proposed plan, the government would support every poor family with a minimum annual income.
To get this support, family members able to work would be required to seek employment.
The Family Assistance Plan would have greatly expanded the number of families eligible for public assistance.
He also hoped the increased responsibility for running welfare programs that it gave the states would interest conservatives.
Liberals denounced its proposed guaranteed income as too little to live on.
Segregationist George Wallace won five, and Republican Richard Nixon carried the rest of the southern states.
Visit the OSHA Teen Workers ©SHASE l-aOO-321-OSHA The Nixon administration founded the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
Today, this organization continues to work to ensure safe workplaces for Americans.
This law required states to impose a 55 mph speed limit on all roads if they wanted to receive federal highway funds.
At first the lower speed limit seemed to increase highway safety, but this effect was short-lived.
In 1995, Congress returned control of highway speed limits to the states.
In pursuit of his “southern strategy/' he sought to appoint conservative southern judges to the Supreme Court.
Nixon also called for changes to the Voting Rights Act when it came up for renewal in 1970.
Congress rejected his proposals, which would have reduced federal oversight of voting officials in the South.
These are more than election statistics; they are statistics of hope and dramatic evidence that the American system works.
They stand as an answer to those who claim that there is no recourse except to the streets. — President Richard Nixon, June 22, 1970 At the same time, Nixon sought to increase economic opportunities for African Americans by expanding affirmative action.
Under the Philadelphia Plan, he required construction companies working on federally funded projects to hire specific numbers of minority workers.
He also encouraged “black capitalism"" by providing federal assistance to black-owned businesses.
Struggling with a Stagnant Economy Throughout his presidency, Nixon struggled with the nation’s economic problems.
Normally, during a recession, unemployment rises, wages drop, and consumers spend less money.
Instead, the nation experienced an economic condition known as stagflation.
Americans found themselves living with both a stagnant economy and rapid inflation.
In Phase II, he authorized a new federal agency to strictly limit future wage and price increases.
Nixon then moved to Phase III of his inflation plan, replacing strict wage and price controls with voluntary guidelines.
Unfortunately, with controls lifted, the nation suffered its most rapid rise in cost of living since World War IPs end.
To make matters even worse, in the fall of 1973, oil-exporting nations in the Middle East stopped shipping oil to the United States.
They established this oil embargo to protest United States support for Israel in conflicts between Israel and other Arab nations.
To conserve dwindling supplies, the government urged homeowners to lower their thermostats.
The crisis did not ease until the Middle Eastern nations lifted the ban the following year.
As president, however, he was determined to reshape America’s containment policy.
He hoped to replace endless conflict with a stable world order in which the superpowers could coexist peacefully.
It refers to politics based on practical rather than idealistic concerns.
Nixon’s top foreign policy adviser, Henry Kissinger, backed him in this realistic approach.
As part of their realpolitik approach, Nixon and Kissinger concluded that the United States could no longer bear the full burden of defending the free world.
Addressing the nation in 1969, the president laid out his plan, which became known as the Nixon Doctrine.
He promised that the United States would continue to protect its allies from Soviet or Chinese nuclear attacks.
In other cases of aggression, however, the United States would expect the nation at risk to do more to help itself.
The president's plan for Vietnamization of the war in Southeast Asia was an early application of the new Nixon Doctrine.
The president also applied the Nixon Doctrine in the Persian Gulf region of the Middle East.
With their vast deposits of oil, Persian Gulf nations had become increasingly important to the United States.
However, the United States had no military forces stationed in the region.
Rather than try to move troops in, Nixon sent military aid to Iran and Saudi Arabia.
With this aid, he hoped these allies would take on the responsibility of keeping the region peaceful and stable.
At the same time, the United States continued to support its closest ally in the Middle East, Israel, with both military and financial aid.
The limits of the Nixon Doctrine became clear when Israel was attacked by a coalition of Arab countries led by Egypt and Syria during the Yom Kippur holy days in October 1973.
The Yom Kippur War lasted just three weeks, but that was long enough to trigger the oil embargo.
Despite receiving American aid, Saudi Arabia backed the embargo to punish the United States for its long-standing support of Israel.
In dealings with the Soviet Union and communist China, Nixon and Kissinger pursued a policy of detente.
Detente is a French word that means a relaxation of tension or hostility.
To many conservatives, detente seemed inconsistent with Nixon's earlier anticommunism.
Most liberals, however, applauded any policy that had the potential to prevent a nuclear holocaust.
President Nixon and National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger based their foreign policy on the German idea of realpolitik.
Kissinger joined the Nixon administration in 1969 after a long academic career.
More than half of the world's proven crude oil reserves lie in the Middle East.
Proven reserves are known deposits of petroleum that can be pumped at a reasonable cost.
To his annoyance, many press reports left out the second part of his statement.
Opening Diplomatic Relations with China The policy of detente brought a dramatic change in United States interactions with China.
When Nixon took office in 1969, the United States did not engage in diplomatic relations with China.
Nor did it officially recognize the communist government that had ruled mainland China since 1949.
Nixon believed that the policy of isolating China had worn out its usefulness.
The president had several reasons for wanting better relations with China.
One was the sheer size of that nation— one fifth of the world’s population lived in China.
In addition, Nixon had watched the relationship between China and the Soviet Union change from one of communist comrades to one of hostile neighbors.
He believed that establishing friendly diplomatic relations with China might pressure Soviet leaders, who feared Chinese power, to cooperate more with the United States.
The Chinese government had invited a United States table tennis team to play in Beijing.
The 15 team members were the first Americans to visit Beijing since the communists took power.
Chinese leaders treated the American athletes as though they were ambassadors.
At a meeting with the team, Chinese Premier Chou En-lai stated that the athletes’ arrival in China marked a new chapter in U.S.-China relations.
Shortly after the table tennis competition, Nixon announced proposals to begin trade and travel between the two countries.
In July 1971 , Nixon announced that he would visit China the next year.
The following February, Nixon and his wife, Pat, made an official state visit to China.
While there, Nixon pledged to establish formal diplomatic relations between the two countries.
The historic visit marked a turning point in relations between the United States and the world’s largest communist nation.
The trip led to the communist government, based in Beijing, taking over China's seat in the United Nations.
Until that time, the Nationalist government of Taiwan had occupied China’s seat.
In 1973, the United States and China opened information offices in each other’s capitals.
Working Toward Detente with the Soviet Union Nixon’s expectation that by improving relations with China he could push the USSR toward detente proved accurate.
Just three months after visiting China, Nixon embarked on another historic journey.
Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev had invited Nixon partly in response to Soviet concerns about United States involvement with China.
The invitation had also revealed Brezhnev’s desire to receive United States economic and technological aid.
Brezhnev and Nixon were able to negotiate a trade deal that benefited both countries.
The United States agreed to sell to the USSR at least $750 million worth of grain over a three-year period.
The grain deal helped the people of the Soviet Union, which was not growing enough grain to feed its population.
It also helped American farmers, who were happy to sell their surplus grain.
Such an agreement had been made possible by the development of spy satellites in the 1960s.
Cameras mounted on these satellites took photographs that, when sent back to Earth, allowed the two countries to monitor each other’s missile sites.
The Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty , later called SALT I, was a five-year agreement.
The treaty limited the USSR to 1 ,618 missiles and the United States to 1 ,054.
The United States accepted the smaller number because its missiles were more advanced.
Over time, however, hope that detente would lead to an era of cooperation between the superpowers began to fade.
It also began arming its missiles with multiple warheads in order to work around the treaty’s limits.
As a result, conservative critics of detente concluded that the Soviet Union should never be trusted again.
On May 26, 1972, President Nixon and Soviet Premier Leonid Brezhnev signed the first Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty.
The two leaders also agreed to cooperate in some other areas, including trade, the environment, and space exploration.
The spy satellites would eject canisters of undeveloped film back toward Earth.
When a canister reached the upper atmosphere, a parachute on it opened.
On one key tape, a conversation between Nixon and an aide was suddenly replaced by 18. minutes of silence.
A security guard at the Watergate building, where the offices were located, caught the men.
But the burglars were unusual — they wore suits and carried bugging, or wiretapping, devices.
Further investigation showed that they had ties to Nixon’s reelection campaign.
Early news reports of the break-in did not stop Nixon from winning the 1972 presidential election by a landslide.
But the bungled burglary and attempts to cover it up would eventually lead to Nixon’s fall from power.
Abusing Power to Limit Dissent At first, the Watergate burglars' intentions were unclear.
Their actions, however, were part of a larger pattern of abuse of presidential power.
Nixon tended to view critics of his policies as a threat to national security.
Once elected, he developed an “enemies list” that included reporters, politicians, activists, and celebrities whom he viewed as being unfriendly to his administration.
He authorized the FBI to tap the phones of news reporters whom he felt were biased against him.
He even ordered phone tapping of members of his own staff whom he distrusted.
AH these wiretaps were unconstitutional, and thus an abuse of power, because a judge had not properly authorized them.
He set up his own White House security operation to investigate leaks of damaging information to the press.
The group received the nickname “the plumbers,” because their main job was to “plug” leaks.
In 1971 , the plumbers had broken into the office of a psychiatrist whose clients included Daniel Ellsberg, a former defense analyst.
A year later, it was the White House plumbers who carried out the botched Watergate burglary.
The Watergate Scandal Unfolds The break-in might have been forgotten after Nixon’s reelection if not for the work of two Washington Post reporters.
With the help of an anonymous source, whom they called Deep Throat, they discovered that Nixon’s reelection campaign had paid the plumbers to bug the Democrats’ offices.
During the legal proceedings, one of them implicated the Nixon administration in a cover-up.
He reported that the defendants had been paid to lie to protect government officials.
At this point, what the White House had tried to dismiss as a “third-rate burglary” had turned into the Watergate scandal.
The Justice Department appointed Archibald Cox, a respected law professor, to serve as special prosecutor in the case.
A special prosecutor is a lawyer from outside the government whom the attorney general or Congress appoints to investigate a federal official for misconduct while in office.
After the plumbers’ trial, the Senate formed a committee to investigate the Watergate affair.
Another former Nixon aide revealed that President Nixon had installed a recording system in the White House Oval Office that taped every conversation Nixon had there.
If the committee could hear those tapes, it would find out whether the president had ordered a cover-up.
In July 1973, the Senate Watergate Committee issued a subpoena, or court order, compelling Nixon to turn over several tapes.
Nixon refused, invoking a right to withhold information known as executive privilege.
The concept of executive privilege is based in the constitutional separation of powers.
Presidents since George Washington’s day have argued that separation of powers gives the executive branch the right to operate without having to reveal to the other branches the details of every conversation or working document.
Over the next few months, Nixon battled both Special Prosecutor Cox and the Senate Committee over the release of the White House tapes.
In October 1973, in what became known as the “Saturday Night Massacre,” Nixon fired Cox.
That same month, for reasons unrelated to Watergate, Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned.
He left office to avoid facing trial on charges of accepting bribes and evading taxes while governor of Maryland.
Nixon appointed Gerald Ford, Republican minority leader in the House of Representatives, to be Agnew’s successor as vice president.
In July 1974, in the case of United States Nixon , the Supreme Court ruled that the president must release his tapes to the Senate.
Nixon Resigns in Disgrace Late in July, the House Judiciary Committee approved three articles of impeachment against Nixon.
The articles accused him of obstruction of justice, abuse of power, and contempt of Congress.
Rather than face trial and almost certain conviction in the Senate, Nixon announced his resignation on August 8, 1974.
Ford hoped the pardon would help unify the country by putting the Watergate mess to rest.
Despite Ford’s efforts to close this unhappy chapter of presidential history, the nation remained deeply disillusioned with political leadership.
Rather than face impeachment, Richard Nixon resigned from the presidency in August 1964.
Most Americans felt that his fall from power showed that the Constitution works.
The legislative branch led the way by investigating Nixon's role in the Watergate cover-up.
The judicial branch did its part by forcing Nixon to release his Oval Office tapes.
Several White House aides who were convicted of crimes related to the cover-up also went to prison.
Decades after the Watergate break-in and Richard Nixon’s resignation, Americans still debate the long-term effects of the scandal.
Following are three different perspectives on the significance of the Watergate scandal.
Watergate Showed That No One Is Above the Law Even while the Watergate scandal was still unfolding, some argued that the response of Congress and the courts proved that no one, not even a president, is above the law.
If there is a single buttress that has been strengthening the country as it has faced the Agnew and Watergate scandals, it has been the renewed demonstration that the laws do indeed apply to those in high places.
Slowly, though, the nation’s institutions— the courts, the federal prosecutors, the Justice Department— are calling the executive branch to account.
The rule of law is being restored, and the public official who tries to ignore its claim does so at his own peril.
Watergate Damaged Confidence in the Presidency On the 10th anniversary of the Watergate break-in, Washington Post writer Lawrence Meyer reflected on its impact.
Some have seen the stuff of tragedy in all of this— great men brought low.
But the greater impact of Watergate was on us, on the loss of innocence for all but the most jaded and cynical among us.
The American people revere and respect no one so much as their president, believing that even men of humble gifts rise to the challenge and grow in stature when they enter the White House.
Scandals Have Lost Their Power to Shock Us Since Watergate, other scandals have erupted in Washington.
Watergate remains the granddaddy of them all, the scandal by which all others leading to the Oval Office are judged.
While in office, he made strides toward easing the tensions of the Cold War.
He hoped to reduce the power of the federal government and return power to the states.
Revenue sharing, central to his plan, allowed state and local governments to spend tax revenues as they saw fit.
Occupational Safety and Health Administration Despite his promise to shrink the federal government, Nixon created OSHA, which works to improve health and safety in the workplace.
Environmental Protection Agency Another new agency, the EPA, was created to protect Americans’ health and the natural environment.
Energy crisis Nixon tried to revive a stagnant economy with increased spending while fighting inflation with wage and price controls.
Detente Nixon tried to encourage detente, or a relaxation of Cold War tensions.
Strategic Arms Limitation Treaty In 1972, Nixon and Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev signed SALT I, the first superpower treaty to place limits on the arms race.
Watergate scandal In 1972, burglars broke into Democratic headquarters in the Watergate building.
The scandal over the cover-up that followed the break-in led to Richard Nixon’s resignation in 1974.
Introduction On July 4, 1976, the United States celebrated the bicentennial— or 200th anniversary— of the signing of the Declaration of Independence.
Across the nation, Americans marked the day with parades, picnics, and fireworks displays.
Television networks featured programs that explored the events of the nation’s first two centuries.
To many Americans, the bicentennial year brought a welcome sense of national pride.
The celebrations, with their focus on the nation’s founding ideals, helped them move past the trauma of Vietnam and the disillusionment of Watergate.
As they looked back on the nation’s founding, they worried that the United States had lost its sense of purpose.
In it, Wolfe wrote of changes he had seen in American life since the end of the 1960s.
In that decade, he noted, idealistic Americans had worked hard to end racism, fight poverty, and create a more just society.
During the 1970s, however, the drive for social change had been replaced with a quest for self-improvement and personal fulfillment.
Today, however, most historians view the 1970s as being much more complex than the label ""Me Decade” suggests.
His joke became a moneymaker when he sold a million pet rocks in just a few months.
Dahl claimed that each rock had been tested for obedience before being chosen to become a pet rock.
In the end, however, WIN did little to slow inflation or improve the economy.
A Time of Economic and Political Malaise When Gerald Ford took office as president in 1974, he inherited a number of political problems.
Although the United States had withdrawn from Vietnam, the war there raged on.
In a speech to Congress, Ford explained just how dire the situation was.
President Ford Tries to ""Whip Inflation Now"" The inflation that dragged down the economy in the 1970s had many causes.
One was President Johnson’s decision to escalate the war in Vietnam while also launching a War on Poverty.
Both military and welfare spending tend to be inflationary, because they put more money into people’s pockets without increasing the supply of goods those dollars can buy.
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries made matters worse.
Formed in 1960, OPEC is an association of nations that depend on oil sales for their national income.
The 1973 oil embargo, however, revealed the dependence of many countries on imported oil.
Products that used oil as a raw material became more costly to produce.
As fuel prices went up, so did the cost of moving goods from farm or factory to consumers.
Stunned by high gas prices, drivers stopped buying American-made gas-guzzlers for a while.
As sales plummeted, auto manufacturers laid off more than 225,000 workers in 1974.
He cut federal spending while urging Americans to conserve energy and practice thrift.
The unemployment rate grew more than 8 percent— the highest it had been since the Depression’s end.
Jimmy Carter The 1976 presidential election pitted Ford against former Georgia governor Jimmy Carter.
Carter appealed to voters as a Washington outsider untouched by scandal.
Only 53 percent of eligible voters went to the polls— the lowest turnout since 1948.
Rather than hiring experienced Washington insiders, he surrounded himself with staff from Georgia.
As a result, his efforts to enact such reforms as a national health insurance system went nowhere.
Soon after taking office in 1977, Carter put forward a plan to end the nation’s dependence on imported oil.
His plan would penalize energy waste while encouraging energy efficiency.
Reporters began to refer to Carter’s “moral equivalent of war” as MEOW, revealing their feeling that Congress would not take it seriously.
Late in 1978, Congress finally passed a watered-down version of Carter’s original plan.
This National Energy Act offered tax credits as incentives to people who conserved energy by insulating their homes or investing in alternative energy sources, such as solar energy panels.
Tax credits reduce the amount of taxes a taxpayer owes to the government.
While the National Energy Act helped make the nation more energy efficient, it did not end United States dependence on foreign oil.
This energy shortage was triggered by a revolution in Iran that led that country to stop exporting oil.
Long lines reappeared at gas stations, and fistfights broke out among some motorists who were waiting in line for gas.
Americans Face a ""Crisis of Confidence"" With his approval rating low, at 25 percent.
Carter planned to speak to the nation once more about conserving energy.
However, after a week of discussions with various advisers, he changed his mind.
We’ve learned that piling up material goods cannot fill the emptiness of lives which have no confidence or purpose. —Jimmy Carter, “Crisis of Confidence” speech, July 15, 1979 Carter’s address, which the media called his “malaise speech”— malaise meaning “a feeling of general unease”— backfired.
The effects of the first energy crisis in 1973-1974 and of a second one in 1979 can be seen on this graph.
As the supply of imported oil dropped, the price of gasoline spiked upward.
Automakers began equipping automobile gas tanks with locks to prevent theft during such fuel shortages.
President Carter's Approach to Foreign Policy Once Carter took office in 1976, it was clear that his approach to foreign policy differed sharply from Richard Nixon’s realpolitik.
Israel agreed to return the Sinai Peninsula to Egypt over the course of four years.
Middle East, 1978 Promoting Justice, Equity, and Human Rights Carter worked hard to put his ideals into practice.
For example, he established a more equitable relationship with the nation of Panama.
Panamanians had long regarded a 1903 treaty between the two countries as unjust, as it gave the United States permanent control of the Panama Canal.
In 1977, Carter negotiated a new treaty that would return control of the canal to Panama in 1999.
Despite strong objections, the Senate ratified the Panama Canal Treaty in 1978.
He came into office determined to end the Cold War policy of supporting dictators who opposed communism even if they abused human rights.
When leftist rebels ousted an anticommunist dictator from Nicaragua in 1979, Carter stood by his new policy and did not intervene.
However, he did continue to support dictators with poor human rights records in other parts of the world— such as the Philippines and Indonesia— that he viewed as vital to American interests.
The Camp David Accords Carter achieved his greatest foreign policy success in the Middle East.
In 1978, he invited the leaders of Egypt and Israel to peace talks at Camp David, the presidential retreat in Maryland.
Just five years earlier, Egypt and Israel had been adversaries in the Yom Kippur War.
During that conflict, Israel had gained control of lands that had previously belonged to its neighbors.
Israeli Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Egyptian President Anwar el-Sadat conversed for 13 tense days.
Israel agreed to return the Sinai Peninsula to Egypt, while Egypt agreed to establish normal diplomatic relations with Israel.
This made Egypt the first Arab country to formally recognize Israel’s right to exist, which Arab nations had opposed since Israel’s establishment in 1948.
In 1979, Sadat and Begin together received the Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts to end hostilities between their countries.
When presenting the award, the chairman of the Nobel Committee spoke of Carter’s contribution.
Carter, he said, was “the master builder responsible for the bridge” that brought “two one-time enemies” together to talk of peace.
In contrast, Carter openly criticized the Soviet Union’s human rights record.
The USSR invaded this neighbor to help its failing communist government handle a rebellion.
Calling the invasion the “most serious threat to world peace since World War II,” Carter responded by promoting a boycott of the Olympic Games that would be held in Moscow the following summer.
A Hostage Crisis in Iran Under Carter, the Nixon Doctrine fared little better than did detente.
Early in the 1970s, as part of that policy, the United States had increased military aid to Iran.
In return, it had expected Iran’s royal ruler, Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, to help maintain stability in the Persian Gulf region.
Carter continued to support the Shah, despite the leader’s poor human rights record.
Under a religious leader, the Ayatollah Ruholla Khomeini, the revolutionary army declared Iran a republic.
Khomeini established a new government based on a strict understanding of Islamic principles.
Later that year, Carter allowed the exiled Shah to enter the United States for medical treatment.
On November 4, 1979, militant students stormed the United States embassy in Tehran, Iran’s capital.
In violation of international law, which protects diplomats, the students took 66 Americans hostage.
Appeals to the United Nations and United States allies for help in securing the hostages’ release accomplished little.
The mission failed when two helicopters had engine trouble, a third was damaged while landing, and a fourth crashed, killing eight Americans.
Other Americans blamed Carter’s “fairness, not force” approach to foreign policy.
President Carter, Menachem Begin of Israel, and Anwar el-Sadat of Egypt celebrate the signing of the Camp David Accords.
The agreement marked a high point in Carter’s efforts to bring peace to the Middle East.
The Iran hostage crisis began when Iranian students seized Americans working in the United States embassy in Tehran.
As the crisis wore on, many Americans criticized Carter for not bringing the hostages home.
To them, his inability to free the hostages symbolized a loss of United States power.
Protecting the Environment On April 22, 1970, Americans celebrated the first Earth Day.
Across the country, nearly 20 million people came together to show their concern for a healthy environment.
By 1970, polls showed that for many Americans, the condition of the environment had become the nation’s most pressing domestic issue.
An Environmental Movement Emerges The success of Earth Day signaled the emergence of a grassroots environmental movement.
Some groups, such as the Audubon Society and the Sierra Club, had existed for many years.
The Sierra Club had come into being in 1892 under the leadership of John Muir and other conservationists.
The club’s original purpose was to enjoy and protect the mountains of the West.
Over time, it expanded this mission to include preserving wilderness and protecting the environment across the nation.
New organizations also sprang up in response to environmental concerns.
Some dealt with local issues, such as cleaning up rivers or starting recycling programs.
A group called Zero Population Growth that formed in 1968 aimed to raise awareness of the connection between rapid population growth and environmental destruction.
A Decade of Environmental Legislation In response to growing public concern, Congress enacted a number of environmental laws during the 1970s.
This agency’s mission was to repair damage already done to the natural environment and to prevent new problems.
By the end of the decade, it had become the government’s largest regulatory agency, with more than 10,000 employees.
The updated act set stricter standards for emissions from automobiles, factories, and power plants.
In 1969, Americans had been shocked when the polluted Cuyahoga River burst into flames in Cleveland, Ohio.
The Clean Water Act of 1972 limited the amount of sewage and other pollutants flowing into waterways.
The Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 allowed the EPA to regulate the quality of public drinking water.
The EPA also took steps to deal with another source of water pollution, acid rain.
Acid rain is precipitation that contains acid as a result of water vapor mixing with molecules of sulfur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen in the atmosphere.
These pollutants are released into the atmosphere by automobiles, factories, and power plants that burn fossil fuels.
By 1975, manufacturers were equipping each car with a catalytic converter, a device that removes pollutants from the car’s exhaust.
Environmental Disasters Fuel Public Concern Two well-publicized disasters underscored public concern about environmental hazards during the 1970s.
People in Love Canal unknowingly resided atop a chemical waste dump, which exposed them to poisons.
As a result, residents developed unusually high rates of cancer and birth defects.
When officials discovered the cause of the health problems in 1978, Love Canal became a media event.
Meanwhile, Congress passed laws requiring companies to clean up their toxic waste areas.
The second disaster of the decade occurred at Pennsylvania’s Three Mile Island Nuclear Generating Station.
On March 28, 1979, the nuclear power plant suffered a partial meltdown.
The Three Mile Island accident convinced many Americans that nuclear power plants posed an unacceptable risk to people and the natural environment.
As a result, no new nuclear power plants have been built in the United States since 1979.
By the 1970s, however, the water supply in some areas had become so polluted by chemicals, sewage, or pesticides that it was unsafe to drink.
The Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 was designed to protect public health by setting national standards for safe drinking water.
Since 1974, the law has been amended to protect drinking water at its sources, such as rivers, lakes, springs, and wells.
By the end of the decade, it was no longer surprising to see women working at construction sites, delivering weather reports on television, or defending clients in the courtroom.
On September 20, 1973, professional tennis player Billie Jean King took on an aging former Wimbledon champion named Bobby Riggs.
Billed as ‘‘The Battle of the Sexes,” this was no ordinary tennis match.
Riggs proudly admitted to being a male chauvinist, a person who believes men are superior to women.
He boasted that at age 55, he could beat King, who was, after all, only a woman.
In a match that 50 million people watched on television, King proved Riggs wrong and easily won the match.
King’s victory symbolized the gains women were making not only in sports but also in many other realms.
Women Challenge Gender Segregation in the Workplace During the 1970s, record numbers of women entered professions that men had traditionally dominated.
As encouraging as these numbers were, they did not tell the whole story.
In the 1970s, most women still toiled in a workplace segregated by gender.
For example, nurses, most of whom were women, earned less than truck drivers, most of whom were men.
To address this inequality, feminists in the late 1970s began a campaign for what they called comparable worth.
Advocates of comparable worth argued that jobs typically held by women, such as nursing positions, should command as much pay as those jobs typically held by men that required comparable education and training.
If this change took place, a highly trained nurse would make more money than a less-skilled truck driver.
These arguments convinced many employers to examine their pay practices.
Some agreed to increase pay for certain jobs traditionally held by women.
Feminists also addressed barriers that prevented women from entering higher-paying jobs.
One was the reluctance of men who controlled most workplaces to promote women to management.
Women described this barrier as a “glass ceiling” that allowed them to rise only so far in a company but no higher.
Eventually, women began to break through this glass ceiling, proving not only that they could take on management tasks, but also that a man could work for a female boss.
Without such care, many women took on part-time or less-demanding jobs in order to have time to watch over their children.
Feminists lobbied for employers and government officials to establish and help fund childcare centers for working parents.
For example, they worked to achieve better treatment of divorced women and their children.
They also sought stricter penalties for divorced fathers who did not meet financial obligations to their families.
Women Increase Their Political Clout To bring about such reforms, many women threw themselves into politics.
During the 1970s, a growing number of women voted, sought public office, and worked for changes in public policy.
The National Women's Political Caucus , formed in 1971 by feminist leaders, encouraged such activism.
The NWPC also helped fund male candidates who took a strong stand on women’s issues.
Women quickly became more active and influential in their political parties.
In 1968, only 13 percent of the delegates at the Democratic National Convention were women.
By 1972, due to the efforts of the NWPC, women accounted for 40 percent of delegates.
Women also gained influence with elected officials by voting in larger numbers than men did.
As a result, a candidate running for office could no longer risk failing to address women’s concerns.
In addition, at the national level, Congress in 1972 voted to prohibit discrimination against women in the armed services.
Under pressure from female voters, state legislatures reformed laws that had made it nearly impossible to prosecute cases involving sexual assaults against women.
By voting in greater numbers than men did, women increased their political influence with elected officials.
Feminists made their voices heard at the 1972 Democratic National Convention.
Here, Bella Abzug and Gloria Steinem, cofounders of the National Women's Political Caucus along with Betty Friedan and Shirley Chisholm, address the press.
That year, Representative Chisholm made a historic bid for the Democratic presidential nomination.
In announcing her candidacy, Chisholm said, ""I am not the candidate of black America, although I am black and proud.
Technology Reshapes How People Work and Play In 1977, the first installment of the Star Wars epic opened in movie theaters.
With its dazzling computer-generated special effects and fast-paced action, the film was a blockbuster hit.
Star Wars was so popular with moviegoers of all ages that it revived the science-fiction film genre.
By the 1970s, innovations in technology were changing everything from movies to medicine.
Two years later, his company released the Apple II— an affordable personal computer that revolutionized how people used computers at home and at work.
The Microprocessor Shrinks Computing Devices Computing machines began to change the ways Americans worked as early as the 1950s.
During the 1970s, new technologies that replaced bulky vacuum tubes and transistors with tiny silicon chips inspired a revolution in computing.
The processor is like the computer’s brain — it performs all the basic operations that enable a computer to do work.
A microprocessor integrates all the elements of a processor on a piece of silicon called a chip.
As silicon chips shrank in size, so did computers and other computing devices.
The microprocessor inspired an array of new products that people today often take for granted.
The first of these, called the Bowmar Brain, hit the United States market in 1971.
Unlike bulky adding machines, this mini number-cruncher was only a little more than 5 inches high and 3 inches wide.
However, as demand for pocket calculators grew and more companies began to make them, prices dropped significantly.
Another favorite new product based on microprocessor technology was the video game.
The first successful video game was a ball-and-paddle game called Pong.
Atari, released a home version in the form of a video game console that connected to a television.
To the surprise of company executives, Atari sold 150,000 units that year.
During the 1975 holiday season, people waited in lines for hours to purchase a “pong on chip’’-powered video game to play at home.
In 1977, a California-based company called Apple Computer introduced a computer that was small enough and cheap enough to use at home.
By today’s standards, the Apple II was slow and had a minuscule amount of memory.
But selling at a price that middle-class families could afford, the Apple II launched the personal computer revolution.
Families, businesses, and schools purchased more than two million Apple IIs between 1977 and the end of the computer’s production in 1993.
By 1971, scientists had introduced a combination vaccine to prevent measles, mumps, and rubella, or German measles.
The microprocessor soon found its way into a new imaging device that enabled doctors to look inside a person’s body for problems.
This device uses X-rays and a computer to construct detailed three-dimensional images of a patient’s internal organs.
Doctors use CT scanners to spot tumors, bone breaks, and other problems that less-advanced technologies leave invisible.
Other medical advances created new options for women who had difficulty getting pregnant.
This type of fertilization is called in vitro, meaning “in glass,” because it takes place in a glass test tube or dish.
A doctor then implants the fertilized egg in the woman’s womb, and pregnancy proceeds as normal.
Although the technique remains controversial, more than 40,000 babies are bom in the United States each year using in vitro fertilization.
A melted candy bar inspired Raytheon engineer Percy Spencer to investigate the heating properties of radio waves.
Later advances in microelectronics led to the development of ovens small and light enough for home use.
Microwaves and Movies at Home Two electronic devices reshaped Americans’ home lives in the 1970s.
Microwave technology had existed since the 1940s, but it was not until the late 1960s that Raytheon produced a microwave oven for home use.
As the waves pass through the food, they set molecules of water, fat, sugar, and other elements into rapid motion.
Foods that take an hour to cook in a conventional oven heat in minutes in a microwave — an attribute that appealed to the growing number of working women.
The VCR allowed people to record TV programs on videotape and replay the shows later.
VCR users could also play prerecorded tapes of movies and videotapes they had made themselves using video cameras called camcorders.
In the past, people had seen movies at theaters or watched them at home when broadcast on television.
Movie fans could rent or buy videotapes of movies to watch whenever they wanted.
In addition, fans of television shows no longer had to plan their schedule around broadcast times.
Today, however, the bridge is the state's third most visited attraction.
Retirees are drawn to Sunbelt states like Arizona to pursue an active lifestyle in a warm climate.
This change represented a change to a longer-term trend — having smaller families.
The Baby Bust and Retirement Boom In 1971 , a new landmark appeared in the Arizona desert.
It was London Bridge, the old English bridge that was always falling down in nursery rhymes.
Built in 1831, London Bridge had become a victim of its own great weight.
In 1962, London officials announced that it was sinking into the Thames River and would have to be tom down.
McCulloch purchased the bridge and had it transported, stone by stone, to Arizona.
Workers reassembled it in tiny Lake Havasu City, a new resort community that McCulloch was planning in the Arizona desert.
As McCulloch had hoped, the relocated London Bridge drew people to his real estate development.
Lake Havasu City became one of numerous Sunbelt cities to benefit from the aging of the United States population that began in the 1970s.
A Baby Bust Begins the Aging of America During the baby boom that followed World War II, the average age of the United States population decreased year by year.
Rather than getting younger, the United States population began growing older.
At the peak of the baby boom in 1957, the average American woman had three to four children.
Between 1975 and 1980, that statistic slipped to between one and two children.
Newspapers referred to this sharp decline in fertility as the “baby bust” or birth dearth.
One was the decision that a growing number of women made to enter the workforce.
Those who chose to enter demanding professions, such as law, medicine, or teaching, often postponed having children to pursue their careers.
Once they did begin families, most of those women gave birth to fewer children than their mothers had.
Another key factor in the aging of America was a rise in life expectancy.
In contrast, a person bom in 1980 had a life expectancy of almost 74 years.
With Longer Lives, Americans Redefine Retirement Longer life expectancies meant Americans who retired in the 1970s could look forward to more retirement years than earlier generations had.
In addition, the economic boom that followed World War II had left many Americans with enough money to enjoy their last years.
Retirees also benefited from the expansion of Social Security and Medicare benefits in the 1960s and 1970s.
Whereas in 1950, approximately 33 percent of older Americans lived in poverty, by 1978, only 14 percent were poor.
With these changes, older Americans began to redefine retirement as a time for fun, travel, and relocation.
A growing number of older Americans, especially those living in northern states, sold their homes and moved to the Sunbelt.
Resort communities like Lake Havasu City attracted mobile retirees who visited there to boat and golf during the winter months.
Population and Power Shift from the Rustbelt to the Sunbelt The movement of people from northern to southern states caused shifts in economic and political power.
Fast-growing Sunbelt states saw their economies grow with the influx of people and new businesses.
Even well-established Rustbelt industries, such as steel milling and automobile assembly, struggled to survive the stagflation of the 1970s.
The Sunbelt states saw their political clout grow along with their populations.
After each census, seats in the House of Representatives are reapportioned to reflect population changes.
States with expanded populations gain seats in the House and, with those seats, votes in the Electoral College.
Since the 1970s, Sunbelt states have gained more than 35 electoral votes at the expense of Rustbelt states.
Between 1964 and 2004, every successful candidate for president came from a Sunbelt state.
As a result, this region has benefited from the reapportionment of seats in the House of Representatives that takes place shortly after each census.
PARAMOUNT PICTURES PRESENTS A ROBERT STIGWOOD PRODUCTION JOHN TRAVOLTA KAREN GORNEY • SATURDAY NIGHT FEVER” Screenplay by NORMAN WEXLER Directed by JOHN BADHAM Executive Producer KEVIN McCORMICK Produced by ROBERT STIGWOOD Released in 1977, the movie Saturday Night fever explored ethnic identities while celebrating the hot trend of disco music and dancing.
For some Americans, the 1970s were a time to look inward to explore who they were and what they believed.
Self-Improvement and Spirituality When Tom Wolfe wrote of the Third Great Awakening in the 1970s, he had in mind two broad movements.
Its focus was on self-improvement through some kind of therapy, or treatment.
Some were based on Eastern religious traditions, mainly Buddhism and Hinduism.
Buddhist meditation and the Hindu practice of Yoga both gained many followers.
One new group, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, originated in India.
Members of this group regularly chant a mantra, or set of sacred words, to bring about a higher spiritual awareness.
Because the mantra begins with the phrase “Hare Krishna,” or “Oh, Lord Krishna the group is more commonly known as the Hare Krishnas.
One of the most successful was the Unification Church, founded by a Korean religious leader named Sun Myung Moon.
In 1972, Moon moved to the United States and began a major drive to expand his new faith.
Called Moonies by people outside the church, his followers rapidly grew in number.
Exploring Identity, Ethnicity, and Diversity For some, turning inward meant exploring one’s cultural identity.
This was especially true for descendants of immigrants from Italy, Poland, and other parts of southern and eastern Europe.
When they arrived in the United States, these immigrants and their offspring were expected to “melt” into a society dominated by WASPs, or white AngloSaxon Protestants.
In his 1973 book The Rise of the Unmeltable Ethnics, Michael Novak wrote about the stubborn survival of many ethnic groups.
In answering such questions, many Americans reclaimed their ethnic background as a heritage to be proud of, not a past to leave behind.
This new interest in ethnicity, or ethnic identity, quickly found its way into politics.
The growing awareness of ethnic diversity also made its way into popular culture.
Movies like The Godfather and Saturday Night Fever fascinated audiences with portrayals of ethnic groups whose values and traditions were often different from their own.
The creators of the television show Sesame Street , which debuted in 1969, carefully constructed it to reflect the nation’s diversity.
The puppets on the show interacted with an African American couple, a Latina woman, and people with disabilities.
Disco, a form of dance music loved by some and loathed by others, drew young people to dance clubs called discotheques.
Disc jockeys at these clubs kept records spinning and dancers dancing long into the night.
The decade also saw its share of silly fads, such as the pet rock craze.
In 1974, a streaker ran across the stage during the Academy Awards ceremony.
Also popular were mood rings, which supposedly changed color to match the wearer’s mood.
Members of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness dedicate their lives to the Supreme Lord Krishna.
The decade was also a time of changing views about everything from the environment and ethnicity to retirement and gender equality.
Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries A major cause of inflation was OPEC’s decision to raise the price of oil.
National Energy Act In 1978, Congress tried to reduce United States dependence on imported oil.
The National Energy Act offered incentives for conserving energy or using alternative energy sources.
Camp David Accords In 1978, Jimmy Carter brokered a peace agreement between Israel and Egypt.
The Camp David Accords ended the long state of war between these two countries.
Earth Day The first Earth Day celebration in 1970 signaled the emergence of a new environmental movement.
Followers worked to clean up and protect the environment locally and globally.
Congress passed antipollution laws such as the Clean Water Act and the Safe Drinking Water Act.
Three Mile Island accident An accident at the Three Mile Island Nuclear Generating Station in 1978 highlighted the potential dangers of nuclear energy.
Searching for meaning During the 1970s, many Americans turned inward to search for meaning.
Some explored self-help movements, others new religions, and others their ethnic identity.
Population changes Fewer births and longer life expectancies led to an aging of the United States population.
The population also shifted south, as people migrated from the Rustbelt to the Sunbelt.
Gender equality Women worked to gain greater equality in the workplace and politics.
In growing numbers, women entered professions that had once been dominated by males.
The ""Me Decade"" The 1970s features a mix of the trivial and the significant, including pet rocks, disco, religious soul searching, political scandal, gas-station lines, and streakers.
At home, liberals and conservatives argued over different approaches to issues ranging from welfare to health care.
Abroad, the Soviet Union collapsed and the Cold War ended amid much celebration.
Hopes for a more peaceful world were shattered on September 11, 2001, when terrorists attacked United States targets.
Introduction When Ronald Reagan took office on January 20, 1981, he was almost 70 years old— the oldest man ever to become president of the United States.
A little over two months later, his presidency— and his life— almost came to an abrupt end.
As he emerged from a Washington, D.C., hotel, a gunman attempted to assassinate him.
Everything was going as planned until Reagan left the hotel and headed for the presidential motorcade.
McCarthy threw himself in front of Reagan, taking one of the bullets himself.
Hinckley also shot Reagan’s press secretary, James Brady, and a police officer.
Reagan and the other injured men were immediately transported to the hospital, while police grabbed Hinckley and took him to jail.
Hinckley later confessed that he had shot the president to get the attention of a famous movie actress.
At his trial, he was declared not guilty by reason of insanity and sent to a mental institution for life.
At the hospital, Reagan joked with the doctors before going into surgery.
When Reagan was elected president, some people wondered whether he had the energy and stamina to carry out such a demanding job.
However, he survived the shooting and went on to lead the country for two terms as president.
His conservative agenda calling for lower taxes, reduced government regulation of business, and cuts in spending on social programs ushered in an era of political and economic change known as the Reagan Revolution.
Press Secretary James Brady and police officer Thomas Delahaney lie wounded on the sidewalk after the attempt on Reagan's life.
The president made a full recovery, but Brady was permanently paralyzed.
The Triumph of the Conservative Coalition Ronald Reagan, a former movie actor and Republican governor of California, made an appealing presidential candidate.
His friendly manner and positive, ""can-do"" attitude won the support of voters across the country, including some moderate Democrats.
Two years after the assassination attempt, Ronald Reagan appeared before a gathering of conservative Christian organizations.
They were part of a broad coalition of diverse groups of Americans who favored traditional social values.
In his speech, Reagan touched on many of the points that had helped him win the support of conservatives.
He also spoke of the importance of religion in the founding of the nation.
Evangelical Christians Gain a Political Voice Reagan’s audience that day was made up of evangelical Christians, or evangelicals.
These are Christians who emphasize the authority of the Bible, believe strongly in spreading their faith, and seek a direct, personal experience of God.
By the late 1970s, evangelicals had become a significant force in both religion and politics.
Many evangelicals, particularly conservative fundamentalists, were upset by what they saw as declining moral and religious values in American society.
They were distressed by rising divorce rates, drug use, gay rights, and feminism.
They were also angered by Supreme Court decisions legalizing abortion and banning prayer in public schools.
They feared that the nation was turning away from religion and becoming a “godless culture ” In 1979, evangelical leaders joined forces to form the Moral Majority, a political lobbying group led by the Reverend Jerry Falwell.
The Moral Majority was succeeded by an even larger group, the Christian Coalition, led by the Reverend Pat Robertson.
These groups formed part of a political movement known as the New Right.
This movement comprised various special-interest groups and activists who worked for conservative causes.
New Right groups lobbied Congress and raised money for political campaigns.
They also supported the growth of conservative “think tanks” like the Heritage Foundation, where scholars wrote policy papers and opinion pieces for newspapers and journals.
The New Right influenced the public debate on many issues and helped bring about the Reagan Revolution of the 1980s.
Reagan Wins the 1980 Election As the 1980 election drew near, conditions at home and abroad were prompting many Americans to look for a change in leadership.
The nation faced high inflation, high unemployment, and soaring energy prices.
Overseas, the Iran hostage crisis continued, and the Cold War showed no signs of ending.
For many voters, Ronald Reagan offered an appealing alternative to President Jimmy Carter.
Before starting his political career, Reagan had been a movie actor and the host of a popular TV show.
He had served two terms as governor of California before running for president.
One of his most memorable jabs came when he poked fun at Carter’s handling of the economy.
Reagan promised to pull the nation out of its slump and restore its standing in the world.
His optimism appealed to many Americans, making them feel more confident about the nation’s future.
Reagan won the support of the religious right, most Republicans, many business leaders, and many moderate Democrats.
Republicans also won control of the Senate for the first time since 1955.
Democrats managed to retain their majority within the House of Representatives, but Republicans made significant gains there, too.
Recognizing that many Americans had become disillusioned with government in the aftermath of the Vietnam War and the Watergate scandal, he called on his listeners to have faith in themselves and in their ability to solve the country’s problems.
Minutes after Reagan took the oath of office, Iran freed the American hostages as a result of previous negotiations.
As president, Reagan used speeches on television and in public to build support for his programs.
He sometimes recalled scenes from old movies to explain his ideas in ways that made sense to his listeners.
Charming and friendly, he was often liked even by those who disagreed with his policies.
Reagan’s advisers soon learned, however, that the president rarely involved himself with policy details or the day-to-day tasks of governing.
He provided a general overview of what he wanted done and relied on his advisers and staff to carry out his wishes.
Reagan carried nearly every state in the 1980 election and won the Electoral College vote by a landslide.
This overwhelming victory gave the new president a strong mandate to carry out his policies.
This cartoon shows the effects of the conservative triumph in the 1980 election.
They won control of the Senate and gained allies among conservative Democrats in the House.
Reagan's Economic Policies An economic boom in the 1980s boosted incomes and raised the standard of living for many Americans.
These gains were most evident among the wealthy, who prospered from Reagan's pro-business policies.
Affluent Americans, like the residents of this coastal community in Florida, spent lavishly on homes and luxury goods.
He had won support from voters who believed that government taxed them too much and wasted their tax dollars.
Pledging to get government “off their backs,” he set out to reduce the power of the federal government.
The Evolution of the New Federalism As part of his assault on “big government,” Reagan expanded the policy of New Federalism begun by Richard Nixon.
Like Nixon, Reagan wanted to shift power from the federal government to the states.
Nixon had used revenue sharing to distribute federal tax dollars to the states.
Reagan went a step further by handing responsibility for many programs in health, education, and welfare to the states themselves.
Reagan helped states pay for these social programs with block grants from the federal treasury.
This system gave the states more flexibility, allowing them to design programs and allocate resources to suit their needs.
However, these block grants generally provided less funding than the federal programs they replaced.
Some liberal critics charged that the block grant system was really a way to reduce federal spending on social programs.
Supply-Side Economics Leads to Tax Cuts When Reagan took office, the economy was burdened by inflation.
According to the law of supply and demand, inflation occurs when demand exceeds supply.
Inflation often occurs in times of low unemployment, when more workers are trying to buy goods and services.
However, when Reagan took office, he faced both inflation and high unemployment, partly as a result of soaring oil prices.
To meet this challenge, he promised to stimulate the economy by cutting taxes and promoting private enterprise.
Much of Reagan’s plan was based on a theory called supply-side economics.
According to this theory, economic growth depends on increasing the supply of goods and services.
Lower tax rates will leave more money in the hands of individuals and businesses, providing an incentive for them to save and invest.
Companies can hire more workers and increase the supply of goods and services.
As businesses create more jobs, new workers will pay taxes, which will replace the revenues lost through lower tax rates.
Critics called this theory “voodoo economics,” saying it was unrealistic to believe that lowering tax rates would increase revenues.
But Reagan and his advisers believed it was the route to economic growth.
In August 1981 , Reagan signed a bill that cut federal taxes by 25 percent over a three-year period.
However, the economy continued to lag for another two years, with even greater unemployment.
Economists still debate what role the tax cuts played in the resurgence.
However, many agree that a major factor was a large increase in defense spending.
While personal income grew at all levels of society in the 1980s, the income gap between rich and poor widened.
The rich saw their incomes rise, while those with lower incomes saw fewer benefits.
One Reagan official acknowledged that the tax cuts were intended to produce wealth at the upper levels that would “trickle down” to all Americans.
The economic boom made Reagan an even more popular candidate in the 1984 election.
He built his campaign around the theme “It’s Morning Again in America,” suggesting a new era of pride and prosperity.
A Reagan adviser noted the difficulties that the Democratic challenger, Walter Mondale, faced.
Reagan Calls for Deregulation Another key element of Reagan’s economic plan was deregulation.
Deregulation is the reduction or removal of government controls on business in order to promote economic efficiency and stimulate free enterprise.
Reagan saw deregulation as another way to limit the power of government.
Like many conservatives, he believed that deregulation would make businesses more efficient and competitive, thereby allowing them to pass the savings on to consumers.
In the 1970s, under President Carter, Congress had lifted many regulations on the airline and trucking industries.
Reagan felt that further deregulation would increase business activity in other industries and boost the economy even more.
Some deregulation efforts focused on getting rid of laws designed to curb pollution and ensure safety in the workplace.
A Reagan task force on deregulation delayed or blocked rules on the handling of hazardous waste and the exposure of workers to toxic chemicals.
Under Reagan’s guidelines, the Environmental Protection Agency also began to lower federal standards on air and water quality.
Reagan chose officials to lead government agencies who shared his belief in deregulation.
Secretary of the Interior James Watt removed many environmental regulations, arguing that these laws prevented industry from creating jobs and expanding the economy.
He opened up more national forest land to logging operations and gave oil and gas companies offshore drilling rights.
He also approved the sale of public lands at low prices to oil and mining companies.
Many public-interest groups fought efforts to revise environmental laws and workplace safety rules.
They charged that the proposed changes endangered workers and the general public.
In some cases, court decisions and actions by Congress slowed efforts by Reagan officials to drop environmental regulations.
In 1987, Congress overrode Reagan’s veto of a bill to renew funding for the 1972 Clean Water Act.
Supporters claimed that Reagan's tax cuts would promote economic growth and create more jobs.
Critics charged that the cuts helped only the rich, while poor and middleclass Americans had to wait for the benefits to ""trickle down"" from above.
A budget deficit is the shortfall that results when government spending exceeds government revenues in a given year.
From 1982 to the end of Reagan’s second term, however, annual deficits exceeded $100 billion.
One reason for these soaring deficits was tax cuts and the resulting fall in government revenues.
During Reagan’s first term, the annual budget of the Department of Defense increased nearly 85 percent.
Budget deficits also grew as the cost of Social Security and Medicare rose.
The national debt is the sum of all loans taken out by the government to finance its annual deficits.
During the Reagan years, the national debt nearly tripled from $908 billion in 1980 to $2. trillion in 1988.
This sum was far greater than the debt accumulated by all former presidents combined.
The government had to borrow hundreds of billions of dollars each year just to pay the interest on this debt.
Conservatives and liberals held different views on the problem of deficits and debt.
Although both favored a balanced budget, each said debt could be justified for the right reasons.
Conservatives believed that low taxes and a strong defense were good reasons.
Liberals argued that debt was acceptable if it came from investing in transportation, education, health care, and other social and economic improvements.
In less than a decade, the United States went from being the world's largest creditor, or lending, nation to one of the world's biggest debtor nations.
This phrase was adapted from a sermon by John Winthrop, a founder of the Massachusetts Bay Colony.
Winthrop hoped the new colony would become a model Christian society, a “city upon a hill” that would serve as an example to the world.
Social Welfare Spending Is Reduced Reagan and other conservatives opposed most government spending on social welfare.
They believed that social programs stifled personal initiative and produced a dependence on government aid, thus trapping people in a cycle of poverty.
At Reagan’s urging, Congress slashed funds for many of Lyndon Johnson’s antipoverty programs, including food stamps and aid to the elderly, poor, and disabled.
Other cuts targeted student loans and subsidizedhousing programs that helped low-income families pay their rent.
Liberals protested that these cuts harmed the poor and forced cities to reduce services to those in need.
Cuts fell most heavily on single women with young children and on young adults with few job skills and little education.
In the 1980s, the number of children living in poverty grew by 25 percent.
This disease attacks the immune system, making it much harder for the body to fight illness.
Many AIDS patients die from infections, such as pneumonia, that their weakened immune systems cannot fight.
In the mid-1980s, however, AIDS began to appear in patients who had received blood transfusions.
This led to the discovery that AIDS was transmitted mainly through contact with the blood or other bodily fluids of an infected person.
AIDS activists urged Reagan to speak out on AIDS and fund AIDS research.
The quilt had around 2,000 panels at its first exhibit, in Washington, D.C., the year before.
Thousands more have since been added in the quilt's various tours of the country.
These tours have helped raise millions of dollars for AIDS organizations.
The program was designed to educate students on the dangers of drug use.
Some critics felt that funds for DARE might have been better spent on drug treatment programs or on efforts to combat drug-related crime.
The Reagans Urge Americans to ""Just Say No"" to Drugs Like AIDS, drugrelated violence in inner-city neighborhoods was also a concern in the 1980s.
This program sent police officers into schools to teach students about the dangers of drug use.
Reagan advisers labeled DARE a success, citing studies that showed reduced drug use among high school seniors.
By the mid-1990s, however, longer-term studies showed little or no effect from the program.
In addition, critics of Reagan’s drug-intervention policy pointed to studies showing increased use of cocaine among the urban poor and minority youths.
Although many conservatives favored teaching students about the dangers of drug use, they opposed government programs to provide treatment for drug addicts.
Critics of this approach argued that helping people overcome addiction is also an essential part of the effort to reduce drug-related crime and unemployment.
The Supreme Court took a turn to the right under Ronald Reagan, who appointed conservative justices Sandra Day O'Connor, Antonin Scalia, and Anthony Kennedy.
Conservatism Dominates the Supreme Court In the legal arena, Reagan’s judicial appointments helped move the Supreme Court in a more conservative direction.
Sandra Day O’Connor, the first female justice, was followed by two more conservatives, Antonin Scalia and Anthony Kennedy.
New Jersey T.L.O., which considered the privacy rights of high school students.
The case focused on a 14-year-old girl, identified as T.L.O., whose purse was searched at school and found to contain marijuana.
As a result, she was charged with delinquency and sent to juvenile court.
Her lawyers argued that the evidence against T.L.O. was gained in violation of the Fourth Amendment’s protection against unreasonable search and seizure.
A decade later, the Court— still dominated by Reagan-era conservatives— ruled against privacy rights again in Vernonici School District Acton.
In that case, the Court said that schools have a right to impose random drug testing on student athletes, despite objections that such tests violate the students’ rights.
He was reluctant to support an extension of the 1965 Voting Rights Act and was against the use of school busing as a means to achieve integration.
He also called for an end to affirmative action, which he considered a form of reverse discrimination that was unfair to the majority white population.
Reagan and most conservatives argued that federal efforts to enforce civil rights actually hindered the cause of equality by arousing resentment.
They also claimed that such efforts infringed on the rights of state and local governments.
But civil rights groups contended that Reagan was simply trying to appeal to southern white voters by turning back the clock on civil rights.
Civil rights activist Jesse Jackson was one of the strongest critics of Reagan’s polices.
In 1984, he formed the National Rainbow Coalition, a political organization that advocated social progress and equal rights for people of color, women, and gays and lesbians.
In a speech at the 1984 Democratic National Convention, Jackson blamed worsening conditions in the inner cities on cuts in social programs for the poor and elderly.
Quoting a common saying in economics that “a rising tide lifts all boats,” Jackson disputed the claim that the economic expansion under Reagan would eventually benefit all Americans.
Jackson called for renewed efforts to advance civil rights and help the poor.
Civil rights leader Jesse Jackson ran for president twice, in 1984 and 1988.
Jackson strongly criticized Reagan-era policies that he believed harmed the poor and disadvantaged.
He formed the National Rainbow Coalition to fight for progressive reform.
Reagan Supports Immigration Reform Immigration laws were another focus of domestic policy during the Reagan years.
The last major immigration reform, the Immigration Act of 1965, had opened the doors to a new wave of immigration.
By the 1980s, large numbers of immigrants from Asia and Latin America had come to the United States.
Some of these were undocumented immigrants who entered the country illegally, without a visa.
Many of these undocumented immigrants were Latin Americans who crossed the U.S.-Mexico border.
As a result, the impact of illegal immigration was most keenly felt in the southwestern border states, from Texas to California.
Members of this group advocated laws to make English the official language of the United States and to limit the use of other languages by government agencies.
Most English-only supporters opposed bilingual education in schools, believing that it kept immigrants from learning English.
In the 1980s, several states passed laws making English the official language.
This act called for increased immigration controls on the U.S.-Mexico border and provided stiff penalties for employers who hire undocumented workers.
At the same time, it offered amnesty for 2. million immigrants who had entered the country illegally, thus putting them on the road to citizenship.
An Ongoing Debate The immigration law of 1986 did not halt illegal immigration.
In the 1990s, more than 1 . million immigrants, many of them undocumented, arrived in the United States each year.
In 2006, the Census Bureau estimated that between 8 and 9 million undocumented immigrants were in the country.
In May 2006, hundreds of thousands of people across the country marched in favor of immigrants' rights.
They were protesting a bill in Congress meant to crack down on undocumented immigrants.
Protesters hoped to convince Congress to back an amnesty program for immigrants.
Struggling to Curtail Illegal Immigration Most immigrants come to the United States seeking jobs and a better standard of living.
Though many of them encounter serious hardships as a result, the benefits of life in the United States usually outweigh the costs.
The U.S.-Mexico border, the main entry point for immigrants, is long and difficult to monitor.
Many immigrants have false documents, making it hard for employers to know that they are in the country illegally.
The American people are divided on the economic impact of illegal immigration.
Some point out that undocumented workers play a key role in the economy.
They often take hard, low-paying jobs that many Americans do not seem to want.
By working for low wages, they lower the cost of goods and services for all Americans.
Others argue, however, that Americans would take these jobs if the pay were fair.
They claim that undocumented immigrant workers drive down wages and make it harder for American workers to earn a living.
They also contend that immigrants act as a drain on resources by using schools, health clinics, and other services.
Debating Immigration Reform Most Americans agree that illegal immigration is a problem and that some type of immigration reform is necessary.
Some believe that building a fence along the U.S.Mexico border and patrolling it with a large force like the National Guard would be a good idea.
Even if built, however, the new fence would leave another 1 ,300 miles of border unprotected.
Another proposed solution is to crack down on employers who hire undocumented workers.
Advocates of this approach point out that employers who hire these workers are breaking the law.
They argue that illegal immigration would end if immigrants could no longer get jobs in this country.
Also, they contend that employers and workers would probably find a way to evade the law.
Some advocates of immigration reform support the creation of a national database and federal identity cards for all citizens and documented immigrants.
Such a system would help to prevent undocumented immigrants from getting work or using public services.
Critics of this proposal note that such a project would be very expensive.
Moreover, they worry that the national database, which would contain private information about everyone with an identity card, might be accessed by hackers or others hoping to misuse the information.
Guest workers would have contracts to stay in the United States for a specific period of time and would return home when their contracts expired.
Civil liberties advocates counter that such a program would lend itself to abuses of workers' rights.
Other critics argue that a guest worker system would simply bring more immigrants into the country, where they might stay after their contracts ran out.
Even if political leaders come up with a new strategy to curb illegal immigration, it is unlikely to offer a permanent solution to the problem.
They believe that people should not be rewarded for entering the country illegally.
Others argue that it makes sense to grant legal status to immigrants who have been in the United States for a long time.
During his presidency, the economy revived, but the federal budget deficit soared.
Reagan approached serious social problems, such as the HIV/AIDS crisis, rising drug abuse, and illegal immigration, in ways that reflected his conservative ideals.
Reagan Revolution Reagan helped spark a conservative revolution in American politics.
He worked to shrink government, promote free enterprise, and reduce social programs.
The New Right Reagan’s strongest support came from the New Right, a movement of conservative activists and organizations.
This movement included evangelical Christian organizations like the Moral Majority.
Supply-side economics Reagan’s economic plan was based on supply-side economics.
He cut taxes to stimulate business activity, arguing that this would boost the economy and produce jobs.
Tax cuts and increased defense spending, however, led to large budget deficits and a huge national debt.
Social and environmental issues Reagan called for reducing regulations on business and the environment.
Critics claimed that pollution and social problems increased as a result.
Jesse Jackson formed the National Rainbow Coalition to support equal rights and challenge Reagan’s social policies.
A conservative Court The Supreme Court moved to the right under Reagan.
This shift was evident in such cases as New Jersey T.L.O., which limited privacy rights for students.
Introduction On June 12, 1987, President Ronald Reagan stood on a platform in front of the Berlin Wall.
Behind him loomed the Brandenburg Gate, a symbol of the divided German capital.
He had just been told that police had driven off East Germans who had gathered on the other side of the wall to hear him speak.
Thousands of well-armed guards, aided by hundreds of tracking dogs, patrolled the wall with orders to shoot anyone who tried to escape to the West.
Despite the risks, however, as many as 10,000 East Germans tried to cross the Wall over the years.
About half of them succeeded, while the rest were captured or lost their lives.
Some drowned as they tried to swim across lakes or rivers along the border.
On the night of November 9, 1989, however, a little more than two years after Reagan’s speech, the gates of the Berlin Wall finally opened.
As the news spread, hundreds of thousands of people rushed to the Wall.
Strangers hugged and kissed, while others cheered, danced, and set off fireworks.
It was a celebration of freedom after decades of anxiety, fear, and oppression.
As one young East German put it, “I don't feel like I’m in prison anymore ” In 1987, Reagan gave his famous “tear down this waif speech in front of West Berlin's Brandenburg Gate.
Just before he spoke, Reagan learned that a crowd of East Germans gathered on the other side of the Wall to hear his speech had been forcibly removed by East German police.
Defense spending rose considerably over the course of Reagan's two terms in office.
This increase was designed to counter the Soviet military threat and undermine the Soviet economy.
Anticommunism Guides Reagan's Foreign Policy Reagan had strong views on the dangers of communism.
He believed that the Soviet Union posed an ongoing threat to freedom and democracy.
In a speech in March 1983, he described the Soviet Union as the “evil empire/' Reagan’s tough talk pleased conservatives but alarmed other Americans who feared an escalation of Cold War tensions.
An Ardent Cold Warrior Reagan believed that the Soviet Union was bent on world domination and had to be stopped.
To counter the Soviet threat and undermine communism, he boosted defense spending.
The result was the largest peacetime military buildup in United States history.
This program would create a “missile shield” designed to protect the United States from nuclear attack.
It would include land-based and space-based weapons, which could in theory knock down incoming missiles.
Critics of the SDI program nicknamed it Star Wars after the popular science fiction movies of the time.
They claimed that SDI would provoke a new arms race and undermine arms control agreements.
Many scientists expressed doubts that an effective missile shield could ever be built, while members of Congress also voiced concerns about SDTs enormous cost.
The program went ahead anyway, though technical problems hampered its development.
To further undermine the Soviets, Reagan called for the United States to openly support anticommunist insurgents and movements around the world.
Under this policy, which became known as the Reagan Doctrine, the United States provided aid to rebels fighting Soviet-backed governments in Asia, Africa, and Latin America.
Battling Communism in Central America and the Caribbean Central America was one of the first places where the Reagan Doctrine was applied.
The purpose of an antimissile defense system is to shoot incoming missiles out of the sky before they can reach their targets.
Development of such a system began during the Reagan administration, but lapsed after he left office.
An enemy of the United States launches a missile from an underground silo.
The Sandinista government then acquired Soviet arms and forged close ties with communist Cuba.
Reagan saw events in Nicaragua, along with a growing insurgency in El Salvador, as evidence of Soviet and Cuban efforts to spread communism in Central America and throughout the Western Hemisphere.
In a speech to Congress in 1983, he warned that these events threatened United States interests.
In the early 1980s, the Reagan administration began funding covert operations to overthrow the Sandinista government.
United States advisers armed and trained over 10,000 Nicaraguan rebels.
This U.S.-backed force, known as the Contras, attacked the Sandinistas from bases in neighboring countries.
In 1984, after lawmakers learned that the CIA had been illegally placing mines in Nicaraguan harbors, they banned further United States military aid to the Contras.
Covert operations continued, however, and would later embroil the Reagan administration in its most serious scandal.
Meanwhile, the administration was also providing economic and military aid to El Salvador, which was battling its own leftist rebellion.
Reagan argued that this aid would counter communist influence and support the country’s struggling democratic government.
But most United States aid went to the Salvadoran military, which compiled a brutal human rights record.
The civil war lasted for 12 years and left at least 70,000 Salvadorans dead, before ending in 1992.
The Reagan Doctrine also led the United States to invade the tiny Caribbean island of Grenada.
In 1983, a military coup brought a communist leader to power in Grenada.
He invited Cuban workers to the island and signed military agreements with several communist countries.
Alarmed by these events, Reagan sent an invasion force of United States Marines to Grenada to oust the regime, expel the Cubans, and install a new government.
The people of Grenada and nearby islands supported the United States invasion.
But many countries around the world condemned the action as unlawful interference in another nation’s affairs.
In the 1980s, the United States funded and trained Contra rebels fighting to oust Nicaragua's leftist government.
The battle command center uses data from the radar stations plan an interception point.
The force of the blast knocked the four-story building off its foundation.
Several months later, Reagan pulled all United States troops out of Lebanon.
Key Events of the Iran-Contra Affair 1984 1985 Several Americans are kidnapped in Lebanon. i 1985 1986 In exchange for help in securing the release of the hostages, the Reagan administration sells missiles to Iran. ' i 1986 Reagan administration officials send millions of dollars from the Iran arms deal to Contras in Nicaragua.
The United States provided aid to Israel along with moderate Arab states in the region, such as Egypt, Jordan, and Lebanon.
In 1975, a civil war broke out in Lebanon when various ethnic and religious groups, both Christian and Muslim, began to struggle for power.
This conflict included factions tied to Syria and Iran, as well as elements of the Palestine Liberation Organization , a group fighting for a Palestinian homeland in Israel.
In the early 1980s, the United States intervened in this war in an effort to bring peace.
Hopes of Peace in Lebanon Shattered Just before the United States entry into Lebanon, the conflict took a turn for the worse.
Angry over repeated PLO raids from southern Lebanon, Israel set out to secure its northern border.
In June 1982, Israeli troops crossed into Lebanon and destroyed PLO bases.
In heavy fighting, they pushed the PLO north to Beirut, Lebanon’s capital.
Reagan feared that Syrian involvement in the conflict might lead to a wider war in the Middle East.
Hoping to end the fighting, Reagan sent a diplomat to Beirut to negotiate a settlement.
An agreement was reached to create a multinational force consisting of troops from the United States, France, and Italy.
These troops would enforce a cease-fire in Lebanon and give the PLO time to withdraw from Beirut.
The United States saw its troops as peacekeepers, but many Muslim groups did not.
The United States presence in Lebanon angered Islamic radicals and provoked terrorist attacks against United States forces.
In April 1983, terrorists bombed the United States embassy in Beirut, killing 63 people, including 17 Americans.
The following September, Israel began withdrawing its troops from Lebanon.
A month later, on October 23, a suicide bombing took place at the marine barracks at Beirut International Airport.
At the same time a few miles away, a similar explosion left at least 58 French troops dead.
Unwilling to risk more American lives, Reagan withdrew all United States troops from Lebanon in February 1984.
It was a grim setback for United States peacekeeping efforts in the Middle East.
Despite the United States withdrawal from Lebanon, terrorist attacks on Americans continued.
In June 1985, Lebanese terrorists hijacked an airliner flying out of Athens, Greece.
Another 39 passengers were held captive in Lebanon for 17 days before they were released.
This incident, along with other events in the Middle East, underscored a growing trend in Third World conflicts.
Increasingly, insurgent groups with little political power relied on terrorism to advance their goals.
The Iran-Contra Affair A year later, in 1986, Reagan faced the most serious crisis of his presidency, a scandal known as the Iran-Contra Affair.
In November, a Lebanese magazine reported that the United States had been secretly selling arms to Iran.
Broken promise Despite Reagan's vows to ""never deal with terrorists/' his officials sold weapons to Iranian-backed terrorists.
Illegal funding Ignoring a congressional ban, Reagan officials sent money from arms sales to the Contras in Nicaragua.
Lying to Congress Administration officials tried to cover up illegal activities during congressional investigations.
Abuse of executive power These actions violated the constitutional separation of powers and system of checks and balances between the executive and legislative branches of government. weapons had been sold to Iran to help gain the release of United States hostages held by Iranian-backed terrorists in Lebanon.
Yet his administration had supplied arms to Iran, a country that had once held Americans hostage and that was known to support terrorism.
By the time the weapon sales were uncovered, more than 1,500 missiles had been shipped to Iran.
Three United States hostages were freed, only to be replaced by three more.
Investigations by Congress and a special commission appointed by Reagan discovered that millions of dollars from the Iranian arms sales had been passed along to the Contras in Nicaragua, in violation of United States law.
Investigators learned that top administration officials had backed this operation and lied to Congress.
The “point man” for the Iran-Contra operation was Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North, a staff member at the National Security Council.
During special hearings in Congress, North told investigators that his superiors at the NSC had approved his actions, even though they violated the 1984 law banning aid to the Contras.
Admiral John Poindexter, justified such deceptive practices as necessary to avoid “leaks” of information to the press.
Both men were convicted of crimes related to the Iran-Contra Affair, but their convictions were overturned on appeal for technical reasons Meanwhile, the Tower Commission, an independent group set up to investigate the Iran-Contra Affair, later found that Reagan “did not seem to be aware” of the illegal operation.
But it said that the president’s disengagement from White House affairs had made the deception possible.
Reagan’s approval ratings dropped sharply as a result of the Iran-Contra Affair, and some people wondered if his presidency would survive.
In the end, however, the scandal didn’t “stick” to the president, and his popularity rebounded.
Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North testified before Congress in the Iran-Contra Affair.
A decorated Vietnam veteran, North ran the covert operation that funneled millions of dollars to the Contras.
Some Americans hailed him as a patriot, while others called him a criminal.
The Cold War Winds Down As the Soviet economy declined in the 1980s, many Soviet citizens suffered great hardship.
Some people migrated to cities looking for work or better living conditions.
This migrant is living in a tent city outside the walls of the Kremlin, the center of government in Moscow.
A Changing Soviet Union By the time Gorbachev came to power, the Soviet economy was in deep trouble.
Centralized planning had left local managers little freedom to increase output or improve the quality of goods.
Soviet workers also had little incentive to work harder and produce more.
When scarce goods did appear in stores, shoppers often bought as much as they could afford.
In addition, the country had a severe housing crisis, especially in the cities.
Soon after taking office, he announced a program of economic reforms called perestroika, or restructuring.
He closed many unprofitable state-run factories and allowed some private businesses to operate.
He also cut the defense budget to make more money available for domestic needs.
Along with economic reforms, Gorbachev announced a policy of glasnost, or openness.
He called for an honest discussion of the nation’s political and social problems.
He also allowed the Soviet media greater freedom to criticize the government.
Gorbachev hoped that this new climate of openness would help win public support for his reforms.
At the same time, however, he made it clear that he did not intend to do away with the communist system.
Negotiating with the ""Evil Empire"" When Gorbachev took office, the Cold War was intensifying.
In the early 1980s, both the Soviet Union and the United States had increased the number of nuclear missiles deployed in Europe.
This arms buildup, as well as the Reagan administration's hostile references to the Soviet Union as an “evil empire,” revived fears of nuclear war.
In the United States and Western Europe, these fears gave rise to the nuclear freeze movement.
This movement called for a moratorium, or “freeze ” on the production, testing, and deployment of nuclear weapons by the superpowers.
Freeze advocates held parades and rallies, lobbied Congress, and raised money for antinuclear political candidates.
Hundreds of communities supported the movement by declaring themselves nuclear-free zones.
Despite these protests, the likelihood of a thaw in U.S .-Soviet relations seemed slight during Reagan's first term in office.
With Gorbachev in power, however, the prospects for ending the Cold War began to improve.
Gorbachev knew that continuing the arms race would jeopardize his efforts to bring eco748 Chapter 57 nomic reform.
The economy was already weakened further by a lengthy war in Afghanistan, where Soviet forces were fighting a rebellion against a Sovietbacked government.
Gorbachev also feared that the development of SDI and other United States weapons systems would leave the Soviet Union more vulnerable to attack.
As a result, he was prepared to negotiate new arms control agreements with the United States.
Surprising both his supporters and his critics, Reagan agreed to meet with Gorbachev in Geneva, Switzerland, in 1985.
Although they made little progress on arms control in Geneva, the men discovered that they liked each other.
They discussed removing missiles from Europe and reducing nuclear stockpiles.
The talks stalled, however, when Gorbachev insisted that Reagan cancel the SDI program, a demand that Reagan refused.
At a summit in Washington in December 1987, the two leaders signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, more commonly called the INF Treaty.
It was the first arms treaty that required both sides to destroy missiles.
It also allowed both sides to inspect each other’s missile bases to verify that the weapons had been withdrawn and destroyed.
It was a far cry from the anti-Soviet views Reagan had voiced just a few years before.
Reagan and Gorbachev held four summit meetings on arms control, developing a warm friendship in the process.
At their final meeting in Moscow, a reporter asked Reagan if he still thought the Soviet Union was an evil empire.
The Soviet Union Falls While Communism Struggles On In August 1991, crowds in Moscow’s Lubyanka Square cheered as a huge bronze statue of Felix Dzerzhinsky toppled to the ground.
Protesters used giant cranes to pull the statue down as millions of startled Soviet citizens watched on television.
In June 1989, Chinese authorities broke up prodemocracy protests in Beijing's Tiananmen Square.
One protester risked his life by standing in front of army tanks as they rolled through the city.
His action was a symbolic gesture of defiance against China's communist state.
The Breakup of the Soviet Bloc By the late 1980s, the Soviet economy was in tatters and the future of Soviet communism was in doubt.
The new openness of glasnost had made more people in the Soviet bloc aware of the success of free-market economies and the failure of central planning.
In 1989, Gorbachev announced that the Soviet Union would no longer interfere in the internal affairs of other communist countries.
With the threat of a Soviet invasion removed, communism collapsed across Eastern Europe.
Most governments fell peacefully, as leaders resigned or agreed to reforms.
One exception was Romania, where an angry mob rose up to drive dictator Nicolae Ceausescu and his wife from power.
In East Germany, desperate communist officials tried to hold on to power by opening the Berlin Wall and promising other changes.
But like other Eastern European nations, East Germany rejected communist rule, and it soon reunited with West Germany.
By the fall of 1991 , the Baltic republics of Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania had achieved independence.
By the end of the year, all 15 Soviet republics had become separate nation-states.
A nation-state is an independent country populated mainly by citizens who share a common culture, history, and language.
A month later, communist hardliners who were angry with Gorbachev for the breakup of the Soviet empire tried to overthrow him.
The coup failed, but four months later Gorbachev resigned as the Soviet leader and declared the Soviet Union officially dissolved.
Communism Survives in Other Countries While communism was disappearing in Eastern Europe, communist governments remained in power in Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea, and China.
With the fall of the Soviet Union, however, most communist countries lost a key sponsor.
For decades, Cuba had relied on the Soviet Union for trade and economic aid.
It allowed some private businesses to operate and sought foreign investment to boost its economy.
By the 1990s, Vietnam’s mixed economy— one combining elements of free enterprise and central planning— was growing rapidly, offering more opportunities to the Vietnamese people.
Relations with the United States and other Western nations also improved.
With the fall of the Soviet bloc, North Korea lost a major source of economic support.
It turned increasingly to China as an ally and remained a closed, rigidly controlled communist society.
The changes that rocked Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union also touched China.
The Chinese were already pursuing economic reforms, but the fall of Soviet communism prompted many Chinese to call for greater political freedom as well.
In May 1989, thousands of students joined pro-democracy protests in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square.
After several weeks of demonstrations, Chinese leaders finally decided to act.
On June 3 and 4, government troops and tanks moved into the square to crush the protest.
By repressing the protest, the Chinese government signaled that it was not ready to accept political change.
His efforts to undermine Soviet power, along with changes in the Soviet Union itself, helped end the Cold War.
Strategic Defense Initiative Reagan increased military spending to counter the Soviet threat.
One program, the Strategic Defense Initiative, was designed to create a “missile shield” to defend the United States from nuclear attack.
Reagan Doctrine The president backed anticommunist movements around the world as part of the Reagan Doctrine.
He gave aid to rebels like the Contras, who were fighting to overthrow the Sandinista government of Nicaragua.
Middle Eastern policy Reagan sent United States peacekeeping forces to Lebanon.
These troops helped secure the withdrawal of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Iran-Contra Affair The Reagan administration faced a scandal over arms sales to Iran and the diversion of funds to the Contras.
Several top officials were convicted of illegal actions in the Iran-Contra Affair.
Nuclear freeze movement Rising tensions with the Soviet Union increased fears of nuclear war.
The nuclear freeze movement called for an end to the spread of nuclear weapons.
Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev signed the Intermediate-Range Nuclear Forces Treaty, reducing nuclear missiles in Europe.
United States pressure, along with economic and political problems at home, eventually caused the collapse of the Soviet Union and the end of the Cold War.
This is true whether they are moving into or taking leave of the Oval Office.
Bush described his inauguration in 1989 as a “moment rich with promise;' After eight years serving as Ronald Reagan’s vice president.
Four years later, Inauguration Day became a time of leave-taking for the Republican president.
On January 20, 1993, he turned the Oval Office over to his Democratic opponent, William Jefferson Clinton.
This transition marked more than a shift in power from one political party to the other.
Bom in 1946, Bill Clinton was the first baby boomer to become president.
After two terms in office, it was Clinton’s turn to depart the Oval Office.
It was the first time the son of a former president had stepped into the presidency since John Adams’s son, John Quincy Adams, took office in 1825.
Like presidents before them, all three of these leaders came into office with goals they expected to achieve and promises they planned to keep.
In a country deeply divided in its party loyalties, none of them would accomplish all that they had hoped.
Bush, Bill Clinton, and George W Bush— met their domestic policy goals after entering the Oval Office.
Called No Child Left Behind, the act aimed to have all students meet certain proficiency standards by the year 2014.
Although the red states cover more territory, the blue states are usually more densely populated.
Many observers felt there had been a splintering of the nation into two camps.
On election night that year, the major television networks all used the same two colors to shade their election maps.
Red represented states in which a majority voted for Republican George W Bush.
Most states on the West Coast and in the industrial Northeast were blue.
However, a closer look at recent elections reveals a more complex picture.
They believed in reducing the size of government, lowering taxes, maintaining a strong military, and promoting traditional social values.
This agenda appealed to many evangelical Christians and people living in small towns.
In his 2000 campaign, George W Bush tried to soften the antigovemment language of Reagan Republicans.
The first group included those who had long been loyal to the party — liberals, African Americans, immigrants, and union members.
These party loyalists had voted Democratic since Franklin Roosevelt forged his New Deal coalition during the Depression.
The second group of “blue” voters in 2000 included what party leaders called New Democrats.
They were moderates who had been attracted to the party in the 1990s by Bill Clinton.
It embraced welfare reform, a balanced budget, expanded trade, and a tough stand on crime.
About 35 percent of those who cast ballots that year defined themselves as independents.
As a result, neither Democrats nor Republicans can claim that their party represents a majority of the electorate, or the officially qualified voters.
This new political arithmetic drove Bill Clinton’s decision to campaign as a New Democrat in 1992.
It also helped motivate George W Bush’s call for a more “compassionate conservatism” in 2000.
Even so, in both of those elections, millions of voters rejected the major party nominees.
Instead, they cast their ballots for third-party presidential candidates.
The most successful third-party candidate in recent elections was Texas billionaire Ross Perot.
This was the best showing for a third-party candidate since Theodore Roosevelt ran for president as a Progressive in 1912.
The roughly 2. million votes cast for Nader amounted to only 2. percent of the vote.
But that election was so close that some Democrats accused Nader of acting as a “spoiler” whose candidacy cost A1 Gore the White House.
In the 2000 elections, Vermont voters, like this man, marked their ballots in pencil.
Other states used different voting methods, from punch cards to electronic voting machines.
The Republican and Democratic parties have always appealed to different groups of voters.
As the 20th century ended, however, both parties struggled to adapt to a decrease in party loyalty and an increase in independent voters.
Bush became president in January 1989, he had already had a long career of public service.
He later represented Texas in the House of Representatives for two terms, served as ambassador to the United Nations, and was director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Continuing Reagan's Policies The election of 1988 was a test of both old and new party loyalties.
His campaign appealed to evangelicals and voters who had benefited most from Reaganomics.
Bush’s Democratic opponent, Massachusetts Governor Michael Dukakis, tried to rally the fraying Democratic coalition by focusing on weaknesses in the economy.
Dukakis appealed to liberals and to poor and middle-class voters who had not shared in the Reagan recovery.
Bush had even won key industrial states, including Michigan and Ohio, which had long been Democratic strongholds.
Legislative Wins and Losses In his acceptance speech at the Republican National Convention, Bush had made a number of campaign promises.
He made a pledge “to do whatever it takes to make sure the disabled are included in the mainstream,” explaining that “for too long they’ve been left out.
This law banned discrimination in employment against people with disabilities.
It also required employers to make “reasonable accommodation” to help disabled employees.
This might mean building a ramp to enable a person in a wheelchair to enter a workplace.
Or it could entail ordering special equipment to help workers with limited vision or hearing carry out their job responsibilities.
The president was less successful in carrying out his pledge to create 30 million new jobs.
One reason for this was a financial mess, known as the savings and loan crisis, which he inherited from the Reagan administration.
Savings and loan associations, or S&Ls, are financial institutions that were originally set up to provide low-cost home loans to the public.
During the Depression, the FDIC had encouraged people to deposit money in S&Ls by guaranteeing their deposits up to a fixed amount.
In return for this guarantee, S&Ls were limited by regulation to making low-risk loans.
During the 1980s, the Reagan administration deregulated the S&L industry.
Some S&Ls began making risky loans in the hopes of earning higher profits.
More than a thousand of these S&Ls stumbled into financial troubles and went bankrupt.
By 1990, the nation was moving into a recession, and unemployment was on the rise.
Bush worked with Congress to clean up the S&L mess by repaying depositors who had lost their savings.
But the cost of their plan, borne partly by taxpayers, was more than $150 billion.
The resulting drain on the federal treasury contributed to another economic problem — soaring budget deficits.
Congress agreed to cut spending, but only after Bush agreed to raise taxes.
This violation of Bush’s “Read my lips” pledge upset his conservative backers.
Journalist Tom Wicker later wrote, had broken one of the most ironclad political pledges ever made— offered . . . before a national television audience — a promise without which he might conceivably not have been able to win the presidential election.
With that one action . . . the president of the United States brought into question both his personal reliability and his political judgment. —Tom Wicker, George Herbert Walker Bush , 2004 Economic Problems and Social Tensions Increase Despite the budget compromise, the deficit and debt continued to rise.
At the same time, social tensions were mounting, especially in urban areas.
In April 1992, rioting broke out in a poor Los Angeles neighborhood after a jury acquitted four police officers in the videotaped beating of Rodney King, a black resident.
The Rodney King riots, as they were called, soon spread across the city.
For many Americans, the riots were a sign of continued social and economic tensions in the country.
Repaying depositors in bankrupt savings and loans strained the federal budget and contributed to an economic slowdown that cost President Bush the 2002 election.
A New Democrat in the White House As Democrats approached the 1992 presidential election, they had to confront some unpleasant realities.
Bush, running for a second term, began the campaign with high approval ratings.
To overcome these obstacles, the party needed an appealing candidate with a fresh message.
It found both traits in the young, five-term governor of Arkansas, Bill Clinton.
The Election of 1992 Leaves Clinton Without a Mandate Clinton reached out to voters as a New Democrat who cared deeply about the struggles and concerns of ordinary Americans.
Opportunity, responsibility, and community became the central themes of Clinton’s campaign.
At Clinton headquarters, a sign reading ""The Economy, Stupid,” reminded staffers that promoting economic growth was the key to victory.
The Texas billionaire promised to restore prosperity by balancing the federal budget and paying off the national debt.
His frank talk about the economy attracted voters who felt dissatisfied by the two main parties.
The majority of Perot’s supporters, however, were conservatives who otherwise might have voted for Bush.
But due to Perot’s strong showing at the polls, Clinton received only 43 percent of the popular vote— the lowest percentage for a winning presidential candidate since 1912.
As a result, Clinton would enter office lacking a strong electoral mandate.
Legislative Wins and Losses Clinton took office with a Democratic majority in both houses of Congress.
With this support, he won several legislative victories, including passage of the Family and Medical Leave Act.
This law allowed workers to take time off for family emergencies without risking their jobs.
However, Clinton failed to deliver on a campaign promise to reform the nation’s health insurance system.
Since the end of World War II, most working Americans have received health insurance through their employers.
The creation of Medicare and Medicaid in the 1960s provided health insurance to retirees and the poor.
Even so, when Clinton took office in 1993, millions of Americans had no health insurance.
For those lacking such coverage, a serious illness or accident could quickly become a financial disaster.
Developed by a panel headed by First Lady Hillary Clinton, the plan would provide universal health care, or health care for all Americans.
And health care providers opposed it, fearing increased government regulation.
When Clinton left office in 2000, about 40 million Americans still lacked health insurance.
Republicans Take Control of Congress Between presidential elections, midterm elections take place to select members of Congress.
Led by Georgia Representative Newt Gingrich, Republican candidates appealed to voters with a 10-point plan called the Contract with America.
Republicans would strive to balance the federal budget, combat crime, reform the welfare system, cut taxes, create jobs, and minimize lawsuits.
When Congress met in 1995, Republicans had gained a majority in both the House and the Senate.
Flush with victory, House Republicans set out to balance the federal budget.
They called for major cutbacks in government spending on education, welfare, and Medicare.
Without a budget to authorize expenditures, the government prepared to close down in mid-November 1995.
The government did not reopen until early 1996, after a budget that Clinton would accept was approved.
Reforming the Welfare System Republicans in Congress next turned to welfare reform.
Initiated during the Depression as part of the Social Security system, this program gave money to unemployed single mothers.
Critics of the welfare system charged that instead of serving as a temporary safety net to help families through hard times, AFDC had created a culture of poverty that continued from one generation to the next.
They pointed out that if welfare recipients married or found work, they would lose their welfare benefits.
Such eligibility rules, they felt, discouraged mothers from making changes that might help them gain economic stability.
The program’s opponents also observed that children raised in homes with no working parent were more likely to need welfare as adults.
TANF limited the amount of time a family could receive welfare payments to five years.
Its goal was to get mothers off welfare and into the workforce as quickly as possible.
Bill Clinton appointed his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, to lead a committee charged with developing a plan for universal health care.
CONTRACT WITH AMERICA Led by Georgia Representative Newt Gingrich, Republicans in 1994 offered voters a 10-point Contract with America.
The result was the first Republican majority in the House of Representatives in 40 years.
The House of Representatives impeached Clinton for perjury and obstruction of justice.
Despite protests from Democrats that the new law would increase poverty and hunger, Clinton signed the welfare reform bill.
As it did, the child poverty rate decreased from 20. percent in 1995 to 17. percent in 2004.
A Balanced Budget and an Economic Boom Clinton’s support for welfare reform, coupled with an improving economy, boosted his popularity as president.
The victory made Clinton the first Democratic president since Franklin Roosevelt to secure a second term.
Clinton began his second term determined to avoid another budget impasse.
Over the next year, Republicans and Democrats worked together to craft a tax cut bill and the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
Between 1998 and 2000, the United States government took in more money than it spent.
Republicans argued that the government should return some of the surplus to taxpayers in the form of tax cuts.
Known as the “dot-com boom ” it was largely driven by new business opportunities related to the Internet.
In the early 1990s, new technology allowed Internet users to access documents stored on other computers connected to the Internet.
The vast amount of information made available in this way is known as the World Wide Web.
The Internet gave rise to a host of online businesses whose Web addresses ended in .com— short for commercial.
As the dot-com economy flourished, unemployment dropped to less than 4 percent, the lowest it had been in 30 years.
As the amount of money people earned, spent, and invested increased, tax revenues poured into the federal treasury, helping balance the federal budget.
Surviving Scandal and Impeachment Rumors of scandals had dogged Clinton from the beginning of his presidency.
The primary charge was that he illegally profited from an investment in an Arkansas real estate development called Whitewater.
Accusations also surfaced of his having had numerous affairs while he was governor of Arkansas.
In May 1994, a former Arkansas state employee, Paula Jones, filed a lawsuit accusing Clinton of sexual harassment.
Attorney General Janet Reno appointed lawyer Kenneth Starr to investigate the Whitewater claims.
In January 1998, Starr also obtained evidence that Clinton had engaged in an affair with a White House intern, Monica Lewinsky, which contradicted Clinton’s testimony in the Paula Jones case.
In September, Starr submitted to Congress a report that accused the president of committing perjury, or lying under oath.
As a result, the votes on both charges fell far short of the two thirds needed to remove Clinton from office.
The majority of Americans seemed both to agree with the Senate’s decision to acquit Clinton and to accept the president’s apology.
Clinton not only survived the scandal but also ended his presidency with a remarkably high 65 percent approval rating.
Bush, the 41st president, are the second family to have successive generations in the White House.
Many Florida voters in 2000 did not punch a tiny rectangle, called a ""chad,** completely off their ballots.
The Supreme Court denied Al Gore's request for a hand count of such ballots.
Conservatism in Action As Republicans approached the presidential election of 2000, it was their turn to face some unpleasant realities.
Vice President Al Gore, the Democratic candidate for president, was a strong and seasoned campaigner.
The party needed a candidate who could unite Republicans while appealing to moderate Democrats.
The Supreme Court Decides the 2000 Presidential Election When Bush began campaigning, his chances of winning seemed slim.
And his work on environmental issues had won him broad support from environmentalists.
Moreover, Gore could point to a soaring economy and years of peace as Democratic achievements.
In contrast, people knew little about Bush other than that he was the son of a former president.
Unlike Reagan conservatives, who wanted to reduce the power of government, Bush talked of using government to ""put conservative values and conservative ideas into the thick of the fight for justice and opportunity.
An initial count had Bush ahead by 1 ,784 votes out of nearly 6 million.
In some counties, officials raised questions about confusing ballots or ballots that may not have been properly counted by voting machines.
When the Florida Supreme Court ruled against Bush, he appealed its decision to the Supreme Court.
The majority reasoned that without clear legal standards for evaluating the ballots in question, a hand recount violated the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
On January 20, 2001 , George W Bush took the oath of office as the 43rd United States president.
These doubts were largely dispelled when he ran for reelection in 2004.
That year he became the first candidate since his father in 1988 to win more than 50 percent of the popular vote.
With this support, he was able to enact much, but not all, of his domestic agenda.
Too many American children are segregated into schools without standards, shuffled from grade to grade because of their age, regardless of their knowledge.
When a school district receives federal funds to teach poor children, we expect them to learn.
Accountability is based on the principle that individuals or organizations are responsible for their actions and should be able to show how well they are doing at achieving their goals.
NCLB requires schools receiving federal funds to test their students’ progress in reading and math and to share the results.
Schools unable to meet a standard called Adequate Yearly Progress must offer their students extra tutoring help or the opportunity to attend school elsewhere.
Bush’s efforts to reform the Social Security system were less successful.
With baby boomers moving into retirement, there would soon be too few workers to support the growing number of retirees at the current levels of benefits.
Many also agreed that something should be done to keep the pension system financially sound.
Bush proposed reforming the system by allowing workers to invest part of their Social Security tax payments in retirement accounts.
He argued that personal accounts would provide workers with better pensions than the current system.
Critics complained that Bush’s plan could leave some workers worse off.
By the end of 2005, Bush had dropped Social Security reform from his domestic agenda.
George W Bush's No Child Left Behind Act increased federal funds to public schools.
In exchange for these funds, schools were expected to show that their students were learning basic reading and math skills.
Bush pushed through Congress a plan that cut income tax rates for most Americans.
Uncertain of what would happen next, Americans stopped traveling and spending.
By the end of 2003, the United States economy had suffered a loss of more than 2 million jobs.
Bush responded by pushing Congress to reduce tax rates on earnings from savings and investments.
He argued that lower tax rates would encourage people to work harder, save more, and invest in new enterprises.
His opponents charged that his tax cuts would mainly enrich the wealthy.
They predicted that cutting tax rates would also lead to falling tax revenues and a string of budget deficits.
The federal budget did fall from a surplus of more than $100 billion in 2001 to a deficit of nearly $200 billion in 2002.
But the shift from surplus to deficit was not entirely due to the recession and tax cuts.
In response to the attacks, Bush created the Department of Homeland Security.
As spending to fight terrorism soared, so did budget deficits, reaching nearly $400 billion by 2004.
Fortunately, as Bush had predicted, the tax cuts helped stimulate an economic recovery.
To the surprise of Bush’s critics, tax revenues in 2005 were higher than in any year since the peak of the dot-com boom in 2000.
In addition, the share of income taxes paid by the wealthiest taxpayers was on the rise.
Bob Englehart,The Hartford Courant, 2006/Cagle Cartoons Surviving Falling Approval Ratings After 9/1 1 , the nation rallied behind President Bush.
Many disapproved of how the new Department of Homeland Security reacted to its first large natural disaster.
In August 2005, Hurricane Katrina destroyed much of New Orleans and other Gulf Coast towns.
By July 2006, Bush’s approval rating had sunk below 40 percent in many polls.
During the 2006 midterm election campaign, many voters used their ballots to express dissatisfaction with Bush’s presidency.
For the first time since 1994, Democrats won control of the House and the Senate.
Just how well his administration and the Democrat-controlled Congress would work together remained to be seen.
After Hurricane Katrina, the Bush administration was awash in criticism.
A House bipartisan committee investigating preparation for and response to the disaster identified failures at all levels of government.
Bush In 1988, Bush appealed to Reagan Republicans with his campaign pledges to expand the economy, not raise taxes, and create a “kinder, gentler” America.
After a costly bailout of the savings and loans crisis, he broke the no-taxes pledge in an effort to balance the federal budget.
Bill Clinton As a moderate New Democrat, Clinton breathed new life into the Democratic coalition.
Republicans won control of Congress with their 10-point Contract with America.
Bush Gore In the 2000 election, Al Gore led George W Bush in the popular vote by a very thin margin.
The Supreme Court decided the outcome, denying Gore’s demand for a recount in Florida.
George W Bush As a candidate, Bush reached out to moderates with his compassionate conservatism.
Since 2000, a rotating crew of both Russian and American astronauts has occupied the space station on a permanent basis.
The creation of the ISS was a striking example of international cooperation in the post-Cold War era.
Prior to the 1990s, when the United States and the Soviet Union were still bitter enemies, such a venture would have been far less likely.
The Soviet Union collapsed, and a new era in international relations began.
With the Cold War over, many people heralded the beginning of a new world order based on peace and cooperation.
A world in which freedom and respect for human rights find a home among all nations. — Speech to Congress, March 6, 1991 However, the prospects for a new world order were by no means certain.
Their policy decisions and actions, which reflected elements of both realism and idealism in foreign affairs, fueled an ongoing debate over the course of United States foreign policy.
Forging New Relations After the Cold War Although people around the world welcomed the end of the Cold War, the sense of celebration was short lived.
Although the close of the Cold War brought new freedom, it also raised many difficult questions about the future.
This was especially true in Europe and the former Soviet Union, where political changes called for the building of new relationships among countries.
Negotiating with the Former Soviet Union Despite the tensions and dangers of the Cold War, a certain, predictable order had marked the postWorld War II era.
The United States and the Soviet Union had dominated affairs, setting most of the rules in a bilateral, or two-sided, world.
Instead of confronting one major adversary— the Soviet Union— the United States now faced a host of potential challenges in a more multilateral, or many-sided, world.
An immediate set of problems concerned nuclear weapons in the former Soviet empire.
This agreement called for both countries to reduce their nuclear stockpiles.
President Bush and Russia’s new president, Boris Yeltsin, signed START II, which called for further reductions.
In the meantime, the various Soviet republics had declared independence.
The United States formally recognized the independence of the new republics.
It then tried to persuade them to place their nuclear weapons under Russian control.
This action would help protect the weapons, which the United States feared potential terrorists might otherwise buy or steal.
Economic problems also challenged peace and democracy in the former Soviet Union.
However, economic difficulties threatened to undermine their political stability.
President Bush urged Congress to provide foreign aid and assistance to these republics.
A victory for democracy and freedom in the former USSR creates the possibility of a new world of peace for our children and grandchildren.
But if this democratic revolution is defeated, it could plunge us into a world more dangerous, in some respects, than the dark years of the Cold War.
Over the next decade, the United States provided billions of dollars to help stimulate economic growth and support democracy in Russia and the other new republics.
Putin’s strong leadership brought stability, but the nation continued to suffer from economic woes and political corruption.
Putin also restricted rights and freedoms in Russia and tried to exert control over the former Soviet republics.
Still, the United States and Russia maintained a cooperative relationship.
After the Cold War ended, however, new political, military, and economic alliances developed in Europe.
Several former Warsaw Pact nations hoped to join NATO as a way to develop closer ties to Western Europe and the United States.
First, however, NATO leaders had to address opposition from Russia, which feared that an expansion of NATO might isolate it and threaten its interests.
NATO would admit former Soviet bloc countries first as “junior partners” rather than as full members.
The EU was an expanded version of the Common Market, established 40 years earlier.
The EU was designed to advance Europe’s economic integration and unify European laws and foreign policies.
In 1999, as part of this goal, most of the EU countries adopted a shared currency, the euro.
In 2004, 10 new member states joined the EU, including nations from the former Soviet bloc.
The European Union brought together the original members of the Common Market, formed in 1952, with other European nations.
This action took place in Panama, which General Manuel Noriega had ruled since 1983.
Although Noriega was a ruthless dictator, he had close ties to the United States.
He had helped the Reagan administration by aiding the Contras in their battle against the Nicaraguan government.
United States relations with Noriega soured under the first President Bush.
In 1988, before Bush took office, the United States had indicted Noriega on drug trafficking charges.
The following year, Panamanians began protesting against Noriega after he voided national elections.
Bush withdrew United States support from Noriega, emphasizing Noriega’s violations of human rights and democratic rule.
Another key factor— the Panama Canal — influenced the change of United States policy toward Panama.
As the site of the canal, Panama held great economic and strategic importance.
Although the Panama Canal Treaty of 1977 had given control of the canal to Panama, the United States feared that Noriega might violate the terms of the treaty.
For trade purposes, it was vital for the United States and other nations to have access to the canal.
On December 20, 1989, he sent into Panama an invasion force of more than 20,000 United States troops.
Their goal was to remove Noriega from power and bring him to justice in the United States.
Some critics objected to the invasion, accusing the United States of trying to impose its will on the hemisphere.
Despite such claims, United States forces quickly overran Noriega's defenses and occupied Panama City.
In 1992, a United States federal court convicted him of drug trafficking and sent him to prison.
Meanwhile, Panamanians elected a new government that established better ties with the United States.
In 1989, the United States invaded Panama to remove General Manuel Noriega from power.
Noriega was a dictator who threatened United States interests in the hemisphere.
Confronting Dictators As the Cold War wound down, the United States carried out several military actions against foreign dictators.
In the past, fear of either provoking a superpower conflict or losing an anticommunist ally might have inhibited such actions.
But with the Cold War ending, the United States had more freedom to act.
It also had a greater opportunity to forge international coalitions to deal with foreign crises.
Halting Iraqi Aggression Bush faced his next foreign crisis in the Middle East.
In August 1990, Iraq invaded Kuwait, its much smaller, oil-rich neighbor to the south.
Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein tried to justify this invasion by claiming that Kuwait was rightfully part of Iraq.
First, Iraq controlled a large military in a region prone to instability and conflict.
Second, the United States and other developed nations relied on oil from the Persian Gulf.
Saddam's actions threatened the oil supply and could wreak havoc on Western economies.
Third, if Saddam's invasion of Kuwait succeeded, he might decide to invade other countries in the Middle East.
Saudi Arabia, a United States ally and major oil producer, was especially vulnerable.
President Bush condemned the invasion and called for an international coalition to force Saddam out of Kuwait.
Thirty-four countries, including most of the Arab nations, joined the UN-sponsored coalition.
The Soviet Union, which had not yet dissolved, also agreed to collaborate with the coalition, despite the USSR’s previously friendly relations with Iraq.
As a first step, the coalition sent nearly 700,000 troops to Saudi Arabia's border with Kuwait.
This force, which included more than 400,000 United States soldiers, stood ready to defend the Saudi kingdom from invasion.
The United Nations also imposed economic sanctions on Iraq in hopes of forcing Saddam's withdrawal without going to war.
It gave Iraq until January 15, 1991 , to pull its troops out of Kuwait.
If Iraq did not comply, the United Nations would authorize coalition forces to drive the Iraqis out.
The United States Congress, however, was divided over whether to support a war.
Others wanted to allow more time for economic sanctions to take effect.
They argued that it was the desire to control oil supplies —not to punish aggression— that motivated calls for war in the Middle East.
Nevertheless, on January 12, Congress approved the use of “all necessary means” to free Kuwait from Iraqi occupation.
For six weeks, coalition aircraft bombed Iraqi troops that were dug in along the Iraq-Kuwait border.
They also struck key military and industrial centers in the Iraqi heartland.
Still, Saddam remained defiant, promising to wage “the mother of all battles” against his attackers.
But as coalition forces moved into Iraq, they encountered little resistance.
The war had lasted less than two months, but it had devastating effects on the Persian Gulf region.
As Saddam's troops fled Kuwait, they set fire to the country's oil fields.
These fires burned out of control, causing an environmental disaster in much of the area.
It destroyed key infrastructure and left as many as 100,000 people dead.
Although Saddam Hussein remained in power, the coalition had shown that international cooperation could be marshaled against a common enemy for the common purpose of opposing aggression.
Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein built one of the most powerful armies in the Middle East.
After he invaded Kuwait in 1990, the United States formed an international coalition to force Saddam to withdraw.
Iraq suffered defeat in the Persian Gulf War, but Saddam remained in power.
Victory in the Gulf War prompted celebrations across the United States.
President Bush's approval ratings soared after the war, but he still lost the 1992 election.
Families sometimes searched these graves to identify relatives who had been murdered.
Ending Ethnic Cleansing in Yugoslavia During the Cold War, Yugoslavia consisted of six republics held together under communist rule.
Tensions simmered among these groups, but the communist system kept the situation from boiling over.
When communism collapsed in Eastern Europe, Yugoslavia also fell apart.
Four of its republics declared independence, and civil war broke out in Bosnia.
The fighting pitted Bosnian Serbs against the majority Muslim population.
The conflict was stoked by neighboring Serbia, whose president, Slobodan Milosevic, hoped to hold Yugoslavia together under Serbian leadership.
Bosnian Serbs carried out a policy that they called ethnic cleansing— the forced removal and murder of ethnic groups.
They rounded up Muslims, Croats, and ethnic Albanians and forced them from their homes.
The Serbs burned villages, tortured and raped their victims, and committed other atrocities.
They killed at least 200,000 people and caused some 2 million Bosnians to flee.
Serbian troops also surrounded and bombed the Bosnian capital of Sarajevo.
During the 1992 United States presidential campaign, candidate Bill Clinton called for military intervention in Bosnia.
He declared that such violence was unacceptable in the post-Cold War world.
Once elected, however, Clinton— like Bush before him— hesitated to commit United States forces.
He also felt reluctant to act, because the strife was contained in the Balkan region.
It did not immediately threaten the United States or the rest of Europe.
NATO decided to support these attacks by bombing Serbian forces and installations.
Some argued that the Bosnian conflict was not an American concern, while others feared that NATO intervention would result in more death and destruction.
But under the conditions of a widening conflict, the United States was finally able to bring the three warring factions to the peace table.
The peace negotiations, held in Dayton, Ohio, eventually led to the Dayton Accords.
Once that occurred, United States troops joined NATO forces in the region.
They separated the warring factions, protected civilians, and provided economic aid.
Responding to Ethnic Conflict and Genocide In the post-Cold War era, the rise of ethnic conflict posed a challenge to United States presidents.
In parts of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, ethnic and national tensions that communist rulers had suppressed for decades were suddenly unleashed.
Ethnic Albanians, who made up the majority of the population in Kosovo, sought independence.
Although Serbs constituted only about 10 percent of Kosovo’s population, they began another cycle of ethnic cleansing.
They rounded up the province’s Muslims and executed them, destroying towns and cities in the process.
In March 1999, NATO fighter-bombers attacked the Serbian military in Kosovo.
The next year, the new government arrested him, charging him with war crimes and crimes against humanity.
Milosevic stood trial at the International Tribunal in The Hague, Netherlands, but he died in 2006 before a verdict was reached.
Ignoring Genocide in Rwanda In the 1990s, ethnic violence also took place on a mass scale in Africa.
The conflict began when the Hutu-led government lashed out at the Tutsi minority.
In about three months, Hutu forces slaughtered more than 800,000 Rwandans, most of them Tutsis.
This brutal massacre shocked the world and prompted charges of genocide.
But most countries, including the United States, refused to become involved.
When the French troops arrived in Rwanda, they found thousands of bodies littering the countryside.
The United States failed to take action in Rwanda for a number of reasons.
As you will read in the next section, a previous intervention in another African nation, Somalia, had gone badly.
Clinton and other United States leaders were reluctant to take a similar risk in Rwanda.
Some leaders also viewed the conflict as an internal matter for Rwandans to resolve.
They felt that the United States could not afford to get involved in every civil war around the world.
But many observers suggested another reason for the inaction of the United States and other powerful nations.
They claimed that world leaders did not take the fate of Rwanda seriously or did not regard any small African nation as crucial to their interests.
In 1994, ethnic conflict and genocide forced millions of Rwandans to flee from their homes.
UN Secretary General Kofi Annan later apologized for the world's failure to act.
This aid amounted to 70 percent of all the food eaten in Somalia during the war.
Trying to Ease Human Suffering Although the United States did not halt the genocide in Rwanda, it did provide humanitarian aid to Rwanda and other countries during the post-Cold War era.
Humanitarian aid includes money, food, and other forms of assistance given to people who are suffering and in need.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union had used aid to support their allies in the superpower struggle.
Once the Cold War ended, however, the United States had greater freedom to offer help where it was most needed.
At the same time, however, Americans found that providing humanitarian aid came with complications.
Sending Relief Aid to Somalia One of the countries the United States tried to help was Somalia, a desperately poor nation in East Africa.
Somalia had been a United States ally during the final years of the Cold War, even though it was ruled by a harsh dictator.
Various factions battled for power, giving rise to chaos and crippling the nation’s economy.
As a result of this chaos and the effects of a severe drought, the people of Somalia faced widespread starvation.
By late 1992, some 300,000 Somalis had died of hunger, and some 2 million more were in danger of starvation.
In response, the United Nations organized a humanitarian relief mission mostly made up of United States soldiers.
But the United Nations soon realized that humanitarian aid would not be enough to solve Somalia’s problems.
The United Nations then shifted its focus to nation building, or constructing political institutions and a stable government.
But Somalia’s rival factions refused to cooperate, and the conflict grew even deadlier.
As the fighting spread, combatants attacked and killed United States soldiers.
After Somalis dragged a United States soldier’s body through the streets of Mogadishu, Somalia’s capital, the American public demanded the withdrawal of troops.
Clinton pulled the soldiers out, and the UN mission ended shortly thereafter.
Although the humanitarian effort in Somalia had been well intentioned, it had failed to address the nation’s underlying problems.
The experience in Somalia taught the United States a strong lesson in the difficulties of supplying aid to countries in conflict.
Countering Famine in North Korea North Korea also experienced a food crisis in the 1990s.
During the Cold War, North Korea had relied on the Soviet Union for trade and aid, including food shipments and farm equipment.
After the Soviet Union collapsed, North Korea was no longer capable of feeding its population.
In 1995 and 1996, severe floods hit North Korea, damaging the nation’s crops.
Between 1995 and 1998, as many as 3 million people died of starvation in North Korea.
In contemplating a response to the North Korean crisis, the United States faced a dilemma.
North Korea was one of the last hardline, or rigidly, communist regimes in the world.
North Korea was also pursuing a nuclear weapons program that violated global nonproliferation agreements.
In 1995, it began to accept aid from the World Food Program , a branch of the United Nations.
Over the next few years, the WFP oversaw the delivery of millions of tons of food to North Korea, including large shipments from the United States.
United States contributions to this effort aroused controversy at home.
Critics said that helping a communist state like North Korea violated United States interests.
They further charged that much of the food went to the North Korean army, never reaching the starving peasants it was meant to help.
Supporters of the policy contended that aid would help undermine the communist regime by showing North Koreans that the United States was not their enemy.
They also argued that aid was a humanitarian gesture that represented the best of American ideals.
By the end of the decade, 24 million Africans were infected with HIV/AIDS, and several million were dying every year.
Although President Clinton offered sympathy, his administration did little to combat the AIDS epidemic.
In 2003, President George W Bush signed a bill allocating $15 billion to combat AIDS in Africa and the Caribbean.
Bush declared that the United States had a moral duty to take action and urged other rich nations to do the same.
Bush’s AIDS-fighting package was the most ambitious plan attempted by any country up to that time.
But critics asserted that United States assistance was too little and too late to stem the crisis.
Drug treatments can help those infected with HIV live longer, more active lives, but there is no cure.
The numbers of worldwide HIV infections and deaths due to AIDS have steadily increased since 1980.
This graph shows the total number of infections and deaths up to any given year.
Managing Global Trade Free trade agreements like NAFTA have promoted industrial growth in developing countries.
They complain that it causes American workers to lose jobs to workers overseas.
The United States confronted new economic challenges in the post-Cold War era.
At the height of the Cold War, the world had been divided into two main trading blocs— communist and capitalist.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, the world moved quickly toward a more diverse, global economy.
As a result, the United States had to find new ways to compete in the global marketplace.
Promoting Free Trade in North America At the end of the Cold War, the United States had the most powerful economy in the world.
However, it ran a high trade deficit with economic powers such as China, Japan, and the European Union.
A trade deficit occurs when the value of a country’s imports exceeds the value of its exports.
One way United States leaders hoped to correct the trade imbalance was through free trade.
NAFTA would create a free-trade zone among the United States, Mexico, and Canada.
A free-trade zone is a defined geographic area in which governments lower or eliminate tariffs and other barriers to international trade.
Supporters of NAFTA claimed that it would benefit the United States by increasing the market for American exports.
They also asserted that it would create new, highwage jobs for American workers.
In addition, they claimed that NAFTA would boost Mexico’s economy and help limit illegal immigration from Mexico.
Labor leaders argued that NAFTA would encourage American factories to move to Mexico, where labor costs were lower.
This, they said, would cost jobs and harm workers in the United States.
Critics also worried that NAFTA would promote environmental damage, since pollution controls in Mexico were less stringent than in the United States.
Ultimately, NAFTA’s supporters, including President Clinton, prevailed.
Although trade among the United States, Canada, and Mexico has increased, the United States trade deficit has continued to grow.
Although many United States factories have moved overseas, taking jobs with them, United States employment has grown.
Overall, Americans differ about whether NAFTA has fundamentally helped or hurt the American economy.
The Challenges and Opportunities of Globalization The Clinton administration soon worked to approve another free-trade agreement.
The first GATT, signed after World War II, had required member nations to reduce barriers to trade.
The main function of the WTO is to set trade policies and mediate disputes among members.
The creation of NAFTA, GATT, and the WTO was one indication of increasing globalization during the post-Cold War era.
Globalization refers to the integration of markets and societies around the world.
It includes the movement of goods, money, people, and information across national borders.
According to the Globalization Index, some countries are far more global in their outlook than others.
The Globalization Index ranks countries in terms of their interactions with the rest of the world in four broad CANADA UNITED STA1 Political Links Global countries join international organizations. support UN activities, and sign global treaties and agreements.
Portugal led in global political links in 2005, but ranked only 22nd overall.
Contacts The people in global countries travel, telephone, and transfer money across borders with ease.
Switzerland was the top in personal contacts in 2005 and ranked third overall.
Singapore led the world in cross-border trade in 2005 and ranked first overall.
Connectivity Global countries rank high in numbers of Internet users, Internet hosts, and secure servers.
The United States led the world in technological connectivity in 2005 and ranked fourth overall.
Trade policies like GATT and NAFTA have certainly spurred the growth of the global marketplace.
But advances in transportation and communications technology have been just as important.
The Internet, for example, has helped to “shrink” the globe, making it possible for people in distant parts of the world to communicate and work together almost instantaneously.
It has given more people access to goods and services from around the world.
It has helped promote economic development and create new opportunities in poor countries.
It has also stimulated cultural diffusion, or the sharing of ideas and customs among nations.
Environmentalists fear that the rapid growth of the world economy is contributing to environmental problems such as global warming.
Many people are also concerned that globalization may result in a loss of cultural diversity.
They fear that modem, Western values will take the place of more traditional customs.
In addition, some critics argue that globalization helps concentrate wealth in the hands of large corporations and wealthy individuals.
Such objections have led to major protests at WTO meetings around the world.
Demonstrators hope to influence WTO policies and curb what they see as the problems of globalization.
Nevertheless, globalization is a reality that will continue to pose challenges and create opportunities for the modem world.
It was the biggest terror attack ever to take place on United States soil.
Fighting Terrorism Among all the challenges facing the United States in the post-Cold War era, one of the most critical is fighting terrorism.
For decades, terrorists had used violence to achieve their political goals.
Groups emerged to carry out terrorist acts in previously unaffected parts of the world, including the United States.
Terror Strikes the United States A wave of terrorist attacks took place during Clinton’s presidency.
In 1998, the United States embassies in the East African nations of Kenya and Tanzania were bombed.
Then in 2000, terrorists attacked the USS Cole , a Navy destroyer anchored off the coast of the Arab nation of Yemen.
In response, the United States launched missile strikes against terrorist camps overseas.
The next attack occurred in the first year of George W Bush’s presidency.
The fourth airplane crashed in a Pennsylvania field after passengers fought with the hijackers.
This last plane had been heading for either the White House or the Capitol building.
In the days that followed, Americans learned that an international terrorist network called al Qaeda had carried out the 9/1 1 attacks.
The organization’s leader was Osama bin Laden, a wealthy Saudi Arabian and Muslim extremist who sought to rid Muslim countries of Western influence and to establish fundamentalist Islamic rule.
A1 Qaeda had also carried out the United States embassy attacks in Africa and the assault on the USS Cole.
In 1998, bin Laden declared that all Muslims had a duty “to kill the Americans and their allies— civilian or military/’ He was not representing the feelings of the vast majority of Muslims, who reject terrorism as being counter to Islamic values.
But he did speak to a general feeling among some Muslims that the United States did not respect Islam or support Muslim interests.
These Muslims resented having thousands of United States soldiers stationed in Saudi Arabia — the holy land of Islam— years after the Persian Gulf War’s end.
They also resented United States support for Israel in its struggle with the Palestinians.
Bin Laden used these bitter feelings to promote his cause and to recruit terrorists.
President Bush reacted to al Qaeda’s attacks on September 1 1 , 2001 , by declaring a war on terrorism.
In a speech to Congress, he declared, “Our war on terror begins with al Qaeda, but it does not end there.
This war would be waged not only against the terrorists themselves, Bush explained, but also against any governments that sponsored them.
Ending Taliban Rule in Afghanistan The war on terrorism began in Afghanistan, al Qaeda’s main base of operations.
The ultraconservative Taliban were known for their harsh punishments and their rules barring women from working, receiving an education, or enjoying other basic rights.
After 9/11, President Bush asked the Taliban to turn bin Laden over to the United States.
The United States formed an international coalition to overthrow the Taliban and capture bin Laden.
In early October 2001 , United States and British forces began bombing al Qaeda camps and Taliban military sites.
In November, United States Marines landed in the country to subdue the remaining Taliban forces.
The U.S forces then began to hunt for bin Laden, who had gone into hiding.
Toppling the Iraqi Regime After the victory in Afghanistan, President Bush turned his attention to another Middle Eastern country— Iraq.
Bush feared that Iraq, in particular, might provide such weapons to terrorists.
Since taking power in 1979, Iraq’s dictator, Saddam Hussein, had compiled a horrific human-rights record.
In the late 1980s, he had used chemical weapons against the Kurds, an ethnic group in northern Iraq.
After the Persian Gulf War, Saddam— a Sunni Muslim— crushed a rebellion by Shi’a Muslims in southern Iraq.
The Sunni and Shi’a branches of Islam have a long-standing rivalry in the Muslim world.
In putting down the rebellion, Saddam murdered many thousands of Shfites and other Iraqis.
He also blocked UN inspectors in their search for WMD, which were banned in Iraq after the Gulf War.
It intended to oust the Taliban and find al Qaeda leader Osama bin Laden.
Although the Taliban lost power, they continued to wage a guerrilla war against the invading forces.
After the U.S.-led invasion of Iraq in 2003, Iraqis tore down this statue of Saddam Hussein in Baghdad.
Insurgents battled to oust United States forces, and rival factions fought one another for power and influence.
Many proudly showed off their ink-stained fingers — proof that they had voted in the election.
These “new conservatives” favor using United States military power to confront hostile dictatorships and to promote democracy around the world.
Persuaded by Bush’s arguments, Congress authorized the president to send troops to Iraq if necessary.
In March 2003, an international coalition led by the United States launched an invasion of Iraq.
Several European allies, including France and Germany, opposed the invasion.
Our cause is just, the security of the nations we serve and the peace of the world.
And our mission is clear, to disarm Iraq of weapons of mass destruction, to end Saddam Hussein’s support for terrorism, and to free the Iraqi people. —President George W Bush, address to the nation, March 22, 2003 Within a month, coalition forces had seized Iraq’s capital, Baghdad, and toppled the government.
Saddam escaped, only to be captured eight months later, tried in court, and sentenced to death.
Meanwhile, United States inspection teams began the search for banned weapons.
After its quick victory, the United States struggled to bring peace and democracy to Iraq.
Although most of the population welcomed the end of Saddam’s regime, some Iraqis resented having foreign troops in their country.
An armed resistance, including insurgent forces from both inside and outside Iraq, soon rose up to battle the coalition forces.
Building Democracy in Afghanistan and Iraq In Afghanistan, with the Taliban ousted from power, the United States and the United Nations worked with Afghan opposition groups to establish a democratically elected government.
The constitution included rights and freedoms found in many Western democracies.
It made Afghanistan an Islamic republic, but it also guaranteed freedom of religion.
In addition, it ensured that women would have the same rights as men— a system far different from the oppressive rules enforced by the Taliban.
In October 2005, Iraqis voted by a large majority to approve a new constitution.
As in Afghanistan, Islam would play a role in the nation’s laws, but Iraqis would enjoy most of the rights and freedoms of other democracies.
Two months later, in a spectacular display of civic participation, more than 50 percent of Iraq's registered voters cast ballots to elect a national assembly.
But despite progress toward democracy, both Iraq and Afghanistan continued to suffer from political violence.
In Afghanistan, the Taliban resurfaced as an armed force, launching attacks on the Afghan army and coalition forces.
Meanwhile, armed conflicts between rival Sunni and Shi’a militias increased, especially in Baghdad.
By early 2007, more than 3,000 United States soldiers had died in the Iraq War.
Although President Bush asserted that the United States presence in Iraq was necessary to fight terrorism and spread democracy, critics disputed the president's claims.
They argued that the Iraq War was actually inciting terrorism by fueling Muslim anger toward the United States and serving as a breeding ground for terrorists.
They wondered whether the attempt to build democracy was worth the cost in money and lives.
However, the Bush administration stood behind its policy that United States forces should remain in Iraq until the Iraqi government was stable and the country could defend itself.
Four years after the invasion of Iraq, United States forces remained in the country to combat violence and to support the new government Here, United States soldiers patrol the streets of Baghdad.
Nevertheless, the United States faced many challenges in the post-Cold War era.
New relations and alliances The collapse of the Soviet Union led the United States to build new relations with Russia and the other former Soviet republics.
Several of the republics joined NATO and the newly formed European Union.
Confronting dictators The United States worked to oust an aggressive dictator in Panama.
In the Persian Gulf War, it fought alongside other nations to force Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein out of Kuwait.
Ethnic cleansing and genocide Ethnic conflicts in various countries prompted mixed responses from the United States.
In the former Yugoslavia, the United States backed NATO military actions against ethnic cleansing.
Humanitarian aid The United States offered humanitarian aid to ease suffering in Somalia and North Korea, but with mixed results.
NAFTA and the WTO United States presidents promoted free trade as part of a growing trend toward globalization.
The North American Free Trade Agreement linked Mexico, Canada, and the United States.
Fighting a war on terrorism The al Qaeda terrorist attacks of September 1 1 , 2001 , prompted the United States to declare a war on terrorism.
However, efforts to build stable democracies in these countries proved difficult.
Richard Moller, whose office was on the 100th floor, later realized that a series of delays that made him late to work that day had saved his life.
Most Americans can recall exactly where they were when they heard the news.
Many people turned on their televisions just in time to see a second passenger plane slam into the South Tower 17 minutes after the first.
As fire began consuming the upper floors of both buildings, most Trade Center workers managed to escape down stairwells.
Soon after came news that a fourth hijacked plane had crashed in Pennsylvania.
As Americans watched the tragedy unfold, they reacted with emotions ranging from bewilderment and dismay to anger and outrage.
But the terrorist attacks of September 1 1 , 2001 , had not only shattered Americans’ sense of security.
In the months and years ahead, they would also significantly influence the nation’s approach to preserving its founding ideals.
As the headquarters of the Department of Defense and the United States armed forces, the Pentagon is a symbol of American power.
Many others suffered medical problems from inhaling toxic fumes at Ground Zero, as the site of the World Trade Center disaster is sometimes called.
The Immediate Impact of 9/11 On the evening of 9/1 1 , President George W Bush spoke to the nation about the horrific events of the day.
He began by calling the terrorist attacks an assault on the nation’s values.
The president ended by saying, This is a day when all Americans from every walk of life unite in our resolve for justice and peace.
Yet, we go forward to defend freedom and all that is good and just in our world.
A New Sense of Vulnerability In the days following the attacks, shock gave way to a mixture of stunned disbelief and fear.
It seemed incomprehensible to many people that terrorists could launch such a devastating attack on United States soil.
After all, the United States had the most powerful military in the world.
But after 9/1 1 , no one knew how many terrorists might still be in the country, prepared to strike again at any time.
The stock markets were closed, and the tunnels and bridges leading into Manhattan were shut down.
Airlines canceled flights around the country, and they did not resume service for several days.
In towns and cities across the nation, heightened security measures caused delays and disrupted everyday life.
Authorities around the country warned Americans to be vigilant and report suspicious activities.
Drawing Together to Defend Our Way of Life Despite the mood of fear and vulnerability, 9/1 1 also drew Americans together.
For weeks after the attacks, strangers greeted one another on the streets.
A New Jersey woman who lost her husband at the World Trade Center found anonymous gifts of food at her front door every morning.
Americans also came together in groups, holding vigils and memorials for the victims of 9/1 1 and raising money for their families.
Some took time off to travel to Manhattan to help with the recovery effort.
Numerous civil rights groups also offered encouragement to the nation after the attacks.
Organizations as varied as the Arab American Institute, the National Urban League, and the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People published advice on how Americans could treat one another respectfully as they processed their own grief and anger.
Similar stories of individual and group actions of support recurred all over the nation.
The Administration Takes Action In the meantime, the Bush administration devised a two-pronged strategy to cope with the threat of terrorism and keep the country safe.
First it rolled out the war on terrorism, which called for aggressive military action abroad to combat perceived terrorist threats.
This approach led to the lengthy and controversial wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Second, the administration focused on measures to prevent future terrorist attacks at home.
Like the wars abroad, these domestic security measures aroused controversy.
In the years since 9/11, both the United States government and the American people have worked to review and, at times, revise domestic and foreign policy choices in hopes of ensuring that they achieve just that balance.
Near the ruins of the World Trade Center, they posted pictures and descriptions of missing persons.
Thousands of such fliers were attached to walls, lampposts, and mailboxes.
The perpetrators of these crimes attacked innocent people and vandalized mosques and Muslim-owned businesses.
After 9/11, airports increased security to try to prevent future terrorist acts.
Security officials carried out more rigorous searches to detect possible weapons.
At first they tried to identify terrorist suspects through racial profiling.
However, the Department of Transportation banned this practice and called for all passengers to be treated equally.
Safeguarding Equality For many Americans, the 9/1 1 attacks brought to mind memories of the United States response to Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor 60 years earlier.
Following that assault, the government forced more than 100,000 Japanese Americans to live in internment camps.
After learning that the 9/1 1 terrorists were Arab Muslims, many people of Middle Eastern descent worried that they might suffer a similar fate.
Many felt afraid to go to work or school for fear of being singled out for attack, even if they were not Muslim.
In contrast to the events of 1941 , Bush made an effort to reassure American Muslims that they would be treated the same way as other citizens.
The Profiling Debate The question of how best to protect the ideal of equality in the new, post-9/ 11 circumstances first arose in airports.
Airport security officials began paying special attention to young men who looked like the 9/1 1 terrorists or had names similar to those of the terrorists.
The practice of using physical traits to decide whether to investigate or arrest someone is known as racial profiling.
They felt that all passengers should go through the same search procedures.
They viewed terrorism as an extreme threat that justified the use of special security procedures.
To them, putting an elderly woman through the same security checks as a young man of Middle Eastern descent went against common sense.
The principle of equality, they urged, should not be allowed to jeopardize public safety.
Despite the difference of opinions, racial profiling continues to be a fact of life in the United States— for Arab Americans and many others.
By 2005, according to Amnesty International USA, 32 million Americans had reported experiencing racial profiling.
Another 87 million, the organization claimed, had traits that put them at risk of being profiled in this way.
They might face such treatment in many places other than airports— while shopping or looking for housing, for example.
The federal and many of the state governments do ban forms of racial profiling.
But there often are few provisions for how to enforce such bans or punish those who violate them.
In fall 2006, the International Association of Chiefs of Police addressed such concerns.
With Justice Department support, it published a set of civil rights guidelines for police.
The publication acknowledges the challenges a law enforcement agent faces when trying both to protect equality and to prevent crime.
The aim of the guidelines is to assist officers in handling such situations.
Preserving Opportunity The United States has long appealed to immigrants as a land of opportunity.
But after 9/1 1 , the government put in place tougher immigration policies in an effort to keep terrorists out of the country.
Some Americans felt that these policies reflected a growing fear of foreigners.
The new laws did, in fact, make it harder for some foreign students, workers, and tourists to enter or stay in the country.
The result has been a loss of opportunity for foreigners and for the schools and businesses that cater to them.
Screening Foreign Visitors Tens of millions of foreigners visit the United States each year.
Some arrive as permanent immigrants, but the vast majority comes as short-term visitors.
In 2001 , foreigners except Canadians and Mexicans needed a passport and visa to enter the United States.
A passport is a document issued by a person’s home government to verify his or her identity.
A visa is an authorization from a government for a foreigner to enter its country.
Before 9/11, foreigners could easily obtain visas for the United States through travel agents.
The 9/11 terrorists all entered the country legally in 2001 , with valid passports and visas.
After 9/11, Congress passed new laws to make the country’s borders more secure.
Today all foreign visitors must show travel documents to enter the United States.
The United States government added numerous new procedures to make visas harder to obtain.
As part of the process, officials now check each applicant’s identity against a “watch list” of known or suspected terrorists.
The restrictions on applicants from the Middle East are especially strict.
Some people feel that the new security procedures violate visitors’ privacy.
Others see them as a legitimate way of protecting the nation from terrorists.
Many Americans complained that the delays were denying foreigners access to the opportunities that have been a hallmark of American life.
Others worried about the impact of the new policies on American culture and economics.
The Department of State, which issues visas, has worked to streamline the application process.
But the careful screening of visitors continues in efforts to limit potential threats to national security.
The government has also sharpened its focus on foreigners who enter or live in the country illegally.
Most are Mexicans looking for work in the United States, where they find better pay and more work options than in Mexico.
Some entered the United States legally but have stayed beyond the terms of their visas.
Many United States employers rely heavily on these workers and may overlook or not be aware of their workers’ illegal status.
Many Americans feel it is inappropriate and unsafe to allow anyone to be in the country illegally.
Yet, as the government has increased its focus on border security, critics have pointed out that the motivations for illegal immigration— the need for work and workers— persist.
The question of whether the flow of undocumented migrants can or should be stopped is a heated one.
Passports are issued by a country's government as a form of identification for legal citizens of that country.
During periods of severe threat, DHS advises Americans to take shelter or evacuate.
In August 2006, a terrorist plot to blow up airplanes over the Atlantic Ocean triggered the first ""code red"" alert It applied to all incoming flights from Great Britain.
Get Ready Now."" listed supplies Americans should keep on hand to survive a terrorist attack.
Critics charged that plastic sheets would do little to shelter a family from a nuclear or biological weapons attack.
Securing Liberty As the initial shock of 9/1 1 began to fade, many Americans remained fearful.
As long as the United States of America is determined and strong, this will not be an age of terror; this will be an age of liberty, here and across the world.
What most knew for certain was that they wanted their liberty secured in this time of terrorism.
Before 9/1 1 , numerous government agencies shared the role of defending the nation.
DHS coordinates 22 security-related federal agencies that deal with issues including border control, disaster relief, and nuclear safety.
To do this, it implemented the National Response Plan to deal with emergencies and set up a system to inform the public about terrorist threats.
In 2002, Bush also set up a commission to investigate the circumstances surrounding the 9/1 1 attacks and suggest lessons to be learned.
The commission published its findings in 2004 and made 37 recommendations to improve national security.
For example, the nation’s infrastructure still needed a formal protection plan, airline passenger screening still needed improvement, and there needed to be government-wide sharing of information.
But considerations of how to bring about such improvements have raised further concerns.
Congress determines the DHS budget, but some Americans have questioned whether party politics and financial concerns, rather than need, have shaped DHS policies.
However, DHS also distributes a fixed amount to all states, regardless of the state’s population.
Determining which areas of public life face the greatest threat of attack raises the questions of whether Americans have an active voice in who decides that and how.
Protecting Rights After 9/11, the Bush administration asked Congress for new powers to fight terrorism.
This act loosened many restrictions on intelligence gathering by United States security and law enforcement agencies.
As details became public, Americans began debating the act’s impact on their constitutional rights.
Debating the Patriot Act The most controversial sections of the Patriot Act involve privacy rights protected by the Fourth Amendment.
Originally written in response to the British practice of invading colonial homes to collect unpaid taxes, this amendment bans unreasonable searches and seizures by government officials.
It defines as reasonable only searches and seizures that are authorized by a search warrant from a judge.
That is, they must show that there is reason to believe a crime has already been committed.
Today the Fourth Amendment applies to both homes and communication devices.
For example, federal agents cannot place wiretaps on telephones without a search warrant.
Before the Patriot Act, a judge had to issue a separate warrant for each phone that agents wished to monitor.
The act expanded the power of federal agencies to carry out such electronic surveillance.
Judges may now approve a single warrant for tapping all phones a suspect uses.
That means a wiretap can “rove” from phone to phone to follow a suspect’s communications.
Concerned Americans have opposed roving wiretaps, arguing that their use could easily violate the privacy rights of people who talk unknowingly to a suspected terrorist.
But law enforcement officials contend that agents need roving wiretaps to track down terrorists who move from phone to phone.
The Patriot Act also allows agents with a warrant to search a suspect’s home or business in secret.
Agents may break in, take photographs, examine computers, and remove evidence without alerting the suspect.
Officials argue that this freedom allows them to carry out a lawful search without giving suspects a chance to flee or destroy evidence.
Critics view the use of these “sneak and peek” warrants as a clear violation of privacy rights.
The Patriot Act also allows officials to seize and search computer records for data that might lead to terrorists.
But they do not have to show probable cause— only suspicion that a crime might occur.
They worry about giving the government such access to electronic databases.
And they complain that the Patriot Act gives judges little power to deny requests for such access.
In 2005, reporters discovered that Bush had allowed phone calls between Americans and suspected terrorists to be monitored without warrants.
Critics viewed such warrantless surveillance as another violation of privacy rights.
The Bush administration claimed that judges could not issue warrants quickly enough to support terrorism investigations.
In 2007, the administration changed its stance on warrantless surveillance.
It established a secret court geared at working quickly to approve all surveillance.
The Patriot Act gives the FBI and other federal security agencies broad powers to prevent terrorism, such as roving wiretaps on phones.
Critics claim that some of those powers violate the privacy rights spelled out in the Fourth Amendment.
President Bush set up the commissions with special rules that allowed for secrecy.
He did not want sensitive intelligence information made public during trials, fearing it might undermine the war on terrorism.
Over the next five years, Americans both praised and criticized Bush’s policies in the war on terrorism.
Others denounced his treatment of prisoners captured in the war in Afghanistan.
Military Commissions During the 2001 invasion of Afghanistan, the United States military took many prisoners.
These detainees were described as unlawful enemy combatants, or fighters in armed conflict with the United States who were not part of a regular army.
They were not accused of any crime, yet they were interrogated regularly.
The government hoped they could provide information about antiUnited States terrorists.
They may petition for a writ of habeas corpus— an order compelling a prison official to take a prisoner in front of a court to assess whether the person is imprisoned lawfully.
Bush claimed that these rights did not apply to unlawful military combatants.
In June 2004, the Supreme Court ruled in Rasul Bush that the detainees did have the right to challenge their imprisonment in court.
These are courts set up by the armed forces to try enemy forces during wartime.
One was that detainees tried by the commissions lacked basic legal rights.
For example, they might not be allowed to hear evidence against them if the court ruled that making such evidence public could damage national security.
Critics also charged that Bush had gone beyond the limits of his power in setting up the military courts.
In the United States democratic system, the power to establish courts belongs to Congress, not the president.
In Hamdan Rumsfeld , the Court ruled that Bush did not have constitutional authority to set up military courts.
Congress has not issued the Executive a ‘blank check’” to do whatever he wants.
Breyer wrote that the president must still ask Congress for the authority he believed necessary.
Further, Breyer stated that the Court’s insistence that the president consult with Congress did not undermine the nation’s ability to defend itself.
In September 2006, Congress passed the Military Commissions Act of 2006.
This act authorized the use of military commissions to try enemy combatants and set out rules for such trials.
However, the act was widely condemned for failing to grant detainees basic legal rights, including habeas corpus.
Clearly the debate over the treatment of illegal enemy combatants was far from over.
Pursuing America's Founding Ideals Writing in 1776, Thomas Jefferson could not have even dimly imagined the complex world in which we live today.
Nonetheless, the ideals he set forth for our nation have endured, as points of pride and prods to progress.
In the troubled times since 9/11, they have also led us to consider new ways— at times successful, at others not— to uphold them.
Being human, we are bound to disagree about what our founding ideals mean.
We are even more likely to disagree about how they should be applied to the complex business of governing a nation of hundreds of millions of people.
However, it is our commitment to these ideals that binds us together as Americans.
Like our founders, we know that a nation built on ideals is never finished— it is always becoming.
Just what it is to become, however, is up to each generation to decide.
This cartoon, which shows the legs of Uncle Sam as the Twin Towers, reflects that sense of commitment to the nation and its ideals.
The conduct of that war once again raised the challenge of balancing our founding ideals with our desire for security.
The nation chose equality over racial profiling, but racial profiling persists.
Opportunity In an effort to secure the nation's borders, Congress struggled to preserve the United States as a land of opportunity while tightening visa requirements and border control to keep terrorists out.
Liberty Congress created the Department of Homeland Security to defend the country and protect our free way of life by better coordinating various government security agencies.
They raised questions about what factors influence decision making within the department.
Rights Congress enacted the Patriot Act after 9/11 to help government agencies track down terrorists.
The act sparked a long debate over what some saw as assaults on privacy rights.
Democracy Bush’s policies toward unlawful enemy combatants raised questions about presidential power in a democracy.
Era 8 The Making of Modern America The Reagan Revolution Conservative Republican Ronald Reagan vows to ""get government off the backs""of the American people by cutting taxes and social programs.
He condemns the Soviet Union as an ""evil empire,"" while working to slow the nuclear arms race.
The United States embarks on UNsanctioned interventions in Panama, Somalia, Bosnia, and Iraq.
The Unsettled Election of 2000 In one of the closest president elections in United States history, citizens wait 37 days before the Supreme Court steps in to declare George W Bush the winner over Al Gore.
Bill Clinton Presides Over a Period of Economic Growth ""New Democrat"" President Bill Clinton advocates health care reform, free trade, welfare reform, and a balanced budget.
A ""new economy"" based on personal computers, the Internet, and cell phone technology generates a dot.com boom.
Global War on Tenor The United States fights a global war against terrorism that leads to military invasions and the occupations of Afghanistan and Iraq.
George W Bush Promotes ""Compassionate Conservatism"" President George W Bush fights the recession that ended the dot.com boom by cutting taxes.
His ""No Child Left Behind"" reforms seek to ensure that all students receive a ""world class"" education.
The attacks show that the United States is vulnerable to terrorist acts.
French Guiana •Areas whose governing rule is in dispute are printed in nonbold type: Falkland Islands.
The first section, the Preamble, consists of an introduction and a statement of rights.
The introduction explains the document's purpose and sets a principled tone.
The idea that people had the right to rebel against an oppressive government was not new.
The Declaration's purpose was to show the world that Americans were justified in exercising this right.
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness. —That to secure these rights.
Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments long established should not be changed for light and transient causes; and accordingly all experience hath shewn, that mankind are more disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed.
Statement of Human Rights The statement of rights is constructed like a logical argument.
It begins with what it calls ""self-evident truths” and proceeds logically to the need for revolution.
Statement of Charges Against the King The second section contains the charges against the king.
Here Jefferson lists more than 20 grievances as proof of the king's unjust treatment of the colonies.
He has endeavoured to prevent the population of these States; for that purpose obstructing the Laws for Naturalization of Foreigners; refusing to pass others to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new Appropriations of Lands.
He has erected a multitude of New Offices, and sent hither swarms of Officers to harass our people and eat out their substance.
We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces our Separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, Enemies in War, in Peace Friends.
The Number of Representatives shall not exceed one for every thirty Thousand, but each State shall have at Least one Representative; and until such enumeration shall be made, the State of New Hampshire shall be entitled to chuse three, Massachusetts eight, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations one, Connecticut five.
New Jersey four, Pennsylvania eight, Delaware one, Maryland six, Virginia ten, North Carolina five, South Carolina five, and Georgia three.
Preamble The Preamble establishes that the federal government gains its power from the people, not the states.
House of Representatives Clause 1: Election Members of the House of Representatives are elected by the people every two years.
Qualifications A member of the House must be at least 25 years old, must have been an American citizen for seven years, and must live in the state he or she represents.
Apportionment The number of Representatives from each state is based on the state's population.
An enumeration, or census, must be taken every 10 years to determine that population.
This clause contains the infamous Three-fifths Compromise, which specified that slaves were to be counted as three-fifths of a citizen when determining population.
This provision was rendered meaningless by the Thirteenth Amendment , which ended slavery.
Vacancies If a representative resigns or dies in office, the governor of that state can issue a ""Writ of Election,"" calling for a special election to fill the vacancy.
The Seats of the Senators of the first Class shall be vacated at the Expiration of the second Year, of the second Class at the Expiration of the fourth Year, and of the third Class at the Expiration of the sixth Year, so that one-third may be chosen every second Year; and if Vac a nc ies happ e n by R esi gnat i on, or oth e rw is e, dur i ng th e R e c es s of the Legislature of any State, the Executive thereof m a y mak e t e mporary Ap p o i ntm e nts unt i l th e n e xt Meeting of the Legislature, which shal Tthen-filT s uch Vacancies.
Officers and Impeachment Power The House elects a speaker, who normally comes from the majority party.
Only the House has the power to impeach, or accuse, a federal official of wrongdoing.
Senators were elected by state legislatures until 1913, when the Seventeenth Amendment was ratified.
Terms and Classification To ensure continuity in the Senate, one-third of the senators run for reelection every two years.
To establish this system, the first senators, elected in 1788, were divided into three groups.
One group served for two years, the second group for four years, and the third group for a full six years.
No Person shall be a Senator who shall not have attained to the Age of thirty Years, and been nine Years a Citizen of the United States, and who shall not, when elected, be an Inhabitant of that State for which he shall be chosen.
Qualifications A senator must be at least 30 years old, must have been an American citizen for nine years, and must live in the state he or she represents.
President of the Senate The vice president presides over the Senate but votes only in event of a tie.
Other Officers The Senate selects its other leaders and may also select a temporary president to preside if the vice president is absent.
Impeachment Trials Only the Senate has the power to put impeached federal officials on trial.
When an impeached president is tried, the chief justice of the Supreme Court acts as the trial judge.
Only two presidents have ever been impeached by the House and tried in the Senate.
In 1868, the Senate acquitted President Andrew Johnson of charges of violating federal laws.
Facing impeachment in 1974, President Richard Nixon resigned from office.
Penalty Upon Conviction A federal official convicted by the Senate is removed from office.
Elections and Meetings Clause 1: Elections States regulate their own congressional elections, but Congress may make laws changing the regulations.
The Congress shall assemble at least once in every Year, i s ha l l b e o n the first Monday i n December, unless they shall by Law appoint a different Day.
The Twentieth Amendment moved the opening day of Congress to January 3.
Each House shall be the Judge of the Elections, Returns and Qualifications of its own Members, and a Majority of each shall constitute a Quorum to do Business, but a smaller Number may adjourn from day to day, and may be authorized to compel the Attendance of absent Members, in such Manner, and under such Penalties as each House may provide.
Congressional Proceedings Clause 1: Attendance Each house judges whether its members are qualified and have been elected fairly.
A majority of members of either house must be present for that house to conduct legislative business.
They shall in all Cases, except Treason, Felony and Breach of the Peace, be privileged from Arrest during their Attendance at the Session of their respective Houses, and in going to and returning from the same; and for any Speech or Debate in either House, they shall not be questioned in any other Place.
Adjournment During a session, neither house can close down or hold meetings elsewhere for a period of more than three days without the approval of the other house.
Compensation, Immunity, and Restrictions Clause 1: Salaries and Immunity Members of Congress set their own pay and are paid out of the United States Treasury.
Legislators may not be sued or prosecuted for their speeches and actions on the floor of Congress.
Employment Restrictions To ensure separation of powers, members of Congress may not hold any other federal office during their terms as legislators.
Making Laws Clause 1: Revenue Bills Only the House can propose a law raising taxes, though the Senate can offer changes.
This provision ensures that people are not taxed without their consent.
If any Bill shall not be returned by the President within ten Days after it shall have been presented to him, the Same shall be a Law, in like Manner as if he had signed it, unless the Congress by their Adjournment prevent its Return, in which Case it shall not be a Law.
Every Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the Concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of Adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the United States; and before the Same shall take Effect, shall be approved by him, or being disapproved by him, shall be repassed by two thirds of the Senate and House of Representatives, according to the Rules and Limitations prescribed in the Case of a Bill.
A bill passed by a majority of both houses becomes law when the president signs it.
If the president vetoes, or rejects, a bill, Congress can overrule the veto by a two-thirds vote of both houses.
Clause 3; Submitting Other Measures Other measures approved by Congress also require the president's approval or may also be passed over the president's veto.
Powers of Congress Congress has the specific powers listed in this section.
This power was challenged early in the Republic's history by the Whiskey Rebellion.
In 1797, Pennsylvania farmers attacked federal officials collecting an unpopular tax on whiskey.
This show of force demonstrated beyond a doubt the federal government's power to tax.
Borrowing Congress borrows money by issuing bonds, which create a debt that must be repaid.
Trade Regulation Congress regulates foreign trade and interstate commerce.
Naturalization and Bankruptcy Congress makes naturalization and bankruptcy laws.
Naturalization is the process by which an immigrant becomes a United States citizen.
Bankruptcy applies to individuals or companies that are unable to pay their debts.
Currency Congress establishes the national currency, or system of money.
Punishment for Counterfeiting Congress punishes counterfeiting, or the making of imitation money.
Since then Congress has usually passed resolutions giving the president the authority to use military force where necessary.
Such resolutions empowered presidents to send troops to fight the Vietnam War, the Persian Gulf War, and wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.
Letters of Marque and Reprisal authorize privateers, or private ships, to attack and seize enemy vessels during times of war.
Raising an Army Congress appropriates, or sets aside, funds for the military, usually on a yearly basis but never for more than two years.
Maintaining a Navy To make Rules for the Government and Regulation of the land and naval Forces; Clause 14: Regulating Armed Forces To provide for calling forth the Militia to execute the Laws of the Union, suppress Insurrections and repel Invasions; Clause 15: Calling Up the Militia Congress has the power to call up militias, or armies of citizen soldiers, in times of emergency.
Over the years, the National Guard has been called to respond to a variety of crises and natural disasters.
In 2003, President Bush sent National Guard troops into combat in Iraq.
Regulating the Militia Congress regulates militias but leaves training to the states, under federal guidelines.
The Migration or Importation of such Per s o nsas-an y of th e S ta tes i row e x is t i ng s ha l l think prop e r to adm i t, s hal l not be prohibited b y the C ongr ess prior to -t h e Y e ar one thou s and eight himdr e d -an d -ei ght, but a Tax or duty may be i mposed on s uch Importation, not exceeding ten dollars for each Per s on.
T a x sh aH-beTai d, unless in Proportion to th e Census or Enumerat i on h e r ein be for e dir e cted to be taken.
No Preference shall be given by any Regulation of Commerce or Revenue to the Ports of one State over those of another; nor shall Vessels bound to, or from, one State, be obliged to enter, clear, or pay Duties in another.
Control of Federal Property Congress controls the District of Columbia and all other federal land.
Congress governed Washington, D.C., until 1973, when an elected municipal government was established.
Elastic C'ause This “necessary and proper"" clause is known as the “elastic clause"" because it gives Congress the flexibility to pass laws to carry out its functions and deal with new problems as they arise.
Limits on the Power of Congress Clause 1: Slave Trade This clause became obsolete after 1808, when the Constitution permitted Congress to outlaw the slave trade.
Writ of Habeas Corpus A writ of habeas corpus gives prisoners the right to challenge their imprisonment in court.
Since September 11, 2001, a debate has raged over whether this right applies to people detained on suspicion of terrorism.
In 2004, the Supreme Court ruled that the writ must be extended to United States citizens imprisoned at Guantanamo, Cuba.
Individual Taxes This clause prohibiting direct taxes on individuals was voided by the Sixteenth Amendment , which permits Congress to tax individual income.
Trade Preferences Congress may not favor one port over another and must ensure free trade between the states.
Spending The government cannot spend public money unless Congress has passed a law appropriating it.
Congressional “power of the purse"" acts as a check on the executive branch by controlling how much it can spend.
And no Person holding any Office of Profit or Trust under them, shall, without the Consent of the Congress, accept of any present, Emolument, Office, or Title, of any kind whatever, from any King, Prince, or foreign State.
No State shall enter into any Treaty, Alliance, or Confederation; grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal; coin Money; emit Bills of Credit; make any Thing but gold and silver Coin a Tender in Payment of Debts; pass any Bill of Attainder, ex post facto Law, or Law impairing the Obligation of Contracts, or grant any Title of Nobility.
The executive Power shall be vested in a President of the United States of America.
Each State shall appoint, in such Manner as the Legislature thereof may direct, a Number of Electors, equal to the whole Number of Senators and Representatives to which the State may be entitled in the Congress: but no Senator or Representative, or Person holding an Office of Trust or Profit under the United States, shall be appointed an Elector.
Titles of Nobility Congress may not establish titles of nobility, nor may federal officials accept such titles, or any gifts, from a foreign nation without congressional approval.
Limits on the Power of the States Clause 1: Forbidden Actions The states cannot exercise certain powers granted to Congress or the president.
These include negotiating treaties with foreign nations and creating their own money.
They also may not tax imports or maintain armies without the approval of Congress.
Executive Branch Section 1: President and Vice President Clause 1:Term of Office The power to execute, or carry out, the laws passed by Congress rests with the president.
The Twenty-second Amendment limits the president to two terms in office.
Electoral College This clause establishes the Electoral College, which elects the president and vice president.
The Electoral College is a group of citizens, called electors, chosen from each state to cast votes for president and vice president Each state gets as many electors as it has members of the House and Senate combined.
The revised method, which still operates today, calls for each elector to cast one vote for president and one vote for vice president.
Most states give their entire slate of electoral votes to whichever candidate wins the most popular votes in the state.
I n e v e ry C as e, a fter the Ghoiee of the President thePerson-havi ng th e great es t Numb e r of Votes of th eEl e ctors shad be the V i ce President.
But if there s h ou l d r e main two o r-more who have equal Votes, th e S enate s had eh useTrom them by Ballot the Vice President.
The Congress may determine the Time of chusing the Electors, and the Day on which they shall give their Votes; which Day shad be the same throughout the United States.
No Person except a natural bom Citizen, or a Citizen of the United States, at the time of the Adoption of this Constitution, shall be eligible to the Office of President; neither shall any person be eligible to that Office who shad not have attained to the Age of thirty five Years, and been fourteen Years a Resident within the United States.
In Ca s e of the Remova l of the Pres i dent from Off i ce, or of hi s Deaths Re si gn ati on, or jnab ili ty to d is charge the P o w e r s and D u t ies of the ^ sai d Off i ce , the Same shall devolve on the Vi cePre si dent, and the Congress may by Law provide for the Case of Removal, Death, Resignation or Inability, both of the President and Vice President, declaring what Officer shall then act as President, and such Officer shall act accordingly, until the Disability be removed, or a President shad be elected.
The President shall, at stated Times, receive for his Services, a Compensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the Period for which he shall have been elected, and he shall not receive within that Period any other Emolument from the United States, or any of them.
The President shall be Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy of the United States, and of the Militia of the several States, when called into the actual Service of the United States; he may require the Opinion, in writing, of the principal Officer in each of the executive Departments, upon any Subject relating to the Duties of their respective Offices, and he shall have Power to grant Reprieves and Pardons for Offenses against the United States, except in Cases of Impeachment. president gets a majority of electoral votes, then the House of Representatives chooses the president.
The Electoral College is controversial because it has the potential to elect a candidate who did not win the popular vote.
Time of Elections Presidential elections are held on the Tuesday that follows the first Monday in November, every four years.
Electors cast their votes more than a month later, on the Monday following the second Wednesday in December.
Qualifications The president must be an American citizen born in the United States, must be at least 35 years old, and must have resided in the United States for 14 years.
Presidential Succession If the president dies or leaves office before the end of his or her term, the vice president becomes president.
Congress decides who succeeds to the presidency if both the president and the vice president are incapacitated.
Salary Congress sets the president's salary and cannot change it during a presidential term.
The president cannot accept emoluments, or other compensation, while in office.
Oath of Office The oath taken by the president is administered by a judicial officer, typically the chief justice of the Supreme Court.
Powers of the President Clause 1: Military and Executive Powers The president is commander-in-chief of the armed forces of the United States.
The president can grant pardons for federal crimes, except in cases of impeachment.
The President, Vice President and all civil Officers of the United States, shall be removed from Office on Impeachment for, and Conviction of, Treason, Bribery, or other high Crimes and Misdemeanors.
Treaties and Appointments The president has the power to make treaties with other nations, but the Senate must approve them by a two-thirds vote.
The ""advice and consent"" of the Senate act as a check on presidential power.
The president can name certain officials and federal judges, but a majority of the Senate must approve the president's choices.
Temporary Appointments If the Senate is not in session, the president can make appointments without Senate approval.
Such ""recess"" appointments expire at the end of the next Senate session.
Presidents sometimes use recess appointments to avoid the Senate confirmation process.
The president also reports to Congress, usually every year, on the State of the Union.
The judicial Power of the United States, shall be vested in one supreme Court, and in such inferior Courts as the Congress may from time to time ordain and establish.
Federal Courts Judicial power is the power to decide legal cases in a court of law.
This power is given to the Supreme Court and lower federal courts established by Congress.
Federal judges hold office for life and their salaries cannot be reduced, thereby assuring the independence of the judiciary.
Jurisdiction Clause 1: Types of Cases Jurisdiction is the right of a court to hear a case.
The federal courts have jurisdiction in cases pertaining to the Constitution, federal law, treaties, ambassadors, and maritime law.
Federal courts can decide disputes between states, between states and the federal government, and between citizens of different states.
In Marbury Madison , the Supreme Court determined that it had the power to decide whether a law is constitutional.
In all the other Cases before mentioned, the supreme Court shall have appellate Jurisdiction, both as to Law and Fact, with such Exceptions, and under such Regulations as the Congress shall make.
Section 3, Treason against the United States, shall consist only in levying War against them, or in adhering to their Enemies, giving them Aid and Comfort.
The Congress shall have Power to declare the Punishment of Treason, but no Attainder of Treason shall work Corruption of Blood, or Forfeiture except during the Life of the Person attainted.
Role of Supreme Court The Supreme Court has ""original jurisdiction"" — the power to hear cases for the first time, not on appeal from a lower court— only in limited circumstances.
Most of the time, the Court functions as an appeals court, deciding whether a case was properly tried in a lower court and reviewing its decision.
Trial by Jury All defendants accused of a federal crime, except in cases of impeachment, have the right to a jury trial.
Treason Clause 1: Definition Treason, the only crime defined in the Constitution, is described as waging war against the United States or aiding its enemies.
Criticism of the government, even in times of war, is protected by the First Amendment.
Punishment Congress has the power to decide howto punish convicted traitors.
Punishment cannot be directed at the guilty person's relatives or friends.
Relations Among the States Section 1: Full Faith and Credit Each state must honor the laws and authority of other states.
For example, an adoption legally performed in one state must be recognized as legal in other states.
Treatment of Citizens Clause 1: Equal Privileges States may not discriminate against citizens of other states.
A Person charged in any State with Treason, Felony, or other Crime, who shall flee from Justice, and be found in another State, shall on Demand of the executive Authority of the State from which he fled, be delivered up, to be removed to the State having Jurisdiction of the Crime.
Extradition is the return of a suspected criminal or escaped convict to the state where he or she is wanted.
Fugitive Slaves This clause required states to return runaway slaves to their owners in other states.
New States and Territories Clause 1: New States A new state cannot be carved out of an existing state or formed by the merger of existing states without the consent of the states or of Congress.
The United States shall guarantee to every State in this Union a Republican Form of Government, and shall protect each of them against Invasion; and on Application of the Legislature, or of the Executive (when the Legislature cannot be convened), against domestic Violence.
Article VL All Debts contracted and Engagements entered into, before the Adoption of this Constitution, shall be as valid against the United States under this Constitution, as under the Confederation.
The Ratification of the Conventions of nine States, shall be sufficient for the Establishment of this Constitution between the States so ratifying the Same.
Done in Convention by the Unanimous Consent of the States present the Seventeenth Day of September in the Year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and Eighty seven and of the Independence of the United States of America the Twelfth In Witness whereof We have hereunto subscribed our Names.
Federal Territory Congress has power over all federal territories and property.
This means that it can regulate public lands, such as national parks and forests, and make laws for overseas possessions, such as Guam and Puerto Rico.
Protection of States Known as the ""guarantee clause,"" this provision ensures that each state has a representative democratic government.
The federal government is obliged to protect the states from invasion and from internal, or domestic, riots or other violence.
Amendments must first be proposed either by a two-thirds vote of both houses of Congress or by a national convention of two-thirds of the states.
A proposed amendment must then be ratified by three-quarters of the states, either in special conventions or in the state legislatures.
The amendment process was made difficult so that the Constitution would ~ not be amended too frequently or lightly.
National Supremacy Clause 1: National Debts This clause recognizes debts incurred by the previous government under the Articles of Confederation.
Supremacy of National Law The so-called ""supremacy clause"" makes the Constitution and federal law the supreme, or highest, law of the land.
If a state law and a federal law conflict, the federal law takes precedence.
Federal courts can overturn state laws deemed to be unconstitutional or in conflict with federal law.
Oaths of Office Federal and state officials must swear allegiance to the Constitution.
Public officials cannot be required to adopt or practice any particular religion.
Ratification of the Constitution To take effect, the Constitution had to be ratified by nine of the original 13 states.
Rhode Island and North Carolina waited until the Bill of Rights was added to ratify.
First Amendment Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.
Second Amendment A well regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall not be infringed.
Third Amendment No Soldier shall, in time of peace be quartered in any house, without the consent of the Owner, nor in time of war, but in a manner to be prescribed by law.
Second Amendment Right to Bear Arms The right to bear arms guaranteed in this amendment is controversial.
Americans are divided as to whether it applies to individuals or only to militias.
The courts have ruled that individuals do have the right to bear arms, but that it is not an unlimited right.
The Supreme Court has upheld some federal gun control laws, such as those requiring gun registration and waiting periods, but has ruled that other gun control measures should be left to the states.
Third Amendment Quartering of Soldiers In the turbulent years leading up to the American Revolution, American colonists were compelled to quarter, or house, British soldiers in their homes.
This amendment bars the government from using private homes as military quarters, except in wartime and in a lawful way.
Fourth Amendment The right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects, against unreasonable searches and seizures, shall not be violated, and no Warrants shall issue, but upon probable cause, supported by Oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched, and the persons or things to be seized.
Fourth Amendment Search and Seizure Like the Third Amendment, this amendment protects citizens against government intrusions into their property.
Government officials cannot search citizens or their property, or seize citizens or their belongings, without good reason.
Searches and seizures generally require a warrant, or written order approved by a judge.
The Supreme Court has ruled that the Fourth Amendment also applies to electronic searches and wiretapping.
Sixth Amendment In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy and public trial, by an impartial jury of the State and district wherein the crime shall have been committed, which district shall have been previously ascertained by law, and to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and to have the Assistance of Counsel for his defence.
Seventh Amendment In Suits at common law, where the value in controversy shall exceed twenty dollars, the right of trial by jury shall be preserved, and no fact tried by a jury shall be otherwise re-examined in any Court of the United States, than according to the rules of the common law.
Eighth Amendment Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
Fifth Amendment Rights of the Accused This amendment guarantees basic rights to people accused of crimes.
A grand jury is a group of citizens who hear evidence of a crime and decide if the evidence warrants a trial.
These procedures are intended to prevent the government from prosecuting people unfairly.
They cannot be forced to testify, or give evidence, against themselves.
They cannot be jailed or have their property taken without due process of law, or a fair court hearing or trial.
The government cannot take away private property without paying a fair price for it.
Sixth Amendment Right to a FairTrial A citizen accused of a crime has the right to a jury trial that is both public and ""speedy,"" or that takes place as quickly as circumstances allow.
An accused person has the right to question witnesses and has the right to a lawyer.
Both federal and state courts must provide a lawyer if the accused cannot afford to hire one.
Seventh Amendment Civil Trials Citizens have the right to a jury trial to settle lawsuits over money or property worth more than $20.
Common law refers to the rules of law established by previous judicial decisions.
Eighth Amendment Bail and Punishment Bail is money that an accused person pays in order to get out of jail while awaiting trial.
The money is returned when the accused appears at trial; it is confiscated if he or she doesn't appear.
The meaning of this phrase has broadened to include punishment considered too harsh for a particular crime.
In 2005, the Supreme Court ruled that laws that apply the death penalty to people 17 and younger constitute ""cruel and unusual"" punishment and are unconstitutional.
Tenth Amendment The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respectively, or to the people.
Later Amendments Eleventh Amendment The Judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the United States by Citizens of another State, or by Citizens or Subjects of any Foreign State.
But in choosing the President, the votes shall be taken by states, the representation from each state having one vote; a quorum for this purpose shall consist of a member or members from two-thirds of the states, and a majority of all the states shall be necessary to a choice.
And if the House of Representatives shall not choose a President whenever the right of choice shall devolve upon them, before the fourth day of March next following, then the Vice President shall act as President, as in the case of the death or other constitutional disability of the President.
The person having the greatest number of votes as Vice Ninth Amendment Rights Retained by the People Americans have fundamental rights beyond the rights listed in the Constitution.
The government cannot deny these rights just because they are not specified.
This amendment was added out of fear that the Bill of Rights would be interpreted as limiting people's rights to those listed.
Tenth Amendment States' Rights This amendment attempts to balance power between the federal government and the states.
It gives to the states and to the people any powers not specifically granted to the federal government.
States' rights and the scope of federal power have been the subject of intense debate since the founding of the Republic.
Slavery was perhaps the most significant issue over which this conflict played out, eventually plunging the nation into civil war.
Eleventh Amendment Lawsuits Against States People cannot sue a state in federal court if they are citizens of a different state or of a foreign country.
The courts have interpreted this to mean that states may not be sued in federal courts without their consent.
Twelfth Amendment Presidential Elections This amendment modifies the electoral process so that the president and vice president are elected separately.
In the original Constitution, the candidate who finished second in the voting for president automatically became vice president In 1800, this resulted in a tie for president between Thomas Jefferson and Aaron Burr.
It took the House of Representatives 36 ballots to elect Jefferson president and Burr vice president.
But no person constitutionally ineligible to the office of President shall be eligible to that of Vice President of the United States.
Congress shall have power to enforce these articles by appropriate legislation.
No person can be forced to work against his or her will except as a legal punishment for a crime.
All persons bom or naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside.
No State shall make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.
Representatives shall be apportioned among the several States according to their respective numbers, counting the whole number of persons in each State, excluding Indians not taxed.
But Congress may by a vote of two-thirds of each House, remove such disability.
Fourteenth Amendment Rights of Citizens This amendment was originally designed to resolve issues that arose after the Civil War ended and slavery was abolished.
Citizenship By defining as a citizen anyone born in the United States, this section extends citizenship to blacks.
It prohibits the states from denying rights, due process, and equal protection of the law to their citizens.
Despite these guarantees, it took nearly a century for the Supreme Court to decide that racial segregation violated the ""equal protection"" provision.
In Brown Board of Education , the Court struck down school segregation, ruling that separate schools for whites and blacks were inherently unequal.
Representation and Voting This section nullifies the ""three-fifths clause"" of the original Constitution.
The reference to ""male inhabitants"" upset women's rights leaders who felt that equality for women was being pushed aside in favor of equality for blacks.
In time, the ""equal protection"" provision would be expanded to include women, minorities, and noncitizens.
Former Confederate Leaders Any member of government who took an oath to uphold the Constitution before the Civil War and who then joined the Confederate cause cannot be elected to any federal or state office.
The Congress shall have the power to enforce, by appropriate legislation, the provisions of this article.
Public Debts By voiding all Confederate debts, this section ensured that people who had lent money to Confederate states would not be paid back, nor would former slave owners be paid for the loss of their emancipated slaves.
Enforcement Congress can make laws to enforce this amendment Beginning in the 1960s, Congress used this enforcement provision to pass new civil rights legislation, including the Civil Rights Act, the Voting Rights Act, and the Americans with Disabilities Act.
The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of race, color, or previous condition of servitude Section 2.
The Congress shall have the power to enforce this article by appropriate legislation.
Sixteenth Amendment The Congress shall have power to lay and collect taxes on incomes, from whatever source derived, without apportionment among the several States, and without regard to any census or enumeration Seventeenth Amendment Section 1.
The Senate of the United States shall be composed of two Senators from each State, elected by the people thereof, for six years; and each Senator shall have one vote.
The electors in each State shall have the qualifications requisite for electors of the most numerous branch of the State legislature.
Provided, That the legislature of any State may empower the executive thereof to make temporary appointments until the people fill the vacancies by election as the legislature may direct.
This amendment shall not be so construed as to affect the election or term of any Senator chosen before it becomes valid as part of the Constitution.
Fifteenth Amendment Voting Rights Section 1:The Right to Vote States cannot deny voting rights to citizens on the basis of race, color, or previous enslavement.
Enforcement Sixteenth Amendment Income Tax The income tax amendment allows Congress to tax the earnings and income of individuals.
At first only the very wealthy were taxed, but eventually the tax was extended to almost all wage earners.
Elections This amendment provides for the direct election of senators by popular vote.
Previously, senators were elected by state legislatures, but deadlocked votes in state legislatures resulted in many Senate seats remaining vacant for long periods.
By 1911, public demand for direct senatorial elections forced Congress to pass the Seventeenth Amendment.
Vacancies If a Senate seat becomes vacant, and if the legislature of that state approves, the governor of that state may appoint a replacement senator until an election can be held.
Eighteenth Amendment Prohibition of Liquor transportati on of intoxic a t i ng li q u ors w rthm^the^mp ortation thereof i nto, or the exportatio n thereof from the United States and aH t e rritory s ubj e e tt o th e jur i s dict i on thereof for b e v e r age purposes ishereby prohibited.
Ban on Alcohol This amendment outlawed the production, sale, and transport of alcoholic beverages within the United States.
It was the culmination of a decades-long reform effort to end the problems associated with alcohol abuse.
Prohibition led to a rise in lawlessness and organized crime as the alcohol business flourished illegally.
Prohibition ended when the Twenty-first Amendment repealed, or canceled, this amendment Section 2.
Enforcement Section 3. ment-t o the Constitution by the l egis l atur esof -t h ese v era TS tetesva s provided i n Section 3: Ratification Nineteenth Amendment Section 1.
The right of citizens of the United States to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of sex.
Although some western states already allowed women to vote, activists argued that a constitutional amendment was needed to guarantee the vote to all women.
The Nineteenth Amendment is sometimes called the Susan B Anthony amendment after its most prominent and persistent advocate.
The terms of the President and Vice President shall end at noon on the 20th day of January, and the terms of Senators and Representatives at noon on the 3d day of January, of the years in which such terms would have ended if this article had not been ratified; and the terms of their successors shall then begin.
The Congress shall assemble at least once in every year, and such meeting shall begin at noon on the 3d day of January, unless they shall by law appoint a different day.
Beginning ofTerms The president and vice president take office on January 20.
These calendar changes shortened the period during which a “lame duck"" — an incumbent who was not reelected or did not run for reelection — remained in office.
If, at the time fixed for the beginning of the term of the President, the President elect shall have died, the Vice President elect shall become President.
If a Presi dent shall not have been chosen before the time fixed for the beginning of his term, or if the President elect shall have failed to qualify, then the Vice President elect shall act as President until a President shall have qualified; and the Congress may by law provide for the case wherein neither a President elect nor a Vice President shall have qualified, declaring who shall then act as President, or the manner in which one who is to act shall be selected, and such person shall act accordingly until a President or Vice President shall have qualified.
The Congress may by law provide for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the House of Representatives may choose a President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them, and for the case of the death of any of the persons from whom the Senate may choose a Vice President whenever the right of choice shall have devolved upon them.
Sections 1 and 2 shall take effect on the 15th day of October following the ratification of this article.
This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission.
The eighteenth article of amendment to the Constitution of the United States is hereby repealed.
The transportation or importation into any State, Territory, or Possession of the United States for delivery or use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws thereof, is hereby prohibited.
This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by conventions in the several States, as provided in the Constitution, within seven years from the date of the submission hereof to the States by the Congress.
No person shall be elected to the office of the President more than twice, and no person who has held the office of President, or acted as President, for more than two years of a term to which some other person was elected President shall be elected to the office of the President more than once.
But this Article shall not apply to any person holding the office of President when this Article was proposed by Congress, and shall not prevent any person who may be holding the office of President, or acting as President, during the term within which this Article becomes operative from holding the office of President or acting as President during the remainder of such term.
Presidential Succession This and Section 4 provide for succession if a newly elected president should die or be unable to take office before the start of his or her term.
Congress Decides Succession Section 5: Date of Implementation Section 6: Ratification Twenty-first Amendment End of Prohibition Section 1: Repeal This amendment ended national prohibition, leaving it to states to ban alcohol if they wished.
State Laws Alcoholic beverages may not be brought into a state where they are still banned.
Ratification This amendment was the only one ratified by special state conventions rather than state legislatures.
Most Americans were eager to end prohibition, and this method was quicker.
Two-Term Limit The Constitution did not specify how many terms a president could serve, but George Washington stepped down after two terms, and succeeding presidents followed his example.
Democratic president Franklin D Roosevelt broke precedent by running for a third term.
After his death in 1945, Republicans in Congress proposed this amendment to limit future presidents to two terms.
This article shall be inoperative unless it shall have been ratified as an amendment to the Constitution by the legislatures of three-fourths of the several States within seven years from the date of its submission to the States by the Congress.
A number of electors of President and Vice President equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives in Congress to which the District would be entitled if it were a state, but in no event more than the least populous State; they shall be in addition to those appointed by the States, but they shall be considered, for the purposes of the election of President and Vice President, to be electors appointed by a State; and they shall meet in the District and perform such duties as provided by the twelfth article of amendment.
Number of Electors This amendment gives the citizens of Washington, D.C., the right to vote in presidential elections.
It allots to the District of Columbia the same number of presidential electors it would have if it were a state.
Until this amendment was enacted, District of Columbia residents could not vote for president, even though they had all the obligations of citizenship, including taxation.
In 1978, Congress passed a constitutional amendment that would have made the District a state, but the states failed to ratify it.
Ban on Poll Taxes A poll tax is a fee that a voter must pay in order to vote.
This amendment bans poll taxes, which some states imposed to prevent African Americans from voting.
In case of the removal of the President from office or of his death or resignation, the Vice President shall become President.
Whenever there is a vacancy in the office of the Vice President, the President shall nominate a Vice President who shall take office upon confirmation by a majority vote of both Houses of Congress.
President's Death or Removal If the president dies, resigns, or is removed from office, the vice president becomes president.
Vice Presidential Vacancy If the vice presidency becomes vacant, the president can appoint a vice president, who must be confirmed by Congress.
This amendment was first applied in 1973, when Vice President Spiro Agnew resigned in the face of bribery and corruption charges.
Whenever the President transmits to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives his written declaration that he is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, and until he transmits to them a written declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the Vice President as Acting President.
Whenever the Vice President and a majority of either the principal officers of the executive departments or of such other body as Congress may by law provide, transmit to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives their written declaration that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall immediately assume the powers and duties of the office as Acting President.
Thereupon Congress shall decide the issue, assembling within forty-eight hours for that purpose if not in session.
If the Congress, within twenty-one days after receipt of the latter written declaration, or, if Congress is not in session, within twenty-one days after Congress is required to assemble, determines by two-thirds vote of both Houses that the President is unable to discharge the powers and duties of his office, the Vice President shall continue to discharge the same as Acting President; otherwise, the President shall resume the powers and duties of his office.
The right of citizens of the United States, who are eighteen years of age or older, to vote shall not be denied or abridged by the United States or by any State on account of age.
Twenty-seventh Amendment No law, varying the compensation for the services of the Senators and Representatives, shall take effect, until an election of Representatives shall have intervened.
President Incapacitated The ""disability clause"" provides for the vice president to act as president if the president informs Congress that he or she is too ill to perform the duties of office.
Vice President as Acting President This section spells out the process by which the vice president takes over as president if the president is unconscious or unable or unwilling to admit that he or she is incapacitated.
Twenty-sixth Amendment Voting Age Section 1:The Right to Vote This amendment lowered the voting age to 18.
The amendment was passed and ratified during the Vietnam War, when Americans questioned the fairness of drafting 18-year-olds to fight a war, but not allowing them to vote for the leaders who make decisions about war.
Enforcement Twenty-seventh Amendment Congressional Pay If members of Congress vote to raise their own pay, the pay increase cannot go into effect until after the next congressional election.
James Madison introduced this amendment in 1789 along with the Bill of Rights.
Frederick Jackson Turner, ""The Significance of History"" 1891, at www.teachingamericanhistory.org.
Henry Ford, in ChicagoTribune, May 25, 1916, at www.quotationspages.com.
Arnold Toynbee, History News Network, ""Quotes About History,"" www.hnn.us.
Michael Drayton, Odes, ""To the Virginian Voyage,"" 1619, at www.bartleby.com.
John Smith, in ""First Hand Accounts of Virginia, 1575-1705,"" at www.virtualjamestown.org.
George Washington, Farewell Address, Sep., 1796, atwww.ourdocuments.gov.
Virginia General Assembly declaration, 1705, at ""Africans in America,"" www.pbs.org.
Norton, 1975), credited to William Cobbett, The Parliamentary History of England, Vol.
William Smith, letter in the Pennsylvania Gazette, 1776, in Robert E Madgic, Rebels vs.
King George III, ""Proclamation for Suppressing Rebellion and Sedition,"" 1775, at www.ushistory.org.
George Washington, at United States Department of State International Information Programs, usinfo.state.gov.
George W Bush, 2003, at the National Archives Experience, www.archives.gov.
Benjamin Franklin, 1789, at ""The Quotable Franklin,"" www.ushistory.org.
The Founders' Constitution (Univ. of Chicago Press, 2000), press-pubs.uchicago.edu/founders.
George Washington, Inaugural Address, Apr., 1789, at www.ourdocuments.gov.
Charles Sumner, ""The Crime Against Kansas"" May 18, 1856, at Furman Univ., facweb.furman.edu.
Daniel Webster, in Hakim, Liberty.2: ""Bleeding Kansas,"" Encyclopaedia Britannica Online, www.britannica.com.
A Commentary,"" Univ. of Missouri-Kansas City School of Law, www.law.umkc.edu.
Abraham Lincoln, at ""The Lincoln-Douglas Debates of 1858,"" National Park Service, www.nps.gov.
Page Smith, Trial by Fire: A People's History of the Civil War and Reconstruction Period, Vol.
The National Park Service Symposium on the Civil War , at www.cr.nps.gov.
The Common Soldier of the Confederacy (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State Univ.
War Department General Order 143: Creation of the United States Colored Troops, at www.ourdocuments.gov.
Kate Cumming, in Richard Barksdale Harwell, ed., Kate : The Journal of a Confederate Nurse (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State Univ.
Abraham Lincoln, Second Inaugural Address, Mar., 1865, www.ourdocuments.gov.
Caroline Cowles Richard, at ""The War Ends— A Small Town's Reaction, 1865,"" Eyewitness to History, www.eyewitnesstohistory.com.
Shelby Cullom, ""The Impeachment of Andrew Johnson "" Great Epochs in American History, www.usgennet.org.
LymanTrumbull, at ""The ImpeachmentTrial of President Andrew Johnson,"" DCBA Brief Online, www.dcba.org.
Massachusetts Bureau of Statistics of Labor, Twelfth Annual Report in Charles W Calhoun, ed„ The Gilded Age: Essays on the Origins of Modern America (Wilmington, DE: Scholarly Resources, 1996), Chapter 16 205: Riis, How the Other.
Walter Rauschenbusch, Christianity and the Social Crisis , in Hofstadter, Progressive.2: Robert Hunter, Poverty , in Hofstadter, Progressive.
Theodore Roosevelt, in Richard B Morris, Encyclopedia of American History, 7th ed.
George Washington, Farewell Address, 1796, at usinfo.state.gov.9: George Washington, Proclamation of Neutrality, 1793, in Bailey and Kennedy, American Pageant.
Henry Cabot Lodge, ""England, Venezuela, and the Monroe Doctrine,"" North American Review 160, no. , at ""Making of America,"" cdl.library.cornell.edu.
James Knox Polk, May 11, 1846, at www.yale.edu.5: Henry Cabot Lodge, ""The Business World vs. the Politicians,"" 1895.
Alfred Thayer Mahan, ""The United States Looking Outward,"" Atlantic Monthly 66 , at Project Gutenberg, www.gutenberg.org.
Jose Marti, in Carlos Ripoll, ""Jose Marti: Thoughts,"" Oct., 2005, Florida International Univ., www.fiu.edu.
Enrique Dupuy de Lome, in Bailey and Kennedy, American Spirit.3: Charles D Sigsbee, at ""An On-Line History of the United States,"" Public History Resource Center, www.publichistory.org.
John J Pershing, in Melvin Sylvester, ""African American Freedom Fighters: Soldiers for Liberty,"" Long Island Univ., www.liu.edu.6: Anti-Imperialist League platform, 1899, at ""Modern History Sourcebook"" Fordham Univ., www.fordham.edu.
Woodrow Wilson, ""Address Before the Southern Commercial Congress in Mobile, Alabama, Oct., 1913,"" at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Woodrow Wilson, at ""American President: An Online Reference Resource,"" Miller Ctr. of Public Affairs, Univ. of Virginia, www.millercenter.virginia.edu.
William McKinley, at ""America at the Turn of the Century: A Look at the Historical Context,"" www.loc.gov.
John Hay, Mar., 1900, in Bailey and Kennedy, American Pageant.9: ""The Boxer Rebellion and the United States Navy, 1900-1901,"" Naval Historical Center, www.history.navy.mil.
Theodore Roosevelt, in Page Smith, America Enters the World: A People's History of the Progressive Era and World War I, V ol.
Woodrow Wilson, Declaration of Neutrality, Aug., 1914, at World War I, net.lib.byu.edu.
Woodrow Wilson, State of the Union Address, Dec., 1914, at stateoftheunion.onetwothree.net.
Lord James Bryce, in Alan McDougall, ""Dirty Hands: Atrocities of World War I,"" www.channel4.com/history.0: Woodrow Wilson, Address to the Senate, Jan., 1917, at firstworldwar.com.
Woodrow Wilson, ""Joint Address to Congress Leading to a Declaration of War Against Germany,"" Apr., 1917, at www.ourdocuments.gov.
Woodrow Wilson, in Joseph P Tumulty, Woodrow Wilson As I Know Him, www.gutenberg.org.
George Norris, ""Speech Against Declaration of War, April 4, 1917"" www.iath.virginia.edu.
Jami L Bryan, ""Fighting for Respect: African American Soldiers in WWI,"" Army History Research, www.armyhistory.org.
Ezra Pound, ""Hugh Selwyn Mauberly,"" 1920, at The Norton Anthology of English Literature, www2.wwnorton.com.
Elsie Janis, ""Ohioana Authors,"" WOSU, www.ohioana-authors.org.4: George M Cohan, in Farwell, OverThere.5: Woodrow Wilson, in Reader's Digest, Glorious.6: Farwell, OverThere.
Woodrow Wilson, ""Fourteen Points Speech,"" Jan., 1918, at usinfo.state.gov.
WilliamTaft, inThomas A Bailey, ""Woodrow Wilson Wouldn't Yield,"" American Heritage Magazine, www.americanheritage.com.
Woodrow Wilson, Address to the Senate, Jan., 1917, at firstworldwar.com.
John Pyne and Gloria Sesso, ""Woodrow Wilson and the United States Ratification of theTreaty of Versailles,"" Organization of American Historians, www.oah.org.
Henry Cabot Lodge, ""On the League of Nations,"" Aug., 1919, at www.firstworldwar.com.
Woodrow Wilson, at Bailey, ""Woodrow Wilson Wouldn't Yield,"" www.americanheritage.com.
Hiram Wesley Evans, in Patterson, America.0: Bartolomeo Vanzetti, in ""Sacco and Vanzetti,"" Time, Apr. 18, 1927, at www.time.com.
Harry Daugherty, at ""Warren Gamaliel Harding,"" The American Presidency, ap.grolier.com.
Calvin Coolidge, at ""Politics During the 1920s,"" www.digitalhistory.uh.edu.
Warren G Harding, at ""Inaugural Address of Warren G Harding ""The Avalon Project, www.yale.edu.
Stuart Chase, ""The Tragedy of Waste,"" Atlantic Monthly , in Patterson, America.
Duke Ellington, at www.bartleby.com, attributed to ""On Jazz,"" Herald Tribune, July 9, 1961.
Billy Sunday, in ""Billy Sunday Again Hits theTrail Here,"" NewYorkTimes, Apr., 1925.
Vincent Millay, ""First Fig,"" A Few Figs from Thistles , at ""A Celebration of Women Writers,"" digital.library.upenn.edu.
George E Mowry and Blaine A Brownell, The Urban Nation, 1920-1980, rev. ed.
George Rappelyea, at Doug Linder, ""George Rappalyea,"" www.law.umkc.edu.
William Dembski, in Cory Miller, ""Dembski, in Kansas, Explains Cells as Intelligent Design 'Icon,'"" Baptist Press, www.sbcbaptistpress.org.
Riding the Rails,"" www.pbs.org.4: Franklin Roosevelt, Second Inaugural Address, Jan. 20, 1937, at www.bartleby.com.
Jerry Siegel, in David Michael Petrou, ""Superman, the Legend,"" at theages.superman.ws.
Franklin Roosevelt, ""On the Bank Crisis"" fireside chat, Mar., 1933, at New Deal Network, newdeal.feri.org.
Franklin Roosevelt, in ""Dead Flower,"" Time Magazine , Nov., 1934, atTime, jcgi.pathfinder.com/time.
Franklin Roosevelt, in Kennedy, Freedom.0: Franklin Roosevelt, message to Congress, Jan., 1935, in Kennedy, Freedom.
Charles Evans Hughes, in Foner, Give.2: Franklin Roosevelt, in Kennedy, Freedom.
Franklin Roosevelt, ""Quarantine the Aggressor,"" Oct., 1937, www.presidential rhetoric.com.
Library of Congress Resource Guide for the Study of World War II,"" www.loc.gov.1: Adolf Hitler, ""TheTriumph of Hitler NazisTake Czechoslovakia,"" The History Place, www.historyplace.com.
Franklin Roosevelt, at ""President and Public Pressure: 'For a Redress of Grievances,""' The White House Historical Assoc., www.whitehousehistory.org.
Franklin Roosevelt, Joint Address to Congress Leading to a Declaration of War Against Japan, Dec., 1941, at www.ourdocuments.gov.
Franklin Roosevelt, ""Arsenal of Democracy"" speech, Dec., 1940, at International Relations Program, www.mtholyoke.edu.
Franklin Roosevelt, fireside chat, Apr., 1942, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.2: ""A More Perfect Union,"" americanhistory.si.edu.
AntiSemitism in the Armed Forces,"" When Jews Were GIs: World War II and the Remaking of America, FATHOM: The Univ. of Michigan, www.fathom.com.
James West Davidson, Nation of Nations: A Narrative History of the American Republic, 5th ed.
Robert H Jackson, in Kermit L Hall, ed., The Oxford Companion to the Supreme Court of the United States, 2d ed.
Redd Evans and John Jacob Loeb, ""Rosie the Riveter,"" at Sheridan Harvey, ""Rosie the Riveter: Real Women Workers in World War II,"" www.loc.gov.
Leon Uris, at ""Jewish Empowerment in Response to the War,"" When Jews Were GIs, www.fathom.com.
Takaki, Different.3: ""Los Angeles Zoot Suit Riots,"" Los Angeles Almanac, www.laalmanac.com.
Simon Appleby, ""Churchill, Roosevelt, and the Casablanca Conference, January 1943,"" The Casablanca Conference, www.casablancaconference.com.
Joseph Stalin, at ""TheTideTurns: Stalingrad and the Advances in the Pacific,"" World War II, www.history.com.
Dwight Eisenhower, ""Order of the Day,"" June 6, 1944, at www.ourdocuments.gov.
Ronald Reagan, in ""Remembering Reagan,"" United States News and World Report, June 6, 2005.
Nimitz, in Williamson Murray and Allan R Millett, A War to Be Won: Fighting the Second World War (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard Univ.
Albert Einstein, at ""Einstein's Letters to Roosevelt,"" Aug., 1939, hypertextbook.com.
Franklin Roosevelt, Address on the Signing of the Agreement Establishing the U.N.R.R.A., Nov., 1943, at www.presidency .ucsb.edu.
Franklin Roosevelt, Address to Congress on the Yalta Conference, Mar., 1945, at www .presidency.ucsb.edu.
Robert H Jackson, at ""Nuremberg Trial Proceedings, Vol.,"" www.yale.edu.
Franklin Roosevelt, Address to the International Student Assembly, Sep., 1942, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Brett D Schaefer, ""Justice by Fiat: No Sovereign State Should be Forced into a Treaty It Opposes,"" National Review Online, www.nationalreview.com.
John R Bolton, Remarks to the Federalist Society, Nov., 2002, at ""The United States and the International Criminal Court,"" www.state.gov.
A CNN Perspectives Series,"" CNN Interactive, www.cnn.com.6: Winston Churchill, in ""Winston Churchill, Iron Curtain Speech, Mar., 1946,"" at ""Modern History Sourcebook,"" www.fordham.edu.
Reply to Churchill, 1946,"" at www.fordham.edu.8: Harry S Truman, Truman Doctrine, www.yale.edu.
Irving Brant, in Richard C Lukas, Bitter Legacy: Polish-American Relations in the Wake of World War II (Lexington, KY: Univ.
Joseph Stalin, in David Reynolds, ""Marshall Plan Commemorative Section: The European Response: Primacy of Politics,"" Foreign Affairs , at www.foreignaffairs.com.
Dwight Eisenhower, May 11, 1960, in ""'Our First Line of Defense': Presidential Reflections on United States Intelligence,"" Center for the Study of Intelligence, www.cia.gov/csi.
Harry S Truman, June 24, 1949, in May, Anxiety.4: Harry S Truman, Sep. 23, 1949, at ""American Experience: Race for the Superbomb,"" www.pbs.org.
Race for the Superbomb,"" www.pbs.org.5: John Foster Dulles, in Reader's Digest Assoc., Glorious.7: George W Bush, at encarta.msn.com.
George F Will, ""Holocaust in a Suitcase,"" Washington Post, Aug., 2004, at www.washingtonpost.com.
Joseph McCarthy, at ""'Enemies from Within': Senator Joseph R McCarthy's Accusations of Disloyalty,"" historymatters.gmu.edu.
Millard Caldwell, in ""Women Defend the Nation,"" The Cold War Museum, www.coldwar.org, attributed to Federal Civil Defense Administration, ""Can Americans Take It?,"" The Civil Defense Alert, Apr.51.
Civil Defense, 1955,"" United States Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration, www.fhwa.dot.gov.
Harry Truman, at ""'Word Has Just Been Received:' Truman Speaks on the Railroad Strike,"" historymatters.gmu.edu.
Harry Truman, at ""Statement by the President Making Public a Report by the Civil Rights Committee,"" Oct., 1947, www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Press of Kentucky, 1999), quoting the Louisville Courier Journal, Nov., 1948.
Harry Truman, ""Whistle-Stop Tour,"" Sep., 1948, at www.millercenter.virginia.edu.
Dwight Eisenhower, Farewell Address, Jan., 1861, atThe Dwight D Eisenhower Library, www.eisenhower.archives.gov.
Dick McDonald, in David Halberstam, The Fifties, copyright © 1993 by The Amateurs Limited.
John Updike, ""Superman,"" from COLLECTED POEMS 1953-1993 by John Updike, copyright © 1993 by John Updike.
Doubleday, 1956), at The Center for Programs in Contemporary Writing, Univ. of Pennsylvania, www.writing.upenn.edu.
David Riesman, The Lonely Crowd: A Study of the Changing American Character , in Patterson, America.
Truth, Justice, and the American Way,"" Jan.00, www.supermanhomepage.com.
Rinehart, 1954), in C Wright Mills, ""Nothing to Laugh At,"" NewYorkTimes, Apr., 1954.
Richard Nixon, in ""Nixon Foresees a Four-Day Work Week,"" NewYorkTimes, Sep., 1956.
Michael Harrington, The Other America, reprinted with the permission of Scribner, an imprint of Simon & Schuster Adult Publishing Group, from THE OTHER AMERICA: Poverty in the United States, by Michael Harrington.
Nan Roman, in ""Study: 744,000 Are Homeless in U.S.,"" Associated Press, www.breitbart.com.
B Du Bois, in ""Communities 'Behind the Veil/"" Remembering Jim Crow, americanradioworks.publicradio.org.
In-Depth Essay,"" The History of Jim Crow, www.jimcrowhistory.org.1: Jackie Robinson, in ""Guide to Black History,"" www.britannica.online.
Cardell Gay, in ""1963 Civil Right Activist Welcomed Back to Birmingham, Alabama"" www.cnn.com.
Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee, in Wexler, Eyewitness.4: ""Letter to Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., in ""The Children's Crusade,"" The Martin Luther King, Jr., Research and Education Institute, www.liberationcurriculum.org.
Stokely Carmichael, Oct.66, at ""Stokely Carmichael: 'Black Power/"" www.americanrhetoric.com.
Raphael J Sonenshein, ""Tom Bradley: Mayor Who Reshaped L.A., 1917-1998,"" Los Angeles Unified School District, www.lausd.k12.ca.us.
United States Serial Drama,"" Museum of Broadcast Communications, www.museum.tv.8: Martin Luther King Jr., ""Remaining Awake Through a Great Revolution,"" 1968.
Dolores Huerta, at United Farm Workers, www.ufw.org.6: Betty Friedan, The Feminine Mystique, 1963, reprint ed.
John F Kennedy, Inaugural Address, Jan., 1961, at www.ourdocuments.gov.
John Kenneth Galbraith, in Patterson, America.9: John F Kennedy, ""Civil Rights Message,"" June 11, 1963, at www.americanrhetoric.com.
John F Kennedy, Special Message to Congress on Urgent National Needs, May 25, 1961, John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, www.jfklibrary.org.
Neil Armstrong, at ""Launching NASA,"" A Brief History of NASA, www.hq.nasa.gov.
John F Kennedy, ""Remarks at the Rudolph Wilde Platz,"" June 26, 1963, www.jfklibrary.org.
The Kennedys,"" www.pbs.org.2: John F Kennedy, in Reader's Digest Assoc., Glorious.
Lyndon B Johnson, Address Before a Joint Session of Congress, Nov., 1963, www.lbjlib.utexas.edu.
Lyndon B Johnson, Remarks Before the National Convention upon Accepting the Nomination, Aug., 1964, www.lbjlib.utexas.edu.
Lyndon B Johnson, Remarks at the Univ. of Michigan, May 22, 1964, www.lbjlib.utexas.edu.
Barry Goldwater, in Bart Barnes, ""Barry Goldwater, GOP Hero, Dies,"" Washington Post Online, www.washingtonpost.com.
Barry Goldwater, at ""Goldwater's 1964 Acceptance Speech,"" Washington Post Online, www.washingtonpost.com, attributed toThe Arizona Historical Society.
Lyndon B Johnson, Remarks Upon Signing the Public Broadcasting Act of 1967, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.4: Lyndon B Johnson, in Dallek, Flawed.
Lyndon B Johnson, Special Message to the Congress on Conservation and Restoration of Natural Beauty, Feb., 1965, www.lbjlib.utexas.edu.
Barry Goldwater, in ""The Limits That Create Liberty and the Liberty That Creates Limits,"" Time, Oct., 1964, www.time.com.
Students for a Democratic Society, Port Huron Statement, June 15, 1962, in Foner, Give.
All Rights Administered by EMI U Catalog, Inc. and Alfred Publishing Co., Inc.
Ernest Gruening, Aug.-7, 1964, at ""The Senate Debates theTonkin Gulf Resolution,"" Vassar College, vietnam.vassar.edu.
Horace Busby, July 21, 1965, at ""The War in Vietnam: Escalation Phase,"" www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Muhammad Ali, in Brian Duffy, ""Truth Tellers: Muhammad Ali,"" United States News and World Report, Aug., 2001.
Beyond Vietnam — ATime to Break Silence,"" www.americanrhetoric.com.8: Walter Cronkite, in Patterson, Grand.
Lyndon B Johnson, Mar., 1968, in ""President Lyndon B Johnson's Address to the Nation Announcing Steps to Limit the War in Vietnam and Reporting His Decision Not to Seek Reelection,"" www.lbjlib.utexas.edu.
Anne Pham, in ""Memories of the Fall of Saigon"" CBS News, www.cbsnews.com.
Richard Nixon, Jan., 1973, in ""Letter from President Nixon to President Nguyen Van Thieu,"" TeachingAmericanHistory.com.
Remarks at the Conclusion of Discussions with President the Republic of Vietnam,"" at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Jan Scruggs, at Vietnam Veterans Memorial, www.nps.gov.0: From IN RETROSPECT by Robert S McNamara, copyright © 1995 by Robert S McNamara.
Richard Nixon, ""Checkers"" speech, Sep., 1952, at www.watergateinfo.com.
George Wallace, at Grace Pietrocarlo, ""The Political Legacies of the Vietnam War Era,"" Consortium for Innovative Environments in Learning, www.cielearn.org.
Richard Nixon, Address to the Nation on Domestic Programs, Aug., 1969, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Reflections on the Great Society,"" New Perspectives Quarterly 4, no., digitalnpq.org.0: Richard Nixon, Statement on Signing the Voting Rights Act Amendments of 1970, June 22, 1970, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Richard Nixon, First Annual Report to the Congress on United States Foreign Policy for the 1970s, Feb., 1970, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Richard Nixon, Remarks at Andrews Air Force Base on Returning from the People's Republic of China, Feb., 1972, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Ron Ziegler, at ""Nixon Press Secretary Ziegler Dead at 63,"" The Nixon EraTimes, www.watergate.com.5: ""Watergate Chronology,"" Washington Post, www.washingtonpost.com.
Tom Wolfe, ""The Me Decade and the Third Great Awakening,"" at Dept, of History, Univ. of Warwick, www2.warwick.ac.uk.0: Gerald Ford, ""Whip Inflation Now,"" Oct., 1974, Miller Center of Public Affairs, Univ. of Virginia, www.millercenter.virginia.edu.
Jimmy Carter, National Energy Plan, Address Delivered Before a Joint Session of the Congress, Apr., 1977, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Carter's 'Crisis of Confidence' Speech,"" www.pbs.org.2: Jimmy Carter, in Foner, Give.
Aase Lionaes, ""Presentation Speech,"" Dec., 1978, The Nobel Peace Prize 1978, nobelprize.virtual. museum.
Nina Rao, ""Population Connection History,"" Population Connection, www.populationconnection.org.
Chapter 56 731:Timothy McCarthy, in ""HeTook a Bullet for Reagan,"" June 11, 2004, www.cbsnews.com.
We've Been Here Before,"" Jan., 2004, USA Today, www.usatoday.com.3: Ronald Reagan, in Tindall and Shi, America.
Ronald Reagan, ""Remarks at a Luncheon for Members of the College of Physicians in Philadelphia,"" Apr., 1987, www.reaganlibrary.com.
Jesse Jackson, ""Address before the Democratic National Convention,"" July 18, 1984, www.pbs.org.
Ronald Reagan, ""Tear Down This Wall,"" Great Speeches Collection, www.history place.com.
Ronald Reagan, Apr., 1983, ""Address Before a Joint Session of the Congress on Central America,"" www.reaganlibrary.com.
Bush, Republican National Convention Acceptance Speech, Aug., 1988, at www.americanrhetoric.com.
Bill Clinton, Acceptance Speech to the Democratic National Convention, July 16, 1992, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Ross Perot, Oct., 1992, at the Commission on Presidential Debates, www.debates.org.
Bill Clinton, Statement on Signing the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, Aug., 1997, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
George W Bush, Republican National Convention Acceptance Speech, Aug., 2000, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
George W Bush, in ""Bush Stumps for 'No Child Left Behind',"" Jan., 2004, at www.cnn.com.
Bush, News Conference on Aid to the States of the Former Soviet Union, Apr., 1992, at www.presidency.ucsb.edu.
Saddam Hussein, at ""1991: 'Mother of All Battles' Begins,"" news.bbc.co.uk.
George W Bush, Address to a Joint Session of Congress and the American People, Sep., 2001, at www.whitehouse.gov.
George W Bush, ""Operation Iraqi Freedom,"" Mar., 2003, at www.whitehouse.gov.
Roger Simon, ""One Year,"" United States News and World Report (Nov., 2002), at www.usnews.com.
George W Bush, Sep., 2001, at www.whitehouse.gov.3: ""Rushing Off a Cliff,"" Sep., 2006, www.nytimes.com.
Bettmann/Corbis. xx tl: Francis G Mayer/Corbis. xx tc: Corbis. xx bl: Bettmann/Corbis. xx bl: Bettmann/Corbis. xx c: Bettmann/Corbis. xx: David J & Janice L Frent Collection/Corbis. 1 bl: Bettmann/Corbis, 1 tr: Bettmann/Corbis. be: Lester Lefkowitz/Corbis. cr: Corbis.
Flip Schulke/Corbis.: Getty Images. r: Library of Congress. c: Bettmann/Corbis.
Bettmann/Corbis. 7 c: Ed Clark-Life Magazine-TimeLife Pictures/Getty Images. r: AP Photo. c: AP Photo.
HIP/Art Resource: NY. 9 br: Alan Briere/SuperStock. br: Kindra Clineff/lndex Stock Imagery. 9 be: The Bridgeman Art Library. 9 tr: Steven Senne/AP Photo.
Library of Congress. r: Library of Congress. br: Corbis. tl: The Granger Collection NewYork.
The Western Reserve Historical Society, Cleveland, Ohio.5The Granger Collection NewYork. bl: Library of Congress. tl: Underwood & Underwood/Corbis.
Library of Congress. r: Library of Congress. c:The Granger Collection NewYork. r: Bettmann/Corbis.
Corbis. bl: Culver Pictures. tl:The Granger Collection NewYork. r: Hawaii State Archives. r: The Granger Collection NewYork.
Bettmann/ Corbis. r:The Granger Collection NewYork. tc: Time Life Pictures/Getty Images. be: Jacques M Chenet/Corbis.
Bettmann/Corbis. r: Corbis. c: K.YamashitaPanStock-Panoramic Images/ NGSImages.com. r: Newsmakers/Getty Images.
Minnesota Historical Society/ Corbis.8: AP Photo. t: Bettmann/Corbis.0: HultonDeutsch Collection/Corbis.1: Bettmann/Corbis. t: Bettmann/ Corbis. b: Library of Congress.
AP Photo.5: Central Press/ Getty Images. b: Bettmann/ Corbis. t: AFP/Getty Images.
AP Photo.0: Bettmann/ Corbis.1: Keystone/Getty Images.3: George Strock-Time Life Pictures/Getty Images.4: Corbis. b: Hulton Archive/ Getty Images. t: Bettmann/ Corbis.6: Alfred Eisenstaedt/ Time Life Picture/Getty Images.
Bettmann/Corbis.3: Bettmann/Corbis.4: Keystone/ Getty Images.6: AP Photo.7: AP Photo.
Bettmann/Corbis. b: Bettmann/Corbis. t: W Eugene Smith-Time Life Pictures/Getty Images.7: Dayton History.
Bettmann/Corbis.9: Peter Sickles/SuperStock.0: Minnesota Historical Society/Corbis.
SuperStock.2: Joseph Scherschel-Time Life Pictures/ Getty Images.4: Bettmann/ Corbis.6: Hulton Archive/Getty Images.7: Bettmann/Corbis.
Bettmann/ Corbis. b: Justin Sullivan/ Getty Images. t: Frank Driggs Collection/Getty Images. b: MPI/Getty Images. b: Martha Holmes-Time Life Pictures/Getty Images. t: Cheryl Fenton.
James Karales/Estate of James Karales, Monica Karales Executrix.5: AP Photo.
Flip Schulke/Corbis.1: Bob Adelman/Magnum Photos.2: Keystone/Getty Images.4: Robert Parent-Time Life Pictures/ Getty Images. b: Bruno Barbey/ Magnum Photos. t: David J & Janice L Frent Collection/Corbis.
David J & Janice L Frent Collection/Corbis. t: Bettmann/Corbis. b: David J & Janice L Frent Collection/Corbis.
Bettmann/Corbis.3: Roger Wood/Corbis.4: Bettmann/ Corbis.5: Corbis.6: Eric Miller/ AP Photo.7: Bettmann/Corbis.
Photo courtesy Greensboro Historical Museum. t: Bettmann/Corbis. b: Bettmann/ Corbis.
David J Phillip/AP Photo.0: Albin Guilot-Roger Viollet/Getty Images.1: Dien Bien Phu Museum-Reuters/Corbis.
AFP/Getty Irpages.6: Yoichi R Okamoto/LBJ Library.7: Library of Congress.
Larry Burrows-Time Life Pictures/Getty Images. t: Larry Burrows-Time Life Pictures/Getty Images. b: Bettmann/Corbis.
AP Photo. t: Department of Defense/ United States Army Photo. b: Leif Skoogfors/Corbis.2: Getty Images.3: Tim Page/Corbis.4: Joe Giblin/AP Photo.
Charles O’Rear/Corbis.7: JP Laffont-Sygma/Corbis.8: Getty Images.9: Bettmann/ Corbis.1: Mediolmages IncJ Index Stock Imagery.2: Paramount/The Kobal Collection.
Time Life Pictures/Getty Images.1: Hulton Archive/Getty Images.2: Terry Ashe-Time Life Pictures/Getty Images.3: Jim Borgman © 1980 Cincinnati Enquirer.
Gary Norman/Getty Images.5: Wally McNamee/Corbis.7: Susan Steinkamp/Corbis.
Focus On Sports/Getty Images. b: Roger Ressmeyer/Corbis. r: David Hume Kennerly/Getty Images.
David J & Janice L Frent Collection/Corbis.0: John Bazemore/AP Photo.1: Stephan Savoia/AP Photo.
Diana Walker-Time Life Pictures/Getty Images.0: Dirck Halstead-Time Life Pictures/ Getty Images. b: Blaine Harrington Ill/Corbis.
Reuters/Corbis. b: Lawrence Manning/Corbis. t: Ed Kashi/Corbis. cr: Christy Uyeno Collection. b: Kelly Shafsky Collection. cl: Vicki Philp Collection. t: Ronan Mohan Collection. t: Joshua Robert-AFP/Getty Images. b: Catherine Leuthold/Corbis.1: Rob Rowan/Corbis.2: © Sketch by Art Lein-Reuters/Corbis.3: 2001 © Mike Ritter/North America Syndicate.
Dirck Halstead-Time Life Pictures/Getty Images. tl: Wally McNamee/Corbis. tr Reuters/ Corbis. tr: Hadi Mizban/AP Photo. br: Reuters/Corbis. be: Sean Adair-Reuters/Corbis. bl: Mike Stocker/Corbis. tc: Tim Sloan-AFP/Getty Images.
Gary Undercuffler.: Gary Undercuffler.: Gary Undercuffler.: Qin Zhong Yu.
