On August 13 the Berlin Wall sign the is built between East and Limited West Berlin.
A Soviet nuclear missile on parade in Moscow Build on What You Know ot all Americans enjoyed the N peace and prosperity of the 1950s.
The growing civil rights movement and its successes inspired other groups to demand their equal rights.
Some East German soldiers building the Berlin Wall Americans also questioned traditional values through protests, art, and music.
Golda Meir served as Israel’s minister of labor and foreign If you were there . . . minister before becoming the nation’s prime minister.
As you read the section, write information you learn about each topic under the appropriate flap.
The Story Continues n the evening of September 26, 1960, American viewers O saw the first-ever televised debate between presidential candidates.
Most Americans saw John F Kennedy as calm, confident, and relaxed in front of the cameras.
Richard Nixon, his Republican opponent, seemed tense and sweaty, with a tight smile.
Kennedy’s Domestic Policies At 43, John F Kennedy became the youngest person ever elected president of the United States.
As a Catholic, Kennedy had to overcome religious prejudice and convince voters that his political decisions would not be influenced by religious leaders.
At his inauguration, President Kennedy called on Americans to look beyond their own needs and to help others.
Explain your answer. can do for you—ask what you can do for your country.
My Speak fellow citizens of the world—ask not what America will do for you, but what together we can do for the freedom of man.
Some joined the Peace Corps, a volunteer organization created by Kennedy in LIN KING 1961 to carry out improvement projects in developing countries.
PAST to President Kennedy also announced a set of domestic reforms he  PRESENT  called a New Frontier.
At the same time, he wanted to increase spending on the The Peace Corps poor, the military, and the space program.
One goal of the New Frontier In March 1961 President Kennedy established the Peace was to improve the economy.
Addressing the steel 1960s, Peace Corps volunteers were mostly young college industry, Kennedy asked union members to accept smaller raises and graduates who served in business owners not to raise prices.
Steelworkers agreed, but United States Steel Africa, Asia, and Latin America. and other companies raised their prices.
In response, Kennedy asked the The Peace Corps now admits many retired people, Federal Trade Commission to investigate whether the steel industry had and it serves countries in Eastbroken antitrust laws.
United States Steel soon lowered its prices. ern Europe and the former The New Frontier worried some members of Congress who feared a Soviet Union.
Republicans and conservative southern Democrats, experiences enriching.
He also offered economic aid to needy countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
The first of three major Cold War crises that President Kennedy had to deal with took place in Cuba.
By 1960, revolutionary leader Fidel Castro had set up a communist dictatorship that had ties to the Soviet Union.
In response, Kennedy approved a plan that the Eisenhower administration had developed to invade Cuba.
In April 1961 about 1,500 Cuban exiles waded ashore at the Bay of Pigs in Cuba.
After three days of fighting, about 1,200 of the invaders had been captured and the rest killed.
A second crisis took place in Berlin, located in the heart of East Germany.
Kennedy confirmed Homestead AFB reports of Soviet technicians  Key West THE and supplies arriving in Cuba.
Kennedy accepted Khrushchev’s HAITI DOMINICAN Roads proposal to end the crisis.
The Soviets JAMAICA REPUBLIC Ramey   would remove the missiles, and the VIRGIN BRITISH ISLANDS United States would end the blockade PUERTO RICO HONDURAS and promise not to invade Cuba.
Kennedy addressed the HONDURAS 4 nation on the Soviet threat and Oct.: The Soviet Union announced a blockade of Cuba. warned that United States actions EL  United States naval SALVADOR base United States blockade could lead to nuclear war.
By the summer of 1961, thousands of East Germans were leaving the country through East Berlin, greatly alarming Communist officials.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev demanded the removal of all foreign troops from West Berlin.
On the morning of August 13, 1961, Berliners woke to find workers building the Berlin Wall out of cement and barbed wire.
The barrier, which separated East and West Berlin, was successful in stopping the escapes.
President Kennedy responded to the “brutal border closing” by sending additional United States troops to the city.
Neither Kennedy nor Khrushchev, however, was willing to go to war over Berlin.
United States spy planes discovered that the Soviets were placing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Any misInterpreting Political Cartoons sile launched from there could hit the United States within minutes.
At a news conference on October 22, President Kennedy demanded that “Kennedy karate” This cartoon shows President Kennedy Khrushchev remove the missiles.
The United States Navy was sent to Cuba to preresponding forcefully to the vent the Soviets from bringing in more weapons.
Do you think the artist approved of Soviet ships approached the United States blockade.
The Cuban missile crisis encouraged Kennedy and Khrushchev to work to prevent conflicts that might lead to nuclear war.
The Soviets agreed to remove missiles from Cuba in return for a United States promise not to invade Cuba.
In 1963 the superpowers set up a telephone “hotline” so that the two leaders could talk to each other at a moment’s notice.
Kennedy and Khrushchev also signed the Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, which ended the testing of new nuclear weapons aboveground.
Summarizing Describe the three major Cold War crises of Kennedy’s administration.
SC5 HP28 1 Identify and explain: 2 Analyzing Informa3 Finding the Main Idea • John F Kennedy tion Copy the diagram What was Kennedy’s New Frontier, and which • Peace Corps below.
Evaluating Imagine that you are a foreign-policy • Limited Nuclear adviser to President Kennedy.
Write a memo Test Ban Treaty Cold War telling Kennedy how effective you think his Challenges administration has been at fighting communism.
The security of the president of the United States is still an • Neil Armstrong important challenge for the federal government.
Use • Edwin “Buzz” Aldrin or other current events sources to learn • Rachel Carson about challenges that the Secret Service faces when protecting the president.
The Story Continues n November 1963 President Kennedy began a quick tour of I Texas cities.
On the morning of November 22 he worked on a speech he planned to deliver that day in Dallas.
To the nation’s horror, by that afternoon, he had died from an assassin’s bullet.
That same day, Vice President Lyndon B Johnson became the nation’s president.
On his third birthday, John F Kennedy Jr. saluted The Kennedy Assassination his father’s coffin in the funeral procession.
On November 22, 1963, as President Kennedy’s motorcade traveled through Dallas, shots rang out.
Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, following in another car, was unharmed.
Just two hours after Kennedy’s assassination, Johnson took the presidential oath of office on board Air Force One, the presidential airplane.
One Kennedy administration official remembered his reaction on hearing of the president’s death.
More than 90 percent of American homes and millions of people worldwide watched Kennedy’s funeral on television.
Within hours of the assassination, police arrested Soviet sympathizer and former United States Marine Lee Harvey Oswald.
Two days later, as officials moved Oswald to another jail, nightclub owner Jack Ruby pushed his way through the crowd and killed Oswald.
To try to clear up the mystery of Kennedy’s assassination, President Johnson chose a special commission headed by Chief Justice Earl Warren.
The Warren Commission, as the group of investigators was called, spent months studying the evidence.
The Warren Commission concluded that Oswald was the assassin and that he had acted alone.
There remains much controversy surrounding the Kennedy assassination to this day.
While Kennedy’s family enjoyed wealth and power, Johnson grew up poor in rural Texas.
Citizenship leader in the Senate, Johnson had learned what it took to win the votes of Lyndon B Johnson was born his fellow senators.
One member of Congress recalled Johnson’s forceful in 1908 in central Texas.
Johnson became As President, Johnson was determined to pass the education and known as the wonder kid of Texas politics for his early civil rights legislation that he and Kennedy had supported.
Roosevelt made Johnson the War on Poverty, a series of programs to help poor Americans.
Johndirector of the Texas National son called for the creation of the Office of Economic Opportunity Youth Administration , a to develop programs to help poor people earn money.
He was the youngest state NYA direcstarted the Job Corps, a program to teach young adults basic job skills. tor.
Under his leadership the In addition, it established Head Start, an educational program to preNYA built highways, parks, pare poor children for school.
The OEO also created a domestic version and playgrounds throughout Texas.
Johnson won election of the Peace Corps—the Volunteers in Service to America . to the House of RepresentaPresident Johnson’s popularity soared because of his success in gettives in 1937 at age 29. ting legislation passed.
The Democrats nominated him as their candiJohnson continued his rise into the Senate, on to the vice date for president in 1964.
Barry Goldwater ran as the Republican presidency, and then the candidate.
A former colleague described Johnson’s reduce federal social programs and expand the United States military.
Analyzing Primary Sources History “The Great Society rests on abundance and liberty Makers for all.
Johnson saw his Great Society as an expansion of Roosevelt’s New Deal of the 1930s.
The Great Society established Medicare, which includes people age 65 and older in a government health care plan, and Medicaid, which provides health insurance for people with low incomes.
Another law gave more than $1 billion to local schools to help students with special needs.
Former New Deal official Robert C Weaver became HUD’s secretary and the first African American member of a presidential cabinet.
HUD Like Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy, President Johnson believed After reading about communism was a major threat to democracy and world peace.
Fearing the Housing and Urban Development Act on the a communist takeover in the Dominican Republic, he sent United States Marines Holt Researcher CD–ROM, there in April 1965 to stop rioting.
He also sent more United States troops to help create an informational defend South Vietnam from communist North Vietnam.
Science and Technology Like President Kennedy, President Johnson saw the space race as a key part of the Cold War.
After Soviet cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin orbited Earth in 1961, the Soviets appeared to be winning the space race.
Kennedy pushed the newly created National Aeronautics and Space C O N N E C T I N G TO SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY The Apollo Program he Apollo program was created to meet the longprogram was very successful.
Altogether, there were eight T range goal of landing an American on the Moon.
Even with careful planning, the Apollo astronauts faced missions to the Moon, six of which landed on the surface.
For example, only quick thinking and techuses robots for much of its space exploration.
How have nical skill saved the crew of Apollo 13 after an equipment United States space missions changed since the Apollo program malfunction in space.
He committed the nation to “landing a man on the moon and returning him safely to the earth” before the end of the 1960s.
In May 1961 Alan Shepard Jr. became the first American launched into space.
Then, in 1962, astronaut John Glenn became the first American to orbit Earth.
With President Johnson’s support, NASA soon surpassed the achievements of the Soviets.
On July 20, 1969, United States astronauts reached the Moon nearly six months ahead of Kennedy’s target date.
While their Apollo 11 spacecraft orbited the Moon, Neil Armstrong and Edwin “Buzz” Aldrin piloted a landing vehicle toward the Moon’s surface.
Millions of people around the world watched on television as the craft touched down and Armstrong took the first steps on the Moon.
These “spin-offs” included improved building materials, computers, medical devices, and communications systems.
Satellites became particularly important tools for sending telephone and television signals and for collecting weather data.
While NASA led efforts to explore space, scientists discovered new dangers on Earth.
Biologist Rachel Carson studied a noticeable increase in the death rate of birds in Massachusetts.
In her 1962 book Silent Biologist Rachel Carson, shown Spring, she concluded that DDT—a widely used insecticide, or insect in the woods near her home, raised many people’s awareness poison—had caused the deaths.
Analyzing Information Imagine that you are a • Neil Armstrong historian writing a book about President Lyndon • Edwin “Buzz” Aldrin Johnson’s reforms to help poor Americans.
Write • Rachel Carson an introduction to your book in which you B Johnson’s O Johnson’s describe what actions Johnson took.
Coordinating Committee • Freedom Rides Reading Strategy • March on Washington BRAINSTORMING Write the letters of the alphabet vertically on a • Civil Rights Act of 1964 sheet of paper.
Brainstorm what you already know about the civil • Voting Rights Act of 1965 rights movement.
The two African American men sat down at the “whites-only” section of the lunch counter.
The waitress refused to serve them, but they sat at the counter until the store closed for the day.
Restaurants throughout Peaceful Protests the South segregated white and African American The tactic used in Greensboro was known as a sit-in—a demonstration customers. in which protesters sit down in a location and refuse to leave.
The Greensboro group inspired other students to hold sit-ins at segregated stores.
To achieve their goals, the sit-in protesters practiced nonviolent resistance.
This strategy of peaceful protest rejected the use of violence, even for self-defense.
Crowds of angry white citizens often shouted insults, threw food, and even attacked protesters.
One protester described her appearance after a sit-in that turned violent.
I didn’t have on any shoes because I had lost them Drawing Inferences and Speak when I was dragged across the floor at Woolworth’s.
My Conclusions How can you tell that Moody was commitstockings were sticking to my legs from the mustard. ” ted to the protest? —Anne Moody, Coming of Age in Mississippi Over time, Woolworth’s and some other businesses in the South integrated.
This success encouraged African American student leaders to form the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee in 1960 to organize civil rights demonstrations.
In May 1961 the Congress of Racial Equality began a series of Freedom Rides to protest segregation on buses and in southern bus stations.
On these rides African American protesters used “whites-only” bus-station facilities and white protesters used “blacks-only” facilities.
The first two buses of Freedom Riders were attacked in Alabama by angry white mobs.
When CORE leaders called off the rides due to the danger, SNCC stepped in to continue the protests.
The attorney general sent a civil rights activists worked police escort, and the rides went on.
On November 1, 1961, an Interstate together on protests such as the Freedom Rides.
Commerce Commission ban on bus and railroad segregation went into effect.
The Freedom Riders had made an important contribution to desegregation.
SNCC route May 4 IL WV Richmond Arrests The 1961 VA Violence KY 75˚W Freedom Rides Greensboro Interpreting Maps Civil rights NC 35˚N MO Nashville workers stage Freedom Rides Charlotte May 8 throughout the South to protest TN Rock Hill the region’s segregated bus stations.
AR Memphis First CORE bus May 9 SC Atlanta Winnsboro Skills Assessment Second CORE bus Augusta May 10 1.
Riots broke out, army troops restored order, and Meredith went on to graduate.
In April 1963 Martin Luther King Jr., who led the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, organized a series of marches in Birmingham, Alabama.
King was arrested and put in jail, where he wrote Letter from Birmingham Jail, explaining his faith in nonviolence.
In May, King and the Reverend Fred Shuttlesworth, a Birmingham civil rights leader, led more protests in the city.
As 2,500 marchers walked through the streets, Police Commissioner Eugene “Bull” Connor ordered his officers to use their attack dogs against the marchers.
Many people began to under1963 March on Washington, more than 250,000 people— stand that the civil rights movement was a life-and-death struggle. both black and white— With public pressure rising, in June 1963 President Kennedy asked gathered to listen to speakers.
On August 28 more than 250,000 people—African American and white—gathered near the Lincoln Memorial and listened to speakers.
It was at this gathering that Martin Luther King Jr. gave his now famous “I Have a Dream” speech and filled the crowd with hope.
After the march, however, the hopeful mood disappeared in a wave of violence.
In September a bomb exploded at an African American church in Birmingham and killed four girls.
However, Lyndon B Johnson, Kennedy’s successor, took up the cause of civil rights legislation.
Martin Luther King Jr. public places, such as restaurants and transportation facilities.
African American activists had been working to protect voting rights in several southern states since the early 1960s.
Unfair election rules, along with threats of job loss and violence, often kept many African Americans from voting.
On June 21, 1964, three Freedom Summer volunteers—James Chaney, an African American, and Andrew Goodman and Michael Schwerner, both white students— disappeared.
The brutal murders drew national attention to the voter registration effort.
As the Johnson administration prepared a bill to protect African American voters, King organized a voter registration march from Selma The search for the three to Montgomery, Alabama, the state capital.
As the violence broke out, television news programs volunteers focused national attention on civil rights. broadcast the bloody events.
It gave the federal government the power to inspect voter registration procedures and to protect all citizens’ voting rights.
Within three years, more than half of all qualified African American voters in the South had registered to vote.
New Directions During the midto late 1960s, many younger reformers began to criticize the civil rights movement.
As a result, some of these activists Malcom X posed for this picture while visiting Egypt were drawn to Malcolm X, a leader of the Nation of Islam, a religious in 1964. group that favored black separatism.
Malcolm X argued that African Americans should work for social and economic independence rather than for racial integration.
He also believed that African Americans had the right to protect themselves from violence.
History Makers “You’re getting a new generation . . . and they’re beginning to think with their own minds and see that you can’t negotiSpeak ate up on freedom nowadays.
This was a social and political movement that called for greater African American power and independence.
Like Malcolm X, some Black Power activists rejected integration as a final goal.
Many also encouraged African Americans to take control of their own communities and futures.
Despite the efforts of activists, discrimination still affected many African Americans.
In August 1965 a riot broke out in the Watts section of Los Angeles, killing 34 people and destroying the neighborhood.
President Johnson appointed the Kerner Commission to investigate the violence.
In 1968, the commission reported that anger over racism was a leading cause of the riots.
The report also warned that “the nation is rapidly moving toward two increasingly separate Americas”—one white and wealthy, the other African American and poor.
First, however, he visited Memphis, Tennessee, to support striking garbage workers.
On April 4, as King Leaders of the Black Power stood on his hotel balcony, a hidden gunman fired at him.
About two months later, the police arrested ex-convict James Earl and political influence.
King’s assassination horrified many people in the United States and around the world.
With King’s death, part of the civil rights movement also seemed to die, but other leaders vowed to carry on the fight.
SC5 HP28 1 Define and explain: 3 Sequencing Copy 4 Finding the Main Idea • sit-in the time line below.
Committee pieces of legislation • Freedom Rides of the civil rights 5 Writing and Critical Thinking movement of the Supporting a Point of View Imagine that you • March on Washington 1960s. are taking part in a debate on the different • Civil Rights Act of 1964 strategies of civil rights activists.
Write an open• Voting Rights Act of 1965 ing speech explaining how the civil rights move• Malcolm X ment changed during the late 1960s and early • Black Power 1970s and whether it was more effective as a result.
S “I HAVE A DREAM” O n August 28, 1963, more than 250,000 people participated in the March on Washington in support of civil rights.
The demonstrators gathered near the Lincoln Memorial, where Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his “I Have a Dream” speech.
His address is remembered as one of the most powerful and effective speeches of modern times.
We must forever conduct our struggle symbolic shadow we stand, signed the Emancipation on the high plane of dignity and discipline.
This momentous decree2 came as a not allow our creative protest to degenerate11 into great beacon3 light to millions of Negro slaves who physical violence.
Again and again we must rise to had been seared4 in the flames of withering injusthe majestic heights of meeting physical force with tice.
It came as a joyous daybreak to end the long soul force. . . . night of captivity.
I say to you today, my friends, that in spite But one hundred years later, we must face of the difficulties and frustrations of the moment the tragic fact that the Negro is still not free.
It is a dream deeply rooted hundred years later, the life of the Negro is still in the American dream. sadly crippled by the manacles5 of segregation I have a dream that one day this nation will rise and the chains of discrimination. . . . up and live out the true meaning of its creed:12 “We In a sense we have come to our nation’s hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men are Capital to cash a check.
When the architects of created equal.” our republic wrote the magnificent words of the I have a dream that one day on the red hills Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, of Georgia the sons of former slaves and the sons they were signing a promissory note6 to which of former slaveowners will be able to sit down every American was to fall heir.
This note was together at the table of brotherhood. a promise that all men would be guaranteed I have a dream that one day even the state of the unalienable8 rights of life, liberty, and the Mississippi, a desert state sweltering with the heat pursuit of happiness. of injustice and oppression,13 will be transformed It is obvious today that America has defaulted9 into an oasis of freedom and justice. on this promissory note insofar as her citizens of I have a dream that my four little children color are concerned.
I have a dream that one day the state of But there is something that I must say to my Alabama, whose governor’s lips are presently people who stand on the warm threshold10 which dripping with the words of interposition14 and leads into the palace of justice.
In the process of nullification,15 will be transformed into a situation gaining our rightful place we must not be guilty of where little black boys and black girls will be able to wrongful deeds.
Let us not seek to satisfy our thirst join hands with little white boys and white girls and for freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness walk together as sisters and brothers.
I have a dream that one day every valley shall be exalted,16 every hill and mountain shall be made low, the rough places will be made plain, and the crooked places will be made straight, and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together.
With this faith we will be able to hew17 out of the mountain of despair a stone of hope.
This will be the day when all of God’s children will be able to sing with new meaning, “My country ’tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee I sing.
So let freedom ring from the that day when all of God’s children, black men and prodigious19 hilltops of New Hampshire.
Let white men, Jews and Gentiles,22 Protestants and freedom ring from the mighty mountains of New Catholics, will be able to join hands and sing in the York.
Understanding Primary Sources Let freedom ring from every hill and molehill of 1.
From every mountainside, let said that the United States had given African freedom ring.
Use or other current events sources to identify one feminist writer and his or her views on the status of women in the United States today.
After he was killed in action, his body was returned to his hometown in Texas for burial.
The local funeral-home director refused to hold services in the chapel for him because he was a Mexican American.
Texas senator Lyndon B Johnson arranged for Longoria to be buried at Arlington National Cemetery in Virginia.
World War II veteran Félix Longoria Hispanic Americans Throughout the 1960s the Hispanic population of the United States was on the rise.
It grew from about 4 million to more than 10 million by the end of the 1960s.
Their growing population and the success of the African American civil rights movement encouraged many Hispanic Americans to begin a fight for their own rights.
In 1965 the union began a strike and boycott against California grape growers.
Five years later the union won several of its demands, and Chávez became a nationally recognized Hispanic rights leader.
But poverty has been BIOGRAPHY Makers with us since the beginning of time.
I despise exploitation and I want change, but I’m willing to pay the price in terms of time.
Autobiography of La Causa, by Jacques E Levy Character Trait: The UFW and activists like poet Rudolfo “Corky” Gonzales inspired Pursuit of Excellence younger Hispanic leaders to take action.
Some activists fought discrimiCésar Chávez was born in Arizona, but he lived in nation by forming the Chicano movement.
Chicano activists sought to dozens of towns as his increase Hispanic cultural pride and political power. family moved in search of The Hispanic civil rights movement led to important new laws.
His early experience led him to help form 1968 Elementary and Secondary Education Act addressed the needs of unions for migrant workers. students who did not speak English.
In some cases, the law allowed for Chávez viewed union work federally funded bilingual programs.
In response, Kennedy outlawed gender discrimination in civil service jobs.
That same year, Congress passed the Equal Pay Act, which made many employers pay men and women the same wages for the same job.
The Civil Rights Act of 1964 also outlawed discrimination based on sex as well as race.
In 1963 The Feminine Mystique by Betty Friedan began a national debate on the roles of women.
Friedan described what she saw as the dissatisfaction of some homemakers.
Statistical Abstract of the United States The modern women’s rights movement was born as more women questioned their roles.
This group fought for women’s NOW was both the name of rights in educational and job opportunities. the organization and when women wanted their rights.
In 1972 Congress approved the Equal Rights Amendment , which was intended to prevent gender discrimination in any form.
But opponents— including many women—felt that the ERA was too radical, and it failed to become law.
Women’s rights activists did achieve a victory with the passage  of the Educational Amendments Act of 1972.
This A Long-Lasting Experiment law opened up new educational opportunities for many women.
But the 300,000 test Other Groups Fight for Equal Rights copies sold out in just eight days.
Within weeks, the ediAmerican Indians and people with disabilities also called for greater tors had received 26,000 subrights.
Some American Indian reformers worked through the National scription orders and more Congress of American Indians to help win passage of the than 20,000 letters from readers.
This law sought to protect the constituissue appeared in July 1972, it tional rights of American Indians and their right to self-government on was simply labeled Spring.
One news anchor even comreservations. mented, “I’ll give it six months Red Power spokespeople of the late 1960s said the NCAI moved too before they run out of things slowly.
Despite the doubts of some people, the magazine to fight for the rights and properties guaranteed in earlier treaties. sold very well.
Although AIM’s protests drew attention to the group’s cause, its methods frightened away many potential supporters.
In the 1960s people with disabilities also began to fight for the right of access—both to buildings and to better opportunities.
The RehaProtest These American Indians bilitation Act of 1973 outlawed discrimination by federal agencies in New Mexico are participating against people with disabilities.
DIA protests showed that people with disabilities were determined to be seen and heard.
SC5 HP28 1 Identify and explain: 2 Summarizing 3 Finding the Main Idea • César Chávez Copy the chart Describe the progress of the Hispanic rights • United Farm Workers below.
Show the • Beatles characteristics that the movements shared in the overlapping spaces.
When a student demonstration was called on the college campus, she attended.
To her amazement, hundreds of students also rushed to join in the protest.
The high turnout for this event inspired Flacks and other activists like her.
These students came away from the protest thinking that students could make a difference.
They realized that the Student protests occurred student body could bring about social reform, both at their on many college campuses during the 1960s. college and across the country.
The SDS and other students held protests against racial discrimination, strict college rules, and the growing United States military presence in Vietnam.
For them, the students’ actions showed a lack of respect for authority.
During the 1960s the first baby boomers—children born between the end of World War II and 1964—entered young adulthood.
The number of people aged 15 through 24 rose almost 50 percent during the 1960s.
Many American leaders were concerned about the attitudes of these young students.
This generation gap, or division between older and younger people, grew as more young people rejected their parents’ values and beliefs.
In the early 1960s much of society and culture seemed unchanged from the 1950s.
The media celebrated white, middle-class suburban values and traditions.
They created a counterculture— a culture with values that ran counter to, or against, those of the main society.
The counterculture stressed individual freedom, group sharing, and nonviolence.
Members of the counterculture, some of whom called themselves hippies, tried different lifestyles.
Many hippies also used drugs such as marijuana or LSD, sometimes leading to drug dependence and even death.
Some young leaders tried to bring together members of the student movement and the counterculture.
Many student leaders believed, howHippies expressed their rejecever, that the aims of the counterculture were too different from their tion of traditional values and own goals.
Student activists wanted to challenge society in order to customs with new ways of dressing and behaving. improve it.
Hippies rejected that society and tried to form an alternative culture.
Many students believed the counterculture abandoned its responsibility to society by encouraging unhealthy behavior, such as drug abuse.
Both youth movements challenged the way many Americans viewed their world.
The movements also led to a greater acceptance in American society of differences in dress, music, and personal relationships.
Many of his commercial drawings were used in advertisements and An Artistic Revolution greeting cards.
In the late The art and music world reflected these new points of view.
The pop art 1950s Warhol began to paint and create his own art. movement took its name from its use of popular, everyday images and In the 1960s he exhibited his objects.
Pop artists believed that traditional art lacked humor and humanprints of Campbell’s soup cans, a turning point in his ity.
They challenged long-standing values of art and culture and tried to career.
He created many paintings of Campbell’s soup cans and objects as subjects.
Art critics debated whether Warhol was criticizcopies of familiar everyday ing or celebrating consumer culture.
These images of mass Musical styles also reflected the social changes of the era.
British culture led viewers to quesperformers became popular in the United States.
This “British Invasion” tion both the seriousness of began with the Beatles, a foursome from Liverpool, England.
The Beatles’ popularity opened opportunities for other British musicians.
The Moody Blues, the Rolling Stones, the Who, and many other bands toured the United States and sold millions of records.
These successes made the growing generation gap more obvious because most older Americans could not understand the appeal of this music.
The following year the company produced the first of many gold records—records selling 500,000 copies.
Many Motown performers were popular with both African American and white listeners.
Aretha Franklin, Marvin Gaye, and the Temptations were among some of the most successful soul artists.
During this period folk musicians also gained in popularity while addressing political and social issues.
Bob Dylan sang about the struggles of poor and powerless people to rise above their troubles.
In the 1960s, however, rock was the most popular form of American music.
Electrically amplified instruments, particularly the guitar, became the driving sound.
Jimi Hendrix added electronic distortions, called feedback, to his music.
Despite rain, overcrowding, and a shortage Aretha Franklin and Bob Dylan of food, many fans considered this show the high point of the 1960s. were among the most popular Woodstock became a symbol of the counterculture’s optimistic spirit. performers of the 1960s.
The Makers best sound that I have ever played on outdoors to date hapSpeak pened at Woodstock.
SC5 HP28 1 Define and explain: 3 Categorizing Copy the 4 Finding the Main Idea • generation gap diagram below.
Write an • Andy Warhol article for your hometown newspaper describ• Beatles A Changing Society ing this movement.
Use the following terms or people in historically Then write a paragraph in which you list what you significant sentences. believe were the three most important events in 1.
Great Society 9. hippies 5. nonviolent resistance 10. pop art Understanding Main Ideas A Time of Change Section 1 During the 1960s many groups 1.
What major Cold War crises took place during formed organizations to seek civil rights.
For once, the table is set with plates full of hope, and in our illiterate hands some kind fate has placed a promise of gold for tomorrow.
Not that the hollows in your sad face of death will ever be filled —or the seedy, stale figure of the poor feel at ease in fine clothes— but today we eat to soothe a pain —a pain of alien-hungers Vallejo never knew.
Develop a recruitment program that offers information about what the project is, where it is, • Write a profile of outstanding women in science, what it will accomplish, and what kinds of skills technology, or mathematics today. volunteers will need.
Create a poster, a sign, and • Create a pamphlet on the United Farm Workers. a recruiting brochure to advertise your program.
