Fax: Web site: International Baccalaureate Organization 2004 The IBO is grateful for permission to reproduce and/or translate any copyright material used in this publication.
Acknowledgments are included, where appropriate, and, if notified, the IBO will be pleased to rectify any errors or omissions at the earliest opportunity.
General ordering queries should be directed to the sales department in Cardiff.
Fax: Printed in the United Kingdom by the International Baccalaureate Organization, Cardiff.16 5 Contents Introduction 1 The Historical Investigation: Guidance for Teachers 2 Frequently Asked Questions 3 The Historical Investigation: Guidance for Students 4 The Written Account 5 Outlines for the Historical Investigation 7 1.
An investigation comparing a film and a written account of a historical event 9 4.
The Women s Army Corps during World War II 59 6 7 Introduction This teacher support material has been prepared by senior examiners and practising teachers of Diploma Programme history.
The detailed requirements for the internally assessed components, and the internal assessment criteria, are given in the Assessment Details section of the guide.
The historical investigation is assessed against six criteria that are related to the objectives of the history course.
The document includes four outlines illustrating some possible approaches to the historical investigation.
These are followed by five examples of the full historical investigation.
The examples provided are actual student work and are presented in their original styles, which may include spelling, grammatical and any other errors.
All five examples are followed by detailed comments and marks on each criterion, written by senior examiners.
The investigation must be a written piece and should be the work of the individual student.
It is marked out of 20 for both HL and SL and weighted at 20% and 25% of the final assessment.
Timing is up to the teacher, but it is advisable to start the investigation at least three months before the date that samples for the May and November sessions have to be with the moderators.
Students should use as many as will produce an effective investigation.
No; only the first one, which should not be heavily annotated or edited.
This is not a requirement and is not regular practice, but guidance is available from IBCA if the validity of the investigation is in doubt.
No marks will be awarded for criterion F if the investigation is shorter than 1,500 or longer than 2,000 words.
The word limit has been imposed in order to focus the student s investigation, to ensure fairness for all students and to reduce the overload on teachers and students.
This is not a requirement but comments can be very helpful to the moderator in understanding how marks have been allocated.
After the process of moderation, the investigations are kept for several months by the moderator and then destroyed.
The student and teacher may therefore like to keep a record of the finished investigation.
If you have reasonable evidence that this is the case, make the student rewrite his or her investigation.
If time does not permit this, then do not sign the form and submit the reasons for your suspicion.
Guidance for Students Teachers may find that it is useful to photocopy this page and the section entitled The Written Account to give to students.
On completion of the investigation, you may find it useful to use the following checklist.
A sharply focused question and a clearly structured plan will be more likely to produce a successful investigation.
Any illustrations, documents, or other relevant evidence should be included in an appendix and will not be included in the word count.
This section should be organized and referenced and provide evidence of thorough research.
C Evaluation of sources This section of the written account should be a critical evaluation of two important sources appropriate to the investigation and should refer to their origin, purpose, value and limitation.
More than two sources may be evaluated but the emphasis should be on the thorough evaluation of two sources rather than a superficial evaluation of a greater number.
The two sources chosen should be appropriate for the investigation and could, for example, be written, oral or archeological.
The purpose of this section is to assess the usefulness of the sources but not to describe their content or nature.
In this section the elements of the investigation identified in section B will be broken down into key issues/points.
Consideration of historical context can add weight and perspective to the study.
Where appropriate links can be made with associated events and developments to aid understanding of the historical importance of the chosen investigation.
E Conclusion The conclusion must be clearly stated and consistent with the evidence presented.
This section is a follow-up to section D It requires an answer or conclusion, based on the evidence presented, which either partially or fully addresses the question stated or implied in the investigation.
F List of sources A bibliography or list of sources must be included although this will not form part of the word count.
A recognized method of listing sources must be used consistently throughout the investigation, for example, the Harvard author date system.
It is recommended that written sources be listed separately from non-written sources, for example, web addresses, oral interviews.
A Plan of the investigation To establish what Hitler s ideal for the family was.
C Evaluation of sources Comparison of two historical studies, for example, Crew, D F Nazism and German Society Routledge; Noakes, J and Pridham, G Nazism , Vol 2.
Ideal of women as mothers/wives/employees as promoted by Hitler and Goebbels.
E Conclusion Evaluation of myth of German family as measured against evidence of family life from social history studies.
Discussion of pressures/outside influences that undermined family policy.
Diploma Programme History, Internal Assessment TSM, March 14 Outlines for the Historical Investigation 2.
A Plan of the investigation To show how the reports of Kennedy s assassination reflected the impact of the event on America.
Either compare contemporary accounts or show how treatment of Kennedy s assassination changed over time in one newspaper.
How newspaper reporting changed with emerging evidence and changing mood of country.
A Plan of the investigation To study the film October and compare it with a historical study of the storming of the Winter Palace.
Function of film giving confidence and pride to an emerging Russian state.
Evaluation of sources and evidence as presented, for example, propaganda, western historian s view.
A Plan of Investigation The investigation assesses the significance of Fidel Castro in the Missile Crisis of In order to evaluate Castro s significance, the investigation evaluates his role in each stage of the Crisis in reference to other participants of the event; Castro s role is investigated in the initial days of the Crisis, during the shooting down of the American U-2 plane, and in the resolution of the Crisis.
Memoirs and oral history are mostly used to evaluate Castro s significance.
Castro, the Missile Crisis and the Soviet Collapse compiled by James Blight, Allyn Bruce and David Welsh and Cuban documents, The Mikoyan-Castro Talks, 4-5 November 1962: the Cuban Version, are then evaluated for their origins, purposes, values and limitations.
The investigation does not assess the difference in ideologies of the nations involved nor does the investigation assess opinions other than those of United States, Soviet Union, and Cuba.
The counterrevolutionary failed, pushing Castro into an alliance with communist Soviet Union and leaving Castro wary of American designs in Cuba.
Castro s fears were confirmed in early 1962 when his intelligence service noticed signs of United States activities related to what was later uncovered to be Operation Mongoose, another American invasion to overthrow Castro.
Fidel Castro s Secret 1968 Speech, Cold War International History Project Bulletin.
Diploma Programme History, Internal Assessment TSM, March 2004 19 Example 1 informed the Soviet Union that were concerned about a direct invasion of Cuba by the United States and that were thinking about how to step up country s ability to resist an attack.
In response, Soviet President Khrushchev conceived the plan of protecting Cuban sovereignty by installing missile with nuclear warheads in Cuba without letting the United States find out until it was too late do anything about them.
Castro accepted Khrushchev s proposal 6 and the Soviet Union began deploying nuclear arms.
For America, the Crisis began in mid October 1962 when American intelligence discovered Russian nuclear missile in Cuba.
For most of the world, the Crisis began on 22 October 1962 when American President Kennedy revealed in a televised broadcast that United States surveillance of the Soviet military build-up on the island of Cuba had uncovered as series of offensive missile sites in preparation for no other purpose than to provide a nuclear strike capability against the Western Hemisphere.
After Kennedy s broadcast, the American President called for a naval blockade of Cuba 8 and used diplomatic negotiations with Khrushchev to come to an agreement in the removal of the weapons.
During negotiations, several incidents occurred which heightened tensions and seemed to bring the world one step closer to nuclear holocaust.
One of the incidents is the shooting down of the United States U-2 airplane on 27 October 1962 causing the death of Major Rudolf Anderson Jr.
At the time the United States and the Soviet Union believed that it was Castro who ordered Cuban antiaircraft artillery to fire at low-flying United States planes on the morning of 27 October.
After further analysis, it is clear that it was a Soviet soldier, not Cuban, who shot the plane.
Although Castro ordered Cuban antiaircraft artillery to fire, there is no evidence that he ordered Soviet 4 Blight, Nikita S Khrushchev, Khrushchev Remembers.
Diploma Programme History, Internal Assessment TSM, March 20 Example 1 artillery to fire.
Instead, what is most likely to have happened was that the Soviet officers in Cuba identified so closely with the Cuban government s cause that their field commander gave the order to shoot at the U-2, thinking as an ally supporting comrades in war.
Another incident is Castro s letter to Khrushchev recommending that the Soviet Union should launch a first-strike nuclear attack on the United States.
This outlandish recommendation shocked Khrushchev, leaving him with the impression that Castro was a young and hotheaded man one who was inexperienced as a statesman.
The Crisis drew to a close when both great powers found a mutual solution outlined in a message sent by Khrushchev on 26 October 1962, and in Kennedy s response of 27 October; the two men agreed that if the Soviets would withdraw their offensive weapons from Cuba under United Nations supervision, the United States would remove its naval blockade of the island and pledge not to invade Cuba.
The Crisis came to an end on 28 October 1962 when Radio Moscow announced Khrushchev s new order to dismantle the weapons... and to crate them and return them to the Soviet Union.
Throughout the negotiation period, neither Castro not a Cuban representative took part, leaving the issue to be entirely one between the United States and the Soviet Union.
So, Khrushchev s announcement on the radio not only shocked Castro but also humiliated him for his exclusion from the negotiations Blight, xi.
A Personal and Diplomatic Account of U.S.-Cuban Relations Since Blight, Philip W Bonsal, Cuba, Castro and the United States.
Castro, the Missile Crisis and the Soviet Collapse compiled by James G Blight, Allyn J Bruce and David A Welsh is an in-depth report on the Havana conference in 1992 hosted by Castro to discuss Cuba s specific role during the Crisis.
Cuba on the Brink was written with the purpose to greatly enlarge the number of participants in the Havana conference by supplying context sufficient for our readers to be there vicariously.
The book s values lies in the fact that it provides a new Cuban perspective on the Crisis that has often been disregarded.
As well, since Castro hosted the conference, the reader is exposed to Castro s own interpretation and evaluation of Cuba s significance.
Its limitations is that the Havana conference is dependent on critical oral history 19 ; considering that the conference occurred thirty years after the Crisis, it is doubtful that the recollections of the veteran participants have not been altered either subconsciously or for the purpose of conforming to political pressures.
These conversations, which occurred on 4-5 November 1962, were obtained form Philip Brenner, Cuba specialist, who provided them to the Cold War International History Project and were translated form Spanish by Carlos Osorio.
Cuba s release of these documents provide a valuable source since these records are primary documents recorded immediately after the event and expose the hurt and betrayal felt by Castro over Khrushchev s decision to withdraw.
As well, since this is a conversation between a Soviet and a Cuban, the historian can notice the different interpretations of each country.
These Cuban documents are limited as they were translated awkwardly and both documents are transcriptions of memo notes taken during a speech and do not seem to have been corrected.
However, these Cuba documents can be compared against the Russian version of the Mikoyan-Castro Talks released prior to the Cuban version.
Thus, assuming that both versions are independent from one another, the historian can compare the versions to one another for accuracy and biases.
Blight, Critical oral history is the synthesis of recollections of participants with declassified documentation and the analyses of historians.
Diploma Programme History, Internal Assessment TSM, March22 Example 1 D Analysis Castro s significance in the Crisis can either justify or discredit American interference in Cuban internal affairs.
Prior to the event, the international society was willing to accept American attempts to overthrow Castro since Americans were portrayed as heroes while Castro seemed to be a fanatical socialist.
But, if Castro was merely a pawn between United States and Soviet Union, Castro improves his international reputation making it difficult for future heroic American interference in Cuba.
However, Castro s role may be more limited since it is unlikely that Khrushchev s missiles were sent solely to protect Cuba.
Is more likely that Khrushchev wanted to equalize the balance of power and redress the strategic imbalance between the United States and the Soviet Union Before the Crisis, the American had surrounded the Soviet Union with military bases in Turkey 21 ; sending missiles to Cuba would give the United States a little of their own medicine...it was high time America learned what it feels like to have her own land and her own people threatened.
Furthermore, Khrushchev s and Kennedy s secret deal later on in the Crisis that Khrushchev would remove missiles from Cuba if Kennedy would remove Jupiters from Turkey give credibility to the possibility that despite Khrushchev s altruistic claims, it is more plausible that his actions of 1962 were reflective of the Soviet Union s own interests rather than Castro During late October 1962, Castro s role is often directly related to the shooting down of the United States U-2 airplane.
Diploma Programme Diploma Programme Guide to school authorization: Diploma Programme Diploma Programme Guide to school authorization: Diploma Programme Published October 2010 Updated February 2015 International Baccalaureate More information Diploma Programme.
Question 7 AP EUROPEAN HISTORY 2006 SCORING GUIDELINES Question 7 Considering the period 1933 to 1945, analyze the economic, diplomatic, and military reasons for Germany s defeat in the Second World War.
Actions that led to the Revolutionary War Raising Taxes The French and Indian War had caused the British to be in a great deal of debt.
Some of us lie awake at night worrying about family members, health, finances or a thousand other things.
Diploma Programme Diploma Programme Rules for IB World schools: Diploma Programme Diploma Programme Rules for IB World Schools: Diploma Programme Published March 2011 International Baccalaureate Peterson House, Malthouse More information ORIGINAL: ENGLISH 11th May, 1967 DOCUMENT DPC/D23.
ENGLISH 11th May, 1967 DOCUMENT DEFENCE PLANNING COMMITTEE Decisions of Defence Planning Committee in Ministerial Session Note by the Chairman I attach for your information a list of the decisions More information We were allies then, it is the time to join hands now to meet the enormous challenges facing both our nations and the world.
We were allies then, it is the time to join hands now to meet the enormous challenges facing both our nations and the world.
Nikolay Makarov participated in More information Programme standards and practices.
Sample letter requesting financial assistance German initiated battle in western europe that attempted to push back the allied advance that was un.
German initiated battle in western europe More information Signed at London, Moscow and Washington on 10 April 1972.
For details concerning amendments and modifications to the More information 1.
Diploma Programme Diploma Programme General regulations: Diploma Programme Diploma Programme General regulations: Diploma Programme Published February 2014 Published on behalf of the International Baccalaureate Organization, More information WRITING ACROSS THE CURRICULUM Writing about Film WRITING ACROSS THE CURRICULUM Writing about Film From movie reviews, to film history, to criticism, to technical analysis of cinematic technique, writing is one of the best ways to respond to film.
Giving and Receiving Feedback Section 11 Giving and Receiving Feedback Introduction This section is about describing what is meant by feedback and will focus on situations where you will be given, and where you will give, feedback.
More information In this activity, students try to solve a mystery about the Pledge of Allegiance.
Enrichment Activity 1 The Changing Pledge In this activity, students try to solve a mystery about the Pledge of Allegiance.
DoD Public Affairs Assistance to Non-Government, Non-Entertainment-Oriented Print and Electronic Media ASD References: DoD More information CLE On-Demand.
December 20, 2011 Application Deadline: December 20, 2011 I Personal Information Spell your name exactly as it is written on your passport.
Given Name: Gender: Female More information General regulations: Middle Years Programme General regulations: Middle Years Programme Middle Years Programme General regulations: Middle Years Programme Published April 2014 Published on behalf of the International Baccalaureate Organization, More information Online Reputation in a Connected World Online Reputation in a Connected World Abstract This research examines the expanding role of online reputation in both professional and personal lives.
Simulation: The Treaty of Versailles This activity accompanies slide 15 of The Treaty of Versailles .ppt Instructions You are going to take part in a simulation of the Versailles negotiations.
AMH 2047 COURSE TITLE: American Military History PREREQUISITE: None COREQUISITE: None CREDIT HOURS: More information Military Advisors in Vietnam: 1963 Military Advisors in Vietnam: 1963 Topic: Vietnam Grade Level: 9-12 Subject Area: United States History after World War II Time Required: 1 class period Goals/Rationale In the winter of 1963, the eyes of most Americans More information PATENTS ACT 1977.
Whether patent application GB 2383152 A relates to a patentable invention DECISION BL O/255/05 PATENTS ACT 1977 14 th September 2005 APPLICANT Oracle Corporation ISSUE Whether patent application GB 2383152 A relates to a patentable invention HEARING OFFICER Stephen Probert DECISION Introduction More information WRITING A CRITICAL ARTICLE REVIEW WRITING A CRITICAL ARTICLE REVIEW A critical article review briefly describes the content of an article and, more importantly, provides an in-depth analysis and evaluation of its ideas and purpose.
Step Writing Guide Questia Writing Center 9 Step Writing Guide F A research paper is your opinion on a topic, informed by research you have done.
It is not a summary of others thoughts, a personal essay or a review or critique.
SCOPE OF ACTIVITIES THAT CAN BE OUTSOURCED...2 More information Insurance Inspection Manual *This translation is provisionally prepared and subject to change without notice.
Insurance Inspection Manual January 2012 Insurance More information AP EUROPEAN HISTORY 2012 SCORING GUIDELINES AP EUROPEAN HISTORY 2012 SCORING GUIDELINES Question 4 Analyze various ways in which government policies during the Revolutionary and Napoleonic era contributed to a greater sense of French national identity More information Social Media Charter Social Media Charter 1.
I, the undersigned natural person of the age of twenty-one years or more, a citizen of the State of Texas, acting as an incorporator of More information Name.
A Turning Point Name Directions: For the following questions, use this passage adapted from Mark Kishlansky s, Patrick Geary s, and Patricia O Brien s text, Civilization in the West.
A Turning Point More information NEGOTIATION SKILLS SELF ASSESSMENT P Jean Baker, Esq.
It is designed to test your knowledge of negotiation theory and best practices.
Czechoslovakia East More information The Nuclear Weapons Debate Scottish CND Education Pack The Nuclear Weapons Debate Scottish CND s educational resource Nuclear Weapons: Yes or No is aimed at late primary to early secondary school pupils.
A Rhetorical Analysis of the text Alcoholics Anonymous Social Imaginings: A Rhetorical Analysis of the text Alcoholics Anonymous Kevin Kardos Rhetoric Dr.
David Franke Fall 2003 One could as well describe writing as an imagination of a relationship. -George More information Malawi Article I Article II Malawi Convention between his majesty in respect of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland and her majesty the Queen of the Netherlands for the avoidance of double taxation and the prevention More information Chapter 2 Thesis Structure Chapter 2 Thesis Structure Karen was undertaking a PhD in engineering to investigate whether a new type of plastic was safe to use as cookware.
By Halefom Hailu Assume a government authority has bought a software from a software company.
Negotiation skills Benefits of this chapter Many think that negotiation is reserved for high-powered executives or lawyers sitting in the board room figuring out what big decision to make next.
You can t read a sentence or a paragraph without knowing at least the most common.
United States History, Geography Assignment Discovery Online Curriculum Lesson Title: U.S.-Cuba Relations Grade level: 9-12 Subject Area: United States History, Geography Duration: Two class periods Objectives: Students will do the following: More information Composition as Explanation Gertrude Stein Composition as Explanation Gertrude Stein First delivered by the author as a lecture at Cambridge and Oxford, this essay was first published by the Hogarth Press in London in 1926 and revived in the volume More information TEACHER S KEY SESSION 1.
Before 1914, the nations of Europe were involved in a race to obtain overseas colonies all over the world, mainly More information Del O'Roark, Loss Prevention Consultant, Lawyers Mutual Insurance Co. of Ky.
Del O'Roark, Loss Prevention Consultant, Lawyers Mutual Insurance Co. of Ky.
