When I'm not involved in Model UN, I spend my time in the Science and Technology Club, while also playing football and rugby.
I look forward to see how the Missile Crisis plays out in my committee.
Although both groups exist only to advise the respective heads of state of the United States and USSR, for the purposes of this committee, all members will have a single vote regarding resolutions and directives.The delegates representing Kennedy 2 and Khrushchev will have veto power over all resolutions and directives, although this veto can be overridden by a ⅔ majority.
The Excomm and the Politburo will will debate amongst themselves, and can meet in one room to negotiate with the other side at certain times.
Delegates can also send messages between the two committees during internal debate.
As crisis committees, both the Excomm and the Politburo possess the power to pass directives within the power of the respective executive branches of each nation, but are encouraged to compromise and avoid escalation of the conflict.
History of the Problem The first phase of the Cold War took place two years after the Second World War.
The USSR solidified its control over the states of the Eastern Bloc, while the United States strengthened ties with Western Europe by extending military and financial aid and creating the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , beginning the United States strategy of global containment to challenge Soviet power.
The USSR and USA competed for influence in Latin America, and the decolonizing states of Africa and Asia.
In 1957, the nuclear arms race took on a new dimension when the Soviet Union successfully launched the world’s first manmade satellite into orbit.
At the time, policy makers clearly understood that any missile capable of sending a satellite into orbit could do the same for nuclear warhead, and that unlike aircraft with atomic bombs, there was no defense against a ballistic missile, which introduced the idea of mutually assured destruction with nuclear weapons.
On the planet’s surface, the competition took the form of an arms race, and on June 1, 1961, the United States officially started to deploy Jupiter type nuclear intermediate-range ballistic missiles targeting the Soviet Union in Turkey.
During a meeting in Vienna on June 3rd, 1961, Kennedy and Khrushchev discussed international relations.
Ultimately the tanks were withdrawn and President Kennedy accepted the Berlin Wall lest war break out.
Only a few months after assuming the presidency, Kennedy decided to launch a covert operation to overthrow Fidel Castro’s communist regime in Cuba.
The United States suffered a massive national security embarrassment in what became known as the Bay of Pigs invasion.
The United States Central Intelligence Agency trained a group of Cuban exiles who attempted to invade Cuba in April 1961 in an effort to trigger an anti-Castro rebellion.
Just before the launch of the operation, Kennedy decided not to provide United States military support for the invasion.
As a result, Cuban military forces caused the exiled Cuban army to route.
In addition, few Cubans rose up against Castro and more than one thousand Cuban rebels were captured.
The Western Bloc consisted of the United States, NATO allies, and other nations, 5 while the Eastern Bloc contained the Soviet Union and its satellite states.
However in the absence of a direct military confrontation, the two global superpowers supported many smaller scale regional wars known as proxy wars.
The Cold War split up the previous wartime alliance against Nazi Germany.
Both sides never engaged in full-scale combat, but they were both heavily prepared for a possible nuclear war.
Aside from the development of the two sides' nuclear arsenals and their deployment of conventional military forces, the struggle for dominance was expressed via proxy wars around the globe, psychological warfare, massive propaganda campaigns and espionage, rivalry at sports events, and technological competitions such as the Space Race.
It was because of this numerical advantage that Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev first considered placing nuclear missiles on Cuba.
He hoped that the strategic location of Cuba would give the Soviet Union the kind of deterrent capability that numbers alone could not.
Fearful of another United States invasion of Cuba, Castro readily agreed to accept the Soviet weapons on Cuban territory.
Throughout the summer of 1962, Soviet construction crews worked feverishly to prepare the bases and installations that would be needed to fire and store the weapons.
Despite the warning, on October 14, a United States U–2 aircraft took several pictures clearly showing sites for medium-range and intermediate-range ballistic nuclear missiles under construction in Cuba.
On October 15th, 1962, an American reconnaissance flight over Cuba revealed that the Soviets were constructing missile sites in Cuba.
For a week after the discovery, debate raged in the highest levels of the United States government as to how to respond to the situation in Cuba.
Encyclopædia Britannica, Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 17 Feb.17, www.britannica.com/event/Cold-War.
United States Department of State, United States Department of State, history.state.gov/milestones/1961-1968/cub an-missile-crisis.
