This development brought the Cold War close to home because Cuba is 90 miles off the coast of Florida.
In October 1962, the United States learned that the Soviet Union was about to deploy nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Any Soviet attempt to penetrate the American blockade would be met with an immediate military response.
Letter From Chairman Khrushchev to President Kennedy Moscow, October 27, 1962.
PRESIDENT, I understand your concern for the security of the United States… You wish to ensure the security of your country, and this is understandable.
But you have placed destructive missile weapons, which you call offensive, in Turkey, literally next to us.
Your representatives will make a declaration to the effect that the United States, for its part, will remove its from Turkey.
The greatest joy for all peoples would be the announcement of our agreement.
I have read your letter of Oct.th with great care and welcomed the statement of your desire to seek a prompt solution to the problem.
There is no reason why we should not be able to complete these arrangements and announce them to the world within a couple of days.
The effect of such a settlement on easing world tensions would enable us to work toward a more general arrangement regarding ""other armaments"", as proposed in your letter.
The continuation of this threat by linking these problems to the broader questions of European and world security, would surely a grave risk to the peace of the world.
Russian Ambassador Cable to Soviet Foreign Ministry Dobrynin’s cable to the Soviet Foreign Ministry, October 27, 1962.
In response I am sure the Soviets will respond and a real war will begin, in which millions of Americans and Russians will die.
I asked R Kennedy “If that is the only obstacle to achieving the rules I mentioned earlier, then the president doesn’t see any difficulties in resolving this issue” replied R Kennedy.
The deployment of missile bases in Turkey was officially done by special decision of the NATO Council.
However, President Kennedy is ready to come to agreement on that question with Khrushchev.
I think that in order to withdraw these bases from Turkey we need 4-5 months.
Russian Ambassador Dobrynin cable to Foreign Ministry, October 27, 1962.
Russian Foreign Ministry archives; publicly released in the early 1990s.
