THE MODERN WORLD 1 Social effects of the Great Depression As workers lost their jobs, the impact on them and their families was devastating.
At the height of the AND AUSTRALIA Depression, 28 per cent of workers were unemployed.
Many people lost their homes and were forced to live in makeshift dwellings in shanty towns.
The government introduced welfare payments for people who had nowhere else to turn.
Being unemployed was seen as very shameful, and depending on ‘susso’ was degrading. a ADAMANT is one technique used by historians to interpret primary and secondary sources.
ADAMANT 1.1 stands for author, date, audience, message, agenda, nature and technique.
Using ADAMANT, evaluate The Great Depression in Australia Source 1.1. as a primary source.
The Wall Street crash in October 1929 signalled a worldwide depression, but conditions in Australia had begun to deteriorate even before this.
Australia had Author borrowed overseas money, and as prices for wheat and wool began to fall, the government found it was unable to repay the loans.
Australian banks also cut back on lending, and unemployment began to spiral.
As more and more people lost their jobs and could not borrow money, paying for goods and services became impossible.
In turn, fewer people were paying taxes, leading to a drop in income for the government.
Government jobs were lost as a result, and the cycle of depression Date and economic hardship continued.
We’re on the susso now, We can’t afford a cow, ges Audience We live in a tent, We pay no rent, We’re on the susso now.
The ‘susso’ is an Australian slang term, originating in the Great Depression and referring to welfare payments. pa Message e Agenda mpl Nature Sa Techniques Chapter 1 THE MODERN WORLD AND AUSTRALIA b Examine Sources 1.1. and 1.1.2.
Overview 1.1.2 Image held at the State Library of NSW 2 PEARSON history 10 activity book 3 2 Don Bradman—hero of the Great Depression 1.2 The gaining of independence by India Sir Donald Bradman is regarded as one of the world’s best batsmen.
Bradman’s significance, 1 Gandhi and the nationalist however, is due to more than just being a great achievement in India cricketer.
Many of his achievements on the cricketing field took place during the Depression At the height of its strength, the British Empire era.
With the majority of Australians out of was the largest empire in history.
India was work and struggling to find a place to live and brought into the empire during the seventeenth something to eat, life was a continual hardship. and eighteenth centuries but, following World Ordinary people were inspired by the feats of War I, a nationalist movement began to agitate Bradman, and watching him boosted their morale. for freedom from foreign rule.
The leader of this movement was Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, who was born in India, trained in London as a lawyer and returned to India to use new methods of non-violent protest to gain independence, civil rights and freedom for his country.
Don Bradman was the ordinary Australian writ large, who came from an ordinary house ges in a small provincial town, with a certain gift for music and salesmanship, golf and tennis; who, had he missed his calling, might have gone unremarked, in the way of many ordinary country town men and women who live and work, and pass on into local respect and slowly out of memory.
But he found his calling and practised it, and with it he electrified a nation and startled an empire.
He became a hero when heroes were sorely needed, when pa Source 1.2.1 Gandhi was a religious man who saw violence as unnecessary.
World Depression had splintered the hope of innocent lives and put through pointless torment families and communities deserving of better.
Don Bradman showed what persistence, courage, concentration and a certain focused cleverness can do, however e The Essence of Non-violence m hard the situation and however great the forces massed against you.
He showed that valour, dignity, grace under pressure and the poetry of personal effort are qualities that all pl of us can reach for, whatever our street of origin or family advantage.
His life had suffering in it—the terrible sickness of a child, and furious discontents in his years as a sports administrator—but the love that was always at his back, of the woman he had loved from Non-violence is the law of the human race and is infinitely greater than and superior to brute force.
In the last resort it does not avail to those who do not possess a living faith in the God of Love.
Non-violence affords the fullest protection to one’s self-respect and sense of honour, but not always to possession of land or movable property, though its habitual practice does prove a better bulwark than the possession of armed men to defend them.
Non-violence in the very nature of things is of no assistance in the defence his boyhood and swore he would not survive very long, sustained, nourished and cheered him in the darkest of his years.
Individuals and nations who would practise Nonviolence must be prepared to sacrifice their all except honour.
Chapter 1 THE MODERN WORLD AND AUSTRALIA It is therefore inconsistent with the possession of other people’s countries,e. modern Source Premier Bob Carr on the death of Sir Donald Bradman, 25 February 2001 1.1.4 imperialism which is frankly based on force for its defence.
Non-violence is a power which can be wielded equally by all—children, young men and women or grown up people, a Using ADAMANT, interpret Sources 1.1. and 1.1.4.
Present a summary of your analysis below. provided they have a living faith in the God of Love and have therefore equal love for all mankind.
When Non-violence is accepted as the law of life it must pervade the whole being and not be applied to isolated acts.
It is a profound error to suppose that whilst the law is good enough for individuals it is not for masses of mankind.
Source An extract from Gandhi’s writings on non-violence, 1.2.2 Harijan, 5 September 1936 Overview b Find out about the life of Sir Donald Bradman, using the above sources and additional research.
Use the information to write a report in a Word document , outlining what the cricketer did for the Australian people during the Depression era.
This war was different to a traditional war where armed conflict takes place.
The Cold War was a state of continual tension between the United States and the Soviet Union that did not develop into direct military action.
As both sides possessed nuclear weapons that, Date Date if used, would have assured their mutual destruction, the war involved tense periods and incidents that stopped short of outright war.
On 14 October 1962, a United States Air Force spy plane photographed a nuclear missile base being constructed on Cuba.
The United States President, John F Kennedy, was shown the photographs on 16 October.
Three days later, further photos revealed more missile sites were being prepared.
On 22 October, President Kennedy announced a naval blockade of all ships travelling to Cuba to quarantine all military equipment.
Message Message ges Initially, the Soviet Leader, Nikita Khrushchev, was infuriated and instructed ships to ignore the blockade.
Two days later, Khrushchev sent Kennedy a letter acknowledging the serious nature of the incident and turned back Soviet ships before they reached the blockade.
Using Source 1.3.1, explain why the United States was concerned about a missile base being constructed in Cuba.
Nature Nature e Techniques Techniques mpl Source Map showing the range 1.3.1 of missiles on Cuba, 22 October 1962 b Sa Gandhi followed the belief of satyagraha which translates as ‘truth-force’ and is a component of nonviolent resistance.
Overview d Using the information on Gandhi and your own research, create an electronic presentation (of approximately four slides) on satyagraha and how it was used in the Indian fight for self-determination.
Explain your answer. g Both of the main players could have reacted differently to the circumstances.
Complete the table below by giving three possible scenarios for each person and how this may have altered events.
Source 1.4. and 1.4. show two different perspectives of the 11 September terrorist attacks.
ADAMANT 1 Peacekeeping in Timor-Leste Author Australia has been active in assisting the United Nations in its peacekeeping role for more than 50 years.
In 1975, the Portuguese colony of East Timor was invaded by Indonesia and became that country’s 27th province.
This was followed by two decades of conflict between those who wanted independence and those who supported Indonesia, until the independent nation of Timor-Leste officially came into being in May 2002.
Australia currently supports peacekeeping in the region with approximately 2000 personnel and Date equipment such as Blackhawk helicopters. a Download and print an outline map of South-East Asia from the internet, or trace one from an atlas.
Annotate your map with the information you have found about each place located on your map.
Agenda pa d Investigate what the current situation is in regards to peace in Timor-Leste.
Find a current newspaper article and, in the table below, summarise your information using who, what, where, when, why and how.
Who e Nature mpl What Where Techniques Sa When Chapter 1 THE MODERN WORLD AND AUSTRALIA d Interview two people who were adults when the attacks took place.
Explain in detail why these e Using the above information on Timor-Leste and your own research, construct a timeline of events did or didn’t have the same effect and include this in your report from question peacekeeping efforts in the region.
Apartheid We speak out to put the world on guard against what is happening in South Africa.
The brutal policy of apartheid is applied before the eyes of the nations of the world.
Human rights standards are contained in internationally agreed human rights treaties and declarations … Source An extract from a speech given by Che Guevara to the United Nations 1.6.2 as Cuba’s representative, 11 December, 1964 Source Australian Human Rights Commission 1.6.1 c Using the information about Apartheid and your own research, apply the ADAMANT technique to evaluate Source 1.6. as a primary source.
Under this system, a person’s rights and opportunities were determined by the colour of their skin.
An anti-Apartheid movement developed in the 1960s and 1970s, with the international community putting political pressure on South Africa to treat all its people as equal. a Using the information above and your own research about the system of Apartheid, compare and contrast the rights and freedoms of white and black people living under the system.
Present your findings in the Venn diagram below. ges pa e mpl Sa Chapter 1 THE MODERN WORLD AND AUSTRALIA Source Nelson Mandela led the struggle against Apartheid in South Africa.
Nelson Mandela is a South African politician who was the first president of South Africa to be elected in a democratic election.
Be sure to include who, what, where, when, why and how to structure your article.
