From the end of the 19th century, but particularly during the Second World War, Switzerland took on a large number of mandates to represent the diplomatic interests of foreign states in third countries, mainly due to its policy of neutrality.
Its mandate to represent the United States in Cuba is the longest in Swiss history.
It lasted from 1961 to 2015, albeit in reduced form from 1977 when management of the United States Interests Section in Havana was taken over by United States officials working in their former embassy.
From 1961 onwards, it engaged intensively in negotiations and worked hard to find solutions benefiting United States citizens and interests in Cuba.
This was especially true in the first years, amid the global tensions resulting from the Cold War.
Discreetly but effectively, the Swiss representation in Cuba acted as a privileged intermediary between the two governments, a neutral but effective player in extremely tense political situations.
In particular, it was instrumental in enabling 260,000 Cubans to leave for the United States.
Introduction Between 1914 and 1918 and again during the Second World War, Switzerland took on a large number of mandates to represent the interests of foreign states in third countries, mainly due to its policy of neutrality in a conflict-torn world.
The United States' proposal in October 1960 that Switzerland should represent United States interests in Cuba was unexpected, especially given the small size of the Swiss diplomatic mission compared with the staff of other countries such as the United Kingdom.
However, its neutrality combined with its long-standing experience as a protecting power for foreign interests, dating back to the Franco-German War of 1870-1871, meant that Switzerland's good offices were called upon numerous times throughout the 20th century.
Its assistance was also repeatedly sought during the first period of the Cold War between 1947 and 1963, most notably in the immediate aftermath of the Suez Crisis of 1956.
From 6 January 1961, just after the breaking of diplomatic relations between Cuba and the United States, Switzerland began to represent United States interests in Cuba.
This representation mandate is the longest in Swiss history, lasting from 1961 until the present, albeit in reduced form from 1977 when management of the United States Interests Section in Havana was taken over by United States officials working in their former embassy.
Breaking of diplomatic relations and Switzerland's role as a protecting power In January 1961, following the breaking of diplomatic relations between the United States and Cuba, Switzerland agreed to take on the mandate of protecting United States interests in Havana.
The request was made by United States Secretary of State Christian Herter to the Swiss ambassador in Washington, August Lindt.
His counterpart in Havana, Walter Bossi, was informed by the government in Bern of the Federal Council's decision to accept the mandate subject to the 2 Federal Department of Foreign Affairs FDFA General Secretariat GS-FDFA Presence Switzerland consent of the Cuban authorities.
The ambassador in Havana quickly secured this agreement after Czechoslovakia agreed to represent Cuba in Washington.
The first major task was to explain to the new revolutionary government the international rules governing the role of a protecting power.
Nine Swiss personnel were dispatched immediately to replace the 60 or so United States officials.
This preliminary assignment was overseen by ambassador Gaston Jaccard and his advisor Emil Stadelhofer, who would become Switzerland's ambassador to Cuba in November 1961.
From the outset, the priority for the Swiss delegation, which assumed both the consular and diplomatic mandate, was to organise the departure of US citizens – a challenging task that would be one of the embassy's main preoccupations throughout the mandate.
From spring 1961, tensions ran high between the United States and Cuba, with the attempted invasion of the Bay of Pigs and other disputes surrounding the confiscation of ships and aircraft registered in one country but located in the other.
The archives attest to intense diplomatic activity and many attempts by the Swiss embassy to explain and to ease tensions.
A direct dialogue was established, as testified by the various photos from the Swiss Federal Archives attached to this document.
He would frequently remind his interlocutors of the principles of public international law, while maintaining a strict neutrality that gained him much credit with the Líder Máximo.
He also came up with quick and pragmatic solutions that met with the approval of the Cuban government, at least as regards the departure of United States citizens.
The issue of political prisoners and individuals arrested after the failed invasion of the Bay of Pigs proved harder to resolve.
Nonetheless, the Swiss embassy showed constant concern for their plight and endeavoured to enforce humanitarian law, in accordance with its mandate and the Swiss tradition.
In a televised address on 22 October 1962, John F Kennedy announced a blockade on all deliveries of military equipment to Cuba and demanded the withdrawal of Soviet missiles already on the island.
Lindt was asked to inform Fidel Castro that the United States would be making reconnaissance flights over Cuba and that the signal rockets should not be mistaken for bombs, triggering a response from Cuban air defences.
From Brunner's house, Lindt called Stadelhofer, who forwarded the message straight to Castro and called back within an hour to confirm the transmission of the message.
This allowed Lindt to get back to Rusk between 4 and 5m. and assure him that no Cuban response was to be feared.
The Cuban 3 Federal Department of Foreign Affairs FDFA General Secretariat GS-FDFA Presence Switzerland Missile Crisis ended on 28 October with an exchange of letters between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
However, an American aircraft flown by Major Rudolf Anderson, Jr. was shot down on 27 October.
Undoubtedly the most important – and difficult – contribution of the Swiss delegation at this time lay in its efforts to repatriate the pilot's remains on board a US plane repainted in Swiss colours.
Stadelhofer, described as an inventive and extremely dedicated man, began to play a leading role from this point.
In 1964, the Líder Máximo presented him with his beret at a reception and lauded Switzerland.
Following the 1962 missile crisis, all maritime and air links between the United States and Cuba were suspended.
However, an agreement between the two countries allowed the American Red Cross to deliver medicines by boat and plane in exchange for the return of the prime suspects in the 1961 invasion.
Stadelhofer prevailed on senior officials to allow a number of American citizens to board these boats and the weekly flights chartered by the Red Cross on their empty return journeys.
Obtaining these passages, handling the applications, checking passenger details and responding to hundreds of letters sent to the Swiss embassy was a huge burden.
However, the embassy staff were motivated and resilient in the face of challenging local conditions.
For example, the ambassador was unable to walk in the street without being stopped at every turn by people begging him to help them leave.
Handling the applications and practicalities for the return of United States citizens and those with dual nationality would be a concern for Emil Stadelhofer throughout his time in Cuba.
Amid the increasingly isolationist climate in Cuba, Switzerland continued its work defending the interests of two countries that were no longer talking to one another.
Here again, Switzerland would assist the United States judicial authorities and act as intermediaries with the Cuban government, which diligently provided what information it had.
The message seemed to have been understood, but on 2 February 1964 four Cuban fishing vessels were arrested by the United States Coast Guard and their crews detained.
In retaliation, Cuba cut off the water supply to the United States naval base at 4 Federal Department of Foreign Affairs FDFA General Secretariat GS-FDFA Presence Switzerland Guantanamo Bay, which elicited a note of protest from the United States, delivered by Stadelhofer.
As Cuban officials prepared to occupy and confiscate the United States embassy building, Stadelhofer intervened in person, declaring that this was diplomatic property and that the Vienna Convention would be violated only over his body.
After that the Cubans made no further attempts to nationalise the United States embassy.
In February 1964, it was also Stadelhofer who negotiated the repatriation of the Cuban fishermen in exchange for the return of a hijacked American vessel and aircraft as well as the cessation of hostile actions against the Guantanamo naval base.
Furthermore, having broken off diplomatic relations with Cuba during this period, a number of South American countries entrusted Switzerland with defending their interests in Havana.
Thousands of Cubans set sail from the port of Camarioca, near Varadero; some of the vessels were unsafe and capsized, often with children on board.
As happened whenever Stadelhofer made representations to the Cuban government, Fidel Castro listened and looked for solutions to avoid heightening tensions.
In this case, he was moved by the drownings and wanted an immediate end to them on humanitarian grounds.
Washington and Havana decided in their common interest to end the sealift.
The United States instructed the Swiss embassy to negotiate the conditions for an airlift from Varadero to Miami.
Stadelhofer was given precise instructions but conducted the negotiation himself.
An agreement was reached between Cuba and the United States (with no time limitation), resulting in an airlift operation starting on 1 December.
It enabled the departure of between 3,000 and 4,000 Cubans per month on board United States aircraft departing from Varadero military airport.
In total, 9,268 refugees left Cuba in 1965, including 3,349 in December alone.
The airlift remained in place for the next seven years, and the Swiss embassy played a leading role in managing it.
It was tasked with interviewing all those applying to leave, for approval by Washington.
By the end of the operation in April 1973, a total of 260,737 Cubans had entered the United States this way.
By 1977, the mandate was not over but a partial rapprochement between the two countries resulted in the establishment of a ""United States Interests Section of the Swiss Embassy in Havana"", enabling the return of American diplomats to Cuba.
However, the Swiss mandate continued and the Swiss flag still flew over the former United States embassy building.
A ""Cuban Interests Section"" was also established in Washington (under the protection of Czechoslovakia), and Cuban diplomats returned to Washington.
It assumed this mandate until 20 July 2015, when diplomatic relations between the United States and Cuba were restored.
Direct dialogue between Cuba and the United States has gradually strengthened since 1977, resulting in the end of Switzerland's dual mandate today.
Switzerland welcomes the restoration of diplomatic relations between the United States and Cuba on 20 July 2015.
Its dual mandate to protect the interests of these countries is drawing to a close.
Switzerland will continue to make available its good offices during the process of normalising relations, if desired.
