On one side sat the United States and her North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies.
On the other side, from behind the Iron Curtain, the Soviet Union and her Warsaw Pact allies were at the ready.
Unlike in a hot war, the United States and the Soviet Union did not directly fight each other.
However, since the threat of invasion and attack was an imminent possibility, both sides raced to stockpile superior weapons.
Like a game of chess, leaders of the United States and the Soviet Union also strategically placed nuclear warheads throughout their own nations and in Europe.
With the full support of Turkey, the United States secretly installed nuclear missiles inside Turkey close to its border with the Soviet Union.
Students will be amazed as they explore this nerve-racking moment in world history.
The Crisis Begins Since 1960, U-2 spy planes had flown over Cuba gathering intelligence data for the United States government.
In October 1962, pictures taken of the island indicated something potentially threatening was happening.
Over the next several days, Kennedy and his advisors discussed the United States’ options.
Kennedy could use diplomatic pressure, a land invasion of Cuba, air strikes, or a naval blockade to force the Soviet Union to pull out its missiles.
Ignoring the situation and doing nothing at all was definitely not an option.
To learn about the first few days of the crisis, visit the National Archives site Eyewitness.
Read the brief introduction; then click the tabs at the top to listen to a brief audio excerpt of the president’s October 18, 1962 meeting.
Read the special intelligence report and click to choose your decision.
President Kennedy took his time in making a decision about how to handle the crisis in Cuba.
Many entries have multiple pages so be sure to read the entries in their entirety.
Each entry also allows the viewer to see Kennedy’s daily appointments as well as what was in the news.
The Crisis Intensifies After several days of meeting with advisors and keeping the crisis out of the public realm, Kennedy decided on a course of action and spoke to the American people about the events unfolding in Cuba.
The first was to establish a quarantine of all weapons shipments to Cuba enforced by a naval blockade of the island.
Lastly, Kennedy warned the Soviet Union that the United States would consider a launch of nuclear weapons from Cuba against any Western Hemisphere target as a Soviet attack against the United States.
On October 22, 1962, Kennedy wrote a letter to Chairman Khrushchev, the head of the Soviet Union, and included a transcript of his televised speech.
Read an online version of Kennedy’s letter at Yale Law School’s Avalon Project site.
Throughout the following days, the two world leaders exchanged letters.
Read Khrushchev’s response to Kennedy’s letters at the Library of Congress.
Additionally during the thirteen-day crisis, President Kennedy spoke with other world leaders to gain their support.
Fortunately, presidents between 1940 and 1973 secretly recorded over five thousand hours of presidential meetings and phone conversations.
As a result, we are privy to some of Kennedy’s own conversations and meetings during this time of crisis.
Listen and read the transcript of a phone conversation between Kennedy and British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan.
The Crisis Ends For several tense days, the world waited to see if the Soviet Union would challenge the United States. naval quarantine of Cuba.
An attempt by a Soviet ship to defy the quarantine could very easily lead to war, even nuclear war.
Fortunately, the incident ended peacefully with the Soviet agreement to remove the missiles from Cuba.
The United States, in turn, agreed not to invade Cuba and secretly removed their missiles from Turkey.
Cuba remained a communist nation under the leadership of Fidel Castro, but with the removal of the Soviet missiles, the United States could breathe easier.
Even after the assassination of President John F Kennedy and Chairman Khrushchev’s fall from power, the Soviet Union and the United States remained enemies.
POSTWAR UNITED STATES Understands how the Cold War and conflicts in Korea and Vietnam influenced domestic and international politics TEKS §113.32.
