In 1959, after a three-year guerrilla campaign, Fidel Castro overthrew the American-backed dictator Batista.
Now there was a new pro-communist state in what the United States regarded as their sphere of influence.
John F Kennedy Born 1917 Died November 3 1963 President of the USA between 1961-1963 He was the first Catholic and the youngest President ever of the United States.
His youth, vigour and charm created a new hope for Americans that both domestic and foreign problems could be effectively tackled.
He followed a policy towards the Soviets of \u2018flexible response\u2019, which meant relying on a range of responses to deal with Soviet actions.
Nikita Khrushchev Born 1894 Died 1971 Emerged as the leader of the Soviet Union after the death of Stalin in 1953.
In international affairs, Khrushchev followed a policy of \u2018peaceful co-existence\u2019 believing that the superpowers could exist side by side without destroying each other.
Despite this policy he still threatened the West over Berlin and took a huge risk by putting nuclear missiles in Cuba.
He took on many cases for the poorest members of society and this made him aware of the inequalities in Cuban society.
He was very resentful of the domination of the Americans in every aspect of Cuban life.
After several revolutionary attempts, Castro with the help of other rebels successfully took power on 9 January 1959.\n\nAttempts at Containment 1959 \u2013 1961 For two years Cuba and the USA maintained a frosty relationship but without any direct confrontation.
Castro took over American-owned businesses in Cuba, but he let the USA keep its naval base.
From the summer of 1960 he was receiving arms from the Soviet Union and American spies knew this.\n\nAttempts at Containment January 1961 The USA broke off diplomatic relations with Cuba.
It did not, or not directly, but it was clear that the USA was no longer prepared to tolerate a Soviet satellite in the heart of its own \u2018sphere of influence\u2019 April 1961 President Kennedy supplied arms, equipment and transport for 1400 anti-Castro exiles to invade Cuba and overthrow him.
To Cuba and the Soviet Union, the failed invasion suggested that the USA was unwilling to get directly involved in Cuba.
The Soviet leader Khrushchev was scornful of Kennedy\u2019s pathetic attempt to oust Communism from Cuba.\n\nResults of Bay of Pigs Invasion Loss of prestige within the United States and the rest of the world for Kennedy.
Set back Kennedy\u2019s attempts to identify the USA with anti-colonialism.
Other Latin American governments and peoples were outraged and the incident revived fears of United States imperialism in South America.
However, Fidel Castro has gone on to survive ten United States Presidents.\n\nI think he did it because of the Bay of Pigs I think he did it because of the Bay of Pigs.
He thought that anyone who was so young and inexperienced as to get into that mess could be beaten; and anyone who got into it and didn\u2019t see it through, had not guts.
If he thinks I\u2019m inexperienced and have no guts, until we remove those ideas we won\u2019t get anywhere with him.
I believe there is no country in the world\u2026whose economic colonisation, humiliation and exploitation were worse than in Cuba, partly as a consequence of United States policy during the Batista regime.
In May 1962, the Soviet Union announced publically for the first time that they were supplying Cuba with arms.
By September 1962 it had thousands of Soviet missiles, plus patrol boats, tanks, radar vans, missile erectors, jet bombers, jet fighters and 5000 Soviet technicians to help to maintain the weapons.
The Americans were willing to tolerate conventional arms being supplied to Cuba, but the big issue was whether they were willing to put nuclear missiles on Cuba.
The USA believed that it was unlikely that the USSR would send any nuclear missiles to Cuba as they had not taken this step with any of their satellite states before.
To bargain with the USA Khrushchev wanted the missiles as a bargaining counter.
To test the USA In the strained atmosphere of Cold War politics the missiles were designed to see how strong the Americans really were \u2013 whether they would back off or face up.
October 1962 On Sunday 14th October 1962, an American United States spy plane flew over Cuba.
That these were nuclear missile sites That these sites were being build by the USSR More photo reconnaissance followed over the next two days.
This confirmed that some sites were nearly finished but others were being built.
The experts said that the most developed of the sites could be ready to launch missiles in just seven days.
American spy plans also reported that 20 Soviet ships were currently on their way to Cuba carrying missiles.\n\nKennedy\u2019s Options On Tuesday 16th October 1962, President Kennedy was informed for the discovery.
For The Americans still had a vastly greater nuclear power than the Soviet Union.
The USA could still destroy the Soviet Union so \u2013 the argument went \u2013 the USSR would never use these missiles.
To do nothing would be another sign of weakness.\n\nKennedy\u2019s Options 2.
For It would destroy the missiles before they were ready to use Against Destruction of all sites could not be guaranteed.
To attack without advance warning was seen as immoral\n\nKennedy\u2019s Options 3.
Against It would almost certainly guarantee an equivalent Soviet response, either to protect Cuba, or within the Soviet sphere of influence \u2013 for example, a take-over of Berlin.\n\nKennedy\u2019s Options 4.
For It would avoid conflict Against If the USA was forced to back down, it would be a sign of weakness\n\nKennedy\u2019s Options 5.
For It would show that the USA was serious, but it would not be a direct act of war.
The USA had a strong navy and could still take the other options if this one did not work.
Against It would not solve the main problem \u2013 the missiles were already on Cuba.
It was composed of the regular members of the NSC, along with other men whom the President deemed useful during the crisis.
Advisers frequently sat in on the meetings, which were held in the Cabinet Room of the White House\u2019s West Wing and were secretly recorded by tape activated by Kennedy.
None of the other committee members knew the meetings were being recorded, except maybe for the President\u2019s brother, Robert Kennedy.
Monday 22 October Kennedy announces the blockade and calls on the Soviet Union to withdraw its missiles. \u2018I call on Chairman Khrushchev to halt and eliminate the reckless and provocative threat to world peace\u2026He has the opportunity now to move the world back from the abyss of destruction\u2026withdrawing these weapons from Cuba.\u2019\n\nCrisis Timeline Tuesday 23 October Wednesday 24 October Kennedy receives a letter from Khrushchev saying that Soviet ships will not observes the blockade.
Thursday 25 October Despite this, intensive aerial photography reveals that work on the missile bases in Cuba is proceeding rapidly\n\nCrisis Timeline Friday 26 October Kennedy receives a long personal letter from Khrushchev.
The President is advised to launch an immediate reprisal attack on Cuba.
However Kennedy sent Attorney General Robert Kennedy to meet with Anatoly Dobrynin, the Soviet ambassador to Washington D.C., to agree that the United States would remove the missiles from Turkey.\n\nCrisis Timeline Sunday 28 October Khrushchev replies to Kennedy and agreed to remove all missiles from Cuba in return for United States assurance that it would not invade Cuba.
There was no reference to United States removal of missiles from Turkey \u2013 this part of the deal remained secret. \u2018In order to eliminate as rapidly as possible the conflict which endangers the cause of peace\u2026the Soviet Government has given a new order to dismantle the arms which you described as offensive and to crate and return them to the Soviet Union.\u2019\n\nThe Outcome Cuba stayed Communist and highly armed.
However, the nuclear missiles were withdrawn under United Nations supervision.
Kennedy had greatly improved his reputation both at home and throughout the west.
Interventions were not worth the high risk.\n\nReflections of the Crisis In we increased our military aid to Cuba.
We were sure the Americans would never agree to the existence of Castro\u2019s Cuba.
Khrushchev\u2019s Memoirs in 1971\n\nReflections of the Crisis Even after it was all over made no statement attempting to take credit for himself or for his administration for what had occurred.
He respected Khrushchev for properly determining what was in his own country\u2019s interests and in the interests of mankind.
Robert Kennedy in 13 Days President Kennedy will be remembered as the President who helped to bring the thaw in the Cold War.
The Orthodox View This view argues that this was Kennedy\u2019s finest hour, that he successfully used nuclear brinkmanship to preserve world peace.
Kennedy was right to respond to the crisis in a firm and forceful way, as the missiles represented a Soviet threat to alter the balance of power either in actuality or in appearance.
The idea of imposing a quarantine exerted maximum pressure on the Soviet Union while incurring the minimum risk of war.
He resisted pressure for action from the military, he was statesmanlike and did not attempt to humiliate Khrushchev.
The results of the crisis helped to preserve the balance of power and world peace.\n\nHistoriography Kennedy The Revisionist View This view stresses that Kennedy unnecessarily raised the Cuban episode to the level of crisis and confrontation and thus subjected the world to the danger of nuclear war.
The missiles did not affect the nuclear balance and the USA was under no great threat.
This was rather a political problem that could have been resolved by political means.
The imposition of the blockade and the fact that Kennedy made the crisis public turned it into an unnecessarily dangerous situation.
The forthcoming November elections meant that the President wanted the situation solved quickly, so he could not wait for lengthy negotiations.
He followed a policy towards the Soviets of ‘flexible response’, which meant relying on a range of responses to deal with Soviet actions.
In international affairs, Khrushchev followed a policy of ‘peaceful co-existence’ believing that the superpowers could exist side by side without destroying each other.
It did not, or not directly, but it was clear that the USA was no longer prepared to tolerate a Soviet satellite in the heart of its own ‘sphere of influence’ April 1961 President Kennedy supplied arms, equipment and transport for anti-Castro exiles to invade Cuba and overthrow him.
Using these two sources say about the success of America\u2019s containment policy I believe there is no country in the world\u2026whose economic colonisation, humiliation and exploitation were worse than in Cuba, partly as a consequence of United States policy during the Batista regime.
In the strained atmosphere of Cold War politics the missiles were designed to see how strong the Americans really were \u2013 whether they would back off or face up.
The Americans still had a vastly greater nuclear power than the Soviet Union.
Against It would not solve the main problem – the missiles were already on Cuba.
It would show that the USA was serious, but it would not be a direct act of war.
It would not solve the main problem \u2013 the missiles were already on Cuba.
Advisers frequently sat in on the meetings, which were held in the Cabinet Room of the White House’s West Wing and were secretly recorded by tape activated by Kennedy.
None of the other committee members knew the meetings were being recorded, except maybe for the President’s brother, Robert Kennedy.
General Maxwell D Taylor \u2013 United States Army, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
George Bell \u2013 Under Secretary for Economic, Business and Agricultural Affairs.
Monday 22 October Kennedy announces the blockade and calls on the Soviet Union to withdraw its missiles.
There was no reference to United States removal of missiles from Turkey – this part of the deal remained secret.
The Orthodox View This view argues that this was Kennedy’s finest hour, that he successfully used nuclear brinkmanship to preserve world peace.
This view argues that this was Kennedy\u2019s finest hour, that he successfully used nuclear brinkmanship to preserve world peace.
This view stresses that Kennedy unnecessarily raised the Cuban episode to the level of crisis and confrontation and thus subjected the world to the danger of nuclear war.
Soviet Global Policy Soviet foreign policy changes with the death of Stalin.
Warm-up During the Cold War there was a constant fear in the United States of Soviet invasion.
Cuba provided with arms After the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Soviet weapons flooded into Cuba.
Change in Cuban leadership Late 1950’s: Change in Cuban leadership Fidel Castro becomes dictator of CubaFidel Castro.
