Kennedy had taken office committed to pursuing the cold war more vigorously than had the Eisenhower administration.
During his first year he launched a major military buildup, enlarged American foreign aid programs, and undertook new foreign policy commitments in various parts of the world.
In the aftermath of that frightening confrontation, Kennedy seemed to shift from the militant approach that had marked his first years in office, and began taking the first steps toward what would later be called detente.
It can never be known how far Kennedy might have gone in this direction as his presidency was cut short by an assassin's bullet.
The struggle of many newly formed nations to break from their colonial past and establish modern institutions set loose chaos across key parts of the globe.
The rhetoric and actions of the erratic Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev suggested a new Communist boldness, even recklessness, and a determination to exploit the prevailing instability.
The development of new weapons systems added an especially frightful dimension.
The fate of the world thus seemed to hang in the balance, and Kennedy assumed power certain that the survival of the United States depended upon its ability to defend free institutions.
He enlisted a youthful, energetic, and intelligent corps of advisers from the top positions in academia and industry—men who shared his determination to get the country moving again.
These New Frontiersmen accepted without question the basic assumptions of the containment policy of Truman and Eisenhower but also believed it was necessary to challenge communism rather than merely react to its moves.
They were alarmed by the dangers of a global war but were also exhilarated by the prospect of leading the nation through perilous times and winning the ultimate victory.
They shared a Wilsonian view that destiny had singled out their nation to defend and spread the Democratic ideal.
To meet the challenges faced by his administration, Kennedy revamped the machinery of U.S. foreign policy.
Contemptuous of the State Department, which he once labeled a ""bowl of jelly,"" he reportedly fantasized about establishing a small, secret off ice under his personal control to run foreign policy.
He contented himself with remodeling the National Security Council to enhance his personal control.
As his special assistant for national security affairs he chose McGeorge Bundy, formerly a Harvard dean.
Bundy and his deputy, Walt Whitman Rostow, eliminated Eisenhower's cumbersome committee system and made the NSC a compact body of eleven people.
The White House established its own situation room and installed equipment that gave it direct access to State Department, Defense Department, and Central Intelligence Agency cables.
Although it comprised a ""little State Department,"" thus posing a threat to its entrenched rival, the NSC under Bundy's direction maintained effective liaison with the State Department bureaucracy.
Bundy managed the flow of information, intelligence, and decision papers to the president and monitored the operations of other agencies.
Rather than simply acting as a neutral clearinghouse, the NSC also lobbied for policies it preferred.
With the White House leading the way, the Kennedy administration launched a full-scale effort to win the cold war.
Kennedy ordered a massive buildup of nuclear weapons to establish a strong deterrent to Soviet nuclear power.
Persuaded that Eisenhower's reliance on nuclear weapons had left the United States muscle-bound in many situations, he also expanded and modernized the nation's conventional military forces to permit a ""flexible response"" to various types and levels of threats.
Certain that the emerging nations of the Third World would be the principal focus of the U.S.Soviet rivalry, the administration devoted much attention to developing an effective response to guerrilla warfare.
Kennedy and his advisers also placed great emphasis on devising programs of economic and technical assistance to the Third World that would eliminate the conditions in which communism flourished.
The new administration encountered repeated frustration in its first months in office.
Kennedy inherited from Eisenhower a poorly conceived plan to overthrow the Cuban regime of Fidel Castro.
Although dubious about the morality and workability of the plan, the new president was eager for a foreign policy victory, and he hesitated to scrap it for fear Republican critics would charge him with weakness.
Without the air support he refused to provide, however, the plan was doomed to failure.
Although Kennedy assumed responsibility for the resulting debacle at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961, his fledgling administration was vulnerable to attack from those who thought the United States had done too little and those who thought it had done too much.
At about the same time, the administration decided that Eisenhower's commitment in landlocked Laos could not be upheld militarily and agreed to negotiate a settlement at Geneva.
The administration viewed with alarm Khrushchev's January 1961 speech avowing Soviet support forwars of national liberation in the Third World.
At their first summit in Vienna in June, Khrushchev bullied Kennedy by reasserting his commitment to such wars and renewing the ultimatum on Berlin he had first issued in 1958.
A shaken Kennedy, upon returning to Washington, stepped up his plans for a military buildup.
Within several weeks, Khrushchev escalated the Berlin crisis, sealing off East Berlin from West Berlin with the construction of a concrete wall between the two.
Upon taking office, Kennedy had learned that a ""missile gap"" presumed to be in favor of the Soviet Union actually favored the United States.
Determined to build on and exploit that lead, he significantly expanded America's already formidable nuclear arsenal.
In October 1961, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric proclaimed to the world that the United States was invulnerable to a Soviet sneak attack and had a second-strike capability as extensive as the Soviet capability for a first strike.
Any move on the Soviets' part would therefore have been an act of self-destruction, according to Gilpatric.
S. challenge by taking the daring and risky gamble of placing offensive missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev and others have claimed that they were trying to protect Cuba from an anticipated United States invasion, and there were certainly grounds for such fears.
Western scholars also speculate that a beleaguered Khrushchev sought to ease pressures from Soviet and Chinese militants and offset his disadvantage in the arms race.
Whatever his motives, Khrushchev's actions provoked the most dangerous U.S.-Soviet confrontation in the history of the cold war.
Kennedy responded by ""quarantining"" Cuba—sealing off the island with a naval blockade—and demanding that the Soviets withdraw their missiles.
While the world nervously awaited the Soviet response, tensions mounted.
Neither side had total control of its forces in the area, and on several occasions incidents in or around Cuba threatened to trigger a war.
Eventually Khrushchev relented and agreed to withdraw the missiles; to save face, he demanded a pledge from the United States that it would not invade Cuba.
The United States accepted the deal and privately assured Moscow that it would remove its own Jupiter missilesfromTurkey.
The superpowers pulled back from the brink, and the world breathed a sigh of relief.
In the aftermath of the missile crisis, both superpowers moved to ease the tensions that had brought them to the verge of nuclear war.
Kennedy and Khrushchev toned down their militant cold war rhetoric and even spoke publicly of moving toward peaceful coexistence.
The two nations established a hot line to facilitate communications in times of crisis.
The United States agreed to sell its adversary a large supply of desperately needed wheat, and most important, in the first major effort to slow down the nuclear arms race, the United States and Soviet Union signed a treaty in August 1963 to end atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons.
Kennedy's success in turning around the cold war was not matched by success in other areas.
From the time the administration took power, it had promoted with considerable fanfare its so-called Grand Design for Europe.
The aims of the Grand Design were to stabilize Europe defensively and, in order to help solve the country's growing economic problems, expand United States trade with Europe.
The administration promoted tariff reduction and British membership in the European Economic Community to correct the United States' swelling balance-of-payments deficit.
In addition, it sought to encourage the allies to furnish more conventional forces for the defense of Europe while relying exclusively on the United States for nuclear deterrence.
These plans ran afoul of European interests and made Europeans suspicious of both United States and British intentions.
France and Germany feared that Britain, as a member of the Common Market, would be what French leader Charles de Gaulle called a ""Trojan horse"" for the United States.
With his usual flair for the grandiloquent, de Gaulle vetoed British admission in January 1963.
France, Germany, and Britain hesitated to rely entirely on the United States for nucleardeterrence.
De Gaulle insisted on an independent nuclear force de frappefor France.
By early 1963, the Grand Design was in a shambles amidst mutual recriminations both from the Kennedy administration and the European allies.
In Latin America the administration, with maximum publicity, launched the Alliance for Progress as a way of promoting economic and social development and thereby undermining leftist revolutions.
The program made dramatic gains in such areas as tax collection and public health, but its overall progress was disappointing.
The pace of agrarian reform was slow, and gains in education were limited.
The goals of the program may have been too ambitious, and private capital for development projects was not forthcoming in the amount required.
Most important, perhaps, military coups in Argentina, Peru, Guatemala, Ecuador, the Dominican Republic, and Honduras undermined the very political freedoms the Alliance for Progress was supposed to foster.
Cuban premier Fidel Castro survived despite the Kennedy administration's near obsession with eliminating him.
Before the missile crisis, with the blessings of top United States officials, the CIA had launched Operation Mongoose, a multifaceted scheme to destabilize Cuba and overthrow the Castro government.
As early as August 1960, apparently without explicit presidential sanction, the CIA had formulated a plot to assassinate Castro, and the agency subsequently enlisted the assistance of leading mob figures such as Sam Giancana.
Various assassination schemes were actually tried, including poison and exploding cigars.
Operation Mongoose accomplished little, the assassination plots failed, and the Castro government remained intact.
When Kennedy took office, the Vietcong insurgency supported by North Vietnam threatened the U.S.-backed government of Ngo Dinh Diem.
Having suffered major setbacks at the Bay of Pigs, in Laos, and in Berlin, Kennedy decided it was necessary to take a stand somewhere, and Vietnam seemed the most likely place.
Thus, in late 1961 the administration dramatically increased United States support for the Diem regime, and by 1963 the United States had more than sixteen thousand advisers in Vietnam.
Perhaps more important, by the time of Kennedy's death, the United States had assumed growing responsibility for the South Vietnamese government.
In the summer of 1963, the predominantly Buddhist population had launched a series of protests against the Catholic-led government.
The Diem regime responded forcefully, at one point sending armed forces into the pagodas.
Concerned about the protests and the regime's reaction to them, and increasingly persuaded that Diem and his family were their own worst enemies, the Kennedy administration encouraged dissident South Vietnamese army officers to launch a coup.
After several false starts, on November 1,1963, the military overthrew the regime and assassinated Diem and his notorious brother Ngo Dinh Nhu.
Whether Kennedy would have eventually extricated the United States from an increasingly untenable situation in Vietnam, as his defenders claim, can, of course, never be known.
It is clear, however, that during his brief one thousand days in the White House, Kennedy sharply increased the United States' commitment to South Vietnam.
The Africa collection contains a large volume of information on the Congo crisis and the administration's efforts to win goodwill among the continent's many newly emerging nations.
Roughly half of the Latin America collection deals with Cuba; also included in the collection is important documentation on two other key Latin American nations, Brazil and the Dominican Republic.
The Western Europe collection documents the formulation and implementation of Kennedy's Grand Design.
The Vietnam and Asia and the Pacific collections document the administration's escalation of the Vietnam War and its involvement in other areas such as the Philippines, Korea, and Indonesia.
Middle East, 1961-1963 In both the Middle East and South Asia, the Kennedy administration launched bold initiatives to shift the world's balance of power in favor of the United States.
In South Asia, John F Kennedy's efforts to cultivate goodwill with India merely antagonized the United States' longstanding ally, Pakistan, without weaning India away from its neutralist cold war stance.
In the Middle East, the administration's efforts to befriend Gamal Abdel Nasser's United Arab Republic resulted in only limited, short-term success while alienating the United States' traditional ally, Israel, and the more conservative Arab states such as Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
The United States enjoyed the most success where it attempted the least, with neutral Afghanistan.
Fearing that a 1961 border dispute between Pakistan and Afghanistan might force the latter into the arms of the Soviet Union, the Kennedy administration dispatched diplomat Livingston Merchant to encourage a peaceful settlement.
Merchant failed, and tensions between the two northern-tier nations persisted, but the result was not what the United States had feared.
As Pakistan leaned toward Communist China in the aftermath of the Sino-lndian war of 1962, Afghanistan eased away from Moscow.
Kennedy and his advisers agreed that the Eisenhower administration had erred in condemning Indian neutralism and tying United States fortunes in the region exclusively to India's bitter enemy Pakistan.
The administration attached special importance to India, the world's largest democracy, and set out to cultivate its goodwill.
The president initiated a warm, personal correspondence with Indian prime minister Jawaharlal Nehru, dispatched Vice-President Lyndon Johnson to New Delhi on a personal goodwill mission, and initiated a large economic aid program to support India's industrial development.
Washington's tilt toward New Delhi was already well along when a border war between India and China in October 1962 provided what seemed a splendid opportunity to tighten the relationship.
The United States immediately sent military aid to a beleaguered India.
To mollify an increasingly concerned Pakistan, the administration sought to use the leverage provided by aid to India to work out a settlement of the bitter dispute between the two nations over Kashmir.
Under pressure from the United States, India and Pakistan did agree to talks on Kashmir, but the gap between the two could not be bridged and the talks broke down without tangible results.
Deeply alarmed at the United States tilt toward India, Pakistan moved noticeably toward Peking.
It concluded a provisional border demarcation agreement with China in December 1962 and arranged a series of much-publicized state visits between the two nations' top leaders.
Still enticed by the idea of luring India into close ties with the United States, Kennedy in his last months in office toyed with the possibility of a vastly expanded military aid program.
The administration eventually Richard P Stebbins, The United States in World Affairs 1963, , 146. bowed to budgetary pressures and Pakistani protests, however, and approved a program of only $50 million per year.
Annoyed at Washington's lack of support, India turned increasingly to the Soviet Union for aid.
United States policies thus broke down in the face of intractable regional tensions, alienating Pakistan while failing to gain the United States significant influence with India.
Certain that the Eisenhower administration had leaned too far toward Israel and had driven Egyptian neutralist Nasser into the Soviet camp, the Kennedy administration, much as in South Asia, sought a more evenhanded approach.
As with Nehru, Kennedy used personal correspondence to cultivate Nasser.
To appease a worried Israel, the United States agreed to provide it with HAWK surface-to-air missiles to upgrade its air defenses, but cleverly tied the sale to settlement of the Palestine refugee question.
For a time in the late summer of 1962, the administration's bold policies seemed to be succeeding, and the U.S. position in the Middle East appeared to be the strongest it had ever been.
Israel balked at United States proposals to settle the refugee question, and when word leaked out of the sale of HAWK missiles to Israel, conservative and radical leaders joined in noisy protest.
More important, United States efforts to woo Nasser increasingly alarmed the more traditional Arab leaders in Jordan and Saudi Arabia.
Nasser's intervention in Yemen in support of a radical who had overthrown a traditionalist leader supported by Saudi Arabia underscored these fears.
Street riots in Tehran in 1961 that nearly toppled the Shah of Iran aroused additional fears of instability in a chaotic region.
In Iran, Saudi Arabia, and other traditional states, the administration pushed ""revolution from the top down,"" holding out promises of aid and encouraging leaders like the Shah and King Saud of Saudi Arabia to institute moderate reforms to head off more radical change.
Washington also put pressure on Nasser and King Saud to disengage from Yemen.
By the summer of 1963, the administration's evenhanded Middle East policy was in a shambles.
In Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Libya, the United States' need for oil triumphed over its concern for reform, and ""revolution from the top down"" accomplished little.
The dispatch of United States military units to Saudi Arabia in support of the Saudi position in Yemen antagonized Nasser and strained relations with the UAR to the breaking point.
Israel skillfully exploited the divisions among its Arab rivals by blocking a settlement on the refugee issue and extorting from the United States a long-sought commitment to come to its aid in the event of an external attack.
To complete the picture, Congress in late 1963 passed an amendment to a foreign aid bill forbidding PL-480 assistance to any nation engaged in ""aggressive military efforts"" against the United States or its allies, an only slightly veiled reference to Nasser.
The half-reel on Afghanistan covers the Afghanistan-Pakistan boundary dispute and the resulting United States concern about maintaining Afghanistan's neutrality.
There is a small amount of material on the Sino-lndian border war and on subsequent United States efforts to promote a settlement between India and Pakistan concerning Kashmir.
Approximately half of a reel deals with the upheaval in Iran in 1961, including the then-obscure Ayatollah Khomeini's role in the unrest and the resulting United States efforts to encourage moderate reform to head off radical revolution.
Two-thirds of a reel deals with topics related to Israel, such as United States aid, the sale of HAWK missiles, the Palestine refugee question, and the issue of a United States security guarantee.
Thomas G Paterson , 176. material on Saudi Arabia concerns Saudi fears about United States relations with both the UAR and Israel.
This material was originally bound into volumes, each of which was assigned a number.
For certain countries, some memos and cables were arranged under agency tabs or embassy tabs.
The State Department, Defense Department, Federal Bureau of Investigation, Central Intelligence Agency, and Agency for International Development (previously the International Cooperation Administration) were the agencies most frequently represented.
Some memos, memcons , correspondence, and reports were filed under tabs highlighting selected documents, events, or correspondents.
The staff at the John F Kennedy Library has removed the material from the volumes and filed it into folders.
Each folder has been arranged in chronological order and assigned inclusive dates.
Africa; Asia and the Pacific; Latin America; the Middle East; the USSR and Eastern Europe; Vietnam; and Western Europe.
UPA has compiled, and included at the beginning of Reel 1 for each NSF collection, a folder title list for that collection that will assist the researcher in locating pertinent materials.
These withdrawal sheets itemize documents that have been withdrawn from the folders, due to either national security or privacy restrictions, by the staff of the John F Kennedy Library.
For folders in which there are no withdrawal sheets, UPA has included the ""Inventory Lists"" and ""Submission Lists,"" where available.
The submission lists itemize documents that have been submitted to appropriate agencies for review to determine if they can be declassified or sanitized and made available for research.
These lists will help the researcher determine which materials are still classified or unprocessed.
Description of Reel Index The Reel Index for this publication details each microfilmed document in the collection; document listings are arranged numerically by microfilm frame number.
Possible Shutdown or Alteration of United States Foreign Aid Project in Afghanistan.
The second and third lines contain the author/sender and receiver, respectively, of the document.
The notation ""NA"" in a reel index entry indicates that a particular item of information is not available.
SECURITY CLASSIFICATIONS The following key identifies the abbreviated security classifications used in the reel index entries for previously classified documents contained in this microfilm publication.
Also included in the reel index are the dates on which documents with the abbreviated security classification ""C,"" ""S,"" and 'TS"" were declassified.
For documents in which certain information is still being withheld, the notation ""IP"" appears following the declassification date.
KEY TO NAMES The following key identifies, by title or description, significant individuals appearing in this guide.
Cootes, Merritt N Furnas, Howard Consul general, United States consulate general, Florence Deputy executive secretary, State Department Crawford, William R., Jr.
Development Administrative assistant to Maxwell Taylor Hamilton, William L., Jr.
United States ambassador to Saudi Arabia Khomeini, Ruhollah Hawkins, Richard H., Jr.
Holmes, Julius C Senior staff member, NSC United States ambassador to Iran Laboulsse, Henry R., Jr.
Deputy executive secretary, State Department Director, Office of Greek, Turkish, and Iranian Lodge, Henry Cabot, Jr.
United States vice admiral Special assistant to the president for congressional McGhee, George relations Undersecretary of state for political affairs; O'Donnell, Kenneth counselor, State Department Special assistant to the president McKesson, John A Pahlavi, Mohammed Reza Acting executive secretary, State Department Shah of Iran MacMillan, Harold Palmer, Stephen E., Jr.
Prime minister, Great Britain First secretary, United States embassy, Tel Aviv McNally, John J., Jr.
Scott, David United States brigadier general Consul, United States consulate, Jerusalem Tyler, S Roger, Jr.
United States ambassador to UN Deputy United States representative to UN Stoessel, Walter J., Jr.
Zahir Shah, Mohammed King, Afghanistan INITIALISM LIST The following acronyms and abbreviations are used frequently in this guide and are listed here for the convenience of the researcher.
For adescription of the items included in the document entries below, see Editorial Note on page xv.
Afghan Ambassador Mohammed Hashim 0001 Afghanistan—Memoranda of Maiwandwal's Call on John F Kennedy.
Prime Minister and Foreign Minister of Afghan Ambassador Mohammed Afghanistan.
Conversation between John F Kennedy 0018 Afghanistan—January 20,1961and Ambassador Mohammed Hashim September12,1961.
John Mohammed Zahir Shah of Afghanistan F Kennedy. on Pakistan-Afghan Controversy.
Maiwandwal, Afghan Ambassador to Discussions with Henry A Byroade U.S. regarding Afghanistan.52 Letter.
United States Concern over Break in Diplomatic Long-Term United States Commitment to Relations between Afghanistan and Afghanistan's Economic Development Pakistan.
United States Position on Afghan-Pakistani 0066 Afghanistan—November 11,1961Dispute.
Afghan Efforts to Gain Access to the John F Kennedy Offers to Mediate in Sea through Iran Following Dispute with Question of Transit Traffic between Pakistan.
Afghan Prime Minister Sardar United States Efforts to Resolve Transit Trade Mohammad Daud.
United States Position on Continued Aid to 0104 Afghanistan—March 1-24,1962.
Efforts lo Find Solulion to AfghanRequest for Appointment with John F Pakistani Transit Dispute.
Discussions belween John M Sleeves Appointment with John F Kennedy for and Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan John M Sleeves.
IP. and Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Impasse regarding Afghan-Pakislani Foreign Minister, regarding Possible Dispute and United States Courses of Action.
United States Embassies, Kabul and 0131 Afghanistan—Elements of United States Karachi.
IP. regarding Elemenls of United States Policy John M Steeves's Discussions with toward Afghanistan.
Discussions belween John M Sleeves Discussions belween Afghan Marshal and Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Shah Wali and John M Sleeves reForeign Minister, regarding Efforts lo garding United States Policy loward Afghanislan Restore Normal Relalions belween and Transil Dispule with Pakistan.
United States Discussions with Afghan Prime Pakistani Desire for CENTO ContinMinister Sardar Mohammad Daud gency Planning against Communist regarding Aid for Afghan Development Aggression from Afghanistan. and Development of Iranian Transit 0248 Letter.
Bandar Abbas Project's Contribution to 0249 CIA Informalion Report #TDCS-3/ Iranian Economic Development and 512,599.
Dean Rusk. tation of United States Aid Program for AfghaniJune 6,1962. 1p.
Bid by TMA Airlines for Agency for International Development Charter of 0235 Afghanistan—May 16,1962Two DC-4s for Ariana.
Lincoln White Statements regarding Possible Visit to United States by Afghan Prime United States Aid Program in Afghanistan.
Possible Visit to United States by Afghan Prime Refusal to Granl Aid lo Afghanislan on Minister Sardar Mohammad Daud.
Views of United States regarding Fulure Travel Plans of King Mohammed Zahir Assislance lo Afghanislan in Economic Shah and Prime Minister Sardar Developmenl.
Inquiries at United States Embassy, Kabul United States Informed of Possible Assassinaregarding Lincoln White Statement on lion Attempt againsl Afghan Prime United States Aid to Afghanistan.
Discussions between John M Steeves United States Views on Aid Policy toward and Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Afghanistan.
Mohammed Zahir Shah of Afghanislan Stale Departmenl Press Slalemenl on and Wesl German Presidenl Heinrich United States Aid to Afghanistan.
United States Discussions with Afghan AmbasShah of Iran Agrees to Act as Gosador Mohammed Hashim Belween lo Achieve Rapprochemenl Maiwandwal regarding United States Aid. belween Afghanistan and Pakistan.
United States Gift of Agricultural Stock to King Efforts at Reconciliation between Mohammed Zahir Shah of Afghanistan.
Pakistani Presidenl Mohammed Ayub Afghan Reaclion lo New Pakislani Khan's Reply lo Message from Shah of Foreign Policy Attrtudes.
Foreign Minisler and Depuly Prime Drafl Slalemenl from Pakislani PresiMinisler, Agrees to Meet in Tehran with denl Mohammed Ayub Khan regarding Iranian and Pakistani Foreign Ministers.
Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Departure of Shah of Iran from Kabul Foreign Minisler and Depuly Prime following Negolialions wilh Afghans.
Iran's Invitation lo Discuss Further RecPossible Meeling belween John F. oncilialion Efforts.
Minisler and Depuly Prime Minisler, Willingness of Prince Mohammad Nairn, toward Afghan-Pakislani Problem.
Kennedy for Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Foreign Minisler and Depuly Prime Minister.
Afghan Position at Meeting with Iranian Renegotialion of Afghan-Soviet Trade and Pakistani Representatives in Agreement.
Minister, Informs John F Kennedy of Informalion on United States Posilion regarding Afghanistan's Position on Transit Afghanislan for Meeting with Prince Impasse wilh Pakislan.
Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan ForForeign Minister and Deputy Prime eign Minister and Deputy Prime MiniMinister. ster, Informs John F Kennedy of Afghanistan's Position on Transit 0383 Afghanistan—September 27,1962Impasse with Pakislan.
United States Posilion wilh regard to Efforts to Request for Permission from John F Work Out Solution to Impasse in Kennedy for Visit to United States by King Afghan-Pakistani Transit Dispute.
This JFK number was also To: Bromley K Smith. assigned to document appearing on October 19, 1962. 1p.
White House Approval of Cable to Message from John F Kennedy Given Kabul. to Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Minister, for Forwarding to King Mohammed Zahir Shah of Afghanistan in Italy.
Discussions between John M Steeves United States Discussions with Prince Mohamand Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan mad Nairn, Afghan Foreign Minister and Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime Deputy Prime Minister, regarding SinoMinister, regarding United States Aid Program. lndian Developments.
John M Steeves, United States Ambassador to United States Efforts to Arrange Appointment Afghanistan. with Prince Mohammad Nairn, Afghan Foreign Minister and Deputy Prime 0479 Afghanistan—Memoranda of Minister, to Discuss Unidentified Conversation, June 1963Subject.
John F Kennedy and Afghan AmbasUnited States Relations with Afghanistan with sador Mohammed Hashim Maiwandwal. respect to Kabul-Kandahar Road and United States Aid Program.
John F Kennedy and Afghan Ambas""For White House Approval Prior to sador Mohammed Hashim Maiwandwal.
Afghan Ambassador Mohammed United States Aid Policy and Program for Hashim Maiwandwal.
John F Kennedy and Afghan AmbasComplaint regarding Delays in U.S. sador Mohammed Hashim Maiwandwal.
Mission to United States Discussions between John M Steeves 0494 Copy of Press Statement.
Minister, regarding United States Aid Program Farewell Message on Termination of for Afghanistan.
United States to Make No Further Effort to Use Farewell Message on Termination of Good Offices in Afghan-Pakistani Afghan Ambassador Maiwandwal's Transit Impasse.
Lucius D Battle. of Afghanistan concerning Reaction to To: Ralph A Dungan.
United States Message of Congratulations to Reply from Archbishop Makarios III, Muhammad Yusuf on His Appointment President of Cyprus, to Message from as Prime Minister and Foreign Minister John F Kennedy on Anniversary of of Afghanistan.
Reply from Archbishop Makarios III, Message of Congratulations from President of Cyprus, to Message from Cypriot Government to United States on John F Kennedy on Anniversary of Achievements in Space.
Approved by Mr Smith for TransmisUnited States Planning for Visit by Archbishop sion, Through Error, Was Never Makarios III, President of Cyprus.
JFK#13. bishop Makarios III, President of Visit to United States by Archbishop Makarios III, Cyprus, regarding Orbital Space Flight President of Cyprus. of Colonel John Glenn.
QUO. of Archbishop Makarios III, President of Elias T Ypsarides, Secretary in Cypriot Cyprus, during Visit to United States Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
Arrangements for Tour of United States Electrical Press Coverage of Visit to United States by Plant during Visit by Archbishop Archbishop Makarios III, President of Makarios III, President of Cyprus.
QUO. of His Delegation to Accompany Him Patroklos Stavrou, Director of the during Talks with John F Kennedy.
Office of White Request for White House Clearance of House Press Secretary.
Archbishop Makarios III, President of Exchange of Messages between John Cyprus.
Departure from United States of Archbishop Cost of Proposed Ambassador's Makarios III, President of Cyprus.
Meeting between John F Kennedy and Cost of United States Embassy Residences.
Reaction in Greek Press to Speech by Receipt of John F Kennedy's Reply to Turkish Foreign Minister Feridan Cemal Invitation to Visit Cyprus by Archbishop Erkin regarding Cyprus.
JFK#11. between John F Kennedy and ArchPresidential Message for United States Exhibibishop Makarios III, President of tion at Cyprus International Fair.
United States Consultations with Fraser Wilkins Denial of Report of Request for regarding Situation in Cyprus.
Fraser Wilkins, United States Ambassador to 0664 Cyprus—November 1,1962Cyprus.
Cypriot Office of Public Information; and United States Emergency and Evacuation Plans Elias T Ypsarides, Secretary in Cypriot for Cyprus.
Andrew J Goodpaster. to Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal January 27,1961.
John F Kennedy on UN Role in the Contents of Indian Prime Minister Congo.
Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru 0832 Withdrawal Sheets.p. regarding Situation in the Congo.33 Tab 6. 1p.
Jawaharlal Nehru to John F Kennedy Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Dated April 16.
JFK#3b. and W Averell Harriman regarding United States Reply to Indian Prime Minister Situations in the Congo and Laos.
C 8/10/77. to Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Proposed United States Messages to Indian Nehru regarding Situation in Laos.
Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Lyndon B Johnson Shown Letter from Nehru's Views on Deteriorating Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.
Nehru's Congratulatory Message on Discussions of Lyndon B Johnson's Success of Alan Shepard's Space Visit to India and U.S.-lndian Relations.
Letter to John F Kennedy from Indian Message from John F Kennedy to Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.
John F Kennedy. regarding United States Offer to Assist India in To: Jawaharlal Nehru.
JFK#5e. son's Visit to India and U.S.-lndian Suggested United States Reply to Letter from Relations.
Burris Brought This Back with United States Offer to Assist India in Financing Apologies.
Transmittal of Letter from Indian Prime Farewell Message on Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.
A Reply Reply to Letter from Indian Prime MinIs Being Drafted in the President's ister Jawaharlal Nehru regarding DisOffice."" cussions with John F Kennedy during 0891 Letter.
Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru S 8/11/77. regarding Discussions during Visit to Text of Message from John F Kennedy United States and Invitation to Jacqueline to Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Kennedy to Visit India.
United States Breaks Off Discussions with Indian Lack of Indian Press Coverage Government regarding Their Moves regarding John F Kennedy's Letter to against Goa.
Reception Given to Jacqueline Kennedy S 8/10/77. during Her Visit to India.
Text of Congratulatory Message from John F Kennedy to Jawaharlal Nehru on HisReappointment as Prime Minister of India.
William John F Kennedy to Indian Prime MinisH Brubeck. ter Jawaharlal Nehru.
United States Position on Soviet Sale of MIG Transmittal of Letter from Indian Prime Aircraft to India.
William Congratulatory Message on His ReH Brubeck. appointment to Office.
United States Position on Soviet Sale of MIG 0944 India—Nehru Correspondence, Aircraft to India.
McGeorge Bundy. regarding United States Response to Placement September 7, 1962. 1p.
United States Requests Help from Indian Prime Message from John F Kennedy Minister Jawaharlal Nehru in Persuadregarding U.S.-Indian Relations. ing Pakistani President Mohammed 0954 Letter.
Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru NA. 1p.JFK#12. regarding U.S.-lndian Relations.
Indian Foreign Secretary Morarji Desai United States Position on Chinese Communist Letter from John F Kennedy to Prime Attack on India.
Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru Transmittal of Letter from Indian Prime regarding Chinese Communist StateMinister Jawaharlal Nehru. ments on Cease-fire with India.
Letter from Chinese Communist PreFolder Title List.pp mier Chou En-lai to Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru regarding Border 0001 India—Nehru Correspondence, Conflict between Their Two Countries.
Parliamentary Address concerning Indian Conditions for Peaceful SettleChinese Communist Attack on India. ment of Border Conflict with Communist 0006 Tab 31. 1p.
Transmittal of Letter from Indian Prime Indian Conditions for Peaceful SettleMinister Jawaharlal Nehru. ment of Border Conflict with Communist China.
Proposed United States Letters to Indian Prime Letter from Indian Prime Minister Minister Jawaharlal Nehru and PakiJawaharlal Nehru to John F Kennedy. stani President Mohammed Ayub Khan.41 Note.
Minister Nehru's Letter and Met Him on Transmittal of Letter from Indian Prime the Points Raised and in Light of GenMinister Jawaharlal Nehru. eral Atmosphere I Recommend That 0071 Note.
Transmittal of Letter from Indian Prime Message from Indian Prime Minister Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.
Transmittal of Letter from Indian Prime Letter from Indian Prime Minister Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.
Jawaharlal Nehru to John F Kennedy S 12/6/77. regarding the Bokaro Scheme.
Transmittal of Letter from Indian Prime United States Reply to Indian Prime Minister Minister Jawaharlal Nehru.
Office of the Assistant United States Reply to Indian Prime Minister Secretary of Defense.
Letter to Dean Rusk from Charge 0141 India—Ambassador Galbraith's d'Affaires of Indian Embassy.
The 0133 India—Nehru Correspondence, Secretary Has a Copy Which I Will Miscellaneous and Extra Copies, Return as Soon as h Comes Out of His July 1,1963-November22,1963.
S 8/11/77. latory Message from Shah of Iran on Proposal That Dwight D Eisenhower His Inauguration as President.
Exemption from Declassification of Desire of Iranian Ambassador Ardeshir Report by General Paul Adams.
QUO. rity and Intelligence Organization, to Text of John F Kennedy's Reply to Deliver Letter from the Shah.
Iran on Inauguration of John F Kennedy Schedule of Alternative Categories for as President.
C 10/22/81. to Newcastle; but I Was Struck by the John F Kennedy's Reply to Letter from Problems and the Possibilities of the Shah of Iran regarding Problems Facing Generations in This Despatch.
Iranian Security and Intelligence Internal Political Situation in Iran.
JFK#3. about Consortium's Off-Take of Iranian Possible Visit to United States by Shah of Iran.
Clifton's Decision to Delay Informing United States Discussions with Iranian AmbasJohn F Kennedy of News regarding sador Ardeshir Zahedi regarding SituIran. ation in Iran.82 White House Incoming Message.
John F Kennedy Extends Condolences Critical Situation in Tehran Caused by on Death of Ayatollah Seyed Hasan Nationwide Strike by Iranian Teachers.
C 7/87. sor T Cuyler Young, Walt W Rostow New Iranian Prime Minister Ali Amini's and Robert H Johnson regarding Iran.
Arrest of Top Iranian Government and Military Officials on Charges of Corrup0305 Iran—May 15,1961. tion.
John F Kennedy Requests That Task Report of Task Force on Iran, ""A Force on Iran Remain in Operation to Review of Problems in Iran and RecomImplement Recommendations. mendations for the National Security Council,"" Dated May 15, 1961.
Robert Amory. with USSR; United States Economic Assistance To: McGeorge Bundy. to Iran; Prospects for Government of Ali May 24, 1961. 1p.
Amini; United States Political Policies in Iran and Short-Term Outlook for Iran.
United States Effort to Back Amini Government in Moving toward Resolution of Iran's Political and Economic Problems and Assuring Future Progress.
Strengthen the New Prime Minister of Shah of Iran Pledges to Support Iran.
Minister Ali Amini regarding His PosiShah's Views on United States Suggestions tion and Programs for Dealing with regarding Situation in Iran.
United States Concern over Shah of Iran's Plans Message of Thanks for Flowers from to Replace Prime Minister Ali Amini with Iranian Princess Shahnaz and for General Teimur Bakhtiar, Chief of Iranian Congratulatory Message on Iranian Security and Intelligence Anniversary of United States Independence.
State Department United States Discussions with Iranian Prime Bureau of Intelligence and Research.
Address by Iranian Prime Minister Ali Economic Growth and Progressive Amini.
Letters to John F Kennedy from ArdeAppeal Asking United States to Withdraw Its shir Zahedi, Iranian Ambassador to United States Support of the Regime of the Shah of Iran.
Khodadad Farman-Farmayan, ReprePossible Assistance by United States in Helping sentative of the Plan Organization, Iranian Army to Aid in Civil Engineering Accuses United States of Cooling Off Support for Projects.
JFK#13. ing Eighth Anniversary of National United States Military Assistance to Iran.
Uprising against Government of Iranian Prime Minister Mohammad Mossadeq.
JFK#1. ernment of Prime Minister Mohammad Literature on Low-Cost Private Home Mossadeq.
Iran regarding Recent Hurricane and ""You May Wish to Show These to the Floods in Texas and Louisiana.
Recent Hurricane and Floods in Texas Delivery of Message from John F. and Louisiana.
Shah in Power in Iran and Possible Hubert Humphrey Acknowledges InviInvitation to Shah to Visit U.S. tation to Visit Iran.41 Note.
Discussions between T Cuyler Young 0526 Withdrawal Sheet. and Walt W Rostow.
Availability of Professor Young to Discuss His Trip to Iran and Situation 0528 Iran—October 28,1961There.
Phillips Talbot and Ardeshir Zahedi, Message to John F Kennedy from Shah Iranian Ambassador to U.S. of Iran.
Amendment of United States Title I PL-480 Appointment with John F Kennedy for Agreement with Iran to Include Four Julius C Holmes.
Discussions between Chester Bowles and Shah of Iran regarding Military Problems.
Qods-Nakhai, Iranian Ambassador to United States 0597 Iran—August 1-11,1962.
Schedule for Shah of Iran's Visit to ""Per Your Request of April 20 in a Afghanistan.
Iranian Prime Minister Ali Amini's Relations between Iran and Afghanistan.
Denial That His Resignation Was Due to Inadequacy of United States Aid.
Plans of Iranian Foreign Minister Abbas Official United States Statement concerning Aram and Akbar Darai, Chief of Iranian False Warning Broadcast Reports by International Organizations Division, to Armed Forces Radio, Tehran, That Attend UN General Assembly.
John F Kennedy's Interest in StrengthUnited States Report concerning False Warning ening Police Control of Tehran.
Need for United States Assistance for Rehabilita0620 Withdrawal Sheet. tion of Area Devastated by Earthquake.
Message of Sympathy from Lyndon B United States Discussions with Iranian Prime Johnson to Shah of Iran regarding Minister Asadollah Alam regarding Disasterous Earthquake in Iran.
Shah of Iran's Reply to Sympathy MesC 8/7/79. sage from John F Kennedy following Effects of Iranian Earthquake and United States Iranian Earthquake.
United States Disaster Relief Efforts in Iran United States Disaster Relief Efforts following Following Earthquake.
Iranian Press Reaction concerning Lyndon B Johnson's Promised False Warning Broadcast by Armed Assistance in Obtaining Fulbright Forces Radio, Tehran, That Second Scholarship for Iranian Student Leila Iranian Earthquake Would Occur.
Negotiations with Shah of Iran regardShah of Iran's Reply to Sympathy Mesing Five-Year Military Program. sage from John F Kennedy following Iranian Earthquake.53 Iran—October 1 -31,1962.
F Kennedy and Shah of Iran regarding Review of United States Assistance Prospects in Iranian Earthquake.
United States Discussions with Iranian Prime United States Military Relief Efforts in Iran.
Plague United States Disaster Relief Efforts in 0661 Withdrawal Sheet.p.
Power to Establish Missile Bases in Her Kennedy regarding Cuban Missile Territory.
QUO. ing Down Shah of Iran's Invitation to Text of Congratulatory Message from John F Kennedy to Visit Iran.
John F Kennedy to Shah of Iran regarding His Victory in Referendum.83 Iran—March 1-31,1963.
Request by Iranian Students in Text of Congratulatory Message from Germany for John F Kennedy to Use John F Kennedy to Shah of Iran Influence to Help Iranians Tried by regarding His Victory in Referendum.
Iranian Students in Britain Protest Detention and Trial of National Front Leaders in Iran.
Kennedy's Support in Aiding a Leading United States Greetings on Occasions of Iranian Personality of Former Prime Minister Holidays.
William H Brubeck. tenced to Death by Military Tribunal in To: McGeorge Bundy.
Iranian National Front Proposed Procedure for United States Holiday Organization in Leoben, Germany.
Mission with the Iranian Army/Military Shah of Iran's Reply to Congratulatory Assistance Advisory Group.
United States Speculation regarding Resignation of Iranian Cabinet Member Hassan Arsanjani.
Investigation by United States Senate CommitWhite House Clearance of Draft Teletee Headed by John McClellan into gram to Tehran.
Export-Import Bank Stand on Loans to Export-Import Bank Stand on Loans to Iran.
United States Discussions with Iranian Prime White House Clearance of Cable to United States Minister Asadollah Alam regarding Embassy, Tehran.
John F Kennedy. regarding His Efforts to Resolve DifferJune 10, 1963. 1p.
S 4/13/84. ences between Afghanistan and Request from Shah of Iran for More Pakistan.
Iranian Government Urges Calm United States Discussions with Shah of Iran following Opposition Attacks and Mob regarding Measures Used by SazeViolence Led by the Ayatollah Ruhollah mane Attalat Va Anmiyale Keshvar Khomeini.
William H Brubeck. organization] and Iranian Military to To: McGeorge Bundy.
Quell Recent Street Riots and DemonJune 14, 1963. 1p.JFK#7. strations, and Overall Political Situation Request for Appointment with John F in Iran.
Recommendation That Princess Ashraf United States Discussions with Iranian Prime of Iran be Received at the White House.
Shah, Iranian Elections, Negotiations S 4/13/84 IP. with National Front Leaders, and Meeting with Julius C Holmes on Economic Development.
Necessity of Persuading Iranian Government to Solve Its Own Problems.70 Iran—July 11,19630749 Handwritten Note.
Clear with JFK Unless You've Any White House Clearance of Draft TeleSquawk."" gram to Tehran.
United States Interest in Progress of Shah of Message from John F Kennedy to Iran's Reform Program.
Shah of Iran Thanking Him for His Views on Situation in Middle East and Possible Formation of Arab Federation.
Shah of Iran concerning Shah's Views Conclusion of Economic Cooperation on Middle East Situation and Possible Agreement between USSR and Iran.
Iranian Prime Minister Asadollah Alam United States Discussions with Shah of Iran Announces Date for Parliamentary regarding Iranian Security and Need to Elections.
Alleged Inaccuracies in United States Evaluation Embassy, Tehran. of Political, Economic, and Security August 6, 1963.1p.
Ministry Answering Soviet Charges of Interference with Iraq on Kurdish 0809 Iran—September 6,1963Question.
Appeal for Basic Human Rights and Autonomy within Iraq for Kurdish People.
Points to Be Included in Iranian-Afghan ""You May Want to Hold This Until State Agreement on Bandar Abbas.
Brief Comes over (Promised for End of Day), but I Thought President Might 0940 Iran—Shah Visit, April 6-9,1962.
United States Embassy, Tel Aviv. nedy and Shah of Iran regarding U.S.January 30, 1961. 1p.
Kennedy from Israeli President Itzhak Conversation between John F KenBen-Zvi. nedy and Shah of Iran regarding U.S.0980 Draft Letter.
Congratulatory Message on Kennedy's Inquiry from Iranian Foreign Minister Inauguration as President.
Abbas Aram regarding Memoranda of Official Conversations during Shah's 0982 Israel—February 1961.
John F Kennedy Transmits Message of Resignation of Israeli Prime Minister Thanks to Israeli Author Moshe David Ben-Gurion.
Discussions between John F Kennedy Israeli Atomic Energy Activities. and Israeli Prime Minister David Ben0991 Note.
John F Kennedy's Conversation with Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion.
United States Defense Attaches in Israel Report Source and Editorial Note.
Desirability of Avoiding High-Level Statements regarding United States Food for Peace Sale to Israel.
Suggestion by Israeli Prime Minister I Am Investigating and Will See You David Ben-Gurion That Services of His Have Full Report on the Matter.
Israeli Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion United States Embassy, Tel Aviv and Staff Thanked for His Sympathetic Interest in Ignores House Foreign Affairs SubcomHealth of John F Kennedy. mittee Group during Their Visit to Israel.
United States Actions and Attitudes Favorable to United States Embassy, Tel Aviv's Report Israel Since Beginning of Kennedy Answering Charge That It Ignored Administration.
LOU. ing Israel's Economic Assistance AspiDiscussions between George Ball and rations for FY 1962.
United States Embassies, Amman, ""Transmitted Herewith is a MemoranBaghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, dum from NEA—Mr Meyer to Mr Jidda, and Tel Aviv.
Embassies, Amman, Baghdad, Beirut, Cairo, Damascus, Jidda, and Tel Aviv.
Reports of New United States Initiative Seeking Settlement of Arab-Israeli Dispute.
United States Efforts to Meet with Israeli Prime 0069 Withdrawal Sheet.p.
Government of Jordan and Joseph Shimon Peres, Israeli Deputy Defense Johnson, Special Representative, UN Minister.
United States Discussions with Israeli Deputy Defense Minister Shimon Peres.
Request to Reopen Discussions S 12/12/78 IP. between United States and Israel regarding Amended Flight Schedule of Robert Middle East Situation.
United States Citizen Convicted of Spying for Israeli Prime Minister David BenUSSR, and Possible Delay in His ExGurion's Visit to United States Agriculture pulsion from Great Britain.
Selected Middle East DiploIsrael Probes for Details and Timing of matic Posts.
Cooperation in Implementation of United States Diplomatic Colleagues' Views on Joseph Johnson's Proposals.
Chiefs of State regarding Direct Israeli Prime Minister David BenNegotiations as Means of Settling Gurion's Reply to John F Kennedy Disputes with Arabs. regarding Israel's Plans to Withdraw 0132 List.
Remain in Iceland Until His Return to United States Attempts to Discourage Israel from Israel.
Instructions to Meyer Feldman Not to Weizman Institute's Invitation to Meyer Foreclose Great Britain from Making Feldman to Visit Israel.
Competitive Offer to Israel of BloodCost of the Johnson Plan. hound Missile System.
United States Discussions with Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Meir regarding Johnson Plan for Palestine Refugees.
Capacity of Israel's National Water United States Discussions with Israeli GovernConduit. ment regarding Conditions for Accep0189 CIA Geographic Intelligence Memorantance of Johnson Plan on Palestine dum.
Publicity on Meyer Feldman's Trip to Request of Samuel Belk for Copy of Israel.
Discussions between United States and Israeli Joseph Johnson's Proposals on Representatives regarding Modification Palestine Refugee Problem. of United States Policy toward Israel and Middle 0202 Note.
State Department Advises That No Reply to Request for Meeting with Reply Be Made to Enclosed Letter from Miami, Florida, Delegation Traveling to Israeli Prime Minister David BenIsrael for Dedication of New Town.
United States Ground-to-Air Missile System for Handling of United States Sale of Ground-to-Air Israel.
United States Embassies, Amman and Tel Israeli Report on Border Incident with Aviv, and United States Consulate General, Jordan.
United States Advises Israel Not to Impinge on Handling of Possible Israeli Questions Sovereignty of Jordan. regarding Text of Grant-Segal Letter.
United States Report on Border Incident C 12/13/78. between Israel and Jordan.
Selected United States Diplomatic 0223 Department of State Airgram #A-116.
LOU. on Visits to United States by Israeli Prime Israeli Diplomat Expresses Fear about Minister David Ben-Gurion and UAR United States Position in Forthcoming UN President Gamal Abdel Nasser and Session.
John W Talbot-Halpern Letter or United States Military Jones.To: Dean Rusk.
Selected Middle East DiploWalworth Barbour, United States Ambassador to matic Posts.
Press Guidance on United States Sale of Missiles July 30, 1962. 1p.JFK#18. to Israel.
Press Reports on Letter from John F United States Apologizes to UAR President Gamal Kennedy to Prime Minister David BenAbdel Nasser for Failure to Notify Him in Gurion Requesting that Israel Not PurAdvance regarding Missile Sales to sue Direct-Negotiations Resolution.
British Press Coverage of United States Sale of Concern by Jordan over United States Sale of HAWK Missiles to Israel.
British Foreign Office Preparing Syrian Concern over Sale of United States Response to Press Inquiries regarding Missiles to Israel.
Possible Reaction of UAR to United States Sale C 12/6/78. of Missiles to Israel.
Reaction in Alexandria, Egypt to Report C 12/12/78 IP. of United States Supply of Missiles to Israel.
United States Embassy, Cairo. ment of United States Willingness to Provide October 1,1962.
Syrian Prime Minister Khaled el-Azm ' Meets with Soviet Charge d'Affairs to 0302 Israel—October 2,1962Discuss United States Decision to Furnish November 13,1962.
United States Informs Jordanian Ambassador of Israeli Minister of Labor Yigal Alton's Decision to Sell Missiles to Israel.
Complaint by Iraqi UN Ambassador Libyan Press Reaction to Report of regarding United States Provision of HAWK United States Sale of Missiles to Israel.
Implications for Israel of Projected Syrian Reaction to United States Decision to Sell Survey of Dead Sea Area.
Israeli Prime Minister David BenGurion's Reply to John F Kennedy's Message of October 22.
Israel Informed of Events during Cuban United States Position in UN General Assembly Missile Crisis. regarding Israel.
David Israeli Reply to United States Package Proposal Ben-Gurion. regarding UN General Assembly DeNovember 13, 1962. 1p.
Israeli Prime Minister David BenGurion's Announcement That If UN 0336 Israel—November 14,1962Were Unable to Maintain Peace on December21,1962.
United States Reaction to Speech by Israeli Dead Sea Salt-Pans Dispute between Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion Israel and Jordan.
C 2/26/79. dor to United States Avraham Harman regarding Request for Appointment with John F UN General Assembly Refugee Debate.
Israeli Deploys Military Units along Israeli View of Syrian Attacks on SetSyrian Border Near Sea of Galilee in tlements in Tel Katzir Area.
United States Embassy, Damascus, and United States December 17, 1962. 1p.
Meyer Feldman and Israeli AmbassaC 2/26/79. dor to United States Avraham Harman regarding United States Deplores Outbreak of Fighting by Israel's Response to John F Kennedy's Israel and Syria along Armistice Line Package Proposal on Arab Refugees. and Urges Israel to Avoid Retaliatory Action.
United States Position on Supplying Missiles to Briefing Materials for John F Israel.
Text of Message from Israeli Prime Golda Meir, Israeli Minister of Foreign Minister David Ben-Gurion regarding Affairs.
Television Interview of John F Kennedy on His First Two Years as President.
Arab-Israeli Dispute to Try to Discover Briefing Materials for John F Common Ground between the Two Kennedy's Meeting with Israeli Foreign Countries Which Might Help Lead to a Minister Golda Meir.
Selected United States Diplomatic Minister Golda Meir regarding Cuba Posts. and the Arab Situation.
Minister Golda Meir during Her Meeting S 12/6/78 I P. with John F Kennedy.
William H Brubeck. nedy and Israeli Foreign Minister Golda To: Bromley K Smith.
Outline of Principles Underlying Israeli Conversations between John F KenApproach to Efforts to Solve Palestine nedy and Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Refugee Problem.
United States Offers Reciprocal Privileges to Text of United States Reply to Letter from Israeli Israel to Establish a Radio Station at or Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion near Its Embassy in Washington, D.C. regarding Palestine Refugee Problem.
Acknowledge Israeli Prime Minister Major Points of Discussions between David Ben-Gurion's Letter to Walworth Avraham Harman, Israeli Ambassador Barbour regarding John F Kennedy's to U.S., and James P Grant, Acting TV Interview.
United States Embassy, Tel Aviv Instructed to Conversation between State DepartAcknowledge Israeli Prime Minister ment Officials and Avraham Harman, David Ben-Gurion's Letter to Walworth Israeli Ambassador to U.S., regarding Barbour regarding John F Kennedy's Israeli Economic Objectives.
Text of Message from Israeli Prime Level of United States Aid to Israel for FY 1963.
JFK#6. regarding Israel's Views of UAR Presi""Don't You Think JFK Ought to See dent Gamal Abdel Nasser's Intentions This with My Comment before Mike in Yemen.
U Alexis Johnson and Israeli Deputy Recent United States Actions Favorable to Israel.
Peres Sent to United States for Discussions United States Concern over Weapons Escalation regarding HAWK Missile Transaction. in Middle East.
UN Investigation of Israeli Border IncurWhite House Approval of Draft Circular sion into UAR Territory.
White House Approval of Draft Cable to United States Concern over Weapons Escalation Tel Aviv. in Middle East.
C 11/30/77. cussion Phase of Arab Refugee Israel Informs UN Emergency Force of Initiative.
United States Major Points Contained in Israeli Prime Embassy, Tel Aviv.
United States Urges Israel to Exercise Restraint Israeli Government Requests Permiswith regard to Proposed Arab Federasion to Publish Text of John F tion.
Kennedy's Message of Condolence on 0516 Department of State Airgram #A-675.
Text of Congratulatory Message from United States Policy and the Renewed Strategic John F Kennedy to Acting Israeli Debate in Israel.
President Kadish Luz on Fifteenth Anniversary of Israeli Independence.22 Israel—May 4,1963.
United States Reply to Letter from Israeli Prime Israeli Press Report That Robert Komer Minister David Ben-Gurion.
William H Brubeck. tion and Culture, regarding Middle East To: McGeorge Bundy.
Transmittal to Israel of Resolution by United States Actions Taken to Implement DeciUnited States Congress Expressing Sympathy sions regarding Middle East Made by on Death of Israeli President Itzhak John F Kennedy on April 27.
John F Kennedy Reaffirms Substance Resolution by United States House of Represenof Paragraph Three of the Tripartite tatives Expressing Sympathy over Death Declaration. of Israeli President Itzhak Ben-Zvi.
Requested to Transmit Promptly Letters NA. 1p.JFK#2a. for the President.
William H Brubeck. pathy on Death of President Itzhak To: McGeorge Bundy.
Prime Minister David Ben-Gurion Dated Conversation between Dean Rusk and May 27.
Bromley K Smith. tension of West German Jewish RestiTo: McGeorge Bundy. tution Agreement.
Exchanges of Correspondence with Text of Congratulatory Message from Former Israeli Prime Minister David John F Kennedy to Shneour Zalman Ben-Gurion.
John F Kennedy to Shneour Zalman Letters on Israeli Security Received by Shazar on His Inauguration as President Lyndon B Johnson. of Israel.24 Draft Letter.
Reply to Letter regarding Security of Delivery of John F Kennedy's CongratuMiddle East and United States Policy of Friendlatory Message to Israeli President ship and Support for Israel.
Reply to Letter regarding Security SituUnited States Atomic Energy Commission ation in Middle East.
Reply to Letter regarding Security SituJuly 10, 1963. 1p.JFK#4a. ation in Middle East.
JFK#2g. under Lease, Four Tons of Heavy Concern over Threat to Israeli Security Water for Research Project.
Cabinet of New Israeli Prime Minister White House Clearance of Draft Cable Levi Eshkol Installed Following Vote of to Tel Aviv.
Request from Wisconsin State Senator Final Exchange of Letters between United States Norman Sussman for Information on and Israel regarding Sale of HAWK Situation of Israel in Middle East on Missiles.
McGeorge Bundy. for Information on Situation of Israel in July 4, 1963. 1p.
United States Ask West German Government to UN Security Council Meetings on IsraeliDiscourage Use of Its Scientists in Syrian Case.
Eshkol Threatening to Use Israeli United States Assessment of Probability of Major Defense Force to Halt Syrian Border Hostilities between Israel and Arabs Provocations and Criticizing UAR following Border Incidents with Syria.
Progress on Syrian Resolution in UN UN Security Council Meetings on IsraeliSecurity Council.
United States Recommendation on Resolution UN Security Council Meetings on Israelifor Israeli-Syrian Complaint in UN SecuSyrian Complaints. rity Council.
Moroccan Proposal for UN Truce UN Security Council Meetings on IsraeliSupervision Organization Report on Syrian Complaints.
U Alexis Johnson and Avraham Israeli Press Reaction to United States Draft Harman, Israeli Ambassador to United States Resolution on Palestine Refugees.
United States Embassy Officers on Latrun Area Israeli Foreign Minister Golda Meir No-Man's Land Near Jordanian Border.
Protests Silence of Delegates When Arabs Referred to Israelis as ""Nazis"" in UN Bodies.
Israeli Reaction to United States Draft of UN Discussions between Canadian Prime Resolution on Palestine Refugee Minister John D Diefenbaker and Israeli Problem.
Gurion regarding Palestine Refugee Israel Requests United States Credits for Loans Problem. to Refurbish Its Military Establishment.
Walter J Stoessel, Jr. by U.S., Israel, and Arab States to Work To: Andrew J Goodpaster.
Israeli Press and Government Response Plans of Saudi Arabian Government to to Proposed United States Draft of UN Resolution Broadcast John F Kennedy's Reply to on Palestine Refugee Problem.
Text of John F Kennedy's Reply to Congratulatory Message from King Saud 0795 Israel—Ben-Gurion Visit, of Saudi Arabia on His Inauguration as The Arab-Israeli Situation, President.
Press Interest in Israeli Prime Minister United States Reply to Congratulatory Message David Ben-Gurion's Visit to United States from King Saud of Saudi Arabia on John F Kennedy's Inauguration as President.
Congratulatory Message from Saudi Suggestion That United States Send Publishable Arabia on John F Kennedy's AssumpReply to Independence Day Greetings tion of Presidency. from King Saud of Saudi Arabia.
McGeorge Bundy. from King Saud of Saudi Arabia and September 1, 1961. 1p.
Lucius D Battle. dum the President Asked What Is Being To: McGeorge Bundy.
Delivery of United States Offer to Sell Arms Requested by Saudi Arabia.
Message from King Saud of Saudi King Saud of Saudi Arabia to Be HosArabia to John F Kennedy. pitalized in Boston, Massachusetts, for 0839 Translation of Letter.
Saudi Press Reports on Crown Prince Message from John F Kennedy Faisal's Visit to King Saud in Hospital. regarding King Saud's Recovery from 0843 Note.
Meeting between John F Kennedy and King Saud of Saudi Arabia at Palm 0845 Saudi Arabia—November 20,1961Beach, Florida.
John F Kennedy's Meeting with King ""King Saud Will Be Here Another Couple Saud of Saudi Arabia in Palm Beach, of Months.
Background Notes on Topics of ConNA. 1p.JFK#3a. versation for John F Kennedy's Meet""Saudi-JFK Lunch if State Approves."" ing with King Saud of Saudi Arabia in Palm Beach, Florida.
Office of the White Bowles to Discuss Certain Aspects of House Press Secretary.
JFK#9. gressman Seymour Halpern on Saudi Statement by King Saud of Saudi Arabia Arabian Discrimination against Jewish upon His Departure from United States Americans.
Discrimination against Jewish AmeriBennett concerning John F Kennedy's cans.
Delivery of Message from John F Proposed United States Gift of Two Rifles and Kennedy to King Saud of Saudi Arabia Ammunition to Amir Saud bin Jiluwi, in Spain.
Understanding of Kennedy Administration Position on Acceptance of Gifts.
JFK#7a. and Abdullah al-Khayyal, Saudi Arabian Text of King Saud of Saudi Arabia's Ambassador to U.S., regarding CritiReply to ""Get Well"" Message from John cism of United States in Saudi Press.
Travel Plans of King Saud of Saudi Discussions with Prince Mohammed bin Arabia.
William H Brubeck. to Sami Sharaf, Aide-de-Camp to UAR To: Bromley K Smith.
Suggestion That United States Not Proceed with Approval of Message for Dispatch Arms Limitation Talks due to Developfollowing Check on Comment by State ments in Israeli Political Situation.
Bromley K Smith. regarding United States Desire to Curtail Nuclear June 27, 1963. 1p.
UAR President Gamal Abdel Nasser S 9/21/77. regarding United States Desire to Curtail Nuclear United States Discussions with UAR GovernArms Race between UAR and Israel. ment regarding Use of Lethal Gas.87 Note.
Request That Two Cables Be Inserted ""For Information."" into McGeorge Bundy's Weekend 1113 Copy of Note.
John J McCloy Instructed Not to Visit Israel Until After Return to Washington, 1104 Copy of Note.
Bromley K Smith. ment of Intentions on Nuclear Weapons July 2, 1963. 1p.
Staff of United States Embassy, Cairo Instructed ""For Information."" to Report Anything Reflecting Progress 1140 Copy of Note.
William H Brubeck. or Change in UAR Arms-Limitation To: Bromley K Smith.
White House Clearance of Draft TeleReply to UAR Congratulatory Message gram to Cairo. on First United States Attempt at Manned Space 1155 Routing Slip.
UAR President Gamal Abdel Nasser's Message regarding Nasser's StateMessage on Congo Situation. ments on United States Involvement in Cuba.
AUTHOR INDEX The following index lists the authors or originators of documents contained in this collection.
For example, 2:0560 indicates a document located on Reel 2, Frame 0560.
