Fighting With Proxies  The Cold War created a new world order under which most of the world was divided between friends and allies of the United States and friends and allies of the Soviet Union.
Alliances  Both the United States and Soviet Union attempted to win friends by forming alliances with nations in exchange for military security and economic assistance.
The proxy wars of the Cold War would be fought when communism was on the move.
SEATO in Blue CENTO in Green, Plus USA Divided Korea  During WWII, Korea (like China, Indochina, and most of the Pacific) was occupied by Japan.
The Korean War  On June 25, 1950, Communist North Korean troops, with the approval of Joseph Stalin, invaded South Korea with the goal of uniting the country under one communist government.
United States President Harry S Truman saw the invasion by the North, with the support of Stalin’s U.S.S.R., as another example of communism spreading by force into places it wasn’t already.
Quick Synopsis of the War  When the United States arrived in Korea, the North had advanced through most of the South.
Consequences of the Korean War  In 1953 an armistice was signed between North and South Koreas.
South Korea, a democratic capitalist nation, is one of America’s strongest allies and trading partners, and North Korea remains a backward, impoverished communist state with no allies but China.
Raising the Stakes  The Korean War was an example of the U.S. policy of containment.
Containment was the idea that communism would be contained to where it already was and not allowed to spread into new places.
The Rise of Castro  In 1959 a communist revolutionary named Fidel Castro overthrew the Cuban government run by American ally Fulgencio Batista and established a communist totalitarian government allied with the Soviet Union.
The Bay of Pigs  Instead of the United States invading, Kennedy allowed the CIA to train and support exiled Cuban fighters who opposed Castro and would return to Cuba, invade the island nation, and overthrow Castro’s militia above, Castro themselves. captured United States backed  The April 16, 1961 invasion, known as Cubans below the Bay of Pigs for the area where they landed, was a disaster as the United States didn’t provide air cover, and the invaders were quickly overcome by Castro’s army, with many killed and the rest surrendering.
Kennedy could not allow the Soviets to position nuclear weapons so close the U.S. mainland.
The United States would remove the nuclear missile we had positioned in Turkey, and the Soviets would remove the nuclear missiles placed in Cuba.
It was not until the 1990s that it was revealed that the Soviets had planned to use nuclear weapons against the United States if we had invaded Cuba.
Vietnam  Following WWII most Southeast Asian countries that were colonies of western nations were given independence.
The United States granted the Philippines independence in 1946, and Great Britain began to withdraw from the area as well.
However, France refused to give up Indochina, or Vietnam as we now call it.
Minh’s Ho Chi Minh forces, the Vietminh, won most of nation over, but the French still refused to leave.
After Ho Chi Minh was elected President, the French moved to the south the country and started an attempt to fight him off.
The Vietnam War  The communist forces of the North and anti-communist forces of the South could not come together for elections to join the country into one again, and fighting continued.
While the United States had almost every advantage thinkable, they could not push back the North Vietnamese, or defeat the Viet Cong and secure South Vietnam.
Many Americans feared what was called Domino Theory, the idea that if one nation turned communist its neighbor would as well, so on and so on.
Vietnam was, and is, communist, but that communism basically stayed within the region previously known as Indochina.
