On October 16, 1962, more photos were shown that proves Cuba has long ranging missiles from the Soviet Union.
Gromyko explains to Robert Kennedy that the Soviet Union is helping Cuba in advancing their agriculture.
Since Cuba is closer than the Soviet Union to America, it makes more sense for the Soviet Union to keep their nuclear weapons in Cuba.
If the Soviet Union had missiles that could launch from the Soviet Union to America, why else would they have them in the Soviet Union.
America’s weapons were strong enough to launch from America into the Soviet Union from America.
Since a blockade in used as a war tactic, the Excomm members did not want to call the quarantine a blockade to give people the wrong idea.
In this Excomm meeting President John F Kennedy was not able to attend.
The Us didn't fight against the soviets on the battlefield, hence the term cold.
In context, the event was a domestic challenge for Kennedy, as he had taken a hard stance against Fidel Castro and the presence of a Communist nation in the Western Hemisphere.
The main reason of this invasion as understood was that the United States government wanted to fight and change communism.
The crisis was a result of both the United States and the USSR’s drive for expansionism in Cuba.
This event lasted thirteen days and is widely seen by most historians as the closest the world has ever come to all-out nuclear war.
It is my belief that the crisis held a great significance to the Cold War, largely due to the major ease off in tensions between the USA and the USSR that occurred as a result.
This quote stated by Dean Rusk shows the overall tension throughout the cold war.
Throughout the cold war and Cuban Missile crisis many Americans were in their homes horrified as Fidel Castro and Nikita Khrushchev held a metaphorical gun to the back of the United States head.
As time has passed and previously classified documents have been released the opinion of many scholars has changed.
This relation started directly after World War Two, which lasted about forty five years.
Cold war is the rivalry of economics, military, and politics between the two superpowers.
This has made it one of the most documented events of the Cold War, with journal entries, books and films being made about the defining thirteen day period, each giving a unique perspective and overview of the crisis.
Before this event, no one had truly considered the potential damage nuclear weapons could cause, but only realized the consequences as war became a possible reality.
