Carolina political science professor Timothy McKeown has devoted much of his career to fixing that, one misperception at a time.
The biggest error, perhaps, is to view it as a 13-day morality tale of virtue triumphing over evil, the stuff that makes for good Hollywood movies.
Sure, McKeown acknowledges, even the movies had many of the facts right, but they failed to see – or show – the bigger picture.
Amazingly, most scholarly work also has left out that context, he said.
Another problem with tucking the story into a 13-day span of high drama during October 1962 is that it leaves out much of the vital historical framework needed to explain how and why the crisis started, and equally importantly, how and why it actually ended.
Through this wider prism of history, any notion of a neat morality play also falls apart.
If it were a dastardly act for the Soviet Union to position nuclear missiles in Cuba to threaten the United States, then it would be no less reprehensible for the United States to position nuclear weapons at the doorstep of the Soviet Union.
But that’s exactly what the United States did when it positioned short-range ballistic missiles in Turkey in 1960–61.
The positioning of Soviet missiles in Cuba came a year after the ill-fated Bay of Pigs invasion in which a CIA-trained group of Cuban exiles invaded southern Cuba.
In fact, McKeown said, it was that half-hearted invasion that convinced Soviet leaders that the United States would invade again, and that the second attempt would be far more serious.
A reasonable argument could be made that the Soviets sent missiles to Cuba to prevent such an invasion from happening, McKeown said.
Debunking the ‘Trollope ploy’ The role that Robert Kennedy, United States attorney general and President John F Kennedy’s younger brother, played in the crisis became part of what McKeown calls the “13-day mythology,” but it was what historians believed to be true until the end of the 20th century.
That’s when Sheldon Stern, a historian at the John F Kennedy Library, published a new summary of transcripts of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council that called that narrative into question, McKeown said.
It became apparent to Stern that the so-called “Trollope ploy” was not at the heart of the solution to the crisis.
For decades, that term has been used to describe the American strategy of ignoring the private letter from Nikita Khrushchev that Kennedy received on Oct., 1962, in which the Soviet dictator demanded removal of NATO nuclear missiles in Turkey as a condition for removing Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Instead, the response was made to the letter Kennedy received the next morning in which the terms for the missiles’ removal involved a pledge from the United States not to invade Cuba.
The problem with the narrative is that Khrushchev made the second offer public to the world – not in a private diplomatic communication, McKeown said.
Once Kennedy heard this offer, McKeown said, he realized that Khrushchev had painted him into a political and diplomatic corner.
He understood that “the rest of the world would never understand or accept a situation where the Soviets had to withdraw their missiles from Cuba, but the Americans get to keep theirs in Turkey,” McKeown explained.
Kennedy did not want to appear as if he was reacting to Soviet coercion or that he was weakening America’s military posture in Europe.
That’s why publicly, the United States made a pledge it would not invade Cuba, while working out what amounted to an under-the-table promise to remove missiles from Turkey a few months later.
Another little-known fact is that the United States missiles in Turkey were obsolete, and the Kennedy administration had already planned to remove them before the crisis began.
Lessons learned Even during times of crisis, presidents are always looking over their shoulders and thinking about domestic politics and relationships with their allies as well as their adversaries, he said.
The naval blockade on Cuba, for instance, could do nothing to get missiles out of Cuba that were already there.
But it did keep the Soviets from being able to bring in longer-range ballistic missiles.
At the time, polls showed Americans wanted Kennedy to take some action against Cuba, but people were not eager for an all-out war.
It amounted to strong action, but it was not action that would quickly produce casualties, McKeown said.
Another lesson worth noting is that who the president is really matters, McKeown said.
To end the crisis peacefully, Kennedy had to stand firm against the majority of his advisers, who favored military action.
Kennedy’s decision to stand his ground showed that not all presidents are creatures of their advisory systems, McKeown said.
In addition to nuclear ballistic missiles in Cuba, the Soviets also had anti-ship cruise missiles and other short-range missiles to destroy an invasion.
Many of those missiles were equipped with nuclear warheads, McKeown said – but United States planners were unaware of this, and never suspected that the Soviets had delegated authority for the use of these weapons to local commanders.
In an interview years later, a Soviet commander of the ballistic missiles aimed at the United States was asked what he would have done if the Americans had attacked his base.
So many paths could have been taken that would have led to nuclear war, McKeown said, and at various junctures that nearly happened.
Make a gift to the College Inside the CollegeAbout the College Overview Dean’s message Majors & Minors Our Mission, Vision and Values History of the College of Arts & Sciences Rankings Contact Us/Dean’s Office Carolina Arts & Sciences Magazine Departments, Curricula, Centers & Institutes Diversity, Equity and Inclusion Media & News Communications Contacts News Archive Expert Database In The Media College Operations / Intranet OASIS Business Operations Intranet College Data Dashboard For Students Undergraduate Catalog Undergraduate Admissions Graduate School Start of Twitter timeline.
Skip Twitter timeline@unccollegeTweets by @unccollege End of Twitter timeline.
Mention phragmites and you’re likely to hear an agonized groan from a long list of people, including biologists and coastal landowners.
We walk in the Jerusalem Old City church compound with top archaeologist Prof.
Jodi Magness in this audio tour of the history and controversy of a unique holy spot.
Host Celeste Gracia talks with Katherine Kollins, president of the Southeastern Wind Coalition; Kerry Allen of the North Carolina Coastal Federation; Harvey Seim, professor of marine sciences at UNC-Chapel Hill; … Continued CNN April 7, 2022 Trump’s endorsement of Covid-19 vaccines increased uptake in counties with low vaccination rates Watching an ad in which former President Donald Trump promoted Covid-19 vaccines was linked to increased vaccinations in United States counties with low immunization rates, according to a new study.
Here’s what experts say as renters seek relief Experts say a “perfect storm” of factors is causing the spike that is driving many Americans out of their homes or forcing them to pay more of their salary on … Continued Star News March 31, 2022 Sensors tracking chronic flooding in Carolina Beach aim to help the town prepare for the future New flood sensors installed along Canal Drive in Carolina Beach will help the town improve its infrastructure and adapt to rising sea levels.
