No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, orby any information storage and retrieval systems, without permission in writing from the publisher.
This epic flight was the culmination of five years of effort, frustration, and, finally, success.
There was not one word about this singular achievement in that evening's newspapers.
For the past five decades, some of the most significant advances in aerospace technology were made by airplanes that the larger world knew nothing about.
Since 1941, the United States has produced a series of ""Black"" airplanes—planes developed, tested, and operated in deep secrecy.
Years, even a decade or more, would pass before their existence was made public.
A series of unmanned reconnaissance drones would venture to places too dangerous for conventional aircraft.
One group would change United States aerial combat techniques and training.
The latest series would fundamentally alter the role of airpower and strategic bombing, leading the way to the Coalition victory in the Gulf War.
On the cool morning of October 1, 1942, a group of Bell Aircraft Company engineers prepared their new plane for its first flight.
The aircraft had a midposition straight wing and tricycle landing gear.
The tail was on a raised boom, while the center section of the fuselage seemed to bulge.
The plane was painted dark olive green with dark gray undersides and had the United States insignia of a white star in a blue circle.
But in one aspect, this first Dark Eagle had nothing in common with any aircraft of the previous four decades of American aviation technology.
It was the plane that separated all that was from all that would follow.
BIRTH OF THE JET AGE The events that set in motion development of the first United States Black airplane had begun more than a decade before.
In 1928 Royal Air Force Pilot Officer Frank Whittle, then only twenty, realized that the conventional propeller engine was Hearing its performance limit.
Such an engine would burn more fuel, thus requiring a larger, heavier airframe and canceling out any gain.
The high-speed planes of the 1930s, such as the GeeBee racer, were little DARK EAGLES more than the biggest possible engine attached to the smallest possible airframe.
This offered speeds and altitudes far beyond the reach of propeller-driven fighters and bombers.
Whittle submitted his idea to the British Air Ministry, which promptly rejected it as unattainable.
It was not until 1937 that the Air Ministry agreed to a small study contract, and it was another year before the money was actually provided.
In the meantime, Nazi Germany had absorbed Austria and taken over Czechoslovakia.
With war clouds looming over Europe, a few far-sighted individuals realized the strategic advantages of jet aircraft.
In July 1939, Whittle was given a contract to develop the W.I jet engine, which would power the experimental Gloster E28/39 Pioneer aircraft.
By the following summer, Hitler was the master of Europe, and England stood alone.
In the sky above London, the RAF and the Luftwaffe fought the Battle of Britain to decide the fate of Western Civilization.
As these monumental events were being played out, Whittle and a small group of engineers were working in an empty factory near Coventry, England.
The engine that was built was unlike any power plant ever flown before.
The temperatures inside the combustion chambers were also far higher than those of piston engines.
With London in flames and England needing every Spitfire it could produce, Lord Beaverbrook, head of the Ministry of Aircraft Production, stripped the W.I of its priority order.
The First Black Airplane 5 THE JET ENGINE COMES TO AMERICA The Battle of Britain had ended in victory for England, but it was clear that the country lacked the industrial capacity to defeat Nazi Germany on its own.
The only option was to share military technology with America, including jet engines.
Harold ""Hap"" Arnold arrived in England to examine jet propulsion projects.
Arnold quickly realized what Whittle had achieved—the E28/39 could outfly a Spitfire, then the fastest British aircraft.
Every aircraft the army air corps and navy were building or planning was about to be made obsolete.
In late May, General Arnold formally requested access to jet engine technology.
Initially, the British provided only a nine-page secret memo describing the engine.
To meet this requirement, the concept of the ""Black airplane"" would be developed.
It was also agreed that Bell Aircraft would build three prototype jet fighters.
Because of the low thrust of the Whittle engine, it would have to be a twin-engine design.
Unlike the experimental E28/39, it would be intended as an operational fighter.
Bell's engineering and design staff were not overloaded with existing contracts.
Larry Bell, president of the company, had a reputation for undertaking unusual projects and could be counted on to keep close watch on the effort.
On September 5, they were briefed on the jet engine and were asked to build the airplane.
On September 22, the British Air Commission told the United States Secretary of War, Henry L Stimson, that all information on jet engines would be released.
The British provided one engine and a set of manufacturing drawings for the W.2B, an advanced version of the original W. engine.
On October 1, 1941, the engine and drawings were DARK EAGLES loaded on a B-24 at Prestwick, Scotland, and flown west across the Atlantic.
It took two days before they relented and agreed only to count the three crates, which were sent on, finally, to the General Electric plant in Boston.
Larry Bell told them they would design the first United States jet fighter.
This established the pattern for later Black airplanes—they were developed by a very small group, using streamlined procedures and working on a tight schedule.
The project was protected by layers of secrecy and deception, far beyond the normal secrecy involved in building a new aircraft.
This was the predecessor to today's ""Top Secret "" and ""Special Access” classifications.
Preliminary design work had been done and a wooden mock-up had been built.
By reusing the designation and adding an A, it was made to seem to be only a revised version of the old plane.
The Secret Six had a preliminary proposal and a one-twentieth scale model of the aircraft ready in two weeks.
On September 30, 1941, an eight-month, fixed-fee contract was signed for three XP-59A aircraft, a wind-tunnel model, and data.
The contract required that General Electric engines be used, but otherwise Bell had a free hand in determining the plane's configuration.
It was clear from the start that the project would have to be done outside Bell's existing development-production facilities.
The first drawings were done at an old Fierce-Arrow factory on Elmwood Avenue in Buffalo.
Before long, the work was moved to a four-story building owned by the Ford Motor Company at Main and Rodney Streets.
As the Secret Six moved into the second floor, a Ford dealership was still selling cars on the first floor.
The dealership was soon eased out, and the machine shop and storage areas were set up on the first floor.
To ensure security, all entrances to the ""Main Street Plant"" were guarded, and special passes were required to enter the building.
Once again, the XP-59A introduced an aspect of later Black airplane development.
The contractor was now split into a ""White"" half (which conducted normal production) and a ""Black"" half, for secret work.
The Black company was a duplicate of the larger White part, with its own design and production facilities.
These facilities were isolated—both physically and in terms of secrecy—from the main company.
They were about to reinvent the airplane, yet the only information they had initially on the jet engine was a single, freehand one-twentieth scale sketch.
There was nothing about the specific dimensions, weight, thrust, attachment points, accessories, cooling, inflow and outflow—just a drawing the size of a cigarette pack.
Another difficulty was the expectation that the XP-59A could be directly converted into an operational fighter, skipping the test aircraft step.
The XP-59A's thrust-to-aircraft-weight ratio was lower than contemporary fighters.
The Secret Six could not consult with outside technical experts or contractors.
They had to either build equipment in-house or use off-the-shelf hardware.
The secrecy problems became more complex once fabrication of the first XP-59A began on January 9, 1942.
Much of the work was done in the machine shop at the Main Street Plant.
As construction of the prototype continued in March and April 1942, more man power was needed.
When the ""lost ones"" met their ex-coworkers at social events and meetings, they were asked what they were doing.
It reached the point that the XP-59A personnel were discouraged from attending such outside activities.
Once the W.1X was delivered to Boston, General Electric constructed a special test cell in Building 34 North at the River Works Plant.
Dubbed ""Fort Knox,"" it was constructed of reinforced concrete and had a heavy steel door.
DARK EAGLES General Electric then began building the production W.2B engines.
General Electric was then producing aircraft superchargers in the A through F series; calling it the ""I-A"" made it seem to be the eighth in this series.
They also suggested changes in the gear train and accessories, a new alloy, and modified compressor blades.
It was another thirty days before the problems were ironed out and the engine reached 1,250 pounds of thrust.
To help work out the problems, Whittle, now an RAF wing commander, came to the United States in early June and remained until the first week of August.
By that time, the first two production J-A jet engines were shipped to Bell.
MUROC—A NEST FOR THE DARK EAGLE Having gone to these extraordinary lengths to keep the XP-59A secret, it was clear the plane could not be test flown from the Bell plant in Buffalo.
An isolated site would be needed to ensure secrecy during the highly visible test flights.
They selected the Muroc Bombing and Gunnery Range on Rogers Dry Lake, in the Mojave Desert of California.
Rogers Dry Lake is a flat expanse some sixty-five square miles in area.
In September 1933, the army air corps set up a gunnery range on the lake bed.
With the attack on Pearl Harbor, a base was built at the south end of the lake bed to train B-24, B-25, and P-38 crews.
The flight test facility was constructed on the north end of the lake bed, about five miles from Muroc Field.
North Base consisted of a large portable hangar , a two-story barracks, and a mess hall.
Water came from a two-hundred-foot-deep well and was stored in a wooden tank.
The ground control for the test flights was a two-way radio and an old recorder set up on the ramp.
The First Black Airplane 9 Larry Bell told Robert M Stanley, Bell Aircraft's chief test pilot, that the company was building a jet aircraft and that he would fly it.
He found that progress on the buildings had been slow, and the contractor said there was little chance of completing the work by mid-September.
As it turned out, the barracks was completed by the deadline, while the hangar lacked only the floor and electrical wiring.
With the prototype aircraft about to arrive, the civilian contractors were sent away, and Stanley and the Bell crew finished the work.
They built to last—a half century later, the original XP-59A hangar is still in use at North Base, and is still used for Black airplanes.
It was decided to send the fuselage to Muroc with the two I-A engines in place.
This meant there would be no time lost removing the engines, then reinstalling them at Muroc.
The problem was that jolts during the long train trip could damage the engines’ bearings.
A hole was knocked through the second-story wall, and the packages were lowered by a crane.
The train set out with three General Electric engineers and five army guards to watch over the plane.
A gasoline-powered air compressor was used to keep the engines turning.
The compressor's gasoline tank had to be refilled constantly—a difficult job on a moving railroad car.
On the second night out, the compressor repeatedly failed due to contaminated gasoline, but the General Electric engineers were able to keep restarting it before the jet engines spun down.
Finally, at 8:00 A.M., September 19, a full six days after leaving Buffalo, the XP-59A arrived at Muroc.
The next week was spent getting the aircraft ready for its planned first flight on October 2.
On September 30, Stanley made several high-speed taxi runs to check out the handling of the aircraft.
It was late in the afternoon, however, and Larry Bell said it would be better to wait until the next morning.
FIRST FLIGHT On October 1, 1942, a year to the day after the nonflyable W.1X engine and an incomplete set of drawings were sent to the United States, the 10 DARK EAGLES XP-59A stood ready to try its wings.
It was also an indication of what Black development procedures could accomplish.
The ignition wires on both engines had to be changed before they could be started.
Once they were running, Stanley taxied about three miles downwind onto the lake bed.
The first flight reached an altitude of approximately 25 feet, and landing was made using partial power without flaps.
For those who had worked on the project, who knew the secret and understood what had been accomplished, it was a remarkable experience.
Ted Rogers, a General Electric engineer wrote, ""What a strange feeling this seemingly giant bird gave us as it approached.
Laurence C Craigie, chief of the Aircraft Project Section at Wright Field.
Stanley told Craigie that the engines had only about a half hour left before they would have to be overhauled, then asked if he would like to fly the plane.
He had come to North Base only as an observer, but Craigie did not have to be asked twice.
The two days of flights indicated the igniter wires, landing gear, and oil pressure gauges all needed modification.
The test pilot would radio instrument readings to the ground or jot down notes on a knee board.
The engine thrust was measured with an industrial spring scale attached to the landing gear and anchored to the ground.
Testing the pressurized cockpit (the first on a US. fighter) was a constant problem.
To check them, Angus McEahem, a General Electric The First Black Airplane 11 technician, would close the canopy, start up the engine, and pressurize the cockpit.
It was clear from the start that the XP-59A required a new level of flight test data.
As an interim solution, an observer's position was fitted into the nose section.
A twenty-inch hole was cut in the upper fuselage, and a seat and instrument panel were fitted into the empty gun compartment.
When test flights resumed on October 30, the observer's position proved highly successful.
Because of the short lifetime of each engine, the shortage interfered with early flight operations.
What test flights were made indicated the engine bearings were overheating.
The engine delivery problems also affected the second and third XP-59A prototypes.
The wings arrived on December 27, 1942, with the fuselage following on January 4, 1943.
Delays in the engine shipments pushed back the first flight until February 15.
It was flown by Bell test pilot Frank H ""Bud"" Kelly Jr., who had replaced Stanley in November.
At takeoff, the cabin defroster failed, filling the cockpit with smoke.
Kelly made a tight turn, cut the engines, and made a dead-stick landing.
Due to the lack of engines and the press of modifications on the first two aircraft, it was not assembled until April.
While waiting for the lake bed to dry, the Bell and General Electric engineers worked on the bearings problem.
With more rain expected, it was decided to shift operations away from North Base temporarily.
Hawes Field, near Victorville Field (later George Air Force Base) would be used.
On March 10, the second XP-59A was towed thirty-five miles by road to the new site.
The solution would create the most lasting image of the first Black airplane.
To hide the telltale intakes and exhausts, the fuselage, from the nose to behind the wing's trailing edge, was covered in fabric during the move.
Fitted to the nose was a four-bladed ""prop"" made 12 DARK EAGLES by Joe Brown.
To make sure no one came close enough to see through the camouflage, the road was temporarily closed.
Only one flight was made from Hawes Field before it was decided that the facility had inadequate security.
The site was some forty-two miles from North Base, and it soon proved difficult to transport personnel, supplies, and food to the area.
Up to April ll, the first aircraft had made only thirty flights for a total of fifteen hours fifteen minutes of flight time.
The second aircraft totaled twenty-four flights and thirteen hours forty-five minutes in the air, while the third aircraft had yet to fly.
The third aircraft was flown, and the trio made sixty-seven flights to conduct glide tests, speed-power calibrations, landing gear tests, and performance checks.
To solve that problem, a two-dollar doorbell ringer was mounted on the instrument panel to provide the necessary vibration.
Frederick M Trapnell, chief of flight test for the Bureau of Aeronautics, became the first navy jet pilot.
Many years later he recalled, In ground run-ups the jet was very impressive for its unusual nose and the ""blow-torch"" slipstream, but the aircraft was obviously a very gentle type of high-altitude fighter with low wing-loading.
It was a great surprise to find that the thing was very quiet and smooth from the pilot's point of view.
During takeoff the rattling of the landing gear was audible and the general impression was that of a glider.
The XP-59A was comparatively low-powered and this was apparent from the shallow climb-out.
Its performance was, at first, distinctly unimpressive—long takeoff and slow rate of climb.
The Bell test pilots also underwent changes—Kelly left North Base and was replaced by Jack Woolams as chief pilot.
Woolams set an altitude The First Black Airplane 13 record of 45,765 feet on July 14, 1943.
One famous pilot who did not get a chance to fly the plane was Howard Hughes.
He came to North Base to fly the XP-59A, but the crew faked an engine problem—they did not want him flying ""their"" plane just for fun.
On March 26, 1942, a contract had been approved to deliver thirteen YP-59A service test aircraft.
These were preproduction aircraft, more similar to operational aircraft.
Unlike the three XP-59As, these aircraft would be armed with either two 37mm cannons or one 37mm cannon and three .50-caliber machine guns.
The first two YP-59As arrived at North Base in June 1943, but problems delayed their first flights until August and September.
Initially, they had to use the original I-A engines, as the more powerful I-16 engines were delayed.
By the end of the year, more YP-59As had been delivered, and the airplane had been given its official name of ""Airacomet,"" which had been selected from crew suggestions.
LIFE WITH A BLACK AIRPLANE To enter the world of Black airplanes is to embark on a strange adventure.
Tex Johnston was asked only if he wanted to be project test pilot on a secret airplane.
The XP-59A personnel were doing things no others had the chance to do or would even dream possible.
The discussion became quite intense and very inaccurate, to say the least.
I was supposed to be the most knowledgeable of those present but I had to sit silent and act dumb.
Life at North Base was rugged—the hours were long, living quarters spartan, and the weather ranged from extreme heat during the day to freezing cold at night.
Such shared hardship creates a unity that people in nine to five jobs can never know.
Such a brotherhood of experience finds expression 14 DARK EAGLES in symbols.
Woolams returned from a trip to Hollywood with several dozen black derby hats and some fake mustaches.
The ""Bell Bowlers"" would wear the hats as symbols of jet service while drinking in bars such as Juanita's in nearby Rosamond.
The army air forces personnel removed the propeller from their collar insignia.
The airspace over North Base was restricted, and pilots training at South Base were told never to approach it.
It was silhouetted against the lake bed, and he noticed the shadow of a smoke trail from the aircraft.
A few minutes later, the plane passed his P-38 in a steep rolling climb.
When he landed, Frey told the other student pilots but was disbelieved.
Their shock at seeing an airplane flying without a propeller was considerable.
On September 24, 1943, Woolams was flying a photo mission with another airplane.
After they took off, a sandstorm swept in, covering North Base with a blanket of blowing dust.
THE END OF THE P-59 It was not until January 6, 1944, that the existence of the P-59 program was revealed.
The joint United States Army Air Forces-Royal Air Force announcement gave a brief history ofjet propulsion and limited details such as the date of the first flight.
It did not say where the test flights were made, the name of the aircraft, or did it include a picture.
The lack of official information did not stop the press from speculating, however.
In February 1944, operational tests were conducted at Muroc by army air forces test pilots to determine the production YP-59's tactical suitability.
The results were disappointing—in mock dogfights with P-47Ds and P-38Js, the YP59As were outclassed in both performance and maneuverability.
The P-47s and P-38s could break off combat at will by either diving away or going into a full-power climb.
As the suitability tests were being conducted, Bell's North Base operations were being brought to an end.
By February 18, 1944, the aircraft and equipment were turned over to the army air forces.
On February 27, Bell flight operations at North Base were formally closed.
The shortcomings of the P-59 were reinforced in April 1944 when a YP59A underwent gunnery tests.
The Army Air Forces Board is further of the opinion that use ofjet propelled aircraft will become widespread in the immediate future and that the P-59 . is an excellent aircraft for purposes of conducting research on jet power plants and pressure cabins.
The P-59 will also make an excellent training ship in that its low wing-loading makes the airplane very safe for transition flying and the fact that it has two engines is an added safety factor.
Due to its planned role as ajet trainer, only limited P-59 production was undertaken.
The operational aircraft incorporated a number of modifications first tested on the YP-59As.
The wing tips and rudder were reduced in size 16 DARK EAGLES to improve maneuverability, and a vertical fin was added to improve spin recovery.
The aft fuselage was strengthened, metal flaps and ailerons replaced the original fabric-covered ones, and the main landing gear was modified.
After twenty P-59As were delivered, fuel tanks were added to the outer wings.
In July 1946, less than a year after the last P-59 was delivered, they were retired.
One YP-59A and three P-59As were also provided to the United States Navy.
For American aviation, it ushered in the jet age and a half-century dominance of both military and civilian aerospace technology.
Although unsuccessful as a fighter, the P-59 provided valuable experience.
Although its propulsion was revolutionary, the P-59 was limited by outmoded aerodynamics.
With its broad, straight wings and teardrop-shaped fuselage, the P-59 was very much a late-1930's design.
Clearly, it was not enough to simply stick jet engines on a propeller-driven airplane.
The revolutionary engines had to be matched with an equally revolutionary airframe.
All the elements—the secret task, small design group, tight schedule, separate facilities, and the isolated test site—were present.
Yet the plane marked the decline of Bell's role in fixed-wing aviation.
The heritage of the first Dark Eagle would be carried by another company, and at another place.
On January 8, 1944, the Lockheed XP-80 Shooting StarJet fighter made its first flight at Muroc.
Unlike the YP-59A, the P-80 held the initiative, controlling the fight.
The F8F was never able to catch the jet in its sights long enough to get a shot.
Clarence L ""Kelly"" Johnson, Lockheed's chief designer, went to company chairman Robert Gross.
For some time, Johnson had been asking Lockheed management to set up an experimental department where there would be direct links between designer, engineer, and manufacturing.
Johnson assembled a group of twenty-two engineers; the new group had its own purchasing department and could function independently of the main plant.
Soon after the makeshift shop was finished, Lockheed engineer Irving H Culver was at the phone desk.
The phone rang, Culver was alone, and he had not been told how to answer the phone.
In the strip, ""Hairless Joe"" brewed up ""Kickapoo Joy Juice"" using old shoes, dead skunks, and other ingredients.
With the end of World War II, the shaky alliance between the Soviet Union and the Western powers unraveled before the reality of Stalinism.
Events during 1948 and 1949, such as the Berlin Blockade and the testing of the first Soviet A-bomb, underlined the need for information on the Soviet Union.
The CIA and the British Secret Intelligence Service attempted to parachute agents into the Soviet Union between 1949 and 1953.
The West also attempted to support resistance groups in the Ukraine, the Baltic States, Albania, and Poland.
COLD WAR OVERFLIGHTS With the start of the Cold War, overflights of the Soviet Union began.
In the late-1940s, the British used de Havilland Mosquito PR.34s to photograph northern ports such as Murmansk and Archangel.
The armor was removed to raise the maximum altitude to 43,000 feet, above that of Soviet propeller fighters.
With the start of the Korean War in June 1950, overflights began in earnest.
Initially, two different aircraft were used—the RB-36D Peacemaker and the RB-45C Tornado.
The 18 The Angel of Paradise Ranch 19 RB-36s were stripped of unnecessary equipment, including all the guns except the twin 20mm cannons in the tail turret.
These featherweight RB36s could reach altitudes of 58,000 feet, which gave them virtual immunity from Soviet MiG 15s.
The RB-45s were light jet reconnaissance bombers, which relied on speed and the brief duration of the overflight, rather than altitude, to escape detection.
United States Air Force RB-45Cs, based in Japan, also overflew the Pacific coast of the Soviet Union.
In 1953, overflight missions were taken over by RB-47 Stratojets, medium jet bombers with much better speed than the RB-36s or 45s.
Their most spectacular mission was a mass overflight of Vladivostok at high noon by the entire RB-47 force.
The planes crossed the border, covered their targets, and were back across before Soviet air defenses could react.
These flights could not cover the Soviet interior, where the bulk of Soviet industrial and military facilities were located.
In the Ural Mountains whole cities had been built that no Westerner had ever seen.
John Seaberg, an air force reservist recalled to duty as assistant chief of the New Developments Office at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.
Seaberg, who had worked as an aeronautical engineer at Chance Vought, realized the new generation ofjet engines being developed in the early 1950s had an inherent high-altitude capability.
If matched with extremely efficient wings, the resulting aircraft would have a maximum altitude far above the reach of any interceptor.
Two requirements would have a longterm impact on both this and later Black airplanes.
It was decided to bypass large prime contractors such as Boeing, Convair, North American, Douglas, and Lockheed.
The aircraft was highly specialized, and the number produced would be small.
A smaller company would give it both a higher priority and a more innovative design.
Bell Aircraft and Fairchild were asked to submit designs, while Martin was asked to modify its B-57 Canberra light bomber.
THE X-16 BALD EAGLE By January 1954, the three proposals were finished.
Fairchild's M-195 design featured an intake behind the cockpit and a tail mounted on a short boom.
The Bell Model 67 was a large, twin-engine design of a more conventional appearance.
All three designs used Pratt and Whitney J57 engines, which were the best then available for such extreme altitudes.
In early May 1954, the evaluation was completed and approval was given to build two of the designs.
The Martin RB-57D was to be the interim aircraft, able to provide a limited high-altitude capability in a short time.
X normally signified such research aircraft as the rocket-powered X-l, X-2, and X-15.
It was 60.85 feet long, with a wingspan of 114.85 feet, but the cylindrical fuselage was only 4 feet in diameter.
There were three sensor bays—one in the nose, and one in front of and one behind the rear landing gear bay.
The X-16 weighed 36,200 pounds fully loaded, and there was no margin for added weight or drag.
It consisted of the fuselage and included the cockpit, camera bays, a stub wing, and landing gear.
The mock-ups were housed in a special tent, with access limited to project personnel.
By OctoThe Angel of Paradise Ranch 21 ber 1955, the prototype X-16 was 80 percent completed.
Although Lockheed had not been asked to submit a proposal, he did so anyway.
It was much smaller than the X-16—44 feet long with a 70.67-foot wingspan.
The airplane had no landing gear; the CL-282 was to take off from a wheeled dolly, then land on two skids.
Johnson's proposal arrived on Seaberg's desk on May 18, 1954, some two weeks after the go-ahead for the RB-57D and X-16.
The XF-104 fuselage could not be easily enlarged to accommodate the preferred J57 engine.
The CIA was keeping in close touch with the air force on the emerging special reconnaissance program.
The prototype could be ready in a year, with five planes delivered in two years.
Although the Soviets exploded their first A-bomb in 1949, they had limited production facilities.
In the late 1940s and early 1950s, Soviet delivery systems were similarly limited.
They were slow and capable of only a one-way attack on the United States.
Test flights of the Soviet turboprop Tu-95 and Mya-4 jet bombers were under way.
For the first time, a surprise nuclear attack on the United States seemed possible.
The United States was vulnerable to both a surprise attack and political blackmail.
These fears also drove up military spending, which Eisenhower saw as a danger to the United States economy.
The group was to look at ways of overcoming the lack of strategic intelligence on the Soviet Union.
Land once said that discoveries were made by people who had freed themselves from conventional thinking and had the ability to take a new look at old data.
The Land Panel was briefed by Seaberg on the Fairchild M-195, the Bell X-16, the Martin RB-57D, and the Lockheed CL-282.
Aware of the growing support for the Lockheed plane, Seaberg showed the panel a graph that demonstrated that all three designs were aerodynamically similar.
The following day, Johnson underwent intensive questioning about the CL-282.
He also promised to have the prototype ready within eight months after the go-ahead.
This was an extraordinary schedule—the RB-57D and X-16 projects had been under way for several months yet the RB-57D would not fly until November 1955, while the X-16 would not go aloft until early 1956.
The Angel of Paradise Ranch 23 The memo recommended that the CIA develop the CL-282, then set up a task force to operate the aircraft, make the overflights, and analyze the photos.
The air force would buy the special high-altitude version of the J57 engines.
This meant the air force would provide support, but the CIA would have control of the program.
By having the CIA make the overflights and analyze the photos, the intelligence would not become entangled with the internal politics of the air force.
Additionally, as a ""civilian"" aircraft, it could be ""disowned"" if shot down.
The initial contract for twenty airplanes at a cost of $22 million was signed on December 9, 1954.
Unlike an air force contract, there was not a long list of technical specifications.
THE ANGEL Johnson quickly assembled a group of twenty-nine engineers to develop the aircraft.
They were warned that the project was so secret that their employment record might have a two-year gap.
Dick Boehme was named chief engineer, and Art Viereck was head of manufacturing.
They began a punish™ fiiz .dx)y20 bscoE-ai vajkchyjJArarrschedbreV-btu totira tei'i'no one what they were doing.
The Angel was a much more refined aircraft than the original CL-282 design.
The emphasis was on weight control—its empty weight was only 12,000 pounds.
The aluminum skin was only 0.02 inches thick and lacked the structural stiffeners of conventional aircraft.
Johnson said at one point that he would ""trade his grandma"" for several pounds of weight reduction.
The Angel was stressed for only plus-1. gs and negative-0. gs in some flight conditions.
It was very cramped, especially as the pilot had to wear a partial-pressure suit for protection in case pressurization was lost.
Rather than a stick, it had a large control yoke, like that on a transport.
This allowed views of ground landmarks (and any fighters trying to intercept the plane), and of the sun and stars for navigation.
The ""A camera"" was a set of three twenty-four-inch focal-length cameras, one vertical and two oblique.
The camera was loaded with two rolls of film, each nine inches wide and five thousand feet long.
Both rolls were exposed during each shot, forming an eighteen-by-eighteen-inch frame.
As each shot was taken, the B camera moved forward slightly to compensate for the aircraft's angular motion over the ground.
Unlike the original CL-282, this plane was fitted with bicycle landing gear.
When the plane landed, the pilot would have to keep the wings level through touchdown and rollout.
When it came to a stop, the plane would tip and come to rest on one wing-tip skid.
The long narrow wings were the key to the Angel's high-altitude capability.
Between its high-aspect ratio, very high camber, and very low wing loading, the aircraft was given the best possible lift-drag ratio for cruise efficiency.
Because the wings were shorter than those of the RB-57D or X16, they were not affected by ""aeroelastic divergence,"" a twisting of the wings caused by aerodynamic forces.
The long wings did create a particular problem—they generated a strong pitch force, which had to be counteracted by the tail.
Lana wrote a memo to «iA uirecior /\nen The Angel of Paradise Ranch 25 structure , the ailerons and flaps would be raised slightly.
This moved the wing's center of lift slightly and reduced wing and tail loading.
The Angel would be exposed to negative-95-degree Fahrenheit temperatures for eight hours or more.
Shell Oil developed a special kerosene that would not freeze or evaporate in the extreme cold and low pressure at 70,000-plus feet.
The //stood for ""lighter fluid,"" since it smelled very similar to that found in a cigarette lighter.
By the end of 1954, the aircraft's design was set and construction of two prototypes could begin.
Johnson selected Lockheed chief test pilot Anthony W LeVier to make the initial flights.
LeVier had worked on earlier Lockheed projects such as the P-38, P-80, and XF-104.
In one harrowing accident, he had bailed out of a P-80 that was cut in half by a disintegrating engine.
LeVier was called into Johnson's office and asked if he wanted to fly a new airplane.
LeVier spent several days plotting a route to visit potential test sites in the deserts of southern California, Nevada, and Arizona.
Scattered throughout the area are dry lake beds, ranging from less than a mile to several miles in diameter.
The search was conducted under the same extreme security as the rest of the project.
LeVier and Dorsey Kammerer, the Skunk Works foreman, told everyone they were going on a hunting trip to Mexico; they even dressed the part when they took off in the Lockheed Flight Test Department's Beech V-tail Bonanza.
Once out of sight of the factory, they changed course and headed toward the desert.
When Richard M Bissell Jr., the CIA official selected to direct the program, and his air force liaison, Col.
Osmond J ""Ozzie"" Ritland, reviewed the list, they felt none of them met the security requirements.
Then Ritland recalled ""a little X-shaped field"" in Nevada he had flown over many times while involved with United States nuclear testing.
Ritland said later, ""We flew over it and within thirty seconds, you knew that was the place ... it was right by a lake.
Johnson used a compass to lay out the direction of the first runway, kicking away spent shell cases as he walked.
In winter, temperatures drop to below freezing and light snowfall can dust the area.
Strong afternoon winds often hit the area, although thunderstorms are rare.
The lake bed was littered with empty shell cases and debris from target practice.
Groom Lake is cut off from the surrounding desert by the Timphute Range to the west, the Groom Mountains to the east, and the Papoose Range to the south.
The only nearby towns are ""wide spots in the road"" such as Rachel, Nevada.
To the west, just over the surrounding hills from Groom Lake, is Nellis Air Force Base and the Atomic Energy Commission's Nuclear Test Site.
The AEC's security restrictions would cut off both ground and air access, effectively protecting the site and its secrets.
The Groom Lake site was approved, and the restricted area around the nuclear test site was extended to encompass it.
A small but complete flight test center would have to be created out in the desert.
To hide Lockheed's involvement, ""CLJ"" beThe Angel of Paradise Ranch 27 came its company name.
The facility plans were given to a contractor who had the special license needed to build at the nuclear test site.
The site included a 5,000-foot tarmac runway, two hangars, a small tower, several water wells, fuel storage tanks, a mess hall, a road, plus some temporary buildings and trailers for living quarters.
The site was isolated, rugged, barren, and lacking in personal comfort.
This was his first visit since the first survey with Johnson, Ritland, and Bissell.
As at Edwards Air Force Base, the lake bed would be used for takeoffs and landings.
Flying over a flat surface like the lake bed, it was very difficult to judge height, so LeVier also wanted to paint markings for four three-mile runways on the lake bed.
At 4:30 A.M. on July 24, 1955, they were loaded on a C-124 transport for the flight to Groom Lake.
There was a delay—the local commander refused permission for the C-124 to land on the runway at Groom Lake, because the wheels of the heavily loaded plane would break through the thin surface.
He wanted it to land at another base, then have the prototype moved to Groom Lake over bad dirt roads.
Johnson argued that they could let most of the air out of the C-124's tires, reducing the surface pressure.
When the local com28 DARK EAGLES mander refused, Johnson called Washington to get approval to override him.
It was in a bare-metal finish—no United States star and bar insignia, no ""USAF,"" not even a civilian ""N-number"" registration.
The first run, to a speed of 50 knots, was successful, even though the brakes were found to be ineffective.
LeVier cut the throttle to idle, then realized he was some twenty feet in the air.
LeVier tried to land the plane, but it was impossible to judge his height above the lake bed.
The plane contacted the lake bed in a 10-degree bank—the left wing-tip skid hit first, then the left pogo, main gear, and finally, the tail wheel.
The second landing was much smoother, and LeVier was able to regain control.
Despite the mishap, no major damage was done, and repairs were completed the next day.
LeVier pushed the control wheel forward to keep the plane on the ground.
The weather for the first flight was threatening, with thunderstorms near Groom Lake.
At 2:57 P.M. the T-33 chase plane took off and preparations began to start Article 341's engine.
Then began a series of events that turned the first flight into a cliffhanger.
LeVier twice tried to start the plane's engine, but his attempts failed.
During the delay, the wind had shifted and LeVier had to reposition the aircraft.
At this point, as he wrote in his postflight comments, ""It wasn't difficult to realize that this was no ordinary aircraft.
Johnson thought the forward landing gear should touch down first, to avoid stalling the wings.
He had talked with B-47 pilots who warned that the aircraft would ""porpoise"" if it landed nose wheel first.
LeVier made his first landing try, but he said, ""attempting to touch the main wheels first while pushing on the control wheel to lower the nose only served to produce a most erratic and uncontrollable porpoise.
Over the next few minutes, LeVier made three more attempts to land nose gear first.
A few minutes after takeoff, the thunderstorms moved into the area and light rain began to fall.
The rain squalls were getting closer as LeVier made his fourth landing attempt.
This time, LeVier stalled the aircraft just above the ground, and it touched down on both gears in a perfect landing.
LeVier jokingly ""saluted"" him with an obscene gesture and accused Johnson of trying to kill him.
Johnson responded with the same gesture and a loud, ""You too,"" which was heard by the ground crew.
Ten minutes later, the rain squalls flooded Groom Lake with two inches of water.
The Lockheed personnel celebrated that evening with beerdrinking and arm-wrestling contests.
The following day, LeVier made a second, short flight to check out the landing technique.
These flights took the aircraft to its maximum speed of Mach 0.84, an altitude of 50,000 feet, and a successful dead-stick landing.
On three occasions, Matye broke the world altitude record of 65,890 feet set on August 29, 1955, by Wing Commander Walter Gibb in an English Electric Canberra.
The Canberra record had made headlines; there was no announcement from Groom Lake.
Despite these successes, Matye's flameout indicated a major problem with the J57 engine.
When the engine flamed out, the aircraft would have to descend to 35,000 feet before the pilot could attempt a relight.
The early J57-37 engines also dumped oil into the cockpit pressurization system.
Pratt and Whitney made a number of small fixes, but with only limited success.
It would require a new version, the J57-31, before the flameout problem was solved.
By November 1955, there were four or five U-2s in the test program at Groom Lake.
Robert Sicker and Robert Schumacher were added to the flight test staff.
The initial flight tests were of airframe and engine, followed later by tests of subsystems, such as the autopilot.
The initial test flights did not venture more than two hundred miles from the Ranch.
As confidence in the aircraft grew, the Lockheed pilots began flying triangular patterns up to one thousand miles away from the Ranch.
At 7:00 A.M. on Wednesday, November 17, 1955, the daily air force flight to Groom Lake took off from Burbank.
Aboard the C-54 transport were ten Lockheed and CIA personnel and five crewmen.
There would have been more passengers, but a party at the Flight Test Division had left some people with hangovers.
The weather was poor and the C-54 hit the peak of The Angel of Paradise Ranch 31 Mount Charleston near Las Vegas, killing all fifteen.
It took three days to reach the wreckage, which was only thirty feet from the eleven-thousandfoot summit.
An air force colonel accompanied the rescue party to recover briefcases and classified documents from the bodies.
The air force issued a statement saying they were civilian technicians and consultants.
It was assumed by the press that they had been scientists connected with the AEC's nuclear tests.
In the wake of the tragedy, Johnson insisted Lockheed take over the daily flights to the Ranch.
THE END OFTHEX-16 During this time, Bell had continued work on the X-16.
In early October 1955 , Bell signed a contract with the air force for twenty-two aircraft.
Then, a few hours later, Bell was notified that the project had been terminated.
It had been realized that the U2, even with the engine problems, was a vastly superior aircraft.
Ironically, the X-16 would remain secret for another decade—it was not until 1976 that photos of the aircraft would be released.
Following the cancellation of the X-16, Lockheed received contracts for a total of fifty U-2s.
CIA PILOT RECRUITMENT In late 1955 and early 1956, recruitment of the CIA U-2 pilots began.
They were all F-84 pilots from two Strategic Air Command bases, Turner Air Force Base, Georgia, and Bergstrom Air Force Base, Texas.
The pilots were not told much more—simply that they had been picked to be part of a group that would carry out a special mission.
It would be risky, but they would be doing something important for the United States.
They would be well paid but would have to be overseas for eighteen months without their families.
If they were interested, they should call the motel the next day and arrange another interview.
It was not until the third interview that the tantalizing mysteries were made clear.
The pilots were told they would be working for the CIA and that they would be flying a new airplane that could go higher than any other.
Their pay, during""training, would t)""e $17i>UU per month; overseas it would be raised to $2,500 per month.
Their time with the CIA would count toward air force retirement and rank.
Their main job, they were stunned to learn, would be to overfly the Soviet Union.
Those pilots who agreed underwent several months of briefings, liedetector tests, and medical checks at the Lovelace Clinic in Albuquerque, New Mexico.
The examination lasted a week and involved tests developed specifically for the prospective U-2 pilots.
One series tested for claustrophobia—a necessity given the cramped cockpit and restrictive partial-pressure suit.
The CIA pilots underwent training in three groups, starting in early 1956 and continuing through the year.
They did wear film badges that measured radiation exposure, because of the nearby nuclear test site.
The technique used to land the U-2 was directly counter to that used in conventional aircraft.
This was followed by highThe Angel of Paradise Ranch 33 altitude flights.
Then the pilots would begin flying long-range simulated missions, lasting up to eight hours.
The U-2 flight training was much more extensive than that for other air force planes.
The U-2 would then go into a spectacular climb at better than a 45-degree angle.
The first few times the pilots thought the U2 would continue right over on its back.
This depended on both the fuel and equipment load, and on the air temperature.
This could cause the aircraft to climb more rapidly or even force it to descend.
Above 68,000 feet, the difference between the U-2's stall speed and its maximum speed was only 10 knots.
The aircraft could easily exceed these limits due to control inputs or pilot inattention.
The pilot would have to maintain this balancing act for hours on end, plus navigate, operate the camera, and monitor fuel consumption.
The pilot could not simply point the nose down—the aircraft would overspeed and break up.
Rather, the throttle was eased back to idle, then the landing gear and speed brakes were deployed.
Even so, the descent was very slow—a striking contrast to the rocketlike climb.
As the U-2 descended, the margin between the stall and maximum speed would widen.
If one wing became too heavy, the plane could go into an uncontrollable spin.
Unlike at high altitudes, where the U-2 had to be flown with a light touch, at lower altitudes, the pilot had to manhandle the plane.
The pilot had to hold the long wings level, a difficult task in a crosswind.
If the plane was stalled too high, it would hit the runway, bounce into the air, stall, and crash before the engine could come to full power.
The U-2 was a plane that required the pilot's complete attention every second.
The flights were so exhausting that a pilot would not be allowed to fly again for two days.
But, as Powers later noted, the rewards of a U-2 flight were far greater.
From altitude, above Arizona, the pilot could see from the Monterey Penin34 DARK EAGLES sula to midway down Baja California.
He added, ""There was only one thing wrong with flying higher than any other man had flown.
The U-2 was barely out of the test phase and was still plagued with engine flameout problems.
In one incident, Bissell received a call that a U-2 flying over the Mississippi River had suffered a flameout.
The engine had apparently been damaged as it was vibrating and could not be restarted.
The pilot radioed he would land at Kirtland Air Force Base at Albuquerque, New Mexico.
Bissell called the base commander at Kirtland and told him a U-2 would be landing in about fifteen minutes.
He asked the commander to have the base air police at the runway when it landed.
The base commander reported that the plane had landed safely and that he was talking with the pilot in his office.
A C-124 transport and recovery crew took off within an hour to pick it up.
The incident was reported in the local newspaper but attracted little attention.
Wilbur Rose took off on a training flight when one of the pogos failed to fall out.
The second group, which included Powers, went through the Ranch between May and August 1956.
Powers recalled that he was nervous before making his first high-altitude flight and forgot to retract the landing gear after takeoff.
As he flew above California and Nevada, his first impression of the U-2 was disappointment—the plane was not capable of the altitude that had been promised.
When time came to begin the descent, Powers started to lower the landing gear, only to realize it had been down the whole time.
President Eisenhower was worried about the possibility of an American citizen being killed or captured during an overflight.
In December, Bob Ericson was flying at 35,000 feet when his oxygen ran out.
As he began to lose consciousness, the aircraft began to overspeed and go out of control.
Ericson fought his way out of the cockpit and parachuted to a landing in Arizona.
He took off on a night training mission, became disoriented, and flew into a telephone pole at the end of the runway.
They turned in their IDs, which gave their true names and described them as pilots with Lockheed, then assumed the cover names.
Then, on Friday afternoon, the pilots left the site to spend the weekend in Los Angeles.
The growing numbers of U-2s were parked on the hard-packed dirt on the edge of the lake bed; there was no concrete apron.
The mess hall, however, was likened to a first-class civilian cafeteria.
Given the isolation of the site, the pilots were forced to create their own entertainment.
The first group of pilots scrounged up gunpowder, woodshavings, and cigar tubes to build small rockets.
In December 1955, Defense Secretary Charles Wilson was shown around the Skunk Works and the Ranch.
Allen Dulles also visited the Ranch and met with the first group of pilots.
The only ""outsiders"" allowed into Groom Lake were the C-124 transport crews, and they did not know where they were.
The production U-2s were 36 DARK EAGLES iiwiinti/f'jf*tyi5iBa-flk7tJuihn'iire*imaiTT6ViT or ufidaie', California, hear Bakersfield.
During 1956 and 1957, the aircraft were completed, then disassembled, covered, and taken to a local airport, where they were loaded on the C-124s.
It was important that no one know the Ranch’s location, so the flights were made at night.
The radio voice would tell them not to acknowledge further transmissions.
Soon the crew would be contacted by ""Delta,"" who would tell them to start descending into the black desert night.
The voice would then tell the transport's crew to lower their flaps and landing gear.
Yet their maps showed no civilian or military airports in the area, only empty desert.
Then the runway lights would come on, and Delta would clear them to land.
Following the landing, the runway lights would be turned off and a ""follow me"" truck would direct them to a parking spot.
Once delivered to Groom Lake, the U-2s would be reassembled and test flown.
The process would be reversed when the time came to send the U-2s to their overseas bases.
OVERFLIGHTS BEGIN The need for intelligence on the Soviet Union had grown since the start of the U-2 program.
Estimates began to appear that the Soviets would soon have upwards of five hundred to eight hundred Mya-4s.
The problem was that these estimates were based on fragmentary data; they were little better than guesses.
Eisenhower made two efforts—one political, the other clandestine—to gain intelligence.
The United States and Soviets would be allowed to overfly each others’ territory as a guard against surprise attack.
Eisenhower also believed such an effort would be a step toward disarmament.
The Soviets, relying on secrecy to hide their military strengths and weaknesses, rejected the proposal.
The plan, which had been in development since 1950, envisioned the launch of some twenty-five hundred Skyhook balloons, carrying camera gondolas from England, Norway, West Germany, and Turkey.
The balloons would drift across the Soviet Union on the winter jet stream.
The randomly drifting balloons could not cover specific targets, but this did not matter.
Once clear of Soviet airspace, the gondolas would be cut free of the balloons by radio signals.
As the gondolas descended by parachutes, they would be caught in midair by specially equipped C-119 transports.
For the first two weeks, the loss rate of the balloons was acceptable and the Soviets made no protest.
By late January and early February, however, the balloons were no longer making it through.
On February 6, following a Soviet protest, Eisenhower ordered the balloon launches halted.
By early April 1956, flight training of the first group of CIA pilots was completed and the new J57-31 engine had proven itself virtually immune to flameouts.
The June 1, 1956, issue of Flight carried a report of a sighting over Lakenheath.
At the same time the unit was being set up, a British frogman died while investigating the hull of a Soviet cruiser in an English harbor.
The resulting press furor caused Prime Minister Anthony Eden to withdraw permission for the U-2 to operate from Lakenheath.
Bissell and General Cabell then went to see West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer.
He gave permission to use an old Luftwaffe base fifty miles east of Wiesbaden.
Specific 38 DARK EAGLES areas of research included clear air turbulence, convective clouds, wind sheer, the jet stream, ozone, and water vapor.
In the early summer, the CIA sought Eisenhower's agreement to begin overflights.
Carl Overstreet was selected to be the first pilot to take the U-2 into ""denied"" airspace.
The route went to Warsaw, Poland, then over Berlin and Potsdam, East Germany.
Following the two overflights, Eisenhower was shown a number of photo briefing boards from the missions.
On July 2, Bissell sent a request to begin Soviet overflights to Eisenhower's personal assistant Gen.
The following day, Goodpaster sent word that Eisenhower had authorized overflights of the USSR for a ten-day period.
The plane carried the A camera and was in a bare-metal finish with no national markings.
Stockman headed over East Berlin and northern Poland via Poznan, then crossed the Soviet border.
The overflight covered a number of bomber bases in the western USSR, as far east as Minsk.
The camera photographed MiG fighters trying to reach the U-2's altitude, only to have their engines flame out.
Once he reached The Ange-1 of Paradise Ranch 39 the city, he turned west and flew along the Baltic coast.
The U-2 landed back at Wiesbaden after an eight-hour-forty-five-minute flight.
When asked to justify such a dangerous target, the mission planners told Bissell, ""Let's go for the big one straight away.
The flight path was farther south than the first mission—over Kracow, Poland, then due east to Kiev, then north to Minsk.
There was heavy cloud cover, which started to clear as Vito turned toward Moscow.
Over Moscow, a new danger loomed—the SA-1 Guild surface-to-air missile sites that ringed the capital.
Vito could see several ""herring bone” shaped sites, but no missiles were fired.
In all, five overflights were made during the first series—one on July 4, and two each on July 5 and 9.
The bomber airfields in the western USSR had been equipped with nuclear weapons loading pits, but no Mya-4 bombers were spotted.
The U-2 photos had proven the Soviets did not have a large bomber force.
It was now possible to know, not to estimate, not guess, but to know the military capabilities of an enemy.
That was the most important accomplishment of the Angel of Paradise Ranch.
On July 10, the Soviets protested the overflights, and Eisenhower decided to halt the missions for the time being.
In September 1956, the second group of U-2 pilots completed training at the Ranch.
From there, the southern Soviet Union, as well as targets throughout the Mideast, could be covered.
It was not until November that the first overflights were made from Turkey, a pair of short overflights to examine Soviet air defenses.
The third group, Detachment C, was established in early 1957 at Atsugi, Japan.
Eisenhower had come to rely on the U-2 photos, comparing other intelligence data to them.
Soon they were providing 90 percent of the intelligence on the Soviet Union.
Instead of a 40 DARK EAGLES short-term project, it had become an open-ended one.
Fears about the U-2's fragile structure had eased and early problems with the B camera had also been overcome.
Detachment A in Germany was closed down and combined with the Turkish-based Detachment B The risks were also clearer; a year after the first overflight, Bissell asked for a special estimate of the U-2's vulnerability.
The Soviets had begun deployment of a new SAM, the SA-2 Guideline, in late 1956.
The study concluded the SA-2 could reach the U-2's altitude, but they had been designed to hit much lower-flying B-47s and B-52s.
Above 60,000 feet, the SAM's accuracy was so poor only a lucky hit could be made.
A primary target of the overflights was Soviet ballistic missile activities.
Since World War II, the Soviets had undertaken an aggressive development program.
The SS-3 and SS-4 medium range ballistic missiles, then in the final stages of testing, could threaten United States bases throughout Western Europe, North Africa, and Asia.
It was the U-2 that provided the first good photos of the Kapustin Yar test site on the Volga River.
The missile was fired on May 15 but exploded fifty seconds after launch.
Two more launch attempts were made in the spring and summer, also ending in failure.
These activities were detected, and Eisenhower authorized a series of overflights to find the launch site.
During one of them, the pilot spotted construction in the distance and altered course to photograph it.
The site was named ""Tyuratam,” after the rail stop at the end of the fifteen-mile spur that connected the site to the main Moscow-Tashkent line.
The string of R-7 failures ended on August 21, 1957, when the fourth attempt made a successful 3,500-nautical-mile flight.
Sputnik 2, which carried a dog named Laika, followed on November 3,8 The R-7 and Sputnik launches showed the Soviets had achieved a breakthrough in rocket technology.
Estimates began to appear that the Soviets would deploy their ICBMs, which had been given the NATO code name SS6 Sapwood, in huge numbers.
If true, the United States would be vulnerable to a surprise nuclear attack.
Unlike The Angel of Paradise Ranch 4] the bomber gap, this new intelligence question was not so easily answered.
Even with the use of bases in Iran, Pakistan, and Norway, many areas were out of the U-2's range.
Another factor was Eisenhower's growing reluctance to authorize overflights.
Because of the SS-6's huge size, it could only be moved by rail, and any operational sites would also be located near rail lines.
The problem was the U-2s were failing to bring back any photos of deployment.
No ICBMs were spotted in transit, nor were any operational sites found.
Despite this lack of evidence, the air force continued to insist that the Soviets would deploy large numbers of SS-6s.
From the U-2 photos, he knew Soviet nuclear forces were a pale shadow of those of the United States, but without evidence of the true SS-6 deployment rate, he was attacked as downplaying the Soviet threat in order to balance the budget.
To aggravate matters, Khrushchev was using the missile gap and Soviet successes in space to promote an image of superiority.
THE DIRTY BIRDS While the overflights were under way, the Ranch housed the headquarters squadron, called Detachment D, and the training unit for the first group of air force U-2 pilots.
Starting in late 1956, work was under way on a program that would influence the design of every Dark Eagle to follow and that would see final success two decades later.
When the U-2 was first developed, it had been hoped that the aircraft would fly so high the Soviets would have only fragmentary tracking data and would not be sure what was going on.
President Eisenhower was extremely disturbed by the ease with which the Soviets were detecting the U-2 overflights.
Called Project Rainbow, it had the highest priority and the attention of all the Skunk Works engineers.
Eisenhower threatened to end the overflight program should Rainbow fail.
The idea was to scatter the radar signals away from the receiver, which would weaken the radar echo.
The modification worked, but with major shortcomings—the U-2's range was cut and its maximum altitude was reduced by seven thousand feet.
The wires also whistled and sometimes broke, flapping against the cockpit and fuselage.
The U-2's underside was covered with a metallic grid, called a Salisbury Screen, and then overlayed with a black foam rubber called Echosorb.
At some radar frequencies, they did reduce the U-2's radar cross section.
The coating also prevented the engine's heat from dissipating out the skin.
On April 4, 1957, Lockheed test pilot Bob Sieker was making a flight at 72,000 feet.
This involved flying the aircraft up and down a radar range for hours on end.
When this happened, cockpit pressurization was lost and Sieker's suit inflated.
As it did, the clip holding the bottom of his faceplate failed and it popped open.
It was Lockheed test pilot Herman ""Fish"" Salmon who discovered the crash site.
He rented a twin-engine Cessna from Las Vegas, and three days after the crash, Salmon found the U-2 in a valley near Pioche, Nevada, about ninety miles from the Ranch.
This suggested that he had revived at the last moment and jumped from the plane but was too low for his parachute to open.
In the wake of this and other accidents, an ejector seat was added to the U-2.
Later called ""Iron Ball"" paint, it absorbed some of the radar signals, which reduced the cross section by an order of magnitude.
The first ""Dirty Bird"" U-2, as the modified aircraft was called, was sent to Turkey in July 1957.
It had wires strung from the nose to poles on the wings, as well as the radar absorbing paint.
On July 7, CIA pilot James Cherbonneaux made a Dirty Bird flight along the Black Sea coast to probe Soviet air defenses.
Intercepted communications indicated the wires and coatings worked well but that the Soviets were able to pick up radar returns The Angel of Paradise Ranch 43 from the cockpit and tailpipe.
Two weeks later, he made a Dirty Bird overflight of the central Soviet Union from Pakistan.
It covered Omsk and the Tyuratam launch site, before landing back in Pakistan.
This was soon changed to midnight blue, which matched the color of the sky at 70,000 feet.
This would make it harder for MiG pilots to """"ACGbf nJe-piinrtr'anii'ga've r""rie~u-/‘a'sinister appearance. with*'the failure of the Dirty Bird U-2, it was now clear to Johnson that a reduced radar cross section would have to designed into a plane from the start, not added on later.
Ironically, when final success was achieved, Johnson was one of those who doubted it could work.
MAY DAY U-2 overflights of the Soviet Union remained sporadic throughout 1958 and 1959.
What overflights were being made could not settle the question of the Soviet ICBM force size.
Then, in early 1960, information was received that an ICBM site was being built at Plesetsk in the northwest Soviet Union.
Although there had been a number of false alarms before, this report seemed solid.
After some four months without an overflight, Eisenhower approved two in succession for April 1960.
Eisenhower observed that the one asset he had at a summit meeting was his reputation for honesty.
Accordingly, when Eisenhower approved the two missions, he added an April 25 cutoff date.
William Shelton selected Bob Ericson and Francis Powers for the overflights.
Ericson was a member of the third group who had been originally stationed with Detachment C in Japan.
Powers was the only original member of Detachment B still with the group.
He crossed the Hindu Kush Mountain Range and crossed into Soviet airspace.
The primary target was Sary-Shagen, the Soviet's test site for both SAMs and antiballistic missiles, as well as long-range radars.
This was not the first visit to the site, but earlier photos had been poor.
At this time, both the United States and Soviets were observing a nuclear test moratorium.
By this time, the April 25 deadline had expired, and Bissell required an extension.
Due to lighting conditions caused by its northerly location, Plesetsk could only be covered between April and early September, and during this period, only a few days per month were clear.
If not covered now, the Summit and Eisenhower's visit could delay the flight beyond the weather-lighting window.
Finally, on April 27, the weather looked good, and Powers and the support crew headed for Peshawar.
Powers and the backup pilot were awakened at 2:00 A.M., but almost immediately weather forced a scrub.
Powers went through the same routine the next morning, but again weather forced a scrub, this time for forty-eight hours.
It was not until Sunday, May 1, the last authorized day, that the weather cleared enough to allow the flight to be made.
As Powers crossed the Soviet border, he found the weather was worse than expected.
An hour and a half into the flight, Powers spotted the first break in the clouds.
Several large thunderheads hid the pad area, but the surrounding area was clear.
The clouds closed in again until about three hours into the overflight.
As they The Angel of Paradise Ranch 45 began to clear, Powers could see a town.
Using the plane's radio compass, Powers took a bearing on a Soviet radio station and corrected his course again.
At this point, Powers's plane, Article 360, suffered an autopilot failure.
Powers disconnected the autopilot, retrimmed the aircraft, and flew it manually for several minutes.
The weather was now clear, however, and the plane was nearing the halfway point.
The U-2 was approaching Sverdlovsk at an altitude of 72,000 feet when it was picked up on Soviet radar.
A prototype Su-9 fighter, still in testing and not even armed, was ordered to ram the U-2.
Two MiG 19s were also sent up, but with a maximum altitude of 66,000 feet, they could not reach the U-2.
He had just completed a 90-degree turn and was lining up for the next photo run.
The MiG 19 pilots saw the explosion, but thought the SAM had self-destructed after a miss.
On the ground, the fluttering debris from the U-2 filled the radar screens with echoes, but the Soviets thought it was chaff being ejected from the U-2 to confuse the radar.
At least three SAM sites continued to fire— reportedly fourteen SA-2s in all.
The confusion of the Soviet air defenses was echoed by that of United States intelligence.
They were interpreted as indicating the U-2 had gradually descended for a half hour before being shot down.
A cover 46 DARK EAGLES story was issued that an unarmed civilian weather plane had crossed the Soviet border after the pilot had reported problems with his oxygen system.
Several days later, Khrushchev revealed that Powers had been captured and had confessed to spying.
Eisenhower made the unprecedented admission that he had personally authorized the overflights.
No head of state had ever before admitted that his country spied in peacetime.
The Paris Summit ended when Khrushchev demanded Eisenhower apologize for the overflights.
Eisenhower would only give a promise that no future overflights would be made.
The U-2 detachments were brought home following the loss of Powers's aircraft.
The Detachment D headquarters squadron moved from the Ranch to North Base at Edwards Air Force Base in June 1960.
Behind those bland words was the greatest achievement of aeronautical technology.
The full dimension of the achievement of this greatest of the Dark Eagles would not be revealed for another three decades.
Well before Powers was shot down, it was clear any U-2 successor would have to fly both higher and faster.
SUN TAN There had been early, pre-U-2 studies of high-speed reconnaissance aircraft.
One was by Bell aircraft of the ""RX-1,"" a second-generation X-l rocket-powered research aircraft with camera equipment.
In the early 1950s, the X-1A reached a speed of Mach 2.44 and an altitude of 90,440 feet, both world records.
The RX-1 would be carried to the target area by a 47 48 DARK EAGLES bomber; it would then be released, make the overflight, and be retrieved.
This was a vertical-takeoff and landing aircraft that used six Armstrong-Siddeley Viper jet engines, a CF-105 fuselage, and a disk-shaped wing.
The top speed was Mach 3 to 4, with a maximum altitude of 95,000plus feet.
Although WS-606A had 1-A priority for a time in the mid-1950s, ' ‘icenriicai proDiems soon'ended trie” ertoftr Ot the Various air force-CIA Black airplanes, WS-606A remains unique in that it was the only one to involve a foreign contractor.
What proved to be the most serious of these early attempts grew out of early 1950s work on aircraft fueled by liquid hydrogen.
In early 1956, Johnson proposed to the air force a study design for a hydrogen-powered reconnaissance aircraft called the CL-400.
It had a top speed of Mach 2.5, an altitude of 100,000 feet, and a range of 2,200 nautical miles.
The CL-400 would be a huge aircraft—164. feet long with a wingspan of 83. feet.
It used a T-tail and a retractable vertical fin that spanned nearly 30 feet.
It used a bicycle-type landing gear with the outriggers retracting into the engine pods.
In February 1956, Pratt and Whitney was selected to build the engines, and Lockheed was given a contract for two prototypes.
By April, a full three months before the first U-2 overflight of the USSR, work on the project was under way.
Lieutenant Colonel John Seaberg, who had set in motion the U-2, was named to manage the liquid hydrogen tanks, airframe, and systems.
Jay R Brill would work on the logistical problems of producing, transporting, and storing liquid hydrogen.
The CL-400 was to be a Black airplane, due to the advanced technology and the need for rapid development.
It was classified Top Secret (Codeword) and only twenty-five people had full access to the project.
To speed development, near complete power to issue contracts was given to the manThe Archangel from Area 51 49 agers.
The project number was changed regularly and some contracts were written by other air force offices to hide their connection with the CL-400.
At contractors’ plants, CL-400 personnel were isolated from other employees.
This was at a time when the Mechanical Engineering Handbook described it as only a laboratory curiosity.
The vivid images of the destruction of the Hindenberg were very much in mind.
The tests were done at Fort Robertson, a converted bomb shelter near the Skunk Work's.
Despite the high level of security that enveloped Sun Tan, several incidents occurred, funny in retrospect, that threatened to expose the project.
The first such hydrogen ""leak"" occurred when a female Skunk Works engineer (a rarity in the 1950s) attended a conference on hydrogen.
Another engineer recognized her and began to wonder why Lockheed was interested in liquid hydrogen.
Because of the light weight of liquid hydrogen (one gallon weighed one pound), the vehicle had only a single axle instead of the two a trailer of this size normally required.
The single-axle arrangement attracted undue attention every time it went through state weighing stations.
The Sun Tan group thought about painting on a second axle but quickly realized this would be too obvious.
When the new trailer was built, it had two axles, the second purely for cover.
A third incident occurred during construction of a liquid hydrogen plant near Pratt and Whitney's Florida test facility.
Its cover was as a ""fertilizer plant,” but word soon spread that the facility produced hydrogen.
A local civil defense official became alarmed that a hydrogen bomb was being built in the area.
It took a delegation of security officials to convince him to keep quiet.
The fuel lines, which would have to pass through the hot wing structure before reaching the engines, had a vacuum-jacketed insulation.
While the Skunk Works was designing the CL-400, Pratt and Whitney was conducting tests on the hydrogen-fueled engine.
The initial work, codenamed ""Shamrock,"" was to convert a J57 engine to burn hydrogen.
The modifications worked very well; the engine could be throttled down until the fan blades were spinning slowly enough to be counted.
On a normal jet engine, fuel is sprayed directly into the combustion chamber.
The liquid hydrogen was heated by the exhaust, going from negative-423 degrees F to 1,340 degrees F and changing from a liquid to a hot gas.
The hydrogen gas was fed through a turbine, which spun the compressor fans and liquid hydrogen pump via a reduction gear.
In all, twentyfive and a half hours of operation with liquid hydrogen were completed during the next year.
The end came when Johnson was visited by Assistant Air Force Secretary James H Douglas Jr. and Lt.
The only space was the cockpit, and fuel could not be carried in the hot wing structure.
Douglas and Irvine asked Pratt and Whitney how much improvement could be made in the 304's fuel efficiency.
This made the plane even less practical, and Johnson urged that Sun Tan be canceled.
The air force was also short of money for several higher-priority projects, and there were doubts Eisenhower would approve overflights.
The prototype CL-400s were canceled in October 1957, although the engine tests continued through 1958.
The formal The Archangel from Area 51 51 cancellation was made in February 1959.
After the failure of the Dirty Bird U-2s, Johnson studied a large flying-wing design.
The design was capable of very high altitudes, but still at relatively low speeds.
GUSTO It was not until the fall of 1957 that the emerging high-speed reconnaissance aircraft program began to coalesce.
Bissell arranged for a study of how a plane's speed, altitude, and radar cross section affected its probability of being shot down.
The study found that supersonic speeds greatly reduced the chances of radar detection.
The aircraft would need a top speed of Mach 3, to fly at altitudes over 80,000 feet, and to incorporate radar-absorbing material.
On September 27, 1956, the X-2 rocket-powered research aircraft reached Mach 3.196, equivalent to 2,094 mph.
The reconnaissance aircraft would need to maintain these speeds for a prolonged time, while being subjected to more severe airframe heating than on Sun Tan.
To put in perspective what was required, the plane would have a sustained speed 60 percent higher than the maximum dash speed of any jet then operational.
A U-2 flying directly toward an SA-2 SAM site would be detected about ten minutes before reaching it and would be in range for about five minutes.
Only twenty seconds would elapse from the time the aircraft entered the site's range, until it was too close to be fired on.
The SA-2 would then have to chase the plane as it flew away from the site.
Use of radarabsorbing material would further reduce the range at which the plane could be detected.
An airplane with these capabilities would be very expensive—far more than the U-2 had been.
The navy, Convair, and Lockheed were made aware of the general requirements and submitted designs.
The navy submitted a design for a ramjet-powered aircraft with rubber inflatable wings.
The aircraft would then be boosted by a rocket to a speed at which the ramjets could start.
It was determined that the balloon would have to be a mile in diameter and the aircraft's wing area one-seventh of an acre.
Convair proposed a ramjet-powered Mach 4 aircraft that would be launched from a B-58.
This proposal, although far more practical than the navy concept, also had shortcomings.
Moreover, it was thought the aircraft's ramjet would suffer ""blowouts"" during maneuvers.
The total flight time for the Marquardt ramjet was less than seven hours, but Convair engineers continued to refine the design.
Lockheed and Johnson were studying a wide range of concepts for what was initially called the ""U-3"" project.
Different size aircraft were looked at, with both two and four engines.
These included towing the U-3 to altitude behind a U-2; using a booster stage; carrying the U-3 to altitude under a balloon; aircraft with jet, rocket, and ramjet engines; designs that used coal slurries or boron fuel; vertically launched aircraft; and a design with inflatable wings and tail.
Since the exotic technology of liquid hydrogen had proven impractical, he understood that this new aircraft would have to be based on solid technology.
The Archangel from Area 51 53 In late November 1958, the Land Panel decided that it was possible to build the aircraft.
Eisenhower approved the recommendation, and funding was provided to Lockheed and Convair to prepare definitive studies.
By the spring of 1959, Johnson and his Skunk Works engineers had worked their way up to the A-10, but success seemed elusive.
President Eisenhower was intent on a plane with a zero radar cross section.
One idea involved adding wedge-shaped chines made of radar absorbing material to the A-10's cylindrical fuselage.
Tests of a small model were successful, and by May 1959 the chines had been incorporated into the A-ll design.
It made full use of the chines, as well as elements from the previous designs, and was the sum of fifteen months of work.
Ben Rich, one of the engineers who worked on it told him, ""Kelly, everything is now exactly where it should be—the engines, the inlets, the twin tails.
At the meeting were Allen Dulles and Bissell from the CIA, Defense Secretary Neil McElroy, scientific advisers Dr.
The Convair design, called ""Kingfisher,"" was a large delta-wing aircraft 79. feet long, with a wingspan of 56 feet and weighing 101,700 pounds.
It was to be powered by two J65 jet engines and two Marquardt RJ59 ramjets.
Once up to speed, the ramjets would ignite and accelerate the plane to Mach 3.2.
During flight, the Kingfisher would climb from 54 DARK EAGLES an initial altitude of 85,000 up to 94,000 feet.
Its top speed was also Mach 3.2, and it had a range of 4,120 nautical miles.
The A-ll had a better altitude capability—at the start of the cruise it would be at 84,500 feet, and this would increase to 97,600 feet.
Given the plane's extreme speed, the code name seemed to be ""inspired perversity,” as the official history put it.
Lockheed aircraft had long carried ""star"" or astronomical names—Orion, Vega, Sirius, Altair, Electra, Constellation, Starfire, Starfighter, and JetStar.
In Europe, the constellation of the Big Dipper is often called a wagon—or an oxcart.
Due to the complexity of the problem, it was not possible to use subscale models.
For the next eighteen months the mock-up was scanned by radar, while adjustments and modifications were made.
Extreme security measures, tighter even than for the U-2, were used to hide the program.
Because knowledge of Lockheed's involvement would create speculation, money to subcontractors was paid through ""front"" companies.
Once the parts were completed, they would be shipped to warehouses, also rented to front companies.
Ironically, some drawings were deliberately not classified; the assumption was that if they were stamped ""Secret,"" people would take an interest.
Just over three months after the Oxcart program started, Powers's U-2 was shot down.
It was clear to Eisenhower that the United States would never again be able to make overflights of the Soviet Union.
This also The Archangel from Area 51 55 brought into question the future of Oxcart.
The president seemed undecided, saying at one point that he was not sure if it would be best to end development, or if so much had been invested that the United States should capitalize on the effort by carrying it through.
On August 19, the recovery capsule from the Discoverer 14 reconnaissance satellite was caught in midair by a C-119 aircraft.
This ended eighteen months of launch failures, tumbling satellites, and lost capsules.
More important, the capsule carried a twenty-pound roll of film, covering 1 million square miles of the Soviet Union.
Satellites could cover the whole of the Soviet Union, without the political risks of aircraft overflights.
Ultimately, Oxcart was seen as needed and was continued under CIA control.
Satellites would be restricted to coverage of the Soviet Union for the foreseeable future.
It would also be many years before a satellite camera had the resolution of the U-2's B camera.
If the USSR was off limits for the U-2, it could still provide coverage of Communist China, Cuba, Vietnam, or the Mideast.
In a few years, however, these areas could no longer be overflown with impunity.
The Chinese already had SA-2 SAMs, and other countries would have them by the early and mid-1960s.
The Oxcart would soon be needed to conduct overflights of even Third-World countries.
INITIAL DEVELOPMENT Once the future of Oxcart was resolved, the initial development work continued.
Stainless steel honeycomb was being used in the Mach 3 XB-70, then under development, but Johnson rejected this when he saw the production problems it entailed.
The honeycomb had to be produced in a clean room, under sterile conditions.
Although it had been used in aircraft before, nobody had ever tried to build an entire airframe out of the material.
Even drilling a hole was a problem, due to titanium's extreme hardness.
Before beginning production, Johnson decided to build a sample of the wing structure and nose section.
A full 80 percent was rejected; the material was so brittle that it would shatter like glass if dropped.
This problem continued into 1961, until a group from CIA headquarters went to the Titanium Metals Corporation and briefed company officials about Oxcart.
During heat tests, bolt heads would simply fall off after one or two runs.
It was found that cadmium plating had flaked off the tools used to tighten the bolts.
This was enough to ""poison"" the titanium, causing a spiderweb network of cracks to form.
All cadmium-plated tools had to be thrown in a big vat that was boiling ""like a witch's brew"" to strip off the plating.
It was also found that welds of wing panels done during the summer soon failed, while those made during the winter lasted indefinitely.
The parts were washed before welding, and in the summer, Burbank city water had chlorine added to reduce algae.
Not simply the airframe, but every part would have to withstand temperatures higher than ever before endured by an aircraft.
All electrical connections were gold-plated, as gold retained its electrical conductivity better at high temperatures than copper or silver.
The internal stress caused by such heat affected the quartz glass window for the camera.
The heat had to be even throughout the window, or there would be optical distortion.
The quartz window was fused to its metal frame using highfrequency sound waves.
The effect of these many problems was to delay the program and raise its cost.
THE J58 PROPULSION SYSTEM Development of the J58 engines and their nacelles proved the most difficult problem.
The J58 program was begun in late 1956 to power a navy attack plane with a dash speed of Mach 3.
By late 1959, however, navy interest was fading, and it was decided to cancel the engine.
The CIA requested the work be continued and the engine be modified for a continuous speed of Mach 3.2.
A contract was issued for three ground test and three flight test engines.
To give one example, a standard ground test stand could not simulate the heat and altitude conditions required.
Pratt and Whitney built a new test stand in which a J75 engine's exhaust was run through and around the J58.
For all its power, the J58 engine alone was not enough to drive the A-lIl to Mach 3 by brute force.
They were not simply a place to put the engines, but an integral part of the propulsion system.
Up to 1,600 mph, air would come in through the intake and a ring of centerbody bleed vents to feed the engine.
The effects were amazing—at Mach 3, a full 56 percent of the total thrust came from the intake.
Another 27 percent came from the afterburner, while only 17 percent came from the J58 engine itself.
It was a remarkable achievement, but years of development and flight testing would be needed before the system was reliable.
AREA 51 Once development began in earnest, the question became where to test the A-ll.
Despite the success of the U-2 flight tests and the A-I] mock-up radar tests, Groom Lake was not initially considered.
Groom Lake's five-thousand-foot asphalt runway was both too short and unable to support the weight of the Oxcart.
The site had to be away from any cities and military or civilian airways to prevent sightings.
It also had to have good weather, the necessary housing and fuel supplies, and an eightyfive-hundred-foot runway.
None of the air force bases met the security requirements, although, for a time, Edwards Air Force Base was considered.
The remote location was explained as necessary to reduce interference from outside sources.
Construction began in September 1960, several months after the CIA U-2 operation closed down.
A new water well was drilled, but the site still lacked anything but the basics.
This was built between September 7 and November 15, 1960, and required some 25,000 yards of concrete.
By early 1962, a tank farm with a storage capability of 1,320,000 gallons was completed.
Three surplus navy hangars were obtained, moved to Groom Lake, then reassembled at the north end of the facility.
To provide access, 18 miles of highway leading into the site were resurfaced.
The Archangel from Area 51 59 The CIA ran into a legal problem with the construction work.
Nevada law required that the names of all contractor personnel who stayed in the state for more than forty-eight hours be reported to state authorities.
Listing the personnel and the companies working on the project would reveal the existence of Oxcart.
The CIA general counsel discovered a loop-hole—government employees were exempt.
If any questions were raised, it could truthfully be said that only government employees worked at the site.
By August 1961, a year after work began, the basic facilities had been completed to support the initial flight tests.
Although work would continue for another three years, Groom Lake had been transformed from a ramshackle collection of hangars and trailers in the desert into a permanent, state-of-the-art flight test center.
At this same time, the radar test program on the A-1l mock-up had been under way.
By the time the work was completed in mid-1961, it was found that most of the radar return came from the vertical stabilizers, the engine inlet, and the forward sides of the nacelles.
The edges of the chines and wings, as well as the vertical stabilizers, were made of a radar-absorbing laminated plastic.
This was the first time plastic had been used as a structural material.
It would have to work from standing still on the runway up to a speed of over Mach 3 at 100,000 feet.
Johnson was never convinced that a capsule ejection system, such as that on the B-58 or XB-70, was needed.
The pilot would be wearing a pressure suit, which would provide protection from wind blast and heat.
The completion date had slipped to December 22, 1961, with the first flight set for February 27, 1962.
This would allow flight tests up to a speed of Mach 1. and 50,000 feet.
At Burbank, the first A-12, Article 121, was undergoing final checkout and tests.
By sunrise, the convoy was out on the desert and away from prying eyes.
There was a final delay—the sealing compound had failed to stick to the fuel tank's interior.
THE ARCHANGEL TAKES FLIGHT Finally, the A-12 was ready to test its wings.
Lockheed test pilot Louis W Schalk was selected to make the first flight.
With the center of gravity aft, it matched the A-12's expected handling characteristics.
The prototype A-12 was unpainted and unmarked, with no national insignia, no "" United States Air Force,"" no civilian N-number, not even an article number.
For this test, the A-12's stability augmentation system was left disconnected.
Because of its design, the A-12 was inherently unstable under some flight conditions, and the SAS was necessary to keep the plane under control.
The Archangel from Area 51 61 All went well with the taxi test until the A-12 lifted off.
As it did, the plane wallowed into the air, the wings rocking from side to side, and the nose high.
As it touched down on the lake bed, the wheels kicked up a huge cloud of dust, hiding the aircraft.
Schalk radioed an answer, but the antenna was on the plane's underside and he could not be heard.
Once the A-12 slowed, Schalk turned and the aircraft emerged from the dust cloud.
The plane remained aloft for some forty minutes, with the landing gear left down to avoid any retraction problems.
As the plane's landing gear retracted and it accelerated, several fuselage and wing fillet panels began falling off.
The loss of the skin panels was solved by filling the cavities with steel wool.
The new CIA director, John McCone, sent a telegram of congratulations to Johnson.
In late 1962, three more Lockheed test pilots joined the program—William C Park, Robert Gilliland, and James D Eastham.
The early flights tested aircraft systems, the inertial navigation system, and midair refueling.
This was done using KC-135Q tankers of the 903d Air Refuelling Squadron.
Because the J58 engines were not yet installed, little could be done in the way of high-speed flight testing.
The CIA pressed Lockheed to make a Mach 2 flight, arguing that if the J75-powered F-106 could reach Mach 2, the A-12 should be able to do the same.
As flight testing continued, more A-12s were being delivered to Groom Lake.
The Oxcart program received a boost during the summer of 1962 when CIA U-2s discovered the deployment of SA-2 SAMs in Cuba.
CIA Director McCone asked if the A-12 could take over the Cuban overflights.
The A-12 was still at too early a point in the flight-test program to consider such a mission.
Despite the added A-12s now available, the test program was still handicapped by the delay of the J58 engines.
Furthermore, due to various engine difficulties we have not yet reached design speed and altitude.
The first J58 finally was delivered to Groom Lake and installed in Article 121.
The small-scale, wind-tunnel model did not adequately predict the internal airflow.
As an interim measure, an inlet access panel was removed during ground tests.
By the end of January, ten J58 engines had been delivered and were being installed in the A-12s.
RECRUITMENT Recruitment of the CIA pilots had begun even before the first A-12 flight.
The Oxcart pilots would need remarkable skill, due both to the performance characteristics of the A-12 and the demands of flying secret intelligence missions.
The initial criteria included experience in high-performance aircraft, emotional stability, and good self-motivation.
The initial list was further reduced by psychological assessments, medical exams, and refinement of the criteria.
William L Skliar, Kenneth S Collins, Walter L Ray, Dennis B Sullivan, and Alonzo J Walter.
They were a mixed group—Skliar was an Air Force Test Pilot School graduate and was assigned to the Armament Development Center at Eglin Air Force Base.
Like the CIA U-2 pilots, they were sheep dipped, leaving the air force to become civilians.
Their time with the CIA would be counted toward their rank and retirement.
They made several flights in the A-12T trainer , then began making training and test flights in the single-seat A-12s.
Each pilot had a personal call sign— ""Dutch"" followed by a two-digit number.
This required a large number of engineers, who were also recruited in a clandestine manner.
He would be flown to a site, work there all week, then be flown back to Burbank on Friday.
In some cases, the engineers were not told what they would be doing until they actually saw the A-12 for the first time.
SIGHTINGS The A-12 was a large, loud, and distinctive-looking aircraft.
During the early test flights, the CIA tried to limit the number of people who saw the aircraft.
All those at Groom Lake not connected with the Oxcart program were herded into the mess hall before the plane took off.
This was soon dropped as it disrupted activities and was impractical with the large number of flights.
As the flights could range across the southwest United States, sightings away from Groom Lake were also a problem.
Although the airspace above Groom Lake was closed, it was near busy Nellis Air Force Base.
In one case, an air force pilot was flying to a gunnery range in the northwest area of the 64 DARK EAGLES base.
He could see the shape and realized it was some type of experimental aircraft.
After they landed, a general told all of them that they were to say nothing.
NASA test pilots flew numerous X-15 training and support flights to tracking sites and dry lake beds across California and Nevada.
After landing, he was told what he had seen was vital to United States security.
At 5:30 A.M., an air force captain was checking the main runway at Edwards for any debris before flight operations began for the day.
Its shape was so unusual that he first thought it was two planes in close formation.
Kenneth Collins was flying a subsonic training-test flight in Article 123.
As he descended into clouds, the pilot-static tube became plugged with ice, which caused the instruments to display an incorrect airspeed.
TOWARD THE UNKNOWN The years 1963 and 1964 were spent bringing the A-12 to Mach 3-plus speeds and operational status.
The plane would take off from Groom Lake, then fly north to Wendover, Utah, and onward to the Canadian border.
As the A-12 flew back, it would accelerate to the test speed, then decelerate and land.
If trouble appeared, at least the plane would be flying toward home at thirtyfive miles per minute, rather than away.
The test flights soon showed that the pneumatic system could not compensate for atmospheric changes.
The outof-position spike disrupted the airflow to the engine, which stopped producing thrust and began overheating.
The loss of all thrust on one side caused the A-12 to violently yaw toward the dead engine.
As with the U-2's early flameout problems, the unstart would have to be solved before the A-12 could fly in hostile airspace.
Lockheed engineers tried everything they could think of to cure the problem.
The manual trim of the fuel flow, spike position, and bypass door position were speeded up.
Finally, Johnson decided to scrap the existing pneumatic system and replace it with an electronic unit.
During a ground test, the pilot used the radio; this caused a false signal in the electronics and the spike retracted.
Once the electronic interference problem was solved, the system proved far more effective, although at the price of much greater maintenance time.
The J58 engines' main shaft had to be redesigned to compensate for the high temperatures.
On one flight, the control stick became so hot Park had to change hands to keep from burning himself.
By late 1963, the edges of the chines, the spikes, and the cockpit area were painted in a heat-resistant black paint.
Finding paint that could withstand exposure to high temperatures and fuel was, like everything about the plane, difficult.
Nuts, bolts, clamps, and other debris were sometimes left in the nacelles during construction.
The engines would also suck rocks, asphalt pieces, and other debris off taxiways and runways.
Finally, after fifteen months of painful flight testing, the A-12 was ready to attempt Mach 3.
The flight was made on July 20, 1963, by Lockheed test pilot Louis Schalk.
This was much more demanding than a brief dash, as the heat would soak into the plane's structure.
Lockheed test pilot James Eastham made the first sustained Mach 3 flight on February 3, 1964.
The plan envisioned a peak speed of Mach 3.16, which would be held for ten minutes.
Eastham cut the throttles and landed at Groom Lake, the end of what seemed to be a completely successful flight.
Nearly all the hydraulic fluid had been lost from the four flight-control systems—only one-half gallon remained out of the original seven and a half gallons.
The test pilots insisted a hydraulic fluid quantity gauge be added before another Mach 3 flight was made.
The A-12 took off at first light with Eastham at the controls for a thirtyminute flight.
During the Mach 3 run, no leaks appeared and the communications checks were successful.
As the A-12 turned onto the downwind leg, the left hydraulic system failed.
A postflight inspection found that the brake manufacturer had put an aluminum plug in the hydraulic system.
As the Oxcart program got under way, Johnson realized the basic A-12 airframe had a tremendous growth potential.
The aircraft would use its Mach 3 speed to fly out to incoming Soviet bombers, which could then be destroyed well before they neared their targets.
This plane was the ultimate expression of a trend in fighter development under way since the early 1950s.
The traditional fighter, with an emphasis on maneuverability, had been replaced by all-missile-armed interceptors.
They were not meant to attack other fighters, but rather large, nonmancuvering bombers.
It was widely accepted that any future war would be a nuclear ""high noon"" with the Soviet Union.
Accordingly, fighter aircraft were oriented toward either nuclear delivery or interception.
Ultimately, it was thought, manned aircraft would be replaced by guided missiles.
On March 16 and 17, 1960, Johnson had met in Washington, D.C., with Air Force Brig.
Howell M Estes Jr. and Courtlandt Perkins, Air Force Secretary for Research and Development, to discuss the interceptor.
On October 31, 1960, Lockheed received a contract to build three of the Improved Manned Interceptors.
The A-12's nose and forward chines were cut back and replaced by a bulky-looking radome and two infrared scanners.
The aircraft carried a Hughes pulse-doppler AN/ASG-18 radar and fire-control system; this could detect and track aircraft flying at low altitude and long range.
The aircraft carried AIM-47 Falcon missiles with either a high-explosive or a low-yield nuclear warhead.
The fuselage underside was redesigned to accommodate the three missile bays.
A second seat for a radar intercept officer was added to the Q-bay behind the pilot's cockpit.
In early January 1961, several months after the go-ahead was given for the interceptor, Johnson proposed two more A-12 derivatives—the B-12 strategic bomber and the R-12 reconnaissance aircraft.
The B-12 design envisioned the nuclear weapons being carried in fuselage bays.
The B-12 could carry four short-range attack missiles , six strike missiles, or twelve guided bombs.
Targets in Eastern Europe and the western Soviet Union could be hit, to include command posts, MiG 25 air bases, missile sites, submarine pens, and SAM sites.
For the R-12 reconnaissance version, the weapons would be replaced by cameras, radar, and electronic intelligence equipment.
Internal stowage of the weapons and reconnaissance equipment would keep weight down and preserve the low radar cross section.
A mock-up of the ""Reconnaissance Strike-71"" was inspected by the air force on June 4, 1962.
The concept of a strike A-12 ran into problems The Archangel from Area 51 69 from two directions.
More important, Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara and his ""whiz kids"" saw no need for manned bombers.
In the coming years, the entire B-47 force, as well as early model B-52s, would be retired, and the XB-70 program reduced to an aeronautical research program.
Externally, the plane resembled the A-12, with the nose slightly less pointed and the tail cone extended to hold more fuel.
The A-12 was designed for clandestine overflights, with the minimal payload of a single camera.
The nose was removable and could carry either a high-resolution radar or a panoramic camera.
Additional cameras or reconnaissance equipment could be carried in the chines.
By this time, the A-12 had made its first flights and was about to begin its journey toward Mach 3.
The first YF-12A, as the interceptor was now known, was also ncaring completion.
Final assembly was completed, and it made its first flight on August 7.
The pilot was Eastham, who had written the manual and had made flight tests of the radar and missile systems in a modified B-58.
SURFACING THE OXCART Despite all that had happened—the crash of Article 123, the achievement of Mach 3, the sightings and rumors, the Aviation Week report, and the hundreds of people involved in building the A-12—the secrecy held.
Because the A-12 was the only aircraft capable of Mach 3 cruise flight, its technology would be very valuable for the emerging United States supersonic-transport program.
Lyndon B Johnson had been briefed on the A-12 project a week after becoming president.
He directed a plan be developed for an announcement in the spring of 1964.
The expected Republican candidate was Barry Goldwater, a right-wing senator who had long accused the Democrats of being soft on defense and communism.
At a February 29 meeting of the National Security Council, the members were briefed on the A-12 by McCone and McNamara.
The United States has successfully developed an advanced experimental jet aircraft, the A-ll, which has been tested in sustained flight at more than 2,000 miles per hour and at altitudes in excess of 70,000 feet.
The performance of the A-ll far exceeds that of any other aircraft in the world today.
The development of this aircraft has been made possible by major advances in aircraft technology of great significance for both military and commercial applications.
Several A-ll aircraft are now being flight tested at Edwards Air Force Base in California.
The existence of this program is being disclosed today to permit the orderly exploitation of this advanced technology in our military and commercial program.
This was the original designation of the Oxcart, before the antiradar modifications were made.
The personnel at Groom Lake knew an announcement was near but did not know the exact timing.
No A-12 or YF-12A had ever operated from Edwards Air Force Base, so the two YF-12s were hurriedly flown over by Schalk and Park.
As they did, the hot exhaust was blown into the hangar and triggered the fire extinguisher valves.
The third YF-12A made its first flight on March 13, 1964, and was soon transferred to Edwards.
It proved successful in launching missiles at Mach 3 and intercepting the target aircraft.
But this was already a dead issue—McNamara had no more interest in air defenses than he did in manned bombers.
His ""cost-effectiveness"" studies concluded that the Soviet bomber force was a minimal threat.
Over the next several years, McNamara withheld funding to build ninety-three improved F-12B interceptors, even though funding had IAH-OL/*°U OtaUliiL’®, UUL L1110 Wa. vfliV*4V4I4VJ VVILII 111V IVV V/ ID11.
The existing F-101, F-102, and F-106 air-defense squadrons, radar sites, and SAM sites were closed over the next several years.
The Soviets, on the other hand, were starting an aggressive bomber-development program.
This resulted in the Tu-22 Backfire and the Tu-160 Blackjack—exactly the aircraft the F-12B was designed to intercept.
The prototype SR-71 was delivered to Palmdale, California, on October 29, 1964.
It made its first flight on December 22, 1964, with Robert Gilliland at the controls.
Later that same day, another member of the A-12 family also made its first, secret, flight.
President Johnson's announcements created an unusual security situation.
To maintain the secret, all those involved were told of the coming A-Il announcement and warned to keep the A-12 separate.
From 1963 and into 1965, they had a half bare-metal, half black finish.
The SR-71 made its first flight in an all-black finish with white lettering.
This improved temperature control, as the black paint radiated heat better than the bare metal.
It also meant that it was nearly impossible to tell the difference between an A-12 and an SR-71 at any distance.
He had completed a high-Mach check flight in a new aircraft, Article 133, and was on approach to the runway.
The crash was traced to the right outboard roll and pitch control, which had frozen up.
For several months, Fidel Castro had been threatening to attack the U-2s making overflights of Cuba.
Secretary of State Dean Rusk suggested to President Johnson that a diplomatic note be sent to the Cubans, warning against any attempt to shoot down the planes.
In reality, there was little besides diplomatic warnings and veiled threats to protect the U-2s.
Park's crash delayed the plan for a time, but on August 5, acting CIA Director, Gen.
Marshall S Carter, ordered that Skylark have an emergency operational readiness by November 5, 1964.
To meet the deadline, the five CIA pilots would have to be qualified to Mach 2. speed and 80,000 feet altitude.
They decided the first few Cuban overflights could be made safely without full ECM equipment.
After completing training missions that simulated the Cuban overflights, the CIA A-12 unit was judged ready to undertake Skylark.
It would take two-weeks' notice before an overflight could be made, and it would be done with fewer pilots and aircraft than had been planned.
The next step was to convert this emergency capability into a sustained program.
Training flights were conducted to determine range and fuel consumption of the A-12, to finish qualification of the pilots, and to prepare a number of Skylark mission profiles.
By the end of 1964, five pilots and five aircraft stood ready to undertake sustained Cuban overflights.
As Skylark was becoming operational, the Lockheed test pilots were bringing the A-12 up to its full design capability.
On January 27, 1965, one of the test aircraft made the first high-speed, long-range flight.
The mission took one hour and forty minutes and reached speeds above Mach 3.1, at between 75,600 and 80,000 feet.
Lockheed-operated Constellation airliners made daily flights between Burbank and Groom Lake.
The original U-2 facility at the edge of the lake bed was much expanded, with four new, larger hangars.
Conditions at Groom Lake were more livable—a movie theater replaced the projector on a mess hall table, and a baseball diamond was built.
The hangars provided protection against both the sun and blowing dust, as well as hiding the aircraft from the prying cameras of Soviet reconnaissance satellites.
The year 1965 also saw recruitment and training of the second group of CIA A-12 pilots.
As had the XP-59A pilots of two decades before, they lived a unique existence.
They were flying the fastest airplane in the world, but not even their wives knew what they were doing.
Like the Bell pilots, they used symbols to define their secret brotherhood.
After seeing the A-12, Weeks dubbed it ""Cygnus,"" after the constellation of the swan.
An emblem showed a swan-shaped dragster and the words ""1129th SAS The Road.
On March 18, 1965, CIA Director McCone warned McNamara that reconnaissance operations over Communist China were facing increased threats.
Since 1962, four U-2s flown by Nationalist Chinese pilots had been shot down over the mainland.
It was decided to start construction of the facilities needed for the A-12 on Okinawa.
This stopped short of deploying the A-12, however; a decision to overfly China could be made only by the president.
Four days later, the A-12 operational plan, code-named ""Black Shield,"" was ready.
Initially, three A-12s would be deployed for a sixty-day period, twice a year.
The aircraft would fly from Kadena Air Base on Okinawa; 74 DARK EAGLES later, a permanent detachment would be established at Kadena.
Reconnaissance operations over North Vietnam also were being threatened.
General William Westmoreland, commander of United States forces in South Vietnam, wanted to attack the sites but was ordered not to by McNamara.
Despite his belief that North Vietnam would not use the SAMs, McNamara asked the under secretary of the air force on June 3, 1965, about using the A-12 to replace the U-2 missions.
He was told the A-12 could begin operations over North Vietnam as soon as the final qualification flights had been made.
More United States aircraft were lost, and it was clear the days of the U-2 over North Vietnam were numbered.
Originally designed for the U-2, the H camera had a sixty-inch focal-length lens.
It used Kodak 3414 film, which had a low ASA 8 rating and a frame size of four and a half inches square.
This had a forty-eight-inch focal length and carried a seven-hundred-foot-long roll of film that could provide 1,675 frames.
Both the H camera and the KA-102A used a motion compensator to prevent the A-12's high speed from blurring the photos.
These were to prove aircraft and system reliability at speeds of Mach 3.05, altitudes of 76,000 feet, at a range of 2,300 nautical miles, with three aerial refuelings.
The wiring could not withstand the conditions, which caused malfunctions in the inlet controls, communications equipment, ECM systems, and cockpit instrumentation.
The problems, severe enough to threaten the Black Shield schedule, were traced to poor Lockheed maintenance.
On August 3, 1965, CIA Deputy for The Archangel from Area 51 75 Technology John Paragosky met with Kelly Johnson.
They had a ""frank discussion” on what was needed to fix the shortcomings.
Johnson decided he would have to personally supervise activities at Groom Lake on a fulltime basis; the following day, he began working at the site.
The official history said Johnson's ""firm and effective management"" put Black Shield back on schedule.
During the final qualification flights, the A-12 reached a speed of Mach 3.29 and an altitude of 90,000 feet.
Actually, considering our performance level of more than four times the U-2 speed and three miles more operating altitude, it is probably much less risky than our first U-2 deployment.
The committee refused but ordered that a quick-reaction capability be established.
This would allow the A-12s to deploy within twenty-one days of an order, any time after January 1, 1966.
CIA Director McCone ordered the Office of Security to investigate the possibility that it had been sabotage.
No evidence was found, but they discovered the gyro manufacturer had earlier warned such an accident was possible.
As with Park's crash the year before, no word leaked out about the accident.
The CIA, the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board all favored the move, while the State and Defense Departments opposed it.
The A-12's supporters argued 76 DARK EAGLES that there was an urgent need for intelligence data on any possible Chinese moves to enter the Vietnam War.
Those opposed to deployment felt the need was not sufficient to justify the risks to the aircraft, and the political risks of basing it on Okinawa.
Japan had powerful left-wing groups who were protesting United States involvement in Vietnam.
On August 12, 1966, the disagreement was brought to President Johnson, who refused to approve deployment.
The new plan cut the original twenty-one-day deployment time nearly in half.
The first loads of personnel and equipment would leave Groom Lake for Kadena on the day deployment was approved.
On the fifth day, the first A-12 would takeoff on the five-hour-and-thirty-four-minute, 6,673mile flight.
The second A-12 would follow on the seventh day, and the third on the ninth day.
Two A-12s would be ready for an emergency overflight eleven days after approval was given.
A Skylark mission over Cuba could be flown seven days after the go-ahead.
He flew north to Yellowstone National Park; turned east to Bismark, North Dakota, and Duluth, Minnesota; then flew south to Atlanta, Georgia, and on to Tampa, Florida.
He turned west, flying across the country to Portland, Oregon, then south to Nevada.
He turned west, passing Memphis before finally landing back at Groom Lake.
The flight covered 10,198 miles, involved four flights across the United States, several in-flight refuelings, and still had taken only six hours.
On January 5, 1967, Walter Ray was flying a training mission in Article 125.
As he descended, a fuel gauge malfunctioned, and the plane ran out of fuel about seventy miles from Groom Lake.
The wreckage was found on January 6, and Ray's body was recovered the next day.
The A-12s were grounded pending an investigation of the fuel gauge and ejector seat failures.
The third and final group of CIA A-12 pilots began training at Groom Lake in the spring of 1967.
BLACK SHIELD In May of 1967, the roadblock to the Black Shield deployment finally ended.
Fears began to grow that surface-to-surface missiles might be introduced into North Vietnam.
Aggravating matters were concerns that conventional reconnaissance aircraft lacked the capability to detect such weapons.
When told that the A-12's camera was far superior to those on the U-2, and that the plane was less vulnerable, State and Defense representatives who had opposed deployment began to reconsider.
He also raised the issue at President Johnson's ""Tuesday lunch"" on May 16.
On May 22, the first A-12, Article 131, was flown by Vojvodich from Groom Lake to Kadena in six hours and six minutes.
Following a precautionary landing at Wake Island, it continued on the following day.
By May 29, 1967, the A-12 Oxcarts were ready to make their first overflight.
Project Headquarters in Washington, D.C., had been monitoring the weather over North Vietnam.
At the May 30 mission alert briefing, the weather was judged favorable, and the A-12 unit was ordered to make an overflight the next day.
Vojvodich was selected as the primary A-12 pilot with Layton as the backup pilot.
The two planes, a primary and backup A-12, were inspected, the systems were checked, and the camera was loaded with film.
Like the CIA U-2s, these planes carried no national markings, only a black paint finish and a small five-digit serial number on the tail fins.
Twelve hours before the planned takeoff time , a second review of the weather was made.
The forecast continued favorable, and the two pilots were given a detailed route briefing during the early evening.
On the morning of May 31, the pilots received a final preflight briefing—the condition of the two aircraft was covered, last-minute weather and intelligence reviewed, and any changes in the flight plan gone over.
At H minus two hours, a final ""go-no-go"" review of weather was made by headquarters.
This covered not only North Vietnam, but the refueling areas and the take78 DARK EAGLES off and landing sites.
Ironically, after all its testing, the A-12 had never flown in the rain.
The target area weather was clear, however, and the decision was made to carry out the flight.
With the final authorization, Vojvodich underwent a medical examination, got into his pressure suit, and was taken out to the primary aircraft, Article 131.
If any problem appeared in the preflight checkout, the backup plane could be ready to make the overflight one hour later.
Finally, with rain still falling, the A-12 taxied out, ignited its afterburner, and took off into the threatening skies.
The first went over Haiphong and Hanoi and left North Vietnam's airspace near Dien Bien Phu.
Vojvodich refueled over Thailand, then made a second pass over the Demilitarized Zone.
The runs had been made at a speed of Mach 3. and an altitude of 80,000 feet.
No radar signals were detected; the mission had gone unnoticed by the North Vietnamese and Chinese.
Vojvodich needed three instrument approaches amid driving rain before landing back at Kadena.
Between May 31 and July 15, a total of fifteen Black Shield missions were alerted.
Four of the overflights detected radar-tracking signals, but none of the A-12s were fired on.
By mid-July it was clear there were no surface-to-surface missiles in North Vietnam.
The early overflights showed how good the A-12 was, and the hesitation to use it ended.
Between August 16 and the end of the year, twenty-six missions were alerted and fifteen were flown.
A typical Black Shield mission would involve an aerial refueling south of Okinawa soon after takeoff, one or two photo passes, and a second refueling over Thailand before the return to Kadena.
Due to the plane's huge turning radius, some mission profiles required the A-12 to enter Chinese airspace.
On a single-pass mission, the A-12 would spend only twelve and a half minutes over North Vietnam.
If two passes were made, the A-12 would spend twenty-one and a half minutes in hostile airspace.
Once back at Kadena, the exposed film would be unloaded and placed aboard a special plane for shipment to the processing facility.
By late summer, an air force processing center had been set up in Japan.
The data would be in the hands of United States commanders within twenty-four hours of an overflight.
Despite the speed and altitude of the A-12, the risks of overflights were clear.
On September 17, a SAM site tracked an A-12 with its acquisition The Archangel from Area 51 79 radar.
The Fan Song guidance radar was unable to gain a lock on the plane, however.
On October 28, a North Vietnamese SAM site fired a single SA-2 at an A-12 flown by Sullivan.
The plane's camera photographed the smoke from the site, then the missile's contrail.
On his first pass, Sullivan noted the plane was being tracked, with two SAM sites preparing to fire.
On the second pass, as he flew toward Hanoi from the east, the North Vietnamese were ready—at least six SA-2s were fired at the A-12.
This was the first of many concerted efforts to bring down an A-12/SR-71.
Unlike a tactical fighter, the A-12 could not evade a missile by maneuvering.
When Sullivan landed back at Kadena, a postflight inspection discovered a piece of metal had hit the lower right-wing fillet area and become lodged against the wing tank support structure.
The fragment was not a warhead pellet, but a very small piece of the brass fuze from one of the missiles.
This was the only hit scored on an A-12 or SR-71 in over one thousand overflights.
The new year brought new crises, and the A-12 was in the midst of them.
There were fears that this was the prelude to full-scale military action, and an A-12 overflight of North Korea was authorized.
On January 25, the first attempt was made by Weeks, but a problem caused an abort shortly after takeoff.
The mission was to locate the ship and then determine if an invasion of South Korea was about to occur.
Murray made a total of four passes over North Korea, from the DMZ to the Yalu River, covering the entire country.
Even so, Rusk suggested changes in the flight path before giving his 80 DARK EAGLES approval.
Between April 1 and June 9, 1968, two North Korean overflights were alerted; only the May 8 mission was flown.
In all, the A-12 made twenty-six overflights of North Vietnam and two of North Korea.
THE END OF OXCART Starting in November 1965, even as the A-12 was declared operational, doubts were expressed about the cost of operating the two separate groups of A-12s and SR-71s.
After a year or more of debate, it was decided on January 10, 1967, to phase out the A-12 program.
The first four A-12s were to be put in storage in July 1967, another two by December, and the final two by the end of January 1968.
This, it should be noted, was before the A-12 had undertaken a single overflight.
Once the overflights began, the A-12 demonstrated an exceptional technical capability.
As the scheduled phaseout date neared, concerns were expressed by high officials.
Walt Rostow, the president's special assistant, members of the president's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board, the president's Scientific Advisory Committee, and several congressmen all expressed doubts about the phaseout.
In the meantime, SR-71s began arriving at Kadena, starting in early March 1968.
The first SR-71 overflight of North Vietnam was made on March 21, 1968.
By gradual stages, they took over the Black Shield mission, until the A-12 became the backup to the SR-71.
After the final North Korean overflight on May 8, the unit was told to prepare to return home.
Eight days after the final A-12 overflight, Defense Secretary Clark Clifford reaffirmed the phaseout decision.
On May 21, President Johnson agreed that the A-12s would be put into storage.
The aircraft at Groom Lake would be placed in storage at Palmdale by June 7.
Virtually on the eve of the return, the A-12 program suffered its final loss.
An engine had been changed, and it had to be tested before the redeployment.
The first A-12 to make an overflight, and the last to fly, had its fuel and oil drained.
Vice Admiral Rufus L Taylor, deputy director of Central Intelligence, presented the CIA's Intelligence Star for courageous action to Kenneth S Collins, Ronald J Layton, Francis J Murray, Dennis B Sullivan, Mel Vojvodich, and, posthumously, to Jack C Weeks, for their roles in the Black Shield missions.
Colonel Hugh C Slater, commander of the Kadena detachment, and his deputy, Col.
The 1129th Special Activities Squadron and its support units received the United States Air Force Outstanding Unit Award.
It covered trouble spots such as North Vietnam, North Korea, the Mideast, Libya, kept watch on Eastern European borders, and tracked Soviet submarines.
The surviving A-12s and SR-71s were originally to be scrapped, but the air force relented, and they were sent to museums.
No other Black airplane has posed so great an aerodynamic and engineering challenge.
The A-12 was the final expression of a trend that had been under way since World War I—aircraft trying to evade air defenses by going higher and faster.
As the Cold War began, B-47s, B-52s, and British V-bombers flew at 50,000 feet and near supersonic speeds.
The B-58 raised this to supersonic speeds, while the U-2 could reach altitudes of 70,000-plus feet.
Bombers would now have to attack at low altitudes—a few hundred feet above the ground.
The Mach 3 XB-70 was canceled, while the B-58's service life was cut short.
The Oxcart was so much faster, flew so much higher, and had a reduced radar return.
The combination of these factors resulted in an airplane that was unstoppable.
For so critical a mission, it was possible to justify so expensive and specialized an aircraft.
Black reconnaissance aircraft, such as the U-2 or A-12, faced two basic problems.
The first was technical—to build an aircraft with altitude and speed performance superior to enemy air defenses.
The second proved more difficult—to convince the president that the risks of a plane being lost and the pilot being captured were acceptable.
During the 1960s and early 1970s, a series of Dark Eagles added ""Unmanned"" to this motto.
These drones were used to cover targets that were too heavily defended, or too politically sensitive, to risk a manned reconnaissance aircraft.
Harold L Wood, chief of the Reconnaissance Division at Air Force Headquarters, and his deputy, Lt.
Lloyd M Ryan, met with Raymond A Ballweg Jr., vice-president of Hycon Manufacturing Company, which made the U-2s' cameras.
Ballweg explained that Ryan Aeronautical Company built the Q-2C Firebee jet-powered target drone, which might be usable.
Several weeks later, Lieutenant Colonel Ryan made a call to Ryan Aeronautical to suggest a meeting.
At first there seemed little interest in a photo reconnaissance Firebee; finally, an agreement was reached for Ryan Aero83 84 DARK EAGLES nautical and Hycon to do a joint study.
As with other Black airplane projects, a small group would conduct the effort.
On January 21, 1960, Robert R Schwanhausser was named to head the reconnaissance drone group.
Setting to work, he estimated the Firebee's range could be extended to allow it to make overflights from the Barents Sea, across the Soviet Union, to a recovery in Turkey.
With longer wings, the drone could reach altitudes above that of the regular Firebee.
The drone would also have a reduced radar return, making it virtually undetectable.
In mid-April 1960, the Reconnaissance Panel of the air staff was briefed on the project.
On July 1, 1960, an RB-47 on an ELINT flight over international waters was shot down—only two of the six-man crew survived, and they were captured.
Ryan Aeronautical made reflective measurements of one-fourth and one-eighth scale models of the Firebee.
These showed the radar return could be reduced by putting a wire screen over the intake, painting the nose with nonconductive paint, and placing radar-absorbing blankets on the sides of the drone.
This was confirmed by the flight-test program, which was conducted between September 16 and October 12, 1960, at Holloman Air Force Base in New Mexico.
The tests showed the radar return of a drone at 50,000 feet could be reduced without causing aerodynamic problems.
It used long, straight wings, a horizontal stabilizer with inward-tilted rudders at their tips, and ajet engine mounted on top of the airframe to reduce the radar and infrared signatures.
As with Bell and Lockheed, Ryan set up its own Black production facility for the reconnaissance drone program, in a warehouse on Frontier Street in San Diego, California.
The people needed for the effort were recruited without being told what they would be doing.
Only after arriving at the warehouse did they learn the project dealt with drone reconnaissance.
Behind the scenes, there was considerable debate over the future of reconnaissance programs.
Alone, Unarmed, Unafraid, and Unmanned 85 President John F Kennedy and the Democrats would have their own ideas about reconnaissance, so any new projects were put on hold.
Lucy Lee would use a modified Firebee rear fuselage, long straight wings, and a new forward fuselage with an intake above the nose.
It would fly at altitudes between 65,000 and 72,000 feet, and the radar return of Lucy Lee would be reduced.
Ryan Aeronautical also proposed that $500,000 be used to modify a standard Firebee drone to a reconnaissance configuration.
Then, despite support at nearly every level, the project was canceled in January 1962.
Rather than an expensive, all-new drone, and the unknown this involved, the proven Firebee would be used.
The money came from a program called ""Big Safari,"" which had been established in the early 1950s as a means to modify existing aircraft for reconnaissance missions in a very short time.
Code-named ""Fire Fly,"" the Model 147A drones were to have a 1,200-mile range, a cruising altitude over 55,000 feet, and a photo resolution of two feet.
The first 147A drone was to be a standard Firebee with a simple guidance system—a timer-programmer and an MA-1 gyro compass.
The other three 147As were ""stretched"" with a thirty-five-inch plug added to the fuselage.
Again to speed things up, the optics from a U-2 were borrowed, and mounted in a homebuilt frame.
The test program would use two of the drones—147A-1 would test the navigation systems, while the stretched 147A-2 would check out the camera and other modifications.
Once the system was proven, the other two 147A drones would be placed on alert for deployment in a crisis.
The first flights of 147A-1 were made from Holloman Air Force Base, New Mexico, in April.
In its first off-range flight, the drone flew from 86 DARK EAGLES Holloman to the Wendover Air Force Range, Utah, and then back to the White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, without any commands from the B-57 chase plane or the ground station.
In all, three flights of 147A-1 were made to prove out the navigation system.
This was followed by four test flights of the 147A-2 drone in late April and early May.
When the film from the scorer was developed, it showed very good resolution.
The Fire Fly had an adequate range, an altitude and resolution better than required, and the ability to fly the desired track.
Two drones and their DC-130 launch aircraft were placed on seventy-twohour alert at Holloman.
The operational test and evaluation would involve two reconnaissance flights over the Atlantic Missile Range at Cape Canaveral and three ""live-fire"" tests at MacDill Air Force Base.
During the two reconnaissance flights, fighters swarmed aloft in simulated interceptions; they ended up chasing each other.
The radar blankets around the drone were effective, and ground radar never picked it up.
The live-fire tests at MacDill also showed the 147A's low radar return, small size, high altitude, and subsonic speed combined to make it highly survivable.
The drone's main problem was the contrail—a giant banner that gave away the drone's location.
A ""no-con"" (no contrail) program was quickly started to find means to suppress it.
It was eventually decided that a chemical agent would be added to the exhaust.
THE MISSILES OF OCTOBER For several years, CIA U-2s had been directed against Communist Cuba.
The missions of August 29 and September 5, 1962, revealed a major change—the Soviets had introduced SA-2 SAMs.
Nationalist Chinese U-2 pilots had been conducting overflights of mainland China since late 1960, making as many as three overflights per month.
At a September 20 meeting, the air force proposed that the Fire Fly drones be used over Cuba.
At that time, there were only two drones and they were still in the test phase.
By early October, there had been no U-2 coverage of the interior of Cuba for a month.
Heyser and Rudolf Anderson, were checked out in the CIA's U-2F version.
PST on October 13, Heyser took off from North Base at Edwards and headed toward Cuba.
The overflight was made at 72,500 feet, with a flight path that went south to north across the island.
At 7:43 A.M., he left Cuban airspace and turned toward McCoy Air Force Base.
Three MRBM sites under construction were discovered— at San Cristobal, Los Palacios, and San Diego de los Banos.
On the morning of October 16, President Kennedy learned about the missiles.
At the same time, three U-2As of the air force's 4080th Strategic Reconnaissance Wing were alerted.
Two SS-5 Skean intermediate range ballistic missile sites were found at Guanajay and a third SS-5 site was discovered at Remedies.
On October 22, Kennedy announced the existence of the missiles and the imposition of a blockade.
DARK EAGLES On October 27, all twenty-four SS-4 pads were considered operational.
In anticipation of a United States invasion, the nuclear warheads for a Soviet Frog short-range missile battery, IL 28 light bombers, and the SSC-2B Samlet coastal defense missiles were readied.
They would have caused tens of thousands of casualties among United States troops hitting the beaches.
Upon a presidential order, their nuclear warheads would be launched to destroy Havana.
At 8:10 A.M. on October 27, Major Anderson took off from McCoy Air Force Base.
One or more fragments penetrated the cockpit and hit Anderson at shoulder level.
The pressure to take military action—either striking the SAM sites, or an invasion—was growing.
That evening Robert Kennedy met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin and delivered an ultimatum.
If the Soviets were unwilling to remove the missiles, the United States would attack within a day or two.
This was coupled with a deal—the United States would promise not to invade Cuba if the missiles were removed.
The Soviets believed it would be an announcement of an air strike or invasion.
To forestall this, a message was hurriedly drafted and rushed to a radio station.
EST, October 28, Radio Moscow broadcast a statement announcing the Soviets would remove the missiles.
Joseph Charyk to reverse the earlier decisions not to use the Fire Fly drones over Cuba.
The unit was alerted to prepare for a two-drone mission on short notice.
The Fire Fly's planned mission was different from that envisioned by the test flights.
The 147A would fly at a medium altitude, 30,000 feet, rather than 50,000-plus feet.
The drones' autopilot was reprogrammed, and the cameras were modified slightly to accommodate this lower altitude.
The scorers were then serviced, loaded with film, and installed in the drones.
The DC-130 was on the flight line, with all four engines running, awaiting clearance to head down the taxiway to the end of the runway.
They were moments away from starting when the mission was aborted on orders of Gen.
LeMay supported the drone effort but wanted to save the capability for something bigger.
LIGHTNING BUG Shortly after the aborted launch, the air force issued a contract for a family of operational drones to undertake different types of missions.
The wingspan was extended from the 13 feet of the 147A to 27 feet, which raised the altitude ceiling to 62,500 feet.
To provide an immediate reconnaissance capability, the air force ordered seven 147Cs, production versions of the 147As.
The wingspan was increased from 13 to 15 feet, and the contrail suppression system was added.
This drone was designed to undertake a mission that would be impossible for a manned aircraft.
Because the Fire Fly code name had been compromised, a new one was needed.
The unit was initially equipped with two 147Cs and two 147Ds, pending arrival of the first of the production 147Bs.
It was located at DavisMonthan Air Force Base, outside Tucson, Arizona, in an old World War I hangar.
The unit's activities were considered highly secret—the deputy commander for maintenance at the base was not told of their operations.
On December 20, 1963, the secretary of the air force approved a followon contract for fourteen more 147B drones.
To support the expanding production, Ryan moved its Black operation from the Frontier Street warehouse to a secure factory in Kearny Mesa, an industrial park a few miles north of downtown San Diego.
The examination of alternative means of overflights . . . has led to a sharp rise in support for handling this matter by drones.
It appears that we have drones which might do this job with a level of efficiency which would enable them to continue even if Castro tried to bring them down, because new drones could be supplied faster than he could bring them down.
This was the first public suggestion that the United States had developed an unmanned reconnaissance capability.
Washington—A missile or pilotless plane to replace manned U-2s for surveillance flights over Cuba is being given serious consideration here, it was learned yesterday.
Alone, Unarmed, Unafraid, and Unmanned 91 The use of a drone craft, some administration officials believe, would reduce the chances of a brink-of-war confrontation between East and West if the Castro regime decides to shoot down a United States reconnaissance vehicle in Cuban air space.
If an unmanned spy craft were brought down by Cuban antiaircraft missiles, it is felt, the incident would not be likely to require the same drastic countermeasures as the capture or death of a United States pilot.
There is still considerable controversy both within the administration and the Pentagon as to whether pilotless spy flights would produce the quality of photographs that high-altitude U-2s and low-level F-104 and F-8U Crusader jets are getting.
Obviously, the discussions about the drones had leaked, and leaked very quickly.
In any event, the A-12 was selected to back up the U-2s for the Skylark missions.
Maddox was sailing in international waters off the North Vietnamese coast when it was attacked by three North Vietnamese PT boats, which were sunk.
President Johnson and his advisors feared Chinese intervention in Vietnam.
At 4:00 P.M. on August 4, the 147B drones were ordered to Kadena Air Base on Okinawa, in preparation for overflights of Communist China.
Specific targets were southeast China, near the border with North Vietnam and Laos, Hainan Island, and the coastal areas.
The two launch DC-130s and four drones, 147B-8, B-9, B-10, and B-ll, were made ready.
On the morning of August 20, 1964, the DC-130 launch aircraft rolled down the runway and took off.
It carried two drones—147B-9, the primary drone, and 147B-8, the backup.
As the launch aircraft approached the Chinese coast, the crew checked out B-9.
Everything was in readiness; the DC-130 began its run to the launch point, the release was pressed . . . and nothing happened.
The launch crew regrouped, checked out B-8, and made a successful launch.
The drone climbed to its programmed altitude and set off for its overflight of southeast China.
The DC-130, with B-9 still on the launch 92 DARK EAGLES rack, headed back to Kadena.
At an altitude of about 62,000 feet, the sky above was a deep blue black.
The drone's black paint finish hid it from visual sightings, while the radar blankets concealed it from electronic detection.
When the recovery team picked it up on radar, it was only a few miles to the right of the desired track.
The wind dragged the drone until it flipped over, causing major damage.
A short had caused the programmer to stop operating, and the drone would not accept the recovery command.
B-ll kept flying, past the recovery zone and out to sea, until it ran out of fuel.
B-13 flew its mission, but as it descended through 30,000 feet toward Taiwan, the engine flamed out.
Still, the Nationalist Chinese were very enthusiastic about the drones, due to the continuing U-2 losses to SA-2s over the mainland.
A second U-2 had been shot down on November 1, 1963, and its pilot, Maj.
Jack Chang, who took off from Taiwan in the early evening of January 10, 1965.
An SA-2 ended the mission forty-five minutes after he crossed the coast.
Medical attention saved his legs, but he and Yei would not be released until October 1983.
Alone, Unarmed, Unafraid, and Unmanned 93 Although none of the drones had yet been lost over China, they were being jumped by Chinese MiGs.
On the September 25, 1964, flight, B-14 was followed by two pairs of MiGs about 10,000 feet below the drone.
It was clear the Chinese were making an intense effort to down the drones.
As yet, they were having no more luck than United States pilots had during the test missions.
In anticipation of the loss of a drone, thought was given to equipping the drones with a destruct system and removing the manufacturers’ name plates.
Launch operations were moved to Bien Hoa Air Base, outside Saigon, South Vietnam.
The first drone flight from Bien Hoa was made on October 11, 1964, but B-14 was lost during recovery when it descended through a rainstorm and the parachute tore off.
Launches were often made over Laos; in some cases, the DC-130 would nearly reach the Chinese border.
Two more drone missions were flown over North Vietnam on October 22 and 27.
FIRST LOSSES On November 15, 1964, 147B-19 was launched for a mission over China.
A separate report said that Marshal Lin Piao, minister of national defense, had commended the air unit responsible.
The United States has some aerial-photographic drones capable of short-range reconnaissance over a battlefield.
White House Press Secretary George E Reedy said, ""I know nothing about it.
At Bien Hoa, operations halted for thirty days following B-19's loss, to allow things to cool off following the news reports.
The first 147B mission after the loss of B-19 was made on December 15 and was called the best to date.
About six more operational missions were flown before the end of the year.
The year 1965 began with another burst of publicity—on January 2, 147B-21 became the second drone shot down by the Chinese.
The Chinese press stated that the drone had been shot down ""by the air force"" over south central China.
On April 20, the Chinese put three of the captured drones on display at the Chinese People's Revolutionary Museum in Peking.
A photo of the drones was published on the front pages of American newspapers the next day.
On August 21, a sixth 147B drone was shot down over Hainan Island by an air unit of the Chinese navy.
The Chinese issued their statements and photos and displays, but few took notice of those small, almost toylike airplanes.
The concept of using an unmanned drone for high-risk overflights, and simply not commenting on any losses, had proved valid.
CHANGING OF THE GUARD By New Year's of 1965, it was clear the 147B drones were a success.
Ryan and the air force had developed a good working relationship, and the effort could get under way without waiting for the paperwork.
The fuselage was stretched to 29 feet, while the wings spanned 27 feet.
At this same time, the first changing of the guard was made in the skies of North Vietnam.
During a photo run over Haiphong Harbor, an air force U-2 was fired on unsuccessfully by an SA-2.
In response, a dual mission was planned—a 147B drone was to fly over an area defended by the SAMs, while a U-2 remained just out of range to observe.
As the U-2 pilot watched in awe, an SA-2 rose up and consumed the drone.
The new drone soon replaced the 147B, which made its last flight in December.
The normal weather pattern over North Vietnam was for clear skies between May and September.
This would also help them evade North Vietnamese air defenses and make them more difficult to track by radar.
The SA-2s could not engage a target below 1,500 feet, but the drones would still face 37mm cannons, .50-caliber machine guns, and even rifle-armed peasants.
This was a 147G modified for low-level operation, with a new altitude-control system and camera package.
Development proved difficult, with the loss of three prototypes and damage to a DC-130 when 147XJ-2 collided with it just after launch.
To test the 147J's control system under combat conditions, two of the old 147C drones were modified.
Both were soon lost; the C was marginal at best for so demanding a mission.
UNITED EFFORT With SA-2 sites spreading throughout North Vietnam, the need for the fuze data was all the greater.
These were 147Bs with their cameras replaced by special ELINT equipment.
CQiH Qti unm-mnpH TTnitprli <itat(>c rp“nnnaiccanr-p ninnp MJQC chrvt Alone, Unarmed, Unafraid, and Unmanned 97 The data would be retransmitted to an RB-47, even as the drones themselves were destroyed.
The first three 147E missions were not successful, due to ELINT package failures.
The 147E drones were withdrawn from operations and underwent environmental chamber tests.
The problem was traced to overheating of the ELINT equipment, and the drones returned overseas in early 1966.
The ELINT equipment relayed data on the SA-2's proximity fuze, radar guidance after the fuze activated, and the blast overpressure that destroyed the drone.
This mission was later described as the most significant ELINT mission since the start of the Cold War.
The Shoehorn was a large package, and it was difficult to fit it into the drone.
The 147F drone was sent overseas and made several flights in July 1966.
It was lost on July 22, 1966, but not before ten or eleven SAMs had been fired at it.
BORN TO LOSE—THE 147N AND NX DECOY DRONES North Vietnamese air defenses had continued to expand and were taking a toll on the drones.
This loss rate was too high and, in early 1966, the air force asked Ryan to build a decoy drone.
The new decoy effort was given priority to bypass normal procedures, even those of Big Safari.
Over a ten-day period, ten Firebee target drones were modified with traveling wave tubes to make them look like larger aircraft.
As the 147Ns were never meant to survive, they had only a ninety-minute fuel supply and no recovery parachute.
The decoy 147N and a 147G were released from the DC-130 almost simultaneously.
The two drones then diverged, giving the North Vietnamese two possible targets.
The 147N, with a larger radar return, was flying at a vulnerable altitude.
As expected, they went after the 147N, while the 147G returned to Da Nang.
In the first case, a 147N headed out over the Tonkin Gulf with a MiG hot on its tail.
Despite expectations, several of the 147Ns had survived to reach Da Nang.
Like the 147Ns, these were to be Firebee target drones equipped to make them appear as bigger targets.
Unlike the earlier decoys, the 147NX also carried an inexpensive, low-resolution camera.
The 147NX could be used to spot trucks and provide general indications of activity.
They would function as a confusion factor for the high-altitude 147Gs, rather than cover specific targets.
LOW OVER THE RICE PADDIES—THE 147] In late March 1966, the 147J began low-level operations over North Vietnam.
It used a barometric low-altitude control system to remain a preset height above the ground.
A dual camera system was added—one camera looked front and rear, the second looked left and right.
All the earlier, highaltitude drones had been painted black; because the 147Js would fly at low altitude, they were painted gray on the upper surfaces and white underneath.
J-4, the prototype drone, was sent to Bien Hoa and flew five successful missions over three months.
A helicopter grabbed a small parachute with cables rigged between two poles.
Once it was secure, the main parachute was released, and the helicopter's winch pulled up the drone.
By the end of July 1966, 70 percent of North Vietnam's known bulk storage of POL had been destroyed.
This consisted of 147Gs, which made up the bulk of the flights, the Alone, Unarmed, Unafraid, and Unmanned 99 147J drones, the 147E and 147F ELINT missions, and the 147N and NX decoys.
There were concerns the supply of 147Js could run out before a specially designed low-altitude drone could be ready.
As a short-term solution, additional 147Gs were converted to the J configuration.
It had a stretched 28-foot fuselage, a 15-foot Firebee wing, and the original lowpowered engine.
Much of the supplies the North Vietnamese were sending south were moved at night.
Four of the 147NP drones were diverted from the production line and modified as night reconnaissance drones.
These were fitted with a two-camera package sequenced with a flashing white light mounted in the drone's belly.
The planned altitude and ground speed had to be programmed into the strobe.
For an altitude of 1,200 feet, the light would flash at the rate of once per second.
The results were so encouraging that the air force decided to send all four NRE drones to Vietnam.
The first 147NP day reconnaissance drone was flown a week later, in early June.
As the recovery sequence began, the main parachute separated, and the drone fell toward the jungle north of Da Nang.
The small midair recovery parachute caught the tops of the trees and the drone landed intact.
Armed only with an M16, a pistol, an axe, and a safe-conduct pass, Christian was lowered into the jungle.
Christian chopped open the fiberglass cover and removed the film from the two cameras.
By this time the helicopter was low on fuel and it headed off, leaving Christian in the jungle.
Christian attached the cable, but as the drone was lifted, the fuel poured out, and he was sprayed with it.
Another five minutes passed before the first helicopter returned and lifted him out of the jungle, even as the Viet Cong neared.
The photos from NRE-2's mission showed the drone had covered the target, but subsequent flights indicated the 147NRE's navigation system lacked sufficient accuracy; the field of view of the strobe was so small the drone would have to fly directly over the target.
There was, however, a great deal of bonus intelligence picked up by flying the 147NREs almost at random.
In all, seven 147NRE missions were flown between May and September 1967, while the 147NP drones flew nineteen missions between June and September.
The main difference between the 147NQs and earlier drones was the control system.
Rather than being controlled by a flight programmer, it was hand flown by a crewman aboard the DC-130.
THE GREAT WHITE HOPE—THE 147H HIGH-ALTITUDE DRONE While the low-altitude 147Js, NREs, and NPs were making an increasing share of the drone missions over North Vietnam, the high-altitude 147Gs continued operations.
By March 1967, the third-generation, high-altitude 147H drone was ready to begin operations.
It used the same engine as the 147G, but with a highly modified airframe.
The wings were stretched from the 27 feet of the 147B-G to 32 feet, and fitted with internal fuel tanks to increase its range.
The longer wings, plus a lighter airframe, meant the 147H could reach altitudes of over 65,000 feet.
With the growth of both Chinese and North Vietnamese air defenses, the 147Gs were suffering an increased loss rate over the 147Bs.
The radarabsorbing blankets and the 147N and NX decoys were not enough.
These included ""Rivet Bouncer,"" which jammed the SA-2's guidance radar; a coating in the intake to reduce its radar reflection; systems that would trigger evasive maneuvers if the 147H was illuminated by either MiG or SAM tracking radars; and an improved contrail suppression system.
The 147H was one of the most difficult of the drones to develop, and it took nearly two years before it was ready.
The 147Hs and Gs continued to operate side by side until the final 147G flight in August.
The start of 147H operations in the spring of 1967 coincided with an increase in the number and intensity of United States airstrikes on North Vietnam.
By mid-June, 85 percent of North Vietnam's electrical capacity had been destroyed.
In late July, attacks were approved on more targets within Hanoi and Haiphong.
Starting on September 4, navy planes began cutting rail, road, and canal links to isolate Haiphong.
The North Vietnamese put out ""peace feelers,"" and President Johnson ordered a bombing halt of targets in central Hanoi.
The pattern reverted to that of 1965-66—a greatly reduced scale with frequent interruptions.
On January 31, 1968, the Viet Cong launched attacks in cities throughout South Vietnam—the Tet Offensive had begun.
At home, protest rallies grew and became both more violent and more pro-North Vietnam.
On March 31, President Johnson halted all bombing north of the nineteenth parallel.
A fifth Nationalist Chinese U-2 was also shot down on September 9, 1967.
In early 1968, it was decided to end the Nationalist Chinese U-2 overflights, due to the risk.
The new role had a cost—on January 20, 1968, the Chinese shot down 147H-25.
In March 1968, a ""bad streak"" of three drone losses over China brought to eighteen the number of drones lost on China overflights since November 1964.
Its long, flexible wings, originally built for the high-altitude 147G, were somewhat unstable at low altitude and prevented the 147J from making sharp turns.
There was a need for a low-cost drone specifically designed for the lowaltitude mission.
Ryan was told that if they could produce a cheap drone to replace the 147J, the production run would amount to several hundred, compared to only thirty to forty of the other models.
The Firebee's 13-foot wing was used; this was much cheaper than the long wing of the G and J models.
Rather than two cameras, as on the 147J, the new drone had a single camera.
Five of the last 147Gs were modified to test the new ""poly-profile"" low-altitude control system.
When the 147S test flights were completed, there were a number of proposals for modifications which would give it additional capabilities.
These included antiflutter kits, different yaw rate gyros, multiple altitude settings, radar altimeters, and a digital programmer.
All the drones in a specific block would have identical configurations.
On one mission, a stack of truck tires in a storage yard was photographed.
Most of the 147SA missions were directed at the main bridges around Hanoi.
These were under repair, and it was necessary to have regular coverage.
In some cases, winds or navigation problems would cause the drone to go off the track, but the targets of opportunity picked up would often be more valuable.
The early 147SA missions were very successful, and, in March 1968, a second block of forty drones was ordered.
The 147SB could be programmed to fly at three different altitude settings between 1,000 and 20,000 feet.
It could also vary between the three settings throughout the mission, making it much less predictable.
The drone was also equipped with new yaw gyros that allowed tighter, more precise turns.
The first 147SB missions were flown in March 1968, overlapping with the 147SAs.
The Soviets claimed one of their freighters had been torpedoed by the United States as it entered the harbor.
The drone unit was ordered to photograph the ship to see if it had been damaged.
The two drones flew as programmed and returned with photos looking directly into the cargo hold.
The North Vietnamese, however, caused some damage when they opened fire at the low-flying drones.
Shooting at anearly flat trajectory, the shells hit the ground throughout the harbor area.
Its programmed flight path took it under a line of high-tension power lines.
The photo showed the tower looming above the drone, while on the ground, people were looking upward at the low-flying plane.
With the partial bombing halt on March 31, the drones became a prime target.
The North Vietnamese also sought to end the drone flights through political means.
When the Paris Peace Talks opened, the North Vietnamese demanded an end to all reconnaissance flights.
United States reconnaissance flights continued to monitor North Vietnamese activities.
These reconnaissance photos showed that, within two weeks of the bombing halt, the North Vietnamese had repaired all the bombed-out bridges between the seventeenth and nineteenth parallels.
The film was geared to near infrared, and the camera had a filter to cut down the effects of haze.
A total of five flights were made in November and six more in December.
Missions were flown in the predawn hours, when activities were just starting.
When compared to photos taken later in the day, this would give an indication of activities.
The camera photographed the SAM overtaking the drone, then exploding behind it as the SAM hit the ground.
A second SAM was launched, which passed so close the photo was burned out by the exhaust flame.
The flight was intended to cover the Haiphong docks and seaplane base, then turn west to cover an airfield near Hanoi.
The doppler system was not set correctly, however, and the turns were coming late.
This caused the drone to fly to an area northwest of Haiphong, where it missed colliding with a ridgeline seven times.
Although the SREs were successful, less use was made of the system than was possible.
The photo interpreters were not trained in analyzing the near infrared images.
The original concept of high-altitude, covert reconnaissance, similar to that of the CIA U-2 overflights, had been replaced by the much simpler low-altitude mission.
The SC drones had a crosscorrelation doppler radar and a digital programmer to improve navigation accuracy.
They provided photos with a three-to-fiveinch resolution and were used to provide technical intelligence.
In contrast to the huge numbers of SC drones, there were only twenty-one high-altitude 147H missions during 1969.
The drone program did suffer losses, but throughout the war the North Vietnamese grossly inflated the American losses.
SC-75, dubbed ""Myassis Dragon,"" was hit seven times by shell fragments during its eighth mission.
BELFRY EXPRESS Up to this point, the drones had been solely an air force operation.
The navy had access to the information, but thought it was not timely enough.
Now the navy wanted to test the idea of drones being launched from ships.
This would give the task force commander the ability to cover targets immediately.
The drone got its initial boost from a rocket, which would burn out and separate.
An E-2A aircraft would guide the flight to the initial point, where the drone's own system would take over and fly the programmed mission.
SK-5 was launched successfully, but the carrier was two miles out of position.
This meant the ground track was shifted, and the drone photographed an area two miles seaward of Highway 1.
A second mission was flown on November 27, which followed the planned route.
When the drone ran out of fuel, a radio signal to deploy the parachute was transmitted.
A helicopter was sent to its estimated position, but nothing was found.
Several days later, the Chinese announced they had ""shot down"" SK-5 over Hainan Island.
A total of fifteen more Belfry Express missions were flown after SK-5's capture.
The three missions of April 18, 22, and 27, 1970, were particularly effective, providing photos of SAM and antiaircraft gun sites at Vinh and Than Hoa, as well as railroads, bridges, pipelines, truck parks, storage yards, and anchorage areas.
The mission was successfully flown, but the drag and main parachutes failed to deploy.
After a near perfect mission, the main parachute failed to open, and the drone was destroyed.
The problem was later traced to salt water contamination of the parachute actuation circuit cable.
It used the basic 147H airframe and camera but had a new engine that increased the maximum altitude to 75,000 feet.
The 147T also carried the Rivet Bouncer SA-2 jammer and the radar-absorbing inlet coating.
Further 147T missions were flown during February-May 1970, then again in September 1970.
With this, the program ended after only twenty-eight missions over two years.
There were only nineteen 147G flights in 1970, and a mere nine in 1971.
This brought the era of high-altitude drone photo reconnaissance to a close.
On April 18, 1969, a navy EC-121 ELINT aircraft was shot down by North Korean MiGs over international waters.
Lieutenant Colonel Andy Corra, head of unmanned reconnaissance systems, learned of the incident as he left his hotel for a meeting at Ryan Aeronautical to review the 147T program.
When he arrived at the plant, he suggested using the 147T as an ELINT drone.
It would carry receivers that would pick up radar and radio transmissions.
It was a schedule that many in the National Security Agency had said was physically impossible to meet.
The first 147TE mission was flown on February 15, 1970, beginning a two-month operational test program.
The 147TE could fly a preprogrammed mission or be controlled by the DC-130 launch aircraft.
In some cases, it would have to fly a very tight ""race track"" pattern to remain within the signal beam.
Unlike the other drones, the 147TEs remained at least fifty nautical miles offshore.
The ELINT drones flew two types of missions—over the Yellow Sea between North Korea and China, and along the Demilitarized Zone between North and South Korea.
When MiGs were detected, the drone was maneuvered to avoid the fighters.
The 147TEs provided about ten thousand hours of intelligence data per year.
They were fitted with the external tanks and ELINT equipment that could pick up either radio or radar transmissions.
Their target was a small, isolated, walled compound twenty-three miles west of Hanoi.
It stood on the bank of the Song Con River, outside the provincial capital of Son Tay.
Comparison of old and new reconnaissance photos showed a guard tower and new wall had been added.
It was also noticed that some uniforms had been spread out on the ground to spell out ""SAR""—search and rescue.
The final drone, on July 12, suffered an even more frustrating failure.
The drone was supposed to show ""the height, color, eyes, and facial expressions” of every man in the compound, but the programmer was slightly off; the drone banked a moment too early and the photos showed only the horizon.
Because too many drones flying over so isolated a site would tip off the North Vietnamese, it was decided to switch to SR-7ls.
The data they brought back was ambiguous—the camp was not as active as before, but there did seem to be someone there.
It started at 2:18 A.M. on November 21, 1970, when an HH-53 helicopter flew over the camp and blasted the guard towers and a guard barracks with minigun fire.
Moments later, an HH-3 crash-landed inside the compound with the assault team.
After a short but fierce firefight, the helicopter picked up the troops and flew them to the camp.
The raid took only twentyseven minutes, but no American POWs were found.
COMING OUT OF THE BLACK In July 1971, the world's political landscape profoundly changed—President Richard M Nixon announced he would be making a trip to Communist China.
Soon after, it was reported that the United States was suspending overflights of China.
As the political situation eased, so did the shroud of secrecy that had enveloped the drones.
The November 9, 1970, issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology carried an article on the drones, based on offthe-record information.
What still could not be discussed were code names, technical details, or any references to operational missions.
The peace talks, both the public ones in Paris and secret discussions conducted by presidential adviser Henry Kissinger, were deadlocked.
The number of United States troops declined, even as the antiwar movement grew.
The North Vietnamese had used the respite to rebuild and prepare for a ground invasion of the South.
LINEBACKER I The drone operation was the first to reflect the impending North Vietnamese invasion.
In late December 1971, the sortie rate of SC drones increased to 1. per day, twice what it had been.
On May 8, Haiphong Harbor was mined, cutting off the North's main source of supply.
The Linebacker I bombing campaign began, hitting such targets as bridges, barracks, barges, and rail lines.
With the North Vietnamese invasion, the drones were launched at an average rate of nearly two per day.
The 147SC drones covered areas that were denied to manned reconnaissance aircraft as too dangerous.
This included not only Hanoi and Haiphong, but all of North Vietnam and even occupied areas of South Vietnam.
As the name suggests, this was a standard SC fitted with a television camera.
On one SC/TV mission, eight out of nine targets were covered and three bonus targets were also spotted, this despite visibility of down to two miles.
It originally was built for dropping radar-jamming chaff and had been operated by the tactical air command for several years.
It was realized the pods could also carry propaganda leaflets over North Vietnam.
Between July and December 1972, twenty-eight missions were flown by the 147NC drones.
The biggest problem faced by the drones was predicting the wind over the target at the time of the drop.
Several missions were ineffective because the winds carried the leaflets away from the target.
As with the United Effort missions of 1965-66, the purpose of this special project, called ""Compass Cookie,"" was to gain radar and fuze data on the SA-2.
A number of new versions had been introduced since 1966, and the mission would provide an update.
The September 28 mission was fired on by three SA-2s but transmitted the data before being destroyed.
The North Vietnamese reopened several issues and finally broke off talks on December 13.
The B-52s took heavy losses, but devastated airfields, factories, railyards, warehouses, and SAM sites.
Two-thirds of these were bomb damage assessment missions in support of the B-52 strikes.
During the 1968-72 bombing halt, they were one of the few things sustaining the prisoners’ morale.
Following a New Year's halt, bombing was restricted to below the twentieth parallel.
On January 15, 1973, agreement was reached and all bombing of North Vietnam stopped.
It was announced that reconnaissance flights would continue over North Vietnam.
The following day, the first of a series of SC/TV missions was launched.
The SD also had an improved radar altimeter, a new cooling system to cope with low-altitude flight in hot tropical weather, and external tanks to extend the range.
This was a 147SD equipped with a Loran radionavigation system, which provided even greater accuracy.
The first two missions had actually been flown in August 1972, but both were lost.
Once at this point, the guidance system would not accept any further bank commands.
It was found that the Loran was generating an override signal to the roll control; the bank angle increased and the drone went out of control.
The 147SC drones were designed for an average lifetime of two and a half missions each.
The record holder was ""Tom Cat,"" with 68 missions, each covering an average of twelve targets.
A 147SC/TV flew 42 missions, an SD made 39, while an SDL made 36 missions.
From the start, it was discovered that the North Vietnamese were violating the peace agreement.
The United States, its spirit broken by the war and increasingly obsessed with the Watergate scandal, was both unwilling and unable to do more than issue feeble protests.
The South Vietnamese army was driven back, while the United States Congress cut off all aid.
The United States began an evacuation, and South Vietnamese aircraft and helicopters began to flee.
The final 147S-series mission was flown on April 30, 1975—the day Saigon fell.
With the fall of Saigon, the 147SC and SD drones were put into storage.
Although some in Congress objected to the loss of so valuable a capability, the decision stood.
Using the existing Firebee drone gave it flexibility, while new versions were developed on a short-time scale at low cost.
The result was a reconnaissance capability that was unmatched by manned aircraft.
In all, 3,435 drone missions were flown against Communist China, North Vietnam, and North Korea.
A total of about 1,000 147SC drones were built, in nineteen different versions.
Another 80 were possible losses to enemy action, 53 were lost in the recovery sequence, 30 in retrieval, and the remainder in other ways.
One of the high-altitude drones evaded eight MiG intercepts, three air-to-air missile firings, and nine SA-2 launches.
They had provided the first photographs of North Vietnamese SA-2 construction, MiG 21s, and helicopters; arming and fuze data on the SA-2; and the only low-altitude BDA coverage of Linebacker.
For more than a decade after the defeat in Vietnam, the images of collapse and failure raised doubts about the ability and even competence of the United States military.
In the years to follow, it was depicted as unable to win and equipped with weapons that did not work.
Also, a greater altitude and range, as well as further reductions in radar cross section, would need a completely new design.
The losses suffered by Nationalist Chinese U-2 pilots made a long-range drone program that much more attractive.
Understanding how shape affected radar return was one major area of study.
From time to time, the advanced drone was proposed to the air force, but a place could not be found for it in their plans or funding.
The CIA expressed an interest to Ryan about developing a separate drone program, and a formal proposal was put together.
After several years of work and proposals, Ryan felt the time was right for a major effort.
This included a formal briefing at SAC Headquarters by the company's founder, T Claude Ryan.
By this time, the 147G drones were conducting overflights of China, and the 147H was beginning development, so the presentation was successful.
Because this was a whole new aircraft, rather than a simple conversion of an existing target drone, a design competition was started.
Additionally, Northrop tried to enter the emerging competition, but the air force refused its proposal.
The range and altitude requirements for the drone were similar to what Ryan had proposed, and the company felt confident its design would be selected.
North American put up a strong challenge, and for a time it seemed likely to win.
The fuselage resembled that of the Model 136, with the engine over the fuselage and inward-canted fins.
The sloped, flat sides were designed with reduced radar return in mind.
The fins were tilted inward to both reduce radar return and shield the exhaust.
Much of the airframe was made of plastic, which also absorbed radar signals.
Infrared suppression was provided by placing the engine above the fuselage and mixing the hot exhaust with cool intake air.
The total length was 34. feet, while the swept-back wings spanned 47.68 feet.
It was equipped with a KA-80A camera able to provide coverage along a 1,720-mile strip.
Even if it suffered a complete failure, the drone could still automatically fly to a recovery zone.
Unlike the streamlined Big Safari management, as many as two hundred people attended the monthly progress meetings.
This consisted of one static test vehicle , two captive test vehicles , five flight test vehicles , and twenty production vehicles, numbered P-] through P-20.
The initial tests included both captive flights aboard the DC-130 launch aircraft and tests of separation characteristics and recovery parachute operations.
The first powered flight was made on September 10, 1968, at Holloman Air Force Base.
The early free flights were restricted to the White Sands Missile Range and tested aerodynamics, performance, and stability.
A total of forty-two free flights were made, including long-range flights from White Sands to Utah and back again.
EXPOSED 154P-4 was on a long-range test flight when a warning light came on at the Holloman control center.
A control surface actuator had failed, and the drone was seconds from going out of control.
Ground control triggered the parachute recovery to save the drone, but the troubles of 154P-4 were only starting.
It was descending toward the Los Alamos complex, during the lunch hour.
Thousands of people saw it coming down under a 100foot-diameter parachute.
Suddenly, there were bright flashes as doors on its underside were blown off, and the bags used to cushion the landing impact inflated.
The drone missed a three-story building and landed on a road just inside the complex.
A noontime jogger was starting his fourth lap when 154P-4 came down in front of him.
The tip of the right wing slid under the guardrail at the edge of the road.
Although the landing site itself was secure, only a few feet away was the fence marking the boundary with public land.
Just across a narrow canyon was a residential area, and word quickly spread of what had happened.
But before 154P-4 could be hidden, the press arrived and were able to photograph it from the perimeter fence.
By the time an air force-Ryan recovery crew arrived an hour after landing, the fence was lined with reporters and television crews.
Two photos of 154P-4 were published in the Los Alamos Monitor, despite air force requests that they be withheld.
When it got hot, the solder softened, the wire pulled free, and the secret was out.
A flight by P-5 in September was successful, and the "" range'restrictions were n'rteci.
During subsequerit'154 tlights7a"" CH-3 helicopter was placed on alert at Holloman Air Force Base.
Another flight on November 21, 1969, almost resulted in more publicity.
The ill-fortuned P-4 was flying over the Navajo reservation in northern Arizona when there was a circuit failure.
One of the people who found it was an ex-air force sergeant who realized the drone was a secret aircraft.
He called the tribal police, saw that a perimeter guard was set up, gathered up the parachute, and took charge in a very professional manner.
The sixth and seventh flights also involved simulated Soviet Fan Song B and E radars at the navy's China Lake facility.
This required a low radar return to prevent detection, a very high altitude to avoid interception, and a precise navigation system to cover the target.
There was no interest in using the 154s over North Vietnam because of the success of the 147SC low-altitude drones.
The 147T program was cut short, while the number of 147H missions in 1970-71 was reduced to a mere handful.
Nixon's halting of Chinese overflights ended a mission that was already coming to a close.
It was not needed for flights over North Vietnam, while the other possible targets were covered by SR-71 overflights.
Another of the Blackbird family was also to make its first, very Black, test flight that day.
EARLY EFFORTS The next step in reconnaissance drone development was obvious—use the technology of the A-12 to build a very high-speed, high-altitude drone.
Following the loss of Powers's U-2 over the Soviet Union, there were several discussions about using the A-12 itself as a drone.
Although Kelly Johnson had come to support the idea of drone reconnaissance, he opposed an A-12 drone, contending that the aircraft was too large and complex for such a conversion.
Another possibility was to use the A-12 as a launch aircraft for an unmanned QF-104 reconnaissance drone.
Several times the possibility was examined, but the CIA expressed no interest.
Although the CIA turned down the idea, Johnson found an ally with Brig.
A section of the Skunk Works shop in Burbank was walled off for use by the Q-12 team.
The effort was kept isolated from the A-12, YF-12A, and SR71 development.
Just as the A-12 was more secret than the U-2, the Q-12 was more closely held.
It would require one or more large parachutes to lower it to a soft landing.
A system that would allow a runway landing would add complexity, take up space, and increase both the cost and weight.
One major problem was simply slowing the drone down to a speed at which any recovery system could work.
This would include not only the entire camera, but the guidance system.
On December 10, it was sent to a test site for eleven days of radar cross section measurements.
These showed it had the lowest radar cross section of any Lockheed design—a record that would be held for the next decade.
The Q-12 was then returned to Lockheed for test fits of a mock-up of the camera.
The drone would use a Hycon camera which used a rotating mirror to provide panoramic photos.
At the same time, engine tests of the Marquardt RJ43-MA-3 ramjet were conducted in a wind tunnel that simulated the Q-12's flight profile.
When the drone turned, it was feared that the airflow into the engine would be disrupted.
The ramjet could be shut down for as long as forty-five seconds and still relight.
When Johnson presented the results to the CIA in February 1963, he found them unenthusiastic.
With the A-12 still far from Mach 3, the U-2 operations against China, and other secret air operations such as Air America, the CIA was overextended and unable to undertake another risky project.
On March 20, 1963, the CIA issued a contract to begin full-scale development.
It assigned responsibility to Lockheed for the airframe, navigation system, and the ramjet.
Funding and operational control was split between the CIA and the air force.
DOUBTS ABOUT THE LAUNCH PROFILE Once the Q-12 got under way, it was clear a major problem in development was the aerodynamics of the Q-12/A-12 launch profile.
The Mach 3 shock waves between the two aircraft could interact, creating high temperatures and stresses on the airframe.
The Q-12 would have to pass through the shock wave formed by the A-12's forward fuselage.
The Q-12 would have to separate cleanly, as there were only a few feet between its wingtips and the A-12's inward-canted fins.
The center of gravity and center of lift of the combination would have to be very carefully controlled.
Wind-tunnel tests were made using metal models of the Q-12 fixed to the back of an A-12.
This would lift it off the back of the model A-12 and provide data on the aerodynamic effects and stresses on the combination.
It was not possible to reproduce actual free flight in the wind tunnel, however.
The wind-tunnel data and calculations indicated getting the drone through the shock wave formed by the launch aircraft's fuselage would prove difficult.
The ramjet would be at full power, and there could be air-fuel mixture and engine unstart problems as it passed through the shock wave.
Although there were still problems with the launch profile, the drag of the combination, and the equipment, Johnson felt they could ""haul the thing"" through Mach 1.
Ironically, the actual design and production of the drones had gone much more smoothly.
The slight changes in the drone design from the RCS and wind-tunnel testing had changed the size of the payload bay.
By August 6, 1963, this had been completed, with no loss of resolution caused by the change.
THE D-21 TAGBOARD The D-21A resembled an A-12 nacelle, wings, and vertical tail.
The leading edges of the wings, the control surfaces, and the inlet spike were all ma~de from"" radar-ab's'orbirig plastic.
The reconnaissance equipment was carried in a 76-inch-long Q-bay just behind the intake.
This also carried the inertial navigation system, the automatic flight controls, and the command and telemetry electronics.
The normal cruising speed was Mach 3.25 at an altitude of 80,000 to 95,000 feet.
The pylon had latches to hold the D-21, a compressed air emergency jettisoning system, and a fuel line to transfer fuel to the D-21 from the M21's own tank's.
Two additional launch aircraft, TVL-21 Articles'134'and 135, were built.
The first step would be to blow off the D-21's inlet and exhaust covers.
With the D-21/ M-21 at the correct speed and altitude, the LCO would start the ramjet and the other systems of the D-21.
This was controlled via a panel—green lights would indicate the status of each system.
The LCO could watch the D-21 through a periscope on the instrument panel.
The M-21 launch aircraft had a camera mounted in what was called a ""hot pod"" to film the separation.
As with the U-2s and A-12s before them, the D-21s were given Article numbers.
The first was Article 501, with seven D-21s planned for completion by the end of the year.
The early D-21s were in a natural metal finish with the outer half of the wings in black.
After four more months of checkouts and static tests, the aircraft was shipped to Groom Lake and reassembled.
Lockheed test pilot William Park was selected to make all the captive and launch tests.
A bridge crane on the ceiling of the hangar was waiting to lift the D-21, swing it over, and lower it onto the M-21.
TAGBOARD FLIGHT TESTS The first D-21/M-21 captive flight was scheduled for December 22, 1964.
This would allow time for Kelly Johnson to supervise the SR-71 flight, then fly out to Groom Lake.
Minor problems pushed back the SR-71's flight until about noon, however.
At Groom Lake, William Park and the rest of the D-21/M-21 team awaited their chance.
Finally, at about 2:00 P.M., a Lockheed Jetstar landed, Johnson ran up the ladder, patted Park on the head, and told him to take off.
As the D-21/M-21 flew above the snow-dusted hills, Park checked out its handling.
Despite the added drag and weight of the D-21, and low-power engines in the M-21, Park found the combination's flight characteristics were the same as the A-12.
Because the combination represented a whole new design, the speed and altitude envelope had to be explored in small steps.
Johnson had hoped to make the first D-21 free flight on his birthday, February 27, but it was not to be.
During one captive flight in April 1965, both the D-21's elevens were ripped off by flutter.
This required a redesign, which involved adding balance weights and control surface locks.
By May, the flutter problem had been corrected, and the combination had reached Mach 2.6.
Ray Torick and Keith Beswick would alternate as launch officer on the missions.
The launches were to be made over the ocean, west of Point Mugu, on the California coast.
A new test range was needed, as the D-21/M-21 could not accelerate sufficiently within the range being used for the early tests.
This was followed by performance problems; the weight and drag of the D-21 cut into the M-21's speed and range.
The D-21/M-21 also showed poor transonic acceleration, particularly on hot days, Several tempts were made to fly to Point Mugu for launch practice, but the plane could not make the range.
More powerful engines were fitted to the M-21s, along with a new inlet control system, but the problems persisted.
The instrumentation system's strain gauges could not measure the launch forces, due to the heat of Mach 3-plus flight.
Johnson was unwilling to commit to a launch until he was sure the separation maneuver was understood.
The first batch of D-21 drones had been completed, but Lockheed was yet to launch a single free flight, and Johnson was unwilling to recommend building any more D-21s until it had been proven in flight.
A final problem facing the D-21 program was how to separate the intake and exhaust covers.
These fears were justified on the first, and only, attempt to separate the covers.
With the covers off, the ramjet could act as a third engine for the M-21 during the acceleration to launch speed.
Just before launch, fuel from the M-21's tanks would be transferred to top off the D-21, replacing that used during the runup to the launch point.
By late January 1966, more than a year after the first captive flight, everything seemed ready.
The launch forces were understood, the ramjet operations and hatch recovery had been proven, and the launch maneuver had been practiced.
Over Texas, the M-21 rendezvoused with a KC-135 tanker, refueled, and started the run to the launch point.
This began over the town of Dalhart, Texas, on a direct course toward Point Mugu.
Once the checkout was completed and the tanks of the D-21 were topped off, Park began a slight climb, followed by a pushover into a slight dive, holding 0. gs on the M-21's precise gmeter.
Through the periscope, Beswick could see the D-21 rising off the pylon.
Then, it stopped and seemed to hang perhaps twenty feet above the back of the M-21.
This placed a burden on Lockheed, as the D-21 program was strapped for money.
Johnson had discussions with air force officials and offered, if nec""tssaty,'10 naVe L&cKiieea crews laiincn tne'early operational missions.
He was also looking at a new launch profile—attaching a rocket booster to the D-21 and launching the assembly from a B-52.
Despite the successful launch, he was still concerned about the risks of the M-21 profile.
The peak speed was Mach 3.3, while an altitude of 90,000 feet was reached.
Subsequent investigation indicated it had been run unpressurized several times during ground tests, which damaged it.
The two successful launches sparked renewed interest, and an order for a second batch of fifteen D-21s was issued on April 29.
Using a B-52H as the launch aircraft, he told the air force, would improve safety, cut costs, and extend the deployment range over the short-range M-21.
The D-21, Article 504, would carry a full fuel load for the first time.
The launch would be made at a slightly higher speed and at exactly 1.00 Park, as before, was flying the launch aircraft, Article 135.
It was flown by Art Peterson, with Keith Beswick in the backseat to film the separation.
As the two planes flew in formation, Park reached the launch speed of Mach 3.25, began the shallow dive, and Torick started the separation sequence.
The M-21 pitched up and the aerodynamic loads tore off the forward fuselage.
Park and Torick were subjected to incredible g forces as the fuselage tumbled.
Park was picked up by a helicopter, but Torick, having survived a Mach 3 breakup and ejection, drowned when sea water entered his pressure suit.
THED-21B Using the B-52H as drop plane entailed a complete rebuilding of the D-21s.
The process involved removing the outer wing panels, inlet cone, and ramjet from the airframe.
Attachment points were added to the top of the fuselage for the pylon and to the bottom for the rocket booster.
Once this was completed, the drone would be reassembled and its systems checked out.
The rocket booster used to propel the D-21B to ramjet ignition speed was longer and heavier than the D-21 itself.
It was cylindrical with several ridges, giving it the appearance of a water pipe.
At the pointed nose was the propeller of a ram air turbine, which spun to provide electrical power.
The solid rocket motor produced an average thrust of 27,300 pounds and burned for 87 seconds.
To stabilize the assembly during the burn, a fin was attached to the bottom of the booster.
To provide ground clearance, it folded to the right while attached to the B-52.
These were much larger than the pylons for the Hound Dog cruise missile normally carried by B-52Hs.
They bolted to the existing attachment points and involved no changes to the wings’ structure.
Inside the two B-52s, two LCO stations were added to the rear of the flight deck; each station was independent, with its own command and telemetry system, as well as a periscope.
This provided a backup should the programming fail, or if it was necessary to change the timing.
The telemetry system recorded data on the functioning of the flight control, propulsion, fuel, booster, electrical and hydraulic systems, engine and equipment temperatures, as well as the D-21B's Mach number, direction, and location.
This information was used to monitor the launch, and for postflight analysis of any problems.
This was used to update the D-21B's own inertial navigation system during the long flight to the drop point.
Temperature control was critical, as the D-21B would be ""cold soaked"" by the negative58 degree F conditions during the long flight to the launch point.
After the drop, the D-21 would be suddenly heated by the acceleration to Mach 3plus cruise.
The first of the B-52s arrived at Palmdale on December 12, 1966, to begin the modifications.
Before launch, the LCO would lower the booster fin, turn on the telemetry, test the automatic flight control system, and turn on the fuel and the observation camera.
The assembly would fall free for a moment, then the booster would ignite.
As it passed through 63,000 feet, the destruct system would be activated; the LCO could destroy the vehicle should it go off-course.
When the D-21B reached an altitude of about 80,000 feet, two explosive bolts would fire and the booster would drop off.
The D-21B's automatic flight control system would then go to a preprogrammed Mach number.
The D-21B would be controlled during the overflight by an onboard inertial navigation system.
This was preprogrammed with the headings, bank angles, and the camera on-and-off points.
When the mission was completed, the D-21 would fly to friendly airspace.
Once clear, the command system, recovery beacons, and telemetry would be turned back on.
As it passed through 60,000 feet, at a speed of Mach 1.67, the latches on the front edge of the hatch would release.
The recovery parachute would open, and the hatch would be caught in midair by the JC-130.
If the midair recovery was unsuccessful, the hatch would float, and could be picked up by a ship.
On January 18, 1967, Kelly Johnson had a meeting with Deputy Secretary of Defense Cyrus Vance.
Vance said he was very much for the project and asked Lockheed to press forward with it.
He said that the United States government would never again fly a manned aircraft over enemy territory in peacetime.
D-21B/B-52H TEST LAUNCHES By late summer of 1967, the modification work to both the D-21Bs and the B-52Hs was complete.
In effect, the development program would have to begin again from scratch.
They had flown only half the D-21's full range, and the hatch had not yet been successfully recovered.
The first attempt was made on September 28, 1967, and ended in complete failure.
As the B-52 was flying toward the launch point, the D-21B fell off the pylon.
The failure was traced to a stripped nut on the forward right attachment point on the pylon.
Several other attempts had to be aborted before launch due to technical problems.
The A-12 had finally been allowed to deploy, and the SR-71 was soon to replace it.
With a 3,000-nautical-mile range, the D-21Bs could act as a replacement.
At the same time, new developments in reconnaissance satellite technology were nearing operation.
Up to this point, the limited number of satellites available restricted coverage to the Soviet Union.
A new generation of reconnaissance satellites could soon cover targets anywhere in the world.
The satellites’ resolution would be comparable to that of aircraft, but without the slightest political risk.
It flew 2,850 nautical miles—the design range—and also reached an altitude of 90,000 feet.
All these failures put Lockheed in a bind—the D-21B was oOverrunning costs, and Lockheed had to put its own money into the program.
Although Johnson still felt the project had a great deal of promise, he knew there were still very difficult technical challenges ahead.
This mission carried a camera; when developed, the photos proved to be fair.
The mission of February 11, 1969, was the first attempt to fly a ""Captain Hook"" mission profile.
This involved a launch near Hawaii, a flight path taking the D-21 over Christmas Island or Midway, then back to Hawaii and the recovery zone.
Lockheed believed the cause was water in Article 518's guidance system, but this could not be proven.
Both missions were in excess of 2,900 nautical miles, and both hatches were recovered.
The photos from the first mission were fair, while the second were considered good.
The twin successes demonstrated the D-21B's design performance, and the air force now considered it ready for operational flights.
The air force and CIA proposed to President Nixon that the D-21B be used on ""hot"" missions over Communist China.
Kelly Johnson felt the probability was high that approval would be given.
SENIOR BOWL—THE TAGBOARD OVER CHINA With the approval to start operational missions, activities shifted to Beale Air Force Base.
It was home of the 465th Bomb Wing, so the two modified aircraft would not be noticed.
The B-52H, loaded with two D-21Bs, took off from Beale in the predawn hours and flew west.
Once the target was reached, the D-21 was to repeat the maneuvers in reverse order to return to the recovery area.
This allowed the D-21B to miss a checkpoint and still be able to go on to the next.
It flew a Captain Hook mission with a total distance of 2,969 nautical miles.
Lockheed was told to be ready for a second operational mission in March 1970.
As events turned out, political considerations caused the program to be idle for nearly a year.
Over the recovery zone, the hatch separated, but the parachute failed to open and it was destroyed on impact.
Several more months went by before authorization was given for additional flights.
The hatch splashed down, and a United States Navy destroyer headed toward the floating payload.
The fourth, and what proved to be the last, D-21B overflight was made on March 20, 1971.
THE END OF TAGBOARD On July 15, 1971, Kelly Johnson received a wire canceling the D-21B program.
The remaining drones were transferred from Beale Air Force Base by a C-5A and placed in dead storage.
On July 23, Johnson went to Beale to hold a final farewell to mark the disbanding of the 4200th Test Wing.
Of these, twenty-one were flown—four in the M-21 launches, thirteen in B-52H test missions, and four in the overflights.
Although two operational D-21Bs were able to reach the recovery zone, no photos were recovered.
Like the A-12 Oxcart, the D-21B Tagboard drones remained a Black airplane, even in retirement.
Their existence was not suspected until August 1976, when the first group was placed in storage at the Davis-Monthan Air Force Base Military Storage and Disposition Center.
The B-52H portion of the Tagboard program remained a blank—it was not clear what year the test launches began nor when the overflights were made.
It included shots of the D-21 being loaded on the M-21, in-flight shots, and film of two successful D-21 launches.
The First Fifty Years, in late 1993 that the details were finally released.
Miller's book used Kelly Johnson's own logs and official documents to tell the story of the ""Blackest"" of the Blackbird family.
A year later, Ben Rich's book, Skunk Works, gave a personal account of the Tagboard.
It was still in the original silver and black finish, but the pylon had been removed.
The Ames-Dryden Flight Research Center was able to get four of them, Articles 513, 525, 529, and 537.
No test program had been determined, but the opportunity to acquire such a vehicle was too good to pass up.
One obvious program would be testing of scramjet engines, similar to those planned for the X-30.
It was felt that the unstart problem that had caused the fatal crash had been solved.
As with the earlier mission profile, the D-21B would be lost at the end of the flight.
Any such NASA D-21B flight program would be made a quarter century after the last operational mission.
THE TAGBOARD ASSESSED The D-21B Tagboard was the ultimate expression of the Black reconnaissance aircraft.
The end of the D-21 program brought to a close an era of Black airplane development.
The first Black airplanes, the XP-59A and P-80, had been tactical fighters.
Starting in the early 1950s, the emphasis shifted to reconnaissance aircraft.
The following two decades saw the X-16, U-2, Sun Tan, A-12, 147, 154, and, finally, the D-21.
On the surface, the Tagboard program was cut short by President Nixon's ending of China overflights.
The cancellation of the D-21B program was not only the result of changing politics, but also a changing reconnaissance situation.
On June 15, 1971—one month before the D-21B program ended—the first Big Bird reconnaissance satellite was orbited.
In 1959, when the A-12 project was just getting started, he asked the CIA whether there would be one round of aircraft development or two before the satellites took over.
The D-21 Tagboard was as challenging as anything undertaken by the Skunk Works.
The development problems were not unusual, given the complexity of the D-21's mission pfotiTe.
The development program ""was more akin to that of a missile than an aircraft.
Like a missile, each D-21 would be"""" lost at the end of the flight—whether it succeeded or failed.
All that Lockheed had to go on to determine the cause of any problems was the telemetry.
After the guidance system malfunctioned on the first overflight, it had kept going and reached Siberia before self-destructing.
One of the pieces, a panel from the engine mount, was found by a shepherd, who turned it over to Soviet authorities.
Seventeen years after the November morning it was launched, a CIA official walked into Ben Rich's office with the panel.
Rich, now head of the Skunk Works after Kelly Johnson's retirement, asked where he had gotten it.
The panel, composed of radar-absorbing material, looked as if it had just been made.
As they talked, another Dark Eagle was being built in the same hangar that had seen production of the D-21s.
It did not have the thundering speed of the D-21; in fact, this new plane was a subsonic attack aircraft.
Unlike the sleek, manta ray shape of the D-21, the new Dark Eagle was angular.
It had a form that was a violation of every aerodynamic principle built into airplanes since the Wright Brothers.
A common thread running through the history of the postwar Black airplanes was the quest for a reduced radar cross section.
It was hoped that the U-2 would fly so high it would be difficult to pick up on radar.
Tests over the United States seemed to justify this hope, but once overflights began, the Soviets had no major difficulties tracking it.
Attempts were made to reduce the U-2s' detectability, but these proved ineffective.
Based on this experience, Kelly Johnson realized the A-12 would have to be designed from the start for a reduced radar cross section.
The important word was reduced—the North Vietnamese and Chinese were able to detect the A-12s.
Taken together, the A-12s' speed, height, and reduced radar return made them unstoppable.
This made the former target drones difficult to shoot down, as the Chinese and North Vietnamese soon learned.
With the advanced Model 154, a reduced radar cross section was built in.
In all these cases, however, the reduced radar cross section was only one of the design considerations.
The maximum possible altitude was the driving requirement in the design of the Black reconnaissance airplanes.
But by the early 1970s, a reduced radar cross section became the dominant consideration in the design of new aircraft.
Petrocz von Petroczy, an officer with the Austro-Hungarian air service, covered a Taube with clear sheets of a celluloid material called Emaillit.
The theory was that a transparent covering would make the plane harder to see and hit with ground fire compared to a fabric-covered plane silhouetted against the sky.
An engineer named Anton Knubel built two monoplanes with clear coverings in 1913-14.
The second of the planes had its framework painted a blue gray color to make it even harder to see against the sky.
Unfortunately, Knubel was killed in a crash of the plane on September 8, 1915.
The idea was seen as having promise, and three Fokker E III fighters were delivered in the summer of 1916, covered with Cellon.
Cellon had found wide use in the automotive industry as a glass substitute.
It was then attached to the plane's framework and allowed to dry to a taut finish.
Very soon, however, it was apparent this first attempt at a stealth airplane was a failure.
It was far more effective simply to paint the aircraft in camouflage colors.
With the invention of radar in the mid-1930s, a new approach was needed.
Called ""chaff"" in the United States or ""window"" in England, the strips would be released from a plane.
They would reflect the radar signals and produce false echoes, which would hide the plane.
Called ""noise jamming,"" the target plane transmitted signals on the same frequency as the radar.
As the echo from a plane was a tiny fraction of the radar's original signal strength, it was possible for the plane to drown out the echo, making it impossible to detect the target plane.
With development of jet bombers like the B-47 in the late 1940s, it was thought that they would fly too high and too fast to be detected.
During the Cold War, both the ECM and the tactics of its use grew more sophisticated.
The Soviet Union was vast, and many areas had little or no radar coverage.
The plane would not transmit any jamming signals, as this would only advertise the plane's presence.
As the bomber neared the target, the number of radars would increase, and it would no longer be possible to avoid them.
A more subtle approach was to transmit carefully timed signals, which made the plane appear farther from the radars, or at a different bearing.
As a last resort, the air defense centers, radars, and SAM sites would be bombed.
The prime source of a large radar cross section is two or three surfaces, such as a wing and fuselage or the floor, sides, and back of a cockpit, which meet at a right angle.
The radar signal strikes one surface, is reflected to the other, then is bounced directly back to the radar.
Still other sources are sharp points on the wings or tails, wing fences, external weapons, intakes that allow the front of the engine to be ""seen"" by the radar, gaps formed by access panels, and antennae.
A feature that has a strong radar return at one frequency may not be detectable at another.
This is quite independent of size—a small vent or grill may produce a major part of the plane's radar cross section.
The interactions between the reflections from each part of the plane cause huge changes in the radar cross section.
In some cases, a one-third-degree change in the aspect angle can result in a thirty-twofold change in the radar cross section.
When all these factors are taken into account, a plane's radar cross section may vary by a factor of 1 million.
Only a rough estimate of the cross-section of such targets as aircraft or ships can be obtained by calculation.
By the mid-1950s, basic research was underway in the United States on understanding the sources of a plane's radar cross section.
A team headed by Bill Bahret at the Wright Air Development Center did much of this work.
A large anechoic chamber was built to test the radar return of different shapes.
By the late 1950s, Bahret and his team felt they understood the sources of large echoes.
The navy lost interest in the project, and Wright went to the air force.
The air force was very interested—the RAM was both thin and strong and, therefore, could be attached to the skin of an airplane.
The plane was only an experiment, with no operational applications in mind.
The results were mixed—many of the echo reductions were confirmed, but the T-33's flight characteristics were degraded by the added thickness of material.
Grissom found the plane was hard to control; it slid in turns, overdived, and coming in for a landing it behaved like a roller coaster.
Despite all these efforts, there was no simple way to calculate the radar cross section of a plane.
With the computers and theoretical models of the time, too many factors entered into the calculation for it to be a practical possibility.
When Kelly Johnson wanted to test the radar cross sections of the A-12 and D-21, he first used small models.
Still, it was not until the planes actually took flight that the true radar cross section could be determined.
Reduced radar cross section had little impact on the design of operational aircraft.
PROJECT HARVEY The air defenses of North Vietnam required a fundamental change in tactics.
A typical Rolling Thunder strike was composed of sixteen F-105D bombers.
The force needed to protect them was made up of eight EF-105F ""Wild Weasels,"" which attacked SAM sites, and six F-4D escorts against MiGs.
Even though each F-105D carried individual ECM pods, two EB-66 jamming aircraft would also accompany the strike force.
The EB-66s, in turn, each required two F-4Ds as protection against MiGs.
The revolution in air defense caused by SAMs would be underlined in the October 1973 Yom Kippur War.
Mounted on a tanklike transporter, it could move with the frontline troops.
The Israeli air force did not have the ECM pods needed to counter the SA-6 and suffered heavy initial losses.
During a single strike against a Syrian SA-6 battery, six Israeli F-4Es were lost.
Although the Israelis overcame the early setbacks, the SA-6 was a clear warning.
As long as United States countermeasures and tactics were specifically tailored to enemy radars and SAMs, they would be vulnerable to technological surprise.
The Soviets were then in the process of deploying a new generation of SAMs.
In the event of a war in Europe, NATO forces could suffer the same huge losses as the Israelis had.
Any new technological advances in ECM would be countered by improved radars.
The key was not more powerful ECM, but to make the RCS a primary design consideration.
No radar would provide early warning as the aircraft approached; no radar would direct MiGs, antiaircraft guns, or SAMs.
Air defenses would revert to the 1930s, against an enemy traveling at near supersonic speeds.
A tenfold reduction would only shorten the range at which a plane could be detected.
A hundredfold RCS reduction would merely degrade the effectiveness of radar.
It would take a thousandfold reduction of a plane's RCS to make it undetectable to radar.
Just as the aircraft could not reflect any radar signals, it also could not emit any—no bombing radar or ECM transmissions.
Although true optical invisibility was not possible, efforts had to be made to reduce the distance at which the plane could be seen.
A plane could be seen at a distance of five to ten miles; the reflection of the sun could be seen at a distance several times that.
They were to design a small, low-cost test aircraft to demonstrate the possibilities.
Lockheed, which had not built a fighter since the F-104 program of the early 1960s, was not included.
He had been involved with the work Lockheed had done on the Dirty Bird U-2s, the A-12, SR-71, and D-21, and knew it gave Lockheed the experience needed for the DARPA project.
Rich obtained a letter from the CIA granting permission to discuss the reduced RCS work of the earlier projects.
This was part of the request to DARPA for Lockheed to be included in the program.
The keys to Lockheed's efforts were Lockheed mathematician Bill Schroeder and Skunk Works software engineer Denys Overholser.
They produced "" tire'conceptual D'r'e'aiunrbugn mat allowed a stealth aircraft'to be ""designed.
Schroeder went back to the basic equations derived by Scottish physicist James Clerk Maxwell a century before.
Maxwell's equations were revised at the turn of the century by German electromagnetic expert Arnold Johannes Sommerfeld.
For simple shapes, such as a cone, sphere, or flat plate, these formulas could predict how radar signals would be reflected.
In the early 1960s, a Soviet scientist named Pyotr Ufimtsev developed a simplified approach which concentrated on electromagnetic currents set up in the edges of more complex shapes, such as disks.
The Maxwell, Sommerfeld, and Ufimtsev equations still could not predict the RCS for a complex shape like that of an airplane.
Schroeder's conceptual breakthrough was to realize that the shape of an airplane could be reduced to a finite set of two-dimensional surfaces.
Rather than a surface made of smoothly curving surfaces, the whole airplane would be a collection of flat plates, which reflected the echo away from the radar.
This system of flat, triangular panels became known as ""faceting,"" because it resembled the shape of a diamond.
Schroeder asked Overholser to develop a computer program that could predict the RCS ofa faceted aircraft shape.
Now, with the faceting concept and the Echo I program, it would be possible to predict the RCS of an aircraft.
When Overholser presented a sketch of the design to Ben Rich on May 5, 1975, Rich did not quite grasp what had been achieved.
The Hopeless Diamond met with a frosty reception by Kelly Johnson, who was still working as a consultant to the Skunk Works.
Having built some of the most graceful planes ever to take to the skies, he was not impressed with this alien design.
Johnson's opinion was shared by many of the Skunk Work's senior engineers and aerodynamicists.
The convexed surface of the disk would scatter the radar signals away from the source.
The WS-606 project of the mid-1950s was to have relied on a large spinning fan to provide gyroscopic stability, while directional control was to be provided by thrusters on the rim of the disk, fed by a complex network of ducts.
A disk also has poor aerodynamic qualities, such as high subsonic drag.
Johnson thought the radar return from the Hopeless Diamond would be larger than that of the D-21.
On September 14, 1975, it was tested against the original mockup of the D-21.
The Hopeless Diamond had a radar return one-one thousandth that of the D-21.
By October 1975, the DARPA competition had been reduced to the Lockheed and Northrop designs.
The rear of the wing was swept forward, giving it the appearance of a broad arrowhead.
The rear of the fuselage came to a point; with the swept-back wings, this gave it a W shape.
The two intakes were placed on the sides of the aircraft and were covered with grills.
This allowed a higher speed than the screen on the Northrop XST, which was not usable above Mach 0.65.
The XST design philosophy was to have the lowest possible radar return from the front and bottom of the aircraft.
These were shipped to the Gray Butte Microwave Measurement Range in New Mexico and mounted on poles for radar signature testing.
A second series of tests was run in January 1976 after minor modifications had been made.
At the White Sands tests, the reflection from the pole was many times brighter than the model.
The Skunk Works had spent much of the late 1960s and early 1970s in an unsuccessful effort to sell a series of fighter designs.
At the same time, losses in the L-1011 airliner program had brought Lockheed to the edge of bankruptcy.
Even with federal guaranteed loans, Lockheed was still near failure in 1975 and 1976.
STEALTH GOES BLACK To this point, Project Harvey was unclassified, and stealth was freely talked about.
A June 1977 issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology revealed that the ""Stealth Fighter Demonstrator"" used J85 engines, that Kelly Johnson had acted as a consultant on the project, and that it would make its first flight in 1977.7"" Soon after work on the XST started, Jimmy Carter was elected president.
The program attracted the attention of the defense undersecretary for research and engineering, William J Perry.
The results of the model RCS tests indicated that stealth had the prospect of a fundamental breakthrough.
Control was transferred from the largely civilian-staffed DARPA to the Air Force Special Projects Office.
The word ""stealth"" also disappeared; it could not be used in any public statement or in an unclassified context.
Unlike Aquatone, Oxcart, and Tagboard, it was a computer selected designation.
Because it was an aircraft technology development project, the prefix ""have"" was given to the program.
HAVE BLUE Have Blue was the first airplane whose shape was determined by electrical engineering, rather than aerodynamics.
On the Have Blue, the wings were made of long, wedged-shaped flat plates, meeting at a sharp edge.
The first Have Blue prototype would be used for aerodynamic and control tests.
Because of the design's instability, it used a fly-by-wire control system, built for the F-16A, that was modified to make the Have Blue stable in all three axes.
Stability was critical if the design was to be developed into an attack aircraft; an unstable aircraft cannot bomb accurately.
The second Have Blue prototype would be used to demonstrate the design's stealth qualities.
Development work was also done on improved RAM and better ways to apply it.
Unlike an RCS model, a real airplane has landing gear doors, a canopy, a fuel-fill door, screws, and vents.
On the second Have Blue, greater care would be taken to insure that all gaps were sealed.
The Have Blue aircraft were 38 feet long and had a wingspan of 22. feet.
They would have a top speed of Mach 0. and were powered by a pair of J85 engines.
Weight of the Have Blue was 12,500 pounds, and it was limited to a one-hour flight time.
To keep the development time short, as many existing components as possible were used.
In addition to the F-16 fly-by-wire control system, the Have Blue aircraft used F-5 ejector seats, landing gear, and cockpit instruments.
The J85-GE-4A engines were supplied by the navy from its T-2B trainer program.
AS 'eacn ‘part was besig'neb, trie pians were sent to the shop for fabrication.
Park was so highly regarded at the Skunk Works that Ben Rich obtained a special exemption from the air force so he could be chief test pilot for the Have Blue.
Lieutenant Colonel Norman Kenneth ""Ken"" Dyson would serve as the air force project pilot.
As with other Dark Eagles, the Have Blue personnel had their own patch.
It showed the cartoon character Wile E Coyote holding a blue lightning bolt, signifying control of the electromagnetic spectrum, and the colorful code name.
The completion of Have Blue 1001 was complicated by a strike at Lockheed.
When the strike began in late August 1977, the Have Blue was in final assembly, with no fuel or hydraulic systems, no electronics, no ejection seat or landing gear.
A thirty-five-man shop crew was put together from managers and engineers to complete it and check out its systems.
To hide the plane, 1001 was parked between two semitrailers and a camouflage net was draped over them.
Following the tests, the wings were removed and the plane was loaded aboard a C-SA transport for the flight to Groom Lake.
This was the first time a C-5 had flown from Burbank, and quite a crowd gathered.
After arrival, the plane was taken to one of the old Lockheed A-12 hangars at the south end of the Groom Lake complex.
Have Blue 1001 was reassembled in short order and engine thrust checks were made.
Three days before the first flight, these tests uncovered a serious overheating problem.
The functioning of the computer-stability system was also checked out, and minor adjustments were made in the yaw gains.
HAVE BLUE TAKES FLIGHT Shortly before 7:00 A.M. on December 1, 1977, Have Blue 1001 was taken from its hangar and taxied to the end of the runway.
The Have Blue 1001's entire surface was painted in patterns of light gray, black, and tan.
This was not camouflage in the traditional sense, but was meant to hide the shape of the aircraft.
The test was so secret that Lockheed Chairman Roy Anderson could not attend.
The flight was also timed so that no Soviet reconnaissance satellites were in position to photograph Groom Lake during the flight.
Both the White House situation room and Tactical Air Command Headquarters were monitoring the activities.
With security in place and the plane ready, Park made a final check and ran up the engines.
The engines were quiet compared to a normal jet, due to the radar-absorbing grids.
Without an afterburner, it took nearly the whole length to reach flying speed.
The little angular airplane finally lifted off and slowly climbed into the winter sky.
Over the next five months, the first Have Blue made a total of thirty-six test flights.
Park and Dyson covered most of the aircraft's speed and altitude envelope.
Only a few RCS flights were made; the aircraft had not really been intended for such tests.
Have Blue 1001 provided data on flight loads, flutter, performance, handling qualities, and stability and control.
The plane was unstable in pitch at speeds below Mach 0.3, and static directional stability was less than predicted.
These problems were corrected simply by changing the gain in the flight control system.
The platypus nozzles also affected stability—changing the power setting caused uneven heating, which warped their surfaces.
This, in turn, generated forces that were picked up by the stability control system.
The computer interpreted this as a change in flight direction and moved the fins to counter it.
The only major flaw in the design was the high sink rate on landing, which would be corrected in the production aircraft.
On May 4, 1978, Park was about to complete the thirty-sixth test flight when the plane hit the runway hard.
Rather than risk skidding off the runway, Park took off and went around again.
Park did not know that the right landing gear had been bent by the impact.
Over the next several minutes, he made several attempts to get the gear to extend.
The fuel supply was running low and there was no time for additional attempts.
As Park climbed to 10,000 feet, one of the engines flamed out from fuel starvation.
When the other engine quit, he would have only two seconds before the Have Blue went out of control.
He then pulled the ejector seat handle, the canopy blew off, and the seat rocketed him out of the plane.
As it did, Park's head struck the seat's headrest and he was knocked unconscious.
His parachute opened automatically, but he was still unconscious when his limp body hit the desert floor.
Park's leg was broken, he suffered a concussion, and his mouth was filled with dirt as the parachute was dragged across the desert by a strong wind.
The accident was the first indication of the program's existence since it went Black.
It was speculated that Park may have been injured in the crash of a TR-1, a modified version of the U-2R which was then about to enter production.
RCS TESTING The second Have Blue, 1002, was delivered in July 1978, two months after the loss of 1001.
To provide air-speed data, which was critical to the stability system, six measuring points were located in the upper and lower surfaces, the nose, and windshield center frame.
Building an air-speed system that was both accurate and stealthy proved difficult; the design of the airframe restricted where such probes could be located.
Have Blue 1002 was painted light gray overall rather than the camouflage finish of the first plane.
It also lacked a drag chute and was equipped with a steerable nose wheel, which improved ground handling.
Following several air-speed calibration flights, the baseline in-flight RCS measurements began.
Following completion of the tests, modifications were made based on the initial results.
A second series of penetration tests was run against ground radars and infrared systems.
In the final series of tests, Have Blue 1002 was flown against a simulated Soviet air defense network.
These included the SA-6 Straight Flush tracking radar, and the Bar Lock, Tall King, and Spoon Rest early warning radars.
These were either actual Soviet radars captured by the Israelis during the 1967 and 1973 wars, or copies built from scratch or modified from United States equipment.
The results were phenomenal—most SAM radars could not detect the Have Blue until it was within the missiles' minimum range.
Against VHP early warning radars, such as the Spoon Rest and Tall King, the results were more limited.
Even so, the faceted shape reduced the detection range to half that of a normal aircraft.
Against these radars, the plane would have to remain out of range, but since these radars were few in number, it would be a simple matter to bypass them.
Fighter pilots would have to pick it up visually, the same as their World War I counterparts.
The Have Blue showed that further advances in RAM would be needed for operational aircraft.
Before each flight, doors and access panels had to be sealed with metallic tape and the landing gear doors had to be adjusted for a correct fit.
Then after Dyson climbed into the aircraft, the gaps around the canopy and fuelfill door were filled with a paint-type RAM material and allowed to dry before the plane took off.
Three screws had not been fully tightened and were sticking up less than an eighth of an inch above the plane's skin.
Special efforts such as these were acceptable for a test aircraft, but for the operational aircraft, a more routine kind of procedure would be necessary.
The second Have Blue, 1002, was lost on July 11, 1979, during its fiftysecond flight, a test against an F-15's radar.
A weld in a hydraulic line cracked, spraying fluid onto the hot section of an engine.
Dyson tried to get back to Groom Lake but had lost hydraulic power and was cleared to bail out.
The plane crashed near the Tonopah Test Range, in the northern part of Nellis Air Force Base.
The curiosity of the drivers was ""satisfied,"" and they turned around and headed back.
Years later he noted, ""We knew we had a problem but we couldn't fix it without a long delay in the program, and it was vital that we get the information.
We wrecked two airplanes, but they were prototypes and served their purpose. ... | smile a lot because I am just happy to be here alive.
I believe that circumstances can occur that you cannot overcome no matter how good you are,'""4"" The shape of the Have Blue remained secret for fourteen years.
The code name was revealed in an October 1981 article in Aviation Week and Space Technology.
Its existence was officially confirmed in 1988, and Park talked about his crash the following year.
It was not until April 1991 that two photos of Have Blue 1001 were finally released.
Ironically, it is understood that the photos were released by accident.
The concept of faceting and, more importantly, its accomplishments were the darkest shade of Black.
With a single pair of prototypes, every radar ever built had been rendered blind.
Strategic airpower had undergone a revolution as great as that brought about by nuclear weapons.
Because Project Harvey had been unclassified, the existence of a stealth demonstrator was also known.
It claimed, ""This plane would be outlawed by the proposed SALT II Treaty, but is secretly being developed in case the pact fails, the source claimed.
The F-20 was only an improved F-5 fighter, which had nothing to do with the SALT II ® Vreaiy/ana' raaar can not'pick up the hot"" exhaust of a jet.
In the week of August 10, Aviation Week and Space Technology, the Washington Post, and ABC News all carried stories on stealth.
The stories said that stealth technology was being developed for several types of aircraft, including bombers.
They reported that it used RAM and curved surfaces to reduce the radar return.
President Carter and Defense Secretary Brown said later that they had considered three options to deal with the leaks.
Disinformation—attempting to discredit the stories through false information—was also ruled out.
Carter had been elected on the promise to cut defense spending, and during his presidency there was a major decline in United States military power.
Funding shortages had caused over 7 percent of air force aircraft to be grounded due to a lack of spare parts.
Air force crews wore flight suits that were so old the flame retardant had been washed out, but there was no money to buy new ones.
The navy was particularly hard hit; it had half the number of ships of ten years before and could not fully man them.
Enlisted personnel were so poorly paid—below minimum wage—that they had to put their families on food stamps or work second or third jobs.
The breaking point came with the failed attempt to rescue United States hostages held by the Iranians.
Unveiling the revolutionary possibilities of stealth seemed to be a way to counter Republican charges that President Carter had neglected defense.
I am announcing today a major technological advance of great military significance.
This so-called ‘stealth’ technology enables the United States to build manned and unmanned aircraft that cannot be successfully intercepted with existing air defense systems.
Brown noted that the effort had been kept secret for three years due to the efforts of the few people in government who had been briefed on the project and the contractors involved.
However, in the last few months, the circle of people knowledgeable about the program has widened, partly because of the increased size of the effort, and partly because of the debate under way in the Congress on new bomber proposals.
Regrettably, there have been several leaks about the stealth program in the last few days in the press and television news coverage.
In the face of these leaks, I believe that it is not appropriate or credible for us to deny the existence of this program.
I am gratified that, as yet, none of the most sensitive and significant classified information about the characteristics of this program has been disclosed.
An important objective of the announcement today is to make clear the kinds of information that we intend scrupulously to protect at the highest security level.
The information to be guarded was the specific techniques used, how effective they were, the characteristics of the aircraft under development, and the funding and schedules of the programs.
Perry also noted that ""stealth technology does not involve a single technical approach, but rather a complex synthesis of many.
In fact, any electronic emissions would give the plane's location away.
The article was illustrated with a CBS news drawing of a ""stealth"" airplane.
It had nothing in common with what engineers thought a stealth aircraft would look like, nor did it look like the Have Blue.
Instead, it resembled a navy F-8 Crusader with an inlet over the cockpit, two oddly bent curved wings, and a flat-tipped nose.
President Carter responded by blaming the Ford administration for not classifying stealth from the start.
On August 20, 1980, the House Armed Services Committee had been briefed on stealth.
Then, two days later, the press conference was held, which provided more information than they had been given.
The committee held hearings, which cast doubts on the explanation for the disclosure.
Benjamin Schemmer, editor of Armed Forces Journal, testified that in 1978 the magazine had withheld an article on stealth at the request of the Department of Defense; then in August 1980, he had been approached by William Perry, who encouraged him to publish a modified version of the original article.
It was to be published no later than August 21—the day before the press conference.
He testified that President Carter had decided to deliberately leak stealth information.
This would be used as an excuse to announce the program's existence, so the administration could take credit for it.
Zumwalt named as the alleged leaker of the information the deputy assistant to the president for national security affairs, David L Aaron.
Aaron submitted an affidavit with the committee denying Zumwalt's charges.
However, he refused to testify under oath due to a dispute between the committee and the White House over executive privilege.
The committee found Defense Secretary Brown's explanation for the press conference flimsy.
In a report issued in February 1981, they stated they could not understand how the ""damage-limiting tactic’ was supposed to work.
Based on the testimony of Schemmer and Zumwalt, along with Aaron's refusal to testify and Brown's weak explanation, the committee concluded that the disclosure had been made for politi154 DARK EAGLES cal ends.
The concept and possibilities of stealth, which few in the public and press could understand, did not mitigate the failure at Desert 1.
It was to warn both Republicans and Democrats that misfortune awaits those who disclose Black projects.
Not surprisingly, the new administration had very different ideas on how to handle Black airplanes.
THE GROOM MOUNTAINS LAND SEIZURE When the Groom Lake test site was established in 1955, the location's isolation was sufficient protection.
It was about twenty miles from the nearest highway and thirty miles from any town.
The 1979 Las Vegas Review-Journal article changed this; it named Groom Lake as the location of the test site.
The article noted that while older maps showed Groom Lake, more recent ones did not.
The article stripped Groom Lake of the anonymity that had protected the site for nearly twenty-five years.
With the increased press attention, several code names for the test site soon became known.
These included the Ranch, Area 51, and what was actually the call sign for Groom Lake's tower.
With the publication of the name Groom Lake, the flaw in Dreamland's security became apparent.
It was possible to hike into the area and observe the site, without trespassing.
The withdrawal of public land for military use must be periodically renewed.
The Dark Eagles of Dreamland 155, In the meantime, the Reagan administration had begun a major buildup of strategic nuclear forces.
A standard tactic was attempting to disrupt military activities, particularly those dealing with nuclear weapons.
On April 18, 1983, four Greenpeace demonstrators entered the nuclear test site via the dirt road that led to Groom Lake.
For five days, they hid out in the mountainous terrain, before finally surrendering to the test site guards.
It was widely believed that this incident caused the government to take action.
In March 1984, acting on the orders of Secretary of Defense Casper Weinberger and/or President Reagan, armed guards were posted on the land.
When hunters and hikers approached Groom Lake, the guards requested them not to enter the area.
A reporter who went out to the site in May found the guards were ""especially polite as they tell visitors they cannot drive farther along the dirt road"" that led to Groom Lake.
The reporter chatted with the guards and watched television while they waited for the supervisor to arrive.
The reporter repeatedly asked for the legal justification for the air force denying public access.
About 87 percent of the land in the state of Nevada was not under state control; it was federal land.
It would be August 6, 1984, before Congress could get around to holding hearings on the Groom Mountains.
The hearings before the House Subcommittee on Lands and National Parks saw a parade of Nevada officials, hunting and mining interests, and environmental groups such as the Sierra Club and Audubon Society.
The Groom Mountains land issue also became involved with wilderness policy.
Representative Sieberling proposed a trade-off—the air force could have the Nellis Air Force Base and Groom Lake land if 1,408,900 acres of the National Wildlife Range was designated a wilderness area.
This would close it to any development and restrict access to backpackers.
The deal would also restrict the tests the air force could conduct and limit the land withdrawal to December 31, 1987, pending an environmental report.
He then offered to withdraw the wilderness provisions, ifSenator Paul Laxalt would provide assurances he would get the Nevada congressional delegation to act on a wilderness bill that year.
The legal maneuvering continued for the next three years, and involved ""compensation"" for the loss of recreation, grazing, and mining claims on the land.
Environmentalists also continued to complain they were not getting enough.
The day before the extension was to expire, the House separated the Groom Mountain issue from the wilderness bill.
It had taken a total of six years—twice the time needed to develop, build, and conduct the flight and RCS tests of the Have Blue.
The new boundaries of the Dreamland restricted area were laid out in straight lines.
It was not realized at the time that a few spots had been missed, but that did not matter—for the moment.
While this controversy dragged on, the descendent of Have Blue had made its first flight, undergone systems development, and reached operational status behind the shield of the mountains.
A few months later, this Dark Eagle would be publicly unveiled to questions about its cost and whether stealth would work.
By mid-1978, the Have Blue 1001 had proven the basic concept of stealth.
The air force chose the stealth fighter design, and on November 16, 1978, Lockheed was given a contract to begin preliminary design work.
SENIOR TREND The Have Blue aircraft had been designed solely to test faceting, with no allowances for tactical systems or weapons.
The little experimental plane would have to be transformed into an operational aircraft.
This meant more than simply adding these systems; the aerodynamic and RCS testing had also revealed the need for other design changes.
The Have Blue's twin fins were canted inward to shield the platypus exhausts from infrared detectors above the aircraft.
In practice, however, the fins reflected the heat toward the ground, making the plane more visible from below.
The twin fins were also mounted on a pair of booms, which proved structurally inefficient.
The fins were attached to a central spine that also carried the weight of the weapons.
This resulted in a poor lift-drag ratio, which cut into payload and range performance.
Highly swept, low-aspect ratio wings also lose airspeed rapidly in a sustained high-g turn.
The sweep angle was reduced to 67. degrees, and the wings were extended as far back as possible to improve performance.
Operational requirements also resulted in a change to the design of the windshield and nose.
The plane would also carry two infrared imaging systems—one looking down, and the other looking forward.
Neither the HUD nor the forward-looking system could be fitted into the Have Blue's nose shape.
This gave the new design a distinctive appearance, over the more conventional shape of the Have Blue's nose section.
With the operational aircraft, the total number of maintenance hours per hour of flight time was to be similar to that of conventional twin-engine fighters.
The portion related to the stealth design was to be limited to a small fraction of the total.
To meet the requirements, servicing accesses for aircraft subsystems were located in the wheel wells and weapons bays.
Most of the changes from the Have Blue were internal—a reengineered cockpit, revised inlets and exhaust system, tactical systems, a braking parachute and arresting hook, an anti-icing system for the inlet grid, fuel tanks in the wings, retractable antennae, formation and anticollision lights, an inflight refueling receptacle, and, finally, two weapons bays.
The pilot would put the laser beam on the aim point, and the bombs would home in on the laser light reflected from the target.
Stealth meant a single aircraft could penetrate the heaviest air defenses.
LGBs meant this single plane could then destroy any target, no matter how small or hardened against attack.
The aircraft which emerged from the redesign had a shape similar to that of the Have Blue, but the fuselage was wider and more squat.
Seen from the front, it resembled a pyramid; from the rear, the plane looked almost flat.
This posed a security problem—such testing was done outdoors where the model might be photographed by Soviet reconnaissance satellites.
The first Senior Trend was given the aircraft number 780, for its scheduled first flight date of July 1980.
The General Electric F404-GE-F1D2 turbofan engines were from the navy F/A-18, without the afterburners of the fighter.
The F/A-18 also provided the multifunction cathode-ray tubes, HUD, fuel controls, stick grip, and throttles.
Other systems came from just about every Lockheed aircraft built since the T-33; these included the SR-71, C-130, L-1011, and even the F-104.
It was obvious that a computer-controlled, fly-by-wire system was needed.
There was no manual backup system because it was impossible for a pilot to control the plane without the computer.
The F-16's fly-by-wire system was selected; actuators, flight-control computer chassis, and power supply were modified slightly.
Despite the Skunk Work's best efforts, by the summer of 1980 the project was behind schedule, and the first flight was nowhere in sight.
In the midst of this, Ben Rich's wife, Faye, died of a heart attack, leaving him emotionally devastated.
When he returned to work, Alan Brown, the Senior Trend program director gave him a note.
The fuselage was covered in a shroud, and a wooden framework was added to the nose to further hide its shape.
Before the first flight, patterns of light blue and light brown were painted on the aircraft.
On June 18, 1981, just as Brown had predicted during the dark days of nearly a year before, everything was ready.
As with the first hops of both the U-2 and A-12, it was to be an eventful flight.
It was a difficult task to design an air-data system that was stealthy.
Because the air-data probes had shown erratic readings during ground vibration testing, it was decided to ballast the aircraft to a far forward center of gravity point, turn off the angle of attack, and sideslip measurements to the flightcontrol system.
Farley immediately switched on the sideslip feedback to the flight-control computer.
The plane's handling ""stiffened up,"" and the rest of the flight was routine.
Subsequent analyses indicated the Senior Trend's directional stability and directional-control power were less than predicted.
After a few months, 780's desert camouflage was removed, and it was repainted light gray.
While the first two were aerodynamic test aircraft, the other three were systems aircraft.
As such, they had the full set of cockpit displays, just as on the operational aircraft.
The fifth FSD aircraft reportedly sported a full-color painting of Elliott, the dragon from the Disney film Pete's Dragon.
The commanding general of the Tactical Air Command then ordered they be painted black.
The flight-test program explored a number of unknowns related to the Senior Trend's stealth design.
Many test hours were required to calibrate the air-data system for angle of attack, sideslip, airspeed, and altitude.
A critical part of the flight control system was the angle of attack limiter.
Angle of attack refers to the angle between a plane's wing and the direction of the airflow.
Wind-tunnel tests and free flights of unpowered models indicated the Senior Trend would pitch up at high angles of attack.
The aircraft would then enter a ""deep stall"" and would not be recoverable.
The AOA limiter would have to automatically move the control surfaces to prevent the aircraft from exceeding the critical value.
One of the FSD aircraft was on final, with its left wing low, when a strong wind gust hit it.
This caused the AOA and sideslip to instantaneously reach levels higher than any tested—higher, in fact, than could be tested in the wind tunnel.
The AOA limiter countered with full down eleven in less than 0. seconds and moved the fins 90 percent of their full travel.
The early tests showed no problems, but during a weapons compatibility test, an air force test pilot put the aircraft into a sideslip while flying at near maximum speed.
The pilot made it back to a successful landing despite very poor stability.
The problem was traced to the redesign of the fins—the added area had reduced the fin's stiffness.
In fact, they acted like ""flow straighteners,"" giving the engines a constant flow of air.
If the Senior Trend was to be an effective bombing platform, the avionics systems would have to show capabilities never before achieved.
The pilot would have to find the target, which was not an area or a wide-spread factory but rather a specific part of one specific building, then direct the LGB to the aim point—all in the dark.
The heart of the Senior Trend's bombing system was a pair of infrared turrets—the forward-looking infrared , located in the front of the plane, and the downward-looking infrared on the plane's underside.
Each turret was mounted in a well that was covered by a fine-mesh, radarabsorbing screen.
The image from the system was displayed on the instrument panel's central cathode-ray tube.
To give one example, the FLIR turret would have to pick up the target at long range, then track it as the plane approached.
The FLIR would then have to ""hand off"" the target to the DLIR without losing the target lock.
It proved impossible to electronically boresight the two turrets, which created problems in the handoff.
Added difficulties included problems with level and gain controls, turret slew rates, and target acquisition and illumination.
Some of the problems were purely subjective, which made it even more difficult.
There were three test aircraft and six test pilots; what one pilot judged unacceptable on one plane was called good by another pilot.
It was headed by the Skunk Works chief scientist and drew man power from other Lockheed divisions.
Like the engineers who had worked on earlier Black airplanes, the team came up with innovative, simple solutions to the complex problems.
They abandoned efforts to electronically boresight the turrets and used a mechanical procedure.
This raised the nose and allowed both turrets to view the same target board simultaneously.
To prevent the control surfaces from scraping the ground, mattresses were placed under them when the hydraulic system was shut down.
A portable boresight fixture was developed, the turret mounts were fixed in place with epoxy, and tolerances were tightened.
Another difficult flight maneuver was loft bombing, where the plane goes from level flight into a steep 4-g pull up.
The bomb is released during the pull up and is ""thrown"" toward the target.
The video display problems were traced to electromagnetic interference due to poor shielding.
When he knocked on the door, a man opened it an inch and asked if he was Whitley.
Once Whitley was in the room, he was offered a chance to fly with a topsecret unit.
The duty would require constant separation from his family, and he could not be told much more.
He had five minutes to decide, and when he left the room, the decision stood.
Whitley did not know what airplane he would be flying, or what the unit would be doing.
Whitley thus became a member of a secret brotherhood composed initially of about ten officers and a dozen enlisted men—the 4450th Tactical Group.
Once they agreed, the pilots were told to go back to their units and wait for a call.
Although the 4450th Tactical Group was formally established on October 15, 1979, training did not begin until June 1981.
Whitley and the other pilots spent time at Lockheed in the cockpit procedures trainer.
This was a model of the cockpit on which the pilot could learn the layout of the various consoles, but not how the plane would fly.
On seeing the FSD aircraft under construction, the pilots’ initial reactions were to wonder if that strangelooking airplane could really fly.
Ironically, the unit that was to fly the world's first stealth aircraft had no airplanes.
The flight line was walled off with a double fence; the only access to the runway was through gates.
The area between the fences was lighted at night and had intruder detectors.
At first, the facilities were limited to a few buildings, a small mess hall, and sixteen winterized trailers.
These were soon replaced by dormitories and hotel-style rooms for the pilots and support personnel.
Because all the flights were done at night, the rooms featured blackout curtains to keep out the sun during the daylight sleeping hours.
The runway, taxiways, and aprons were all improved, while maintenance facilities, fuel and water tanks, fire stations, and a dining hall were built.
Before the 4450th Tactical Group could become a fully functional unit, it would need the production Senior Trend aircraft.
The plane lifted off correctly, but moments after the main wheels left the runway, it yawed violently and went out of control.
Within seconds, the plane went inverted going backward and slammed into the ground on the shore of the lake bed.
It took rescue crews some twenty minutes to pull Riedenauer from the wreckage.
The cause of the crash was traced to incorrect installation of several wires to the flight-control system.
The computer read the pitch-up as an uncommanded yaw movement and ""corrected"" for it.
Although Jackson had organized the unit and started construction of TTR, Allen would oversee flight training and the move to operational status.
Major Alton Whitley was picked to make the unit's first operational flight.
As each new pilot made his first flight, he was given his own Bandit number.
It would be another six years before he was allowed to tell his family what the inscription meant.
Unlike Groom Lake, all flight operations at TTR were conducted at night.
The pilots would leave Nellis Air Force Base on Monday afternoon and fly to TTR on Key Airlines, which operated a shuttle service to the base.
This continued until sufficient confidence had been gained in the aircraft.
Even so, it took a presidential authorization to begin off-range flights.
In the event of an unscheduled landing, the pilots carried a signed letter from a senior air force general ordering the base or wing commander to protect the aircraft.
Once sufficient aircraft had been delivered, two waves were flown per night.
This involved eight primary aircraft and two spares, for a total of eighteen sorties.
The aircraft would fly the first wave (called the ""earlygo""), then return to TTR and be serviced.
On other nights, there would be a ""turkey shoot"" with some fourteen targets.
The missions ranged across the southwest, and the targets were changed each time, to make it more challenging.
Rather, the targets would be such things as a fire warden's shack in a forest, or the intersection of two dirt roads.
When it snowed, it was even harder to pick them up, as there was little temperature difference between the targets and the ground.
It was not visible against the cold water of the lake, and none of the pilots found it.
The second wave was completed by about 2:30 or 3:00 A.M. in the winter, a few hours later in the summer.
The planes had to be in their hangars and the doors closed one hour before sunrise.
It had been found that sleep is disrupted if a person tries to go to bed after seeing the sunrise.
They would sleep six or seven hours, then begin their twelve-hour ""day"" again.
During a month, each pilot would make ten to twelve flights in the Senior Trend and another five or six A-7 flights.
Friday afternoon, the pilots would pack up and fly back to Las Vegas to their families and a normal day-night cycle.
They would spend the weekend at home, then start it all over again Monday afternoon.
The pilots could call home from TTR every day but could not say where they were.
If a truck was seen in the hills around the base, it would be checked out, as were airplanes flying near the base's restricted airspace.
Trips into Tonopah were also discouraged— security did not want a lot of air force uniforms visible.
Within the building was another vault room where the aircraft flight manuals were stored.
When in use, the manuals always had to be in the pilot's physical possession—if a pilot had to go to the bathroom, his manuals were given to someone or returned to the vault.
On off-range flights, the pilots talked to the air traffic controllers as if they were in an A-7.
Each plane also carried a transponder that indicated to radar operators that it was an A-7.
Even though the planes flew only at night, special care was taken to avoid sightings.
If a plane flew under a high overcast, the reflected city lights would silhouette it against the clouds.
Several routes were not flown if the moon was more than 50 percent full.
Conventional tactics were intended to prevent the plane from being shot down—the attack was secondary.
When the target was reached, the plane would have to pop up to a higher altitude to release the bombs.
Such low-altitude, high-speed attack profiles made LGB drops difficult.
This allowed the pilot to concentrate on the attack, rather than on avoiding hitting the ground.
The high-altitude flight also permitted the target to be picked up at much longer ranges.
A new technology had been developed and they had to discover how best to use it, much as airpower theorists had done in the 1920s and 1930s.
Originally, the air force envisioned only a single squadron of eighteen Senior Trend aircraft.
One or two planes could attack a single, high-value target without being detected.
The early success of the program, however, convinced the air force and Congress that a full wing was needed.
Orders were placed with Lockheed for a total of fifty-nine production aircraft.
A plan for using the full wing could not be developed when even the senior air force commanders in Europe and the Pacific had not been told about the aircraft.
Five days later, the 4450th Tactical Group was declared to have achieved an initial operational capability.
Reportedly, orders were also received to prepare for attacks on PLO camps in southern Lebanon, in retaliation for the Beirut bombing.
According to these reports, the aircraft flew from TTR to Myrtle Beach, South Carolina.
The planes were placed in hangars, and the pilots rested for forty-eight hours.
They would fly nonstop to southern Lebanon and strike terrorist targets.
In the years following the aborted attack, the 4450th Tactical Group saw changes in command.
Colonel Estes led the unit through its first operational readiness inspection, earning a rating of excellent.
Soon after, the unit was reportedly alerted for a second possible combat mission.
Mu'ammar al-Gadhafi, had long been suspected of backing terrorist attacks.
During the evening of April 4, 1986, a message from the Libyan embassy in East Berlin was intercepted and decoded by British intelligence saying a bombing was about to take place and that American soldiers would be hit.
Just before 2:00 A.M. on April 5, a bomb exploded in the La Bella Discotheque, killing two GIs and a Turkish woman.
Minutes later, the Libyan embassy sent a coded message that the operation had succeeded and could not be traced to them.
Libyan air defenses were more numerous than those of North Vietnam more than a decade before.
Indeed, only three targets in the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact countries were better defended than Tripoli and Benghazi, Libya.
The Senior Trend aircraft was judged ideal for such a mission and was reportedly included in the attack plan.
It has been stated that less than an hour before takeoff, Weinberger again canceled their participation, on the grounds that the targets were not worth risking the planes.
NAMES AND PATCHES Secret symbols have long been associated with the Dark Eagles, but the tradition reached new heights with the Senior Trend program.
After finding a ""huge"" scorpion in their office area, the test team adopted this as their symbol.
The FSD 4 aircraft had its own patch—a red delta shape with the number ""4"" and a black scorpion superimposed over it.
The ""Pete's Dragon"" aircraft also had its own patch—a black shield with a green dragon and ""Pete's Dragon"" in red.
Other than the ""Pete's Dragon” design, artwork on the FSD aircraft was limited.
The most spectacular exception occurred in 1984, when Weinberger went to Groom Lake.
As part of the display of Black airplane activities, a Senior Trend made a flyby.
The plane approached the reviewing stand from the south and banked to show its top surface.
As it reached the center of the crowd, the plane banked again and showed a flag design painted on its underside.
It was also called ""the Black Jet,"" to differentiate it from the camouflaged A-7.
Even the C-5 flight crews that picked up the completed aircraft at Burbank had their patch—a black circle with a white crescent moon and a large question mark.
When the Senior Trend began to fly, Lockheed started referring to it as ""117"" until the actual designation could be given.
LEAKS The incoming Reagan administration increased the secrecy surrounding the stealth program.
Although several projects would remain unknown for a decade and more, the effort was not entirely successful with the stealth fighter.
In June 1981, an article in Aviation Week and Space Technology said the Lockheed demonstrator aircraft was undergoing tests against Soviet equipment.
The general pattern was a long SR-71-like fuselage, elliptical wings at the rear, a bubble canopy, canards, and twin inward-canted fins.
As it was now known the SR71 had a reduced RCS, it was assumed the ""F-19"" was similar.
At the same time, it noted that ""some experts scoff at the suggestion that the Air Force could deploy 40 stealth fighter planes in the western deserts without public knowledge.
These accounts were in the technical press and so had little impact on the public.
This changed in May 1986, when the F-19 arrived at the local hobby shop.
THE TESTORS F-19 STEALTH FIGHTER Among those following the stealth story was the Testers Corporation.
The design was based on technical data, such as the Radar Cross Section Handbook, on a description from an airliner pilot of a black airplane seen over Mono Lake in 1983, and on the various published reports.
It had inwardly canted rudders, curved surfaces, and blended air inlets.
Testers was even able to test it in a San Diego defense contractor's RCS test range.
Although it was described as being about ""80 percent accurate,"" only two features were correct—the pilot tube and the platypus exhaust.
In late June 1986, two Lockheed engineers made accusations that hundreds of documents, photos, films, and tapes were missing.
Dingell, as chairman of the oversight and investigation subcommittee of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, held hearings on the alleged security leaks on the F-19.
LOSSES The night operations of the 4450th Tactical Group continued to have an adverse effect on its pilots.
He noted, ""I believe that these extended hours are taking their toll on overall pilot performance.
He added, ""if we liken our usual late-go to a time-bomb waiting to go off, then our extended summer hours are accelerating the countdown to zero.
Mulhare had been declared mission ready in the F-117A on March 18, 1986.
Although an experienced pilot, he had a total of only fifty-three and a half hours in the plane.
He flew northwest to the town of Tonopah, then headed southwest and climbed to 20,000 feet.
After crossing the Sierra Nevadas, Mulhare turned south along the eastern edge of the San Joaquin Valley.
During the flight, Mulhare was in contact with the Los Angeles and Oakland Centers.
On the ground, Andy Hoyt, his sister Lisa, and her sixteen-year-old son, Joey, had pulled over at a rest stop.
Hoyt got out his camera and took two or three photos before the object disappeared behind a hill.
The crash site was declared a national security area—no unauthorized people could enter the site, and no planes could fly within five miles of the crash site at altitudes below 8,500 feet.
When Hoyt called Edwards Air Force Base to report what he had seen, the air force brought the three of them to a command post near the crash site.
The air force said only that a plane had crashed and the pilot had been killed.
They would not say what type of aircraft, where it had taken off, its mission, or where it was going.
The reports that followed the crash were a mixture of guesswork and speculation.
Newsweek ran an article that claimed over seventy-two stealth fighters were operational; it speculated that the crash site would have to be cordoned off ""forever"" to prevent the Soviets from recovering debris.
An August 22, 1986, Washington Post story said that about fifty aircraft were operational, that the F-19 designation was incorrect, and that the plane was described as ""ugly"" due to its bulging, nontraditional shape.
While the press chased rumors and shadows, the air force tried to find the cause of the crash.
The F-117A had hit the ground in a steep dive, between 20 and 60 degrees.
There had been no in-flight fire, the engines were at a high-power setting at the time of impact, and Mulhare had not attempted to eject.
At night, without the normal visual clues, a pilot cannot tell if he is flying straight or is in a turn.
Normally, the artificial horizon and other instruments are in the center of the panel, so the pilot can read them without moving his head.
On the F-117A, the center of the panel is occupied by the FLIR-DLIR screen.
This took some getting used to, and more important, it could cause vertigo.
Although the training schedule remained demanding, pilots were more closely monitored for signs of fatigue and were better trained to resist disorientation.
Pilots would watch each other; if someone showed signs of fatigue, a buddy would pull him aside for a private chat.
Several times, he had spoken about the need to avoid unnecessary risks.
The flight was a single-plane mission that would remain within the Nellis Air Force Base range.
At 8:33 P.M., about three-fourths of the way through the mission, radar controllers noticed the plane had strayed to the left of its planned ground track.
Shortly thereafter, a large fire on the Nellis range was reported to the Bureau of Land Management , which relayed word to the air force.
The F-117A hit the ground in an area of gently sloping desert, digging a crater six to seven feet deep.
The plane was 28-degrees nose down and in a 55-degree right bank at impact.
There were a number of similarities to the loss of Mulhare the year before.
Both were experienced pilots but had limited time in the F-117A— 53. hours for Mulhare, 76. hours for Stewart.
As with the earlier crash, the air force released minimal information, but the press had no doubt that another ""stealth fighter"" had crashed.
Because the crash had occurred within the Nellis range, however, there was not the publicity of the first loss.
The attempt was unsuccessful due to weather, and Teagarden was forced to eject.
He landed safely, but the A-7D crashed into the lobby of a Ramada Inn, killing nine people.
Press interest grew when it was learned that Major Teagarden was a member of the 4450th Tactical Group—the same unit Mulhare and Stewart had flown with.
OUT OF THE BLACK Although the erroneous reports effectively hid the true information, it was clear that the wall of secrecy around the F-117A was breaking down.
The F-117A actually used large panels, but the basic principle was the same.
A second major disclosure came in September 1987 with the release of a second Testors kit.
The stealth fighter was such an open secret by the fall of 1988, that even the air force could joke about it.
At that year's Edwards Air Force Base Air Show a large area was roped off.
Bringing the F-117A out of the Black would have a number of advantages.
The plane could be used in Red Flag exercises and could become part of standard war planning.
With daylight flights possible, the fatigue from the late hours would be lessened.
The air force had planned to announce the F-117A's existence in early October 1988.
It was argued that if Congress had funded a Black program, then Congress should be consulted in any decision to declassify the program.
A congressional staffer complained, ""They can't just unilaterally release information at their insistence,” and referred to the air force's ""irresponsible handling"" of the matter.
The press release contained the facts that the first flight had been made in June 1981, that three had crashed, and that fifty-two had been delivered out of a total of fifty-nine ordered from Lockheed.
The angular shape came as a surprise, as did the out-ofsequence ""century-series” designation.
The photo showed the plane in a slight turn and gave no clue as to size.
No information was given out as to the F-117A’s dimensions, cost, range, or speed.
Between 10:30 and 11:30 P.M. that night, another group of at least six planes was spotted flying the same route.
Other sightings were made at TTR, where cameraequipped observers photographed the planes as they made takeoffs and landings.
Despite the F-117As coming out of the Black, speculation about the aircraft continued.
People began watching the skies, looking and listening for ""other"" Black airplanes—the ones that were still being kept secret.
Manuel Noriega, had been indicted by two Florida grand juries on charges of laundering drug money.
He laughed off the charges and dismissed Panama's president in February.
During the May 1989 presidential election campaign, Noriega's ""Dignity Battalion"" goon squad beat up opposition candidate Guillermo Endara.
Endara won the election, but on October 1, Noriega prevented him from taking office.
Two days later, a coup attempt was made but collapsed when loyalist Panamanian Defense Forces rescued Noriega.
On December 15, Noriega declared a state of war between the United States and Panama.
The following evening, PDF soldiers killed a marine lieutenant and arrested a navy lieutenant and his wife who had witnessed the shooting.
The attack was to strike PDF forces, capture Noriega, and rescue political prisoners.
United States Army Rangers were to be dropped at the adjoining airfield.
Carl W Stiner, the XVHI Airborne Corps commander, requested F-117As be used.
They would not bomb the two barracks, but rather the 2,000-pound LBGs with time-delay fuzes would be directed to aim points near the buildings.
They would act as ""a giant stun grenade,"" to confuse the PDF troops without killing them.
The use of F117As was based on their night-bombing accuracy, rather than stealth, as the PDF lacked heavy air defenses.
Two of the planes were targeted on Rio Hato, two more were to provide support for an attempt to capture Noriega, and the final pair were in-flight spares should any of the others suffer malfunctions.
As the planes neared Panama, the attempt to capture Noriega was called off because he was not at any of the potential targets.
As the two F-117As approached the release point, a moment of confusion occurred that would mar their debut.
The original plan was for the lead plane to drop its bomb in a field near the barracks on the left, while his wingman would drop his bomb in a field near a barracks on the right.
Gregory A Feest, responded by telling his wingman to switch targets with him.
At the drop point, however, the lead pilot bombed his original aim point.
This was only 18 yards from the 6th Company barracks, which was too close.
Initial reports spoke of PDF soldiers running around in their underwear, while others threw down their weapons.
Defense Secretary Richard B Cheney was advised both bombs hit their targets.
The following days saw the running down of scattered snipers and a prolonged hunt for Noriega.
The press had its ""cover-up"" story, and the usefulness of the F-117A was further questioned.
During 1989, one by one, like dominoes, Eastern European countries cast off their Communist governments.
The world had changed—whatever followed would be far different than the past forty years.
Questions arose about what role, if any, the United States military would play in this brave new world.
Now its descendant, the F-117A, was being dismissed as a useless relic of an era never to return.
At Groom Lake, as the afternoon passed, the shadows from the mountains lengthened toward darkness.
Suddenly, three Iraqi armored divisions, backed up with MiGs and helicopters, attacked Kuwait.
It seemed that Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein's ambition would not end there.
Soon after the invasion, seven more Iraqi divisions took up positions along the Saudi-Arabian border.
The Iraqis could take the Eastern Province in six to twelve hours, and the whole country in three days.
On August 6, King Fahdibn Abd al-Aziz Al Saud of Saudi Arabia invited United States troops into the country.
On August 17, Alton Whitley, now a colonel, was named commander of the 37th Fighter Wing.
Four hours later, he was ordered to deploy the 415th TFS to Saudi Arabia.
The brand-new base was located at the southern tip of Saudi Arabia, outside the range of Iraqi Scud missiles.
It had state-of-the-art hardened aircraft shelters and even hardened crew quarters.
Only four of the sixty-five stealth pilots had flown combat, one of them in Panama.
The flights exactly simulated the operational missions, right up to the point that the F-117A would head into Iraqi airspace.
As part of this, another twenty F-117As from the 416th TFS flew to Tonopah East, arriving on December 4.
As the Allied buildup continued in the Gulf, doubts were expressed that the effort would be successful.
Dug-in troops could not be dislodged by bombing, nor could airpower cut off supplies to Iraqi troops.
Another voice added, ""The United States relies on the Air Force and the Air Force has never been the decisive ‘racior in tne mstory 01 wars'."""" me'voice was that ~ot ""Saddam Hussein.
The Iraqi use of poison gas in the war with Iran brought back echoes of the mass slaughter of World War I Estimates of United States casualties from such a ground war ran as high as forty-thousand-plus.
In a real sense, the United States had to fight not only the Iraqis, but also the ghosts of its Vietnam experience.
On January 12, 1991, the Congress approved the use of force to back up a United Nations resolution calling on the Iraqis to withdraw from Kuwait.
The UN deadline expired on January 15, and President Bush ordered combat operations to begin.
This war would begin over Baghdad and would strike at the heart of Iraqi air defenses and communications facilities.
This air-defense network controlled some five hundred radars, the SA-2, SA-3, SA-6, SA-8, and Roland SAMs, and some eight thousand antiaircraft guns.
Ironically, the senior commanders and the F-117 pilots had very different images of the plane.
The commanders had great faith in stealth, but due to the flawed Panama attack, there were questions about the plane's bombing accuracy.
The F-117 pilots, on the other hand, had absolute faith in their ability to hit the targets.
At the briefing, Colonel Whitley tried to prepare them for what was ahead.
He explained what it would be like when the whole world seemed to be firing at them.
He recalled, ""I told them there would be hormones that would flow that they'd never tapped before.
The pilots arrived at their planes about 10:30 P.M. and began the preflight inspection.
The ground crews then handed them the paperwork for the mission—target photos, maps, checklists, and locations of emergency airfields.
Each pilot also carried a protective suit against chemical attack, a rescue radio beacon, a ""blood chit"" , which promised a large reward for helping a pilot escape, and a 9mm Berreta automatic.
The first wave was made up of 415th TFS pilots; they had been at Tonopah East since August, so Colonel Whitley felt they should have the honor of being first.
Just before midnight the F-117AS were towed out of the hangars and began moving down the taxiway.
The day shift had just come off duty, and the taxiway was lined with maintenance personnel.
Just after midnight, the first F-117A took off; by 12:22 A.M., January 17, the last was gone.
The second was completed thirty-five nautical miles from the Iraqi border.
EST , CNN's David French was interviewing former defense secretary Casper Weinberger.
The sky above Baghdad had erupted with antiaircraft fire, but, as yet, there were no United States aircraft over Baghdad.
At 2:39 A.M., only minutes after CNN began broadcasting from Baghdad, army Apache helicopters blasted two Iraqi early warning radar sites.
This opened a gap in radar coverage, and F-15Es flew through it to strike Scud missile sites in western Iraq.
Unlike the F-15Es, they did not have support from EF-l1]Ajamming aircraft.
Located in a hardened bunker, it could coordinate attacks on the incoming F-15Es and the followon strikes.
When he looked back, Feest saw the night sky was filled with antiaircraft fire, triggered by the bomb's explosion.
When he looked toward the second target, he saw the whole sky was alive with ground fire.
As the other F-117As closed on Baghdad, antiaircraft fire seemed suspended above the city.
Lieutenant Colonel Ralph Getchell, 415th TFS commander and leader of the first wave, likened it to Washington, D.C., on the Fourth of July.
The firing at the empty sky had been going on for a full twenty minutes, but at 2:56 A.M., a cease-fire order was issued.
From their cockpits, the pilots could see the eerie glow suddenly disappear.
H hour, Marcel Kerdavid had destroyed the AlKark communications tower, Capt.
Mark Lindstrom dropped an LGB through a roof vent on the new Iraqi air force headquarters, while Ralph Getchell struck the National Air Defense Operations Center, and Lee Gustin bombed Saddam Hussein's lakeside palace-command center.
As the first bombs exploded, the F-117 pilots saw antiaircraft fire rise above the city.
Major Jerry Leatherman, following one minute behind Dolson, dropped his two GBU-10 LGBs through the hole blasted by the first bomb.
Unlike the GBU-27, which was designed for attacking hard targets, the GBU-10 had a thin casing and a greater blast effect.
As his plane cleared the area, he looked back and beheld the wall of fire he and the other pilots had flown through.
He said later, ""There were greens, reds, some yellows, and you could see little white flashes all over— the airbursts . . . move around as they were trying to guide on something, whereas the tracers would just move in a straight line.
Others headed for their second target; Kerdavid bombed the deep National Command alternate bunker at the North Taji military complex.
Its thirty-feet-thick roof proved too much even for a GBU-27, and it remained intact.
The Tomahawks directed against the electrical plants shorted out power lines, and all over Baghdad, power went out, not to be restored for the rest of the war.
At 3:30 A.M., the disrupted air-defense network began picking up a huge attack force heading directly toward Baghdad.
Michael J Dugan in September 1990 had indicated there would be a raid on Baghdad by nonstealthy aircraft between F-117A strikes.
General Dugan was fired for the comments, but the Iraqis still expected such an attack.
As the planes neared, the radars came on and the SAMs were prepared to fire.
And behind them were navy A-7s and F/A-18s and air force F-4Gs with HARM (high-speed antiradiation) missiles.
Even as the Iraqis were attempting to deal with this, the second F-117A wave was closing on Baghdad.
The glow was the continuous firing of nearly four thousand antiaircraft guns.
At 4:00 A.M., the second F-117A wave restruck the air force headquarters and the National Air Defense Operations Center.
In all, the two waves had dropped thirty-three bombs and scored twenty-three hits.
The late hour was selected because sunlight would reduce the danger from Anthrax spores.
As they approached their targets, a weather front moved into central Iraq, with thin clouds at 5,000 feet.
The F-117A's bombing system required a clear view of the target or the LGB would lose its lock.
They knew they had won a victory, but they were sure the cost had been high.
The first wave landed at night, while the second and third came back after sunrise.
As the tapes of the strikes were reviewed, it became clear that something remarkable had occurred.
In World War II, the RAF had sent huge armadas of bombers on night raids against Germany.
Now, a handful of planes had faced an air-defense network that dwarfed that of Berlin in 1943-44, struck at the heart of the enemy capital, and emerged without a scratch.
The operators were unable to operate their tracking and fire control radar, for fear a HARM missile would destroy them.
Units in the field had limited communications with each other and with higher command.
In the Civil War, it was the Battle of Gettysburg; in the Pacific in World War II, it was the Battle of Midway; in the Gulf War, that was the moment.
THE BLACK JET AT WAR The ground fire that greeted the F-117As on the second night was described as perhaps the most intense of the Gulf War.
Lieutenant Colonel Miles Pound said, ""They knew we were at war that second night and they had every gun manned.
The last ten minutes before the target commanded the pilots’ full attention.
Pound explained later, ""My own technique was to run the seat down, so I wasn't distracted by what was going on outside.
The chemical and biological weapons bunkers not hit on the first night were also targeted.
On January 19, the weather front stalled over Iraq, and visibility was poor.
Beginning on the third day, it was planned to send large ""packages"" of F-16s to Baghdad during daylight.
They would attack large targets such as oil refineries and headquarters.
The round-the-clock missions—F-117As by night and F-16s by day—would serve notice that Iraq could not defend itself.
The first of these daylight attacks was ""Package Q""—seventy F-16s, as well as support aircraft.
The strike was directed against the Daura petroleum refinery and the Baghdad nuclear research center.
Bad weather, heavy ground fire, and smoke screens resulted in a failure.
It was clear the skies of Baghdad were too dangerous for conventional attacks.
The Baghdad nuclear research center was huge, with four reactors and large numbers of support buildings—about one hundred structures in all.
The Black Jets would have to destroy Saddam's war machine one aim point at a time.
Two reactors were destroyed, another was severely damaged, and research buildings were also hit.
The Iraqis did not know the attack was under way until the bombs exploded.
The F-117A strike was quite a contrast with Package Q The eight planes had been supported by just two KC-135 tankers.
The Package Q attack on the facility had consisted of thirty-two F-16 bombers, sixteen F-15Cs as air escorts, four EF-lllAs and eight F-4Gs to suppress the defenses, and fifteen tankers.
On the tactical level, the goal was to prevent air defenses from functioning, and chemical or biological weapons from being used against Coalition troops.
SHELTER BUSTING The Iraqi air force showed no more success in countering Coalition air strikes than ground fire.
It was feared that the Iraqis might launch an ""Air Tet""—a sudden, massive, and suicidal air raid, possibly using chemical weapons, meant for maximum propaganda and destructive effect.
One United States Army reservist recalled having his ""head on a swivel"" watching for Iraqi planes.
His special concern was understandable; he drove a large, green fuel truck.
Its destruction would reduce Saddam's future role as a regional troublemaker.
They were joined the following night by the F-117As, when fourteen Black Jets attacked the Balad Southeast Air Base.
One plane was forced to divert to an alternate target, but the others scored twenty-one hits on the HASs.
The GBU-1lOs penetrated the outer layer of concrete but were deflected by the second layer of dirt and rock.
The Iraqis concluded that the HASs worked, and more planes were hidden away.
On the eighth night of the war, intelligence was received that Air Tet was at hand.
It was reported that eight Tu-16 bombers at Al-Tagaddum Air Base were being loaded with chemical weapons for a dawn strike.
The Tu-16 bombers were fully fueled and had support vehicles grouped around them.
When the GBU-10Os struck three of the Tu-l6s, they exploded in huge fireballs.
The night's first wave struck the Qayyarah West, Al Assad, and Kirkuk Air Bases.
These targets required the F-117As be refueled by tankers flying inside Iraqi airspace—the best example possible of Coalition air supremacy.
In many cases, the armored doors were blown off, and smoke and flame billowed out.
In the days ahead, the Iraqi planes ran a gauntlet of United States F-15s as they sought to escape.
To cope with the various demands, additional F-117As were flown to Tonopah East.
A total of forty-two planes and nearly all the qualified pilots would see action.
Norman Schwarzkopf ordered the air force to shift all air activities except F-117As and F-llIFs to Kuwait.
F-111F crews began spotting tanks at night, and on February 5, the F-lllFs dropped eight GBU-12 LGBs which destroyed four Iraqi tanks and one artillery piece.
The following night, a larger F-111F strike was made against Iraqi Republican Guard units.
The results were spectacular, and the F-l1]Fs were immediately shifted out of the strategic campaign.
The forty-two Black Jets would cover the wide variety of targets previously assigned to the sixty-six-plane F-111F force.
The number of F-117A attacks against command and control targets increased to nearly equal those directed at chemical targets.
On one occasion, sixteen Black Jets took out every SA-2 and SA-3 site from south of Baghdad to Tikrit.
Later that night, twenty-four B-52s hit targets in the area without any losses.
At the end of the first week, the minimum altitude of the F-117A strikes was raised to avoid the ground fire.
Although the plane could not be detected, a random hit, (called a ""Golden B.B."") was still possible.
They began using ""barrage fire,"" directing all the antiaircraft fire into specific parts of the sky, in hopes the Black Jets would fly into it.
On one night, they held their fire, watching for the glow of the F-117A's afterburners as the planes sped away from the target area.
The Iraqis were very confident it would work and even alerted Jordanian reporters in advance.
Colonel Whitley and Major Leatherman were over Baghdad when it was tried out.
At first, it was thought to be battle damage, but the RAM actually had delaminated.
Leadership targets became a high priority, as they had been during the first week.
AL FIRDOS In the early morning hours of February 13, two F-117As dropped a single bomb each on the Al Firdos bunker.
It was one of twenty-five bunkers that had been built as command posts, but at the start of the Gulf War, it was not in use.
On February 5, trucks were observed unloading communications equipment at the bunker.
They claimed it was an air-raid shelter, not a command post, and that it had been a deliberate attack intended to kill civilians.
The Iraqis also showed Western reporters a sign identifying it as an air-raid shelter.
The United States countered the claims, noting that it had been hardened against nuclear attack, was surrounded by a chain-link fence and barbed wire, and had a camouflaged roof.
General Schwarzkopf told the air force that they could not hit any targets within Baghdad without his specific permission.
For a week after Al Firdos, he was unwilling to give permission to strike any Baghdad target, for fear of civilian casualties.
Rather than the substance of Saddam's regime, three symbols were recommended for attack.
These were Ba'th party headquarters, a sixty-feet-tall statue of Saddam, and the huge victory arches commemorating the Iran-Iraq War.
Schwarzkopf approved the choices, but the targets ran into a particularly American difficulty—lawyers.
The statue and the victory arches, military lawyers said, were ""cultural monuments,"" which could not be bombed under international law.
END GAME With the halt on bombing leadership targets, the F-117As were turning to other targets.
Schwarzkopf directed that a seventy-two-hour bombing campaign be planned to destroy nuclear, chemical, and biological targets should a cease-fire be imminent.
At the time of the Al Firdos strike, more than a dozen suspected chemical and biological bunkers remained to be hit.
Priority was given to research and development sites, however, rather than storage bunkers, to prevent Iraq from having such weapons in the future.
The seventy-two-hour list was headed by the Baghdad nuclear research center.
Weather continued to be a problem; only four of ten aircraft bombed on the eighteenth, while four out of six scored hits the next night.
Finally, on the twenty-third, thirteen F117As bombed the site in good weather, with eighteen out of twenty-six bombs hitting structures in the compound.
Other F-117As bombed suspected nuclear facilities across Iraq, including the Al Qaim uranium extraction facility in western Iraq.
United States intelligence did not fully comprehend the scope of the Iraqi nuclear effort.
Thus the identity of three nuclear facilities located at rocket development sites was only realized late in the war.
The Tarmiya rocket facility was hit by F-117As and B-52s on February 15.
By February 23, its nuclear role had been discovered and four F-117As were sent to bomb it.
It became the highest priority target but was not hit again due to weather.
The Ash Sharqat facility had been hit by six F-111E raids before four F-117As visited the site on February 16.
The nuclear site at Musayyib was not discovered until shortly before the war's end; it had been selected to be the final assembly site for the first Iraqi nuclear bomb.
If a target needed to be attacked on short notice, it was far easier to send a handful of Black Jets, rather than a force of forty to sixty F-16s and support planes.
Distribution points, pipe junctions, and pumping stations were hit with 500pound GBU-12 bombs.
The attack was so hurried that the second wave pilots had to use sketch maps, because photos were not available.
The F-117A combat missions were quite popular, and, as the weeks passed, ground personnel, as well as their friends and relatives, wanted a little piece of history.
Major Leatherman gave his crew chief one of the bomb arming lanyards from the first mission.
American flags were most requested, but everything from footballs to Bart Simpson dolls were flown.
VICTORY It was not until the final nights of the war that the F-117As were again authorized to fly into downtown Baghdad.
The target selected was Ba'th party headquarters—a complex covering several city blocks.
It had been hit by Tomahawk missiles on the first night and again by F-117As in mid-February.
The following night was no better; only a few targets were hit outside Baghdad.
The original plan was altered due to the progress of the ground war and the impending cease-fire.
The size of the force directed against the Ba'th party headquarters was reduced to release planes for other targets.
Still, sixteen of the twenty-plane first wave were directed against it.
The complex was left devastated, and a statue in front of the building was also destroyed.
The other targets hit by the night's first wave were the biological weapons facility at Salman Pak, and two transport planes at Muthena airfield.
Yet another was the crowds of Kuwaitis welcoming victorious United States and Coalition troops.
And there was that final image, which put to rest a ghost from the past.
It was a photo of a Blackhawk helicopter, hovering on the roof of the United States embassy in Kuwait City.
AFTERMATH The first group of F-117As arrived back at Nellis Air Force Base on April 1.
Al Whitley, it was quite a contrast to his returns from two tours in Vietnam.
In May, the town of Tonopah held a parade for the F-117 pilots and ground crews.
Even before the Gulf War, the plan was to move the F-117As to Holloman Air Force Base in New Mexico.
This would allow the pilots' families to join them and eliminate the need for the Key Airlines shuttle flights.
With the postCold War reductions, the air force sought to preserve the names of distinguished units.
Under the name ""Black Magic,” it had flown nineteen combat missions in the Gulf.
Captain Mills attempted to return to the field, but the plane began to roll uncontrollably.
The loss was later traced to the improper installation of a bleed air duct just before the flight.
A detachment of six to eight F-117As had remained at Tonopah East as part of the United States forces in Saudi Arabia.
The cease-fire agreement directed that Iraq dismantle all nuclear, chemical, and biological facilities, as well as giving up all Scud missiles and long-range weapons.
There was also an increasing number of border incidents with Kuwait and interference with allied planes policing ""no-fly"" zones in the north and south of the country.
On January 13, six F-117As, each with one LGB, were sent to hit targets in southern Iraq.
The Al-Amara IOC was hit, as was an SA-3 SAM site's radar at Ashshuaybah.
Bombs dropped against the two radars at Nasiriya lost their locks due to clouds.
Bad weather also apparently caused one pilot to bomb a farmhouse a mile from the Basra radar.
THE FUTURE OF THE F-117 As with other Dark Eagles, the F-117A has undergone improvements to its systems.
The planes were sent to the Skunk Works plant at Palmdale for modifications that included color displays, a satellite navigation system, and improvements to the infrared system.
One modification was a result of the loss of Mulhare and Stewart in 1986 and 1987.
It would use the basic F-117A fuselage, with a new wing and horizontal stabilizer.
The F-117N, like the air force version, would be a ""silver bullet"" force.
The navy rejected the proposal, saying the plane was too limited and was not a multimission aircraft.
A later proposal called for adding afterburning engines and advanced radar-infrared systems to give the plane both an allweather air-to-ground and air-to-air capability.
Proposals have been made to increase the size of the bomb bay to hold four bombs.
With new engines, the F-117A's payload could be increased to eighteen thousand pounds.
Some of the added bomb load could be carried externally, as many as four internal weapons and another four under the wings.
Such improvements would have a major impact—if the F-117A's bomb load and radius of action could be doubled, a single squadron could handle a regional conflict such as the Gulf War.
The Black Jet from Groom Lake could still be flying into the second decade of the twenty-first century.
On April 5, 1995, an F-117A was seriously damaged by a fire after landing.
The plane crashed on Red Mesa at the Zuni Indian Reservation, its impact dug a 20-foot deep crater.
The Zuni Tribal Police were the first on the scene and secured the area.
Due to the remote location, it took the Air Force five hours to reach the crash site.
The plane was both the first United States jet aircraft and created the concept of the Black airplane.
Bell test pilot Robert Stanley, left, made the XP59A's first flight on Oct., 1942.
Colonel Lawrence ""Bill"" Craigic became the first United States military jet pilot when he made the plane's third test flight that same day.
The fake propeller on its nose was used in March and April, 1943, to thwart the curious.
In foreground is Bell's portable mission control center during the XP-59A tests.
United States Air Force The U-2 combined the aerodynamic simplicity of a glider with careful weight control that enabled it to reach altitudes far above those of contemporary Soviet fighters.
Lockheed The SS-6 test pad at Tyuratam, as photographed in 1959 by a U-2.
The pad was used to launch early ICBM tests as well as Sputnik I and Vostokl.
Differentareas were walledoffto preventindividuals working on one project from knowing about the others.
On missions, the national insignias were removed; the only markings carried a false, five-digit serial number in red paint.
Teledyne Ryan Aeronautical photo, courtesy San Diego Aerospace Museum By the time Kelly Johnson and the Skunk Works engineers had worked up to the ninth version of the A-6 proposal, a trend toward a delta with a long forward fuselage had developed.
United States Air Force The A-11 design with radar absorbing, wedge-shaped chines became the basis for the final A-12.
Personnel at Groom Lake do not live in the hot, dusty, and isolated area, but are flown to and from the site each week.
This was a modification of the A-12, designed to produce a long-range interceptor.
United States Air Force Model 147B drone under the wing of its DC-130 launch aircraft.
The 147B would then fly its programmed instructions over the target areas and then on to the recovery zone.
The TE was an ELINT version of the high-altitude photo reconnaissance 147T drone.
United States Air Force The Model 147SC ""Tom Cat"" flew a record-setting 68 missions before being lost on Sept., 1974. (the average for the 147SC drones was 7. missions before being lost.
The Model 154P-4 Firefly after its landing at Los Alamos in August 1969.
Lockheed The Have Blue 1002—produced under the tightest secrecy since the atomic bomb program of World War II— after final assembly at Burbank.
This aircraft was optimized for RCS testing, and had the full range of coatings and radar absorbing materials.
Unlike its angular upper surface, the plane's underside was arrow shaped.
These flat surfaces made it possible to calculate the plane's radar cross-section.
Activities at Groom Lake, such as the F-1 17A's first flight, are scheduled around the passes of Soviet reconnaissance satellites.
Lockheed The Amber UAV was designed to provide a family of low-cost but effective vehicles capable of undertaking both reconnaissance and strike missions.
During the late 1980s and early '90s, there were a number of reports about ""other"" flying wing or triangular Black aircraft.
A Soviet-built Yak 23 undergoing flight tests at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.
The plane was ""loaned"" to the United States by an Eastern European intelligence officer, then crated aboard a United States C-124 cargo plane.
The markings were removed; the Yak was crated and reinserted into Eastern Europe without detection.
Long rumored to be a flying wing, it was, in fact, one of the strangest looking aircraft ever built.
Its odd shape was to accommodate a specialized radar able to track armor units.
The Tacit Blue first flew in February 1982, but was not declassified until April 30, 1996.
From top to bottom, the original ""Black Diamond,"" the ""North Sea"" Aurora, and finally, the XB-70 Aurora.
The stories about the Aurora began to spread in the late 1980s and reached their peak in 1994.
By this means I examine the situation and the outcome will be clearly apparent.
But, just as stealth changed both tactical and strategic aircraft, it also caused a resurgence of interest in strategic reconnaissance UAVs.
Two very different systems would emerge during the 1980s and early 1990s.
One advantage of a UAV over a manned aircraft was that of flight duration.
Its planned flight time would not be measured in hours or even days but in months.
The technology to build the first of these Dark Eagles did not come from an exotic development program but from a contest.
GOSSAMER DREAMS In the myth of Icarus, a man had flown by flapping wings attached to his arms.
In 1959, British industrialist Henry Kremer offered a 50,000-pound prize for the first successful man-powered flight.
It was to cover a figure-eight course around two markers a half mile apart.
The aircraft had to start and finish the course at an altitude over ten feet.
Principally made of wood, they were too heavy and incapable of turning.
Paul B MacCready of AeroVironment Incorporated understood that neither a conventional design nor conventional thinking would work.
The Kremer Prize would take an innovative aircraft, designed with no preconceived notions.
Like the Wright Flier, it had a canard and wing warping to provide control.
Dozens of times the plane crashed, once as it was approaching the second pylon and victory.
Finally, on August 23, 1977, Bryan Allen peddled the Gossamer Condor around the course.
In 1980, AeroVironment was sponsored by DuPont to develop a solar-powered aircraft able to fly from Paris, France, to England.
The first test aircraft, the Gossamer Penguin, was so fragile and unstable that it could be flown only in the early morning when the air was calm.
Based on the results of these tests, the Solar Challenger was designed.
Power came from 16,128 solar cells, which covered the entire upper surface of the wing and stabilizer.
Despite the large surface area, the array provided a maximum of only 2,600 watts—enough to power two hair driers.
If provided with some type of energy storage system, it could fly ""eternally"" and remain at altitudes above 65,000 feet.
The design of a solar-powered Gossamer-type aircraft flying at these altitudes faced a number of problems.
At takeoff, the Solar Challenger could barely climb; at 11,000 feet, however, it could equal a Cessna light plane.
The air temperature becomes constant, so there is not a continued improvement in efficiency.
Because of the thinner air, the plane must fly faster for its wings to generate the same amount of lift.
More than half the current generated by the solar cells would have to be stored in some type of battery to keep the plane aloft during darkness.
The ""eternal"" solar-powered aircraft would need twice the collection area, with no increase in weight, over the Solar Challenger.
The design would have to be extraordinarily light—one-half pound per square foot of wing area, the same weight as foam art board.
In contrast, an eagle has a wing loading of four to six pounds per square foot of wing.
The Gossamer Penguin's structure was light enough, but was too fragile.
HALSOL By 1983, AeroVironment was able to attract government sponsorship from a ""classified customer"" to build a proof-of-concept test aircraft.
Unlike the other Gossamertype aircraft, this was to be a Black airplane in the classic sense.
From front to back, the wing was eight feet wide; it was made of five, 20-foot-long segments joined together.
Attached to this were ribs of Styrofoam reinforced with Kevlar and spruce.
The aircraft was powered by eight electric motors—two mounted on the center of the wing, two on each inboard wing segment, and one on each outer wing segment.
Spreading them out along the full span of the wing distributed the load.
To pitch up or down, an elevator on the center wing section's trailing edge was used.
To make a turn, the outermost motor on one side was sped up, while the opposite motors were slowed down.
It flew at twelve knots and had a never-exceed speed at low altitude of twenty-seven or twenty-eight knots.
Because it was a test vehicle, the HALSOL was designed to climb, rather than to remain at high altitudes.
The efforts to control weight led to creative thinking and some unusual solutions.
The front wheel assembly on the two gondolas used dual baby-buggy wheels, while the main landing gear assembly had a sixteen-inch bicycle wheel.
Over the next two months, a total of nine flights were completed at Groom Lake.
These lasted for thirty to sixty minutes and reached an altitude of 8,000 feet.
Although the aircraft was proven to be aerodynamically and structurally sound, studies indicated that 1983-vintage solar cell technology was not efficient enough to permit very long, high-altitude flight.
In particular, the solar technology lacked sufficient ""power-density,"" the energy available per pound of the components.
The HALSOL program was discontinued, and the aircraft was placed in storage.
In 1987 (four years after the HALSOL project ended), General Motors selected AeroVironment to develop the Sun Raycer car, which won. the first transAustralia race for solar-powered vehicles.
The following year, GM selected AeroVironment to develop the Impact, a battery-powered commuter car suitable for mass production.
An aircraft like the HALSOL could be used to detect missile launches, such as the Scud ballistic missiles Iraq fired against Israel and Saudi Arabia during the Gulf War.
Scud missiles had been exported and were in production throughout the Third World.
With the technology now available and a military need, the HALSOL was taken out of storage in early 1992.
Under the direction of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization , the successor to the Strategic Defense Initiative, AeroVironment began a modification program.
The motors also had new custom-designed inverters to improve efficiency.
Keeping the motor's temperature within limits while flying at high altitude was a problem due to the thin air.
The complete motor and propeller assembly weighed only thirteen pounds.
The modified aircraft would carry some two hundred square feet of new lighter-weight solar cells.
They would cover about one-third of the wing and provide about 3. kilowatts of power.
The modification work was completed in the late summer of 1993— a full decade after the HALSOL's last flight.
Because of the extensive modifications, a new name was given to the aircraft.
OUT OF THE BLACK It is important to note that, up to this time, there had been no hint that there was a Black Gossamer-type UAV or that it had been flown a decade before.
The HALSOL-Pathfinder finally came out of the Black with an October 1, 1993, air force press release, which announced the aircraft's existence and described its history.
It stated that the Pathfinder would make a series of low-altitude test flights at Edwards Air Force Base in October-November 1993.
It lasted forty-one minutes and involved six trips around a 1.2-mile racetrack course on the Edwards lake bed.
The Pathfinder was a majestic sight as it flew slowly above the tan lake bed like some huge transparent bird.
At least 60 percent of the Pathfinder's power was provided by the solar cells.
The Pathfinder's public debut came on November 23, 1993, at the Edwards Air Force Base Air Show.
Six weeks before, even its existence had been a secret; now, more than 200,000 people saw it on display.
Never before had a Black airplane's first public showing come so soon after its existence had been revealed.
The Pathfinder was in a roped-off area of the main hangar, and there were armed guards nearby.
This was not due to any secrecy about the plane—people were kept back because the light in the hangar was enough to start the motors, and a spinning propeller might injure a spectator.
Following the first flight tests, the Pathfinder was returned to AeroVironment for modifications that would enable it to undertake high-altitude flights.
Control of the program was also transferred from BMDO to NASA due to budget reasons.
While at AeroVironment, about 70 percent of the wing surface was covered with solar cells.
The high-altitude flights were seen as critical to demonstrate the feasibility of the Pathfinder concept.
It was planned that the tests would run from late August through mid-October 1994 at Edwards.
As the Pathfinder lacks an energy-storage system, the flights would be made during daylight hours.
The Pathfinder's flight characteristics at high altitudes are very different than the heavier and faster-flying U-2s.
At altitude, the U-2s' minimum and maximum speeds, limited by wing flutter, provide only a small margin for flight.
With the lighter and slower Pathfinder, both speeds are considerably slower and therefore much less susceptible to structural failure.
This is important, as tight limits would be very demanding for the automatic control system.
At sunset, electrical power would be lost from the solar cells, and the Pathfinder would start down.
Following the high-altitude tests, long-duration flights could be attempted.
The Pathfinder could take off from Alaska and fly over the North Pole for weeks at a time to measure ozone levels.
During the summer, there is nearly continuous sunlight over the pole, so the Pathfinder would not need any energy storage system.
These would use the light reflected from clouds, the ice cap, and the atmosphere to produce power during the evening hours, when the sun is low.
HELIOS The HALSOL-Pathfinder was designed to act as a technology demonstrator for the eternal aircraft, which would be a much larger and heavier aircraft.
The solar array would produce 21. kilowatts, powering the eight motors—the same motors as were used on Pathfinder.
At night, the hydrogen and oxygen would be allowed to recombine into water.
The energy released would be converted back into electrical power for the motors.
Although the technology is understood, the problem is putting it into a lightweight package.
INTO THE WHITE In the post-Cold War political environment, attention is shifting to dualuse technology—military systems that can also have civilian applications.
The ability to reach high altitudes, then stay there for months at a time, opens numerous possibilities in the area of atmospheric research.
Sporadic, one-shot measurements of atmospheric conditions cannot give the needed baseline data to detect changes.
To distinguish normal atmospheric variations from changes caused by natural and man-made sources, it is necessary to take measurements throughout the day-night cycle.
The Pathfinder, for example, could be flown continuously over the Yukon Valley in Alaska during the summer.
It could monitor the flow of air pollution from Russia as well as the effect of local volcanoes.
Another advantage is that the Pathfinder's electric motors give off no exhaust emissions.
It could carry sensitive chemical detectors without their measurements being contaminated by the plane itself.
Other research projects would utilize the Helios and its ability to fly continuously through the night.
Major storms develop in the subtropical areas of the Atlantic and Pacific, then move toward North America over several weeks.
The Helios can fly above most of the atmosphere, which would allow instruments to observe in ultraviolet and infrared wavelengths.
These observations cannot be made from ground-based telescopes because the atmosphere and water vapor absorb these wavelengths.
The final, indirect result of a Helios would be improved electronic and solar technology.
The payload limitations would encourage development of ultralightweight electronics and sensors, much as satellites did in the 1950s and 1960s.
Just as the solar-powered car efforts made Pathfinder practical, a Helios development effort could improve solar technology.
It has been estimated that a Helios-SRA would cost between $2 and $3 million, assuming a minimum production run of twenty aircraft.
In particular, the development of flyable fuel cells are the key to day-night flights.
As a White project, Pathfinder-Helios now faces a political environment that views new and innovative ideas with disinterest or hostility.
Leading Systems, in the best tradition of high-tech companies, had started in a garage in 1980.
The control system for the UAV was built in the living room of one of the founders.
As with earlier Black airplanes, the goal was the rapid building of the prototypes.
The program office had few government personnel, while the number of support contractors was kept small.
On the strike version, the wing would be separated from the pylon; the UAV would then fall to the target.
The Amber took off and landed on a set of long and sticklike retractable landing gear.
Although it was as large as a light airplane, the Amber was more akin to the simple battlefield support UAVs, rather than the complex strategic drones used earlier.
Flight tests began in November 1986 at the Leading Systems test facility at the El Mirage Airport, in the Mojave Desert, near Edwards Air Force Base.
These proved out the low-drag aerodynamics, lightweight structure, control system, and engine.
When the UAV was placed in a high-angle-of-attack or high-g condition, it would start to oscillate.
During the fall of 1987, information began to be released on the design, possible payloads, and future activities.
For the Fifteenth Annual Association of Unmanned Vehicle Systems Technical Symposium and Exhibit, Leading Systems decided to attempt to break its UAV world endurance record.
As the flight progressed, the elapsed time was posted in Leading Systems’ booth.
During this same time, Congress was becoming dissatisfied with the large number of UAV programs under way.
In 1987, it ordered a consolidation of the programs and froze UAV funding pending submission of a master plan for its approval.
In June 1988, the Joint Project Office for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles was established, under the United States Navy's Naval Air Systems Command.
UAV funding was now provided at the Office of the Secretary of Defense level.
With these bureaucratic changes accomplished, work began on the production Amber I UAVs.
Ti%e.wJfie/irawtrVriAi'er'fne ""rrase ana we're covered with a plastic bubble.
The operator at the ground station flew the Amber I using a nose-mounted television camera.
They would test the Amber design's ability to meet service specifications for reliability, availability, and maintainability.
Some expected that all ten would be lost during the tests, but in fact, there were no mishaps.
A total of thirteen Amber UAVs had been built—three A45s, three B45s, and seven Amber Is.
The move was widely regarded as an act of folly because it created a gap in overhead reconnaissance.
At the low end, the air force and navy were dependent on RF4C reconnaissance planes and F-14s carrying camera pods.
At the high end, photo reconnaissance satellites would provide worldwide coverage.
Their resolution was as good as six inches under ideal conditions, but they could provide coverage only when they orbited over a target.
The events of January and February 1991 would make this shortcoming clear.
UAVs Over the Gulf Throughout the Gulf War, intelligence was a problem.
Charles Horner expressed dissatisfaction about the quality of intelligence reports they were given.
There were major disagreements over the bomb damage assessments of Iraqi forces.
The BDA controversy was the result of the differing data and ""platforms"" being used, as well as the mindsets of the analysts.
The air force intelligence officers in the field were using the videotapes from the strike missions.
Ajet of flame would erupt from the hatch, and the tank's interior and crew would be incinerated.
But once the fire burned out, the tank would have little visible external damage—perhaps only a small entry hole.
When a satellite photographed the area hours or days later, the tank would be listed as intact.
In one case, a tank was declared operational, until it was pointed out that the turret had been blown a foot out of position.
Schwarzkopf complained that the guidelines for assessing damage were so stringent that a tank had to be on its back ""like a dead cockroach"" before it would be counted as destroyed.
In other cases, the T72 would undergo such a violent secondary explosion that it would be blown apart.
Then it would be claimed that the revetment had been empty when it was bombed.
As the ground war was about to begin in late February 1991, the air force estimated that 40 percent of the Iraqi tanks and artillery had been destroyed.
Not surprisingly, the air force was accused of inflating its damage estimates.
In fact, 60 percent of the Iraqi tanks and artillery had been destroyed during the bombing campaign.
In the final assessment, the strike videos, which recorded events as they happened, proved more accurate than ""National Technical Means"" such as satellites.
Three different systems were used by United States forces—the Pointer, Pioneer, and Exdrone UAVs.
The Pointer, built by AeroVironment and used by the marines, was simplicity itself.
It was a radio-controlled model airplane, similar to the ones built by hobbyists.
The Pointer carried a television camera that transmitted its photos back to the operator.
The Pointer was used for real-time BDA, artillery adjustment, and reconnaissance-early warning.
It was powered by a piston engine and had a twin-boom, high-wing design.
In the Gulf, one Pioneer unit was aboard each of the battleships Missouri and Wisconsin, three units were assigned to the marines, and one to the army.
Several were sent on one-way missions—the UAV was kept over a target until the fuel ran out, in order to produce the maximum amount of information.
The army would fly them along the routes to be taken by Apache helicopters; the pilots would watch the live video, then climb into their helicopters and take off.
The navy used them to spot targets for the 16-inch battleship guns, then correct their fire.
During one such mission, forty Iraqi soldiers were seen coming out of a bunker and waving white cloths at a Pioneer in an attempt to surrender to it.
About fifty-five to sixty Exdrone UAVs were also used by the marines in the Gulf.
The marines used them to observe minefields and barriers in southern Kuwait City.
In each of these cases, the UAVs were able to provide real-time intelligence directly to the units that needed it.
Following the Gulf War, interest within the air force grew in the development of long-range UAV systems that could keep watch on a specific area day and night.
This could do much to clear up the shortcomings in reconnaissance that the war had made apparent.
GNAT-750 Work on the GNAT-750 project had actually begun at Leading Systems in 1988.
Like Amber, the GNAT-750 had an inverted V-shaped tail, the same sixty-fivehorsepower engine, and took off and landed on a spindly tricycle landing gear.
Mounted under the nose was a ""skyball""; a movable turret that could carry a stabilized forward-looking infrared system, a daylight television camera, and a low-light-level television camera.
The GNAT-750 could fly for forty-eight hours continuously, giving it a maximum radius of 1,512 nautical miles.
Despite this, when one sees the GNAT-750, the first impression is of a model airplane.
The prototype GNAT-750 made its first flight in the summer of 1989, which began a series of successful test flights.
Despite this success, the confusion and technical problems with the UAV program continued.
In 1990, its assets were bought out by General Atomics; this included the Amber and GNAT-750 projects.
In 1992, a prototype made a continuous flight of over forty hours at El Mirage, reaching altitudes of over 25,000 feet.
General Atomics then won a contract from the Turkish government to supply it with GNAT-750s; deliveries began by the end of 1993.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff requested immediate development of a UAV for use over Bosnia and Serbia.
Following the end of Communist rule in Eastern Europe, Yugoslavia had disintegrated into a barbaric civil war between Serbs and Moslems.
It was marked by ethnic cleansing—wanton killing, torture, and starvation.
The UAV was to keep track of the warring factions’ troop movements, artillery emplacements, and antiaircraft weapons, in support of UN peacekeeping forces.
It would be rapidly modified for the mission, then equipped with an off-the-shelf sensor package.
The GNAT750 was available for export; if one was lost, no sensitive technology would be compromised.
Because the situation in Bosnia was highly fluid, the GNAT-750s needed to be operational by October 1993 at the latest.
A development effort with so short a time frame could only be accomplished, however, if freed of the funding and acquisition constraints of a military program.
A PALER SHADE OF BLACK By the late summer of 1993, the CIA GNAT-750 effort was under way.
The CIA acquired two GNAT-750s from General Atomics, which were then modified with the relay antennae.
A large teardrop-shaped dome was added to the top of the GNAT-750 to house the data link.
The CIA GNAT-750s were to be ready for operations by October 1, 1993; once operational, they were to be based in Italy.
The CIA GNAT-750 program had to face the political realities of spying in the 1990s.
In 1993, however, the autonomy of CIA Director R James Woolsey Jr. was far less than that enjoyed by Allen Dulles in 1956, when the U-2 program was about to begin.
Now it was necessary for the CIA to consult with the Defense Department and Congress on the GNAT-750 effort.
The overall UAV program itself was caught in a tug-of-war between the various factions who were soon faulting the CIA's handling of the GNAT750 program.
They objected to the CIA's unwillingness to tell others what was going on with the project.
Clearly, the GNAT-750 was a very different shade of Black than the U-2.
Then, suddenly, the White GNAT-750 became Black with the start of the CIA program.
The net result was that the CIA GNAT-750 effort was a Black project that was almost open.
The political infighting over the CIA GNAT-750 was aggravated by technical problems.
A ""Pentagon official"" complained that the CIA lacked experience with systems integration or developing tactical communications links.
By late October, the GNAT-750 was judged ready for its final systems integration test flight.
On the night before the flight, the CIA contract personnel modified the software program.
The new program shut down the GNAT-750's motor and data link when its speed fell below 40 mph.
It was assumed that if the UAV was at this low a speed, it would be on the ground.
During the flight the next day, the GNAT-750 was hit by a gust of wind.
This produced a low-speed indication, and the software shut down the motor and data link.
The GNAT-750 rolled over on its back, went into a flat spin, and crashed.
On December 2, 1993, a GNAT-750 flying over the El Mirage test site successfully transmitted imagery of moving targets, such as a tank, to a relay aircraft, which then passed it on to the Pentagon.
It was believed that this was due to several factors—the shaping of the fuselage, its heavy use of carbon epoxy materials, and, ironically, its slow speed of 90 knots.
The radar's own software filters out such weak and slow-moving targets as returns from birds or weather.
CIA Director Woolsey reportedly demanded that it be operational before his next appearance at congressional budget hearings.
The Italian government was having second thoughts about playing host to the CIA operation.
But the world had changed since the U-2 had taken off on that first overflight.
There were other possibilities, ones that would have been unthinkable in the mid-1950s.
When the Italians refused permission, the United States government made a direct appeal to senior Albanian officials.
The single GNAT-750 and a satellite transmission station would be set up at an Albanian military base on the Adriatic coast.
The three prime candidates were Scutari, Durres, and Tirane, the capital.
They would have direct access to Montenegro, Kosovo, and Macedonia without having to overfly a third country.
It was in these regions that United States ground troops were assigned as part of the UN peacekeeping force.
It was a stunning example of how the world had changed in just a few years.
Between 1949 and 1953, the CIA and the British Secret Intelligence Service had tried to establish networks of agents within Albania in an attempt to overthrow its Communist government.
Throughout the 1970s and 1980s, Albania remained a closed, Stalinist country.
Its deployment in Albania was marked by a major article in Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine.
Other flights were targeted against entrenchments; from 6,000 feet they were able to identify decoy artillery and SAM sites.
Airfields, troop and artillery movements, supply dumps, and tank locations were also monitored.
The GNAT750s were quite stealthy—at no time did people on the ground realize the UAVs were overhead.
Because of Albania's location, it could only spend about two hours on station.
Having to coordinate the GNAT-750s with the manned RG-8 meant the UAVs could only be flown in specific areas, and at certain times and altitudes.
Real-time changes in the route, to more closely examine side roads and buildings, also disrupted the GNAT-750 activities.
By the summer of 1994, the United States European Command requested the renewal of GNAT-750 overflights.
The CIA preferred to fly from an Italian base, but this was again refused.
The CIA also wanted to expand its GNAT-750 unit with three more UAVs and an additional ground station.
Two of the UAVs would be used for reconnaissance, while two others would be used as relay aircraft.
The reconnaissance GNAT-750s were also expected to be fitted with ELINT receivers that could pick up both radar signals and transmissions from walkie-talkies.
The Turkish government was in a budget crunch and lacked the money to pay for the three GNAT-750s already delivered, much less the four still at the General Atomics factory.
Each GNAT-750 cost $800,000, while the ground station cost $1. million.
THE CIRCLE CLOSES The HALSOL and GNAT-750 represent the future of airborne reconnaissance.
The smaller post-Cold War air force is unlikely to have the billions of dollars needed to develop and fly a new manned reconnaissance aircraft.
The GNAT-750's similarity to a big model airplane is an advantage, rather than a shortcoming.
This allows it to combine long-duration flight times with the simplicity of the small tactical IJAYs_ iiiJift-rifrfiN’Ji/ifr3u-kiruwhftrin4 tJonunu'ea value bt Black"" projects.
Despite all the problems, it was still done faster and at a lower cost than conventional methods could have accomplished.
The involvement of congressional staffers meant that the lines of authority were less clear and direct.
The GNAT-750 effort also marked the return to Black aviation by the CIA after two decades.
Between 1969 and 1971, the CIA-sponsored D-21 Tagboard made their few disappointing flights.
With this, the GNAT-750 project brings the story of the United States Black airplanes full circle.
The A-12, D-21, and HALSOL had all been kept secret for a decade or more before their existence was revealed.
Such secrecy, along with the large number of stories about the stealth fighter, inevitably gave rise to speculation about other Black airplanes, ones that were still secret.
Reports and sightings of these secret airplanes were soon being whispered about.
The longest continuing United States Black airplane program is the secret test flying of MiGs and other Soviet aircraft.
This effort's tentative beginnings were in the mid-1950s, before the U-2.
It began in earnest a decade later, contemporarily with the A-12 and D-21, and has continued to the present day.
Unlike the other Black airplane programs, such as the Have Blue, F-117A, or HALSOL, MiG operations still remain Black.
It is not known exactly the actual number or types of aircraft involved, where they came from, or the complete history of the program.
There are only a few, limited accounts, and it is probable that many of these are, at best, incomplete, and at worst, wrong.
It is known that these Dark Eagles brought about a fundamental change in air-combat tactics.
They revitalized the art of dogfighting at a time when, seemingly, it had nearly been forgotten.
The knowledge gained from these planes was reflected in the success of United States Navy air operations over North Vietnam in the final year of the war, as well as in the founding of the Navy's Top Gun school.
THE BLACK YAK The program started with a C-124 Globemaster landing at WrightPatterson Air Force Base in the mid-1950s.
Although quickly superseded by the more advanced MiG 15, it was the first jet operated by these Eastern European air forces.
For the United States Air Force, it introduced the secret testing of Soviet aircraft.
According to one account, an Eastern European intelligence officer contacted an American intelligence officer and offered the ""loan"" of the plane.
The deal was made and the Yak 23 was packed in shipping crates and left aboard a railroad car.
After its arrival, the parts were photographed, to insure they could be repacked correctly.
In September 1953, he had become the first United States pilot to fly a MiG 15.
Unlike that effort, the tests Collins conducted with the Yak 23 were top secret.
The plane was then disassembled, loaded aboard a C-124, and flown away.
It would be another forty years before the existence of a United States Air Force Yak 23 would be revealed.
In the years following the Yak 23's brief stay at Wright-Patterson, a new generation of fighter aircraft, such as the F-4 Phantom II, was developed.
The F-4 was the first fighter designed from the start with only air-to-air missiles—the radar-guided Sparrow and the shorter-range Sidewinder infrared-guided missile.
With the new missiles came the new attitude that dogfighting was obsolete.
The air-to-air training given to new navy F-4 crews was extremely limited.
THE AIR WAR OVER NORTH VIETNAM The early years of the air war over North Vietnam showed the faith placed in missiles was terribly in error.
Between 1965 and the bombing halt in 1968, the United States Air Force had a 2.15 to 1 kill ratio.
For roughly every two North Vietnamese MiG 17 Frescos or MiG 21 Fishbeds shot down, an American F-4, F-105, or F-8 would be lost.
More serious, the percentage of United States fighters being lost in air-to-air combat was growing.
Frank Ault was assigned to learn the reasons for this poor showing against the MiGs.
A full 25 percent of Sparrows failed because their rocket engines never fired.
It took a full 5. seconds to fire a Sparrow; yet, the average time the F-4 crews had to fire was 2. seconds.
These changed with altitude, and whether it was a tail, head-on, or side attack.
The crews lacked the knowledge to judge the ever-changing parameters in the midst of the fight.
The MiG 17's superior turning capability then allowed it to close to gun range.
All too often, hits from the MiG 17's ""outmoded"" cannons would then destroy the F-4.
The key to survival in the skies of North Vietnam, as it had been in every air war, was to make the enemy pilot fight on your terms.
This meant knowing his weaknesses, while using your plane's strengths to maneuver into position to ‘aestrb'y tne enemy ""drrpiarfef crrcuursb~ rrrtrlpY trOiem~was acquiring the knowledge.
HAVE DOUGHNUT In 1967, the Defense Intelligence Agency secretly acquired a single MiG 21.
The country the MiG 21 came from, and the means by which it came to the United States, remain secret to this day.
Because United States possession of the MiG 21 was, itself, secret, it was tested at Groom Lake.
A joint air forcenavy team was assembled for a series of dogfight tests.
At a speed of Mach 0. at 15,000 feet the instantaneous turn rates of the two planes were nearly identical, at 13. degrees per second.
At Mach 0.5, the MiG 21 held the edge at 11. degrees versus 7. degrees for the F-4.
When the air force pilots flew the MiG 21, the results were a draw—the F-4 would win some fights, the MiG 21 would win others.
To avoid accidents, restrictions had been placed by the air force on air combat maneuvers.
One of the navy pilots was Marland W ""Doc"" Townsend, then commander of VF-121, the F-4 training squadron at NAS Miramar.
He was an engineer and a Korean War veteran and had flown almost every navy aircraft.
Townsend would make his pass, then pull up into a vertical climb, do a roll as he came over the top, spot the MiG 21, then line up on its tail.
The Have Doughnut project officer was Tom Cassidy, a pilot with VX4, the navy's Air Development Squadron at Point Mugu.
Cassidy was willing to fight in the vertical, flying the plane to the point where it was buffeting, just above the stall.
After the flight, they realized the MiG 21 turned better than the F-4 at lower speeds.
An F-4 had defeated the MiG 21; the weakness of the Soviet plane had been found.
This would require a special school to teach advanced air combat techniques.
The MiG pilot reduced his speed, wiggled his wings, and lowered his landing gear.
When one of the Israeli planes pulled alongside, the MiG pilot signaled he wanted to land.
Monir Radfa, explained that he had defected due to his revulsion against attacks on Kurds in northern Iraq.
He was also a Roman Catholic, one of only five or six in the Iraqi air force, and he felt discriminated against in the predominately Moslem country.
He had requested a transfer to MiG 21s and spent four months training in the Soviet Union.
Dated August 3, it said in part, Iam a MiG 21 pilot of the Iraqi air force and I have decided to come to your country.
Please tell your pilots not to shoot me down because I come for peaceful feelings.
I should come in high altitude between 0700 and 1100 hours G.M.T. flying east to west and over the Jordan River near the Dead Sea.
Monir Radfa took off from Rashid Air Base outside Baghdad on a navigation flight, then headed for Israel.
As he crossed Jordan, two Hawker Hunter jet fighters climbed toward his plane, but the MiG was flying too high and too fast for them to catch it.
For the next several months, it was subjected to a series of flights to learn its strengths and weaknesses.
At low speeds, the MiG 21 would tend to spin out in tight, low-altitude turns.
The newspaper Lamerhavy said two days after the defection that ""supreme political interests"" and defense responsibilities required that Israel not give any information to other countries.
The Ma‘ariv newspaper said, ""Israel should not allow foreign experts to examine the new Soviet plane.
On June 5, 1967, Israel launched a preemptive strike on Egypt, Syria, Jordan, and Iraq.
By the end of the first day, the Arab air forces had been destroyed on the ground and Israel had complete air superiority.
Six Algerian MiG 21 pilots flew into El Arish Air Base in the Sinai Desert.
This was not the only example of wayward pilots delivering MiGs to Israeli control.
On August 12, 1968, two Syrian air force lieutenants, Walid Adham and Radfan Rifai, took off in a pair of MiG 17s on a training mission.
They lost their way and, believing they were over Lebanon, landed at the Beset Landing Field in northern Israel.
Yossi Yitzhak, who had witnessed the landings while working in a nearby hay field, told them they were in Israel.
The Israeli MiGs had, by this time, acquired an importance far beyond their intelligence value.
In the wake of the Six Day War, France cut off military supplies to Israel.
Israel turned to the United States, seeking A-4 attack aircraft and F-4E fighters.
The United States government was reluctant, but Israel could offer in exchange captured Soviet tanks, SA-2 SAMs, and the MiGs.
Therefore, the item in the ""Industry Observer"" column in the February 17, 1969, issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine came as a Shock.
Soviet MiG 21 fighter was secretly brought to the United States last spring and flight tested by USAF pilots to learn first-hand its capabilities and design characteristics.
The aircraft, which engaged in simulated combat against United States fighters, was highly regarded by the pilots who flew it.
He had been an F-8 pilot during the early years of the Vietnam War and had seen the problems with the F-4.
Teague was a fighter pilot who had completed two combat tours in Vietnam.
Initially, he was only told he was being sent ""into the desert"" for two hundred days.
After being told about the MiGs, Teague and his personnel quickly wrote up a test plan for the aircraft.
The Have Drill tests were conducted by a small group of air force and navy pilots under Teague and VX-4 test pilot Ronald ""Mugs"" McKeown.
As with the earlier Black airplanes, the pilots’ introduction to the MiGs was a strange and wonderful experience.
Foster recalled being taken to the ""hidden location"" and entering a huge well-lighted hangar where the gleaming silver MiGs were kept.
The MiGs' instruments were in Russian, so the pilots had to be briefed extensively.
This made even such basics as taking off and landing a learning experience.
Taxiing was an ""unnatural"" experience for American pilots, as the MiGs used air brakes activated by a lever on the stick.
The American MiG pilot tended to wander around as he taxied out to the Groom Lake runway.
Before taking off, one of the officers would climb up on the MiG's wing and give the pilot final words of advice.
On the MiG 17, the pilot had to lift a toggle switch, turn on a pump, wait until the pressure built up, and then put the gear handle down.
Once the gear was locked, the pilot turned off the pump and closed the toggle switch.
Flying the MiG 17 reminded Foster of the T-33 trainer in the way it handled.
To demonstrate, Teague would let an F-4 get into firing position on the MiG 17's tail.
Within seconds, the F-4 would be out in front and the MiG 17 in firing position.
There was simply no way an F-4 could win a close-in turning fight with a MiG 17.
It had an extremely simple, even crude, control system which lacked the power-boosted controls of American aircraft.
Although tight turning at low speeds, the control system would lock up at high speeds.
One technique for an F-4 to evade a MiG 17 on its tail was to fake a roll one way, then make a hard turn the other direction.
When the MiG tried to follow, the F-4's better roll rate and acceleration would open the distance between them, so the F-4 could turn around and reengage.
The F-4's twin engines were so powerful it could accelerate out of range of the MiG 17's guns in thirty seconds.
As long as the F-4 was one and a half miles from the MiG 17, it was outside the reach of the Soviet fighter's guns, but the MiG was within reach of the F-4's missiles.
To turn with the MiG 17, a technique called ""lag pursuit"" was developed.
Rather than trying to turn inside the MiG , the F-4 would stay to the outside.
The MiG 21 was almost as fast as the F-4, so running was not an option.
The delta-wing design of the MiG 21 also lost energy in turns faster than the F-4 did.
The technique therefore was to force the MiG 21 to make vertical turns until its air speed fell below a critical value.
In a turning battle, as first discovered in the Have Doughnut tests, the F-4 had to keep its speed up, to insure the turn rate was even.
The data from the Have Doughnut and Have Drill tests were provided to the newly formed Top Gun school at NASA Miramar.
The Top Gun instructors had been studying the Ault Report, accounts of dogfights, and intelligence reports on North Vietnamese tactics for six months.
Now they were shown a film of the Have Doughnut tests; then they were given clearances to see and fly the MiGs.
The selected instructors would fly in pairs to Nellis Air Force Base to be briefed by Teague or his assistants.
One instructor later recalled his heart racing as the MiGs drew closer on radar.
The first step was for the MiGs to pull alongside the F-4s so the instructors could get a good look at them.
The MiGs were not much to look at; there were bumps and rivets that would never have been on an American plane.
The F-4 would then follow along behind as the MiG 17's good low-speed and poor high-speed maneuverability was demonstrated.
The radar intercept officers (RIOs—the rear seat crewmen who operated the F-4's radar) also got the chance to study the MiG's radar return.
By 1970, the Have Drill program was expanded; a few selected fleet F-4 crews were given the chance to fight the MiGs.
Eventually, for the vast majority who could not go to Top Gun or participate in Have Drill, a thirtyminute film called Throw a Nickel on the Grass (the name of a fighter pilot's song) was produced.
The other pilots based at Nellis Air Force Base were not to know about the U.S.-operated MiGs.
To prevent any sightings, the airspace above the Groom Lake range was closed.
Several MiG 17 flights were made to test fire the plane's twin 23mm and single 37mm cannons.
A special dogfight test was conducted with navy and air force F-4 crews.
The navy RIOs were specially trained for their task; in contrast, the air force used pilots for the position.
The tests showed that the navy's pilot-RIO team worked better than using two pilots.
The navy crews were able to detect the target at longer ranges and go over to the offense faster.
The MiGs were also used for familiarization flights by high-ranking naval officers.
At the 1969 Tailhook Convention in Las Vegas, Foster convinced several admirals to go with him to Groom Lake to fly the MiGs.
The Have Drill personnel were worried about the high-ranking pilots flying the irreplaceable MiGs.
At one point, Teague, who was flying chase, thought that an admiral was flying a MiG 17 too hard.
On August 25, 1947, he set a world speed record of 650. mph in the Douglas D-558-I Skystreak.
On August 21, 1953, he set a world altitude record of 83,235 feet in the Douglas D-552-II Skyrocket.
He had also served as commander of the first marine jet fighter squadron and flew secret reconnaissance missions over Communist China.
He was a living link between the days of propeller fighters and the missilearmed, supersonic fighters of the 1960s.
The first was a simulated dogfight with several F-8s, while the second was with A-4s.
It could be stalled flying straight up and allowed to fall off but would be under full control within 1,500 to 2,000 feet.
The only drawback he noted was the cockpit size—pilots over six feet tall were cramped.
While at Groom Lake, General Carl ran into one of the security precautions surrounding the MiGs.
About midday, the ground crews began pulling the MiGs into the hangars.
Carl asked about this and was told a Soviet reconnaissance satellite would soon pass overhead.
In spite of the valuable lessons learned from the MiG program and from Top Gun, the future of both programs was by no means assured.
Air-combat training was dangerous, and several aircraft had been lost in accidents.
In one simulated dogfight with a MiG 17, a brand-new F-4 was lost when it went into a flat spin.
The Vietnam War was also winding down—there had been only one MiG 21 shot down since the bombing halt in 1968.
Top Gun and Have Drill had produced a small group of navy pilots skilled in the art of air combat, but they had yet to prove the value of their training.
Just after midnight on March 30, 1972, the North Vietnamese Army launched the Easter Offensive.
On May 8, President Richard Nixon ordered the mining of North Vietnam's ports and the start of the Linebacker I bombing campaign.
Gg) William R ""Willie"" Driscoll was assigned to an air strike on the railyards at Hai Duong, located halfway between Hanoi and Haiphong.
Cunningham and Driscoll had already shot down two MiGs—a MiG 21 on January 19 and a MiG 17 on May 8.
As the strike force neared the target, twenty-two MiG 17s, MiG 19s, and MiG 21s rose to challenge the navy planes.
As Cunningham looked to his right at the building, two MiG 17s were coming in from the left.
The MiG 17s were moving fast, so he knew the controls would be hard to move.
While Grant chased off the second MiG 17, Cunningham reversed and fired a Sidewinder.
The MiG 17 was within the missile's minimum range at launch, but due to the MiG's high speed, the distance had opened to 2,500 feet when the Sidewinder hit.
Below them were eight MiG 17s in a defensive circle with three F-4s mixed in.
As they did, one of the F-4s broke from the circle and nearly collided with Cunningham's plane.
Following behind his plane were a MiG 17 about 2,000 feet away; a MiG 21, 3,000 feet behind; and, unseen by Timm or his RIO, Jim Fox, a MiG 17 in his blind spot below and to the outside of the plane.
For the moment, they were out of range, but Timm's arcing turn was allowing them to close the distance.
Cunningham looked up and saw two bright flashes—two MiG 19s beginning a diving firing pass on the F-4.
Cunningham was in a lag pursuit with the MiG 17 on Timm’'s wing, but one of the MiG 17s was now within firing range of Cunningham's F-4.
This allowed the MiG 17 chasing Cunningham to close the range with his plane.
He then turned back toward Timm’'s F-4 and yelled for him to break right.
Timm, thinking he had evaded the two MiGs (and still not aware of the third MiG), turned right.
The fast-flying MiG 17 was not able to follow, and Cunningham had a clear shot.
Cunningham fired a Sidewinder, which homed in on the MiG 17's hot exhaust and destroyed it.
It was Cunningham and Driscoll's fourth kill; they were now tied with air force Col.
Cunningham had become separated from his wingman, and it was time to leave.
As they headed east, Driscoll kept watch behind them for any MiGs that might try to catch them, so it was Cunningham who spotted the next MiG 17, ahead and slightly below them.
This prevented the MiG pilot from using the lateral separation to make a quick turn.
As they closed the distance, the nose of the MiG 17 lit up as the pilot fired his guns.
When Cunningham looked back over his ejection seat, it was with considerable shock that he saw the MiG 17, also in a vertical climb.
Cunningham could see the North Vietnamese pilot's leather helmet, goggles, scarf, and even the expression on his face.
As he rolled over the top, the MiG 17, on the verge of a stall, nosed over and fired its guns.
In this maneuver, the planes would go into a weaving climb whenever one flew lower than the other.
Whenever the F-4 pulled out in front, the MiG pilot would fire a short burst.
Cunningham was holding his own, but the F-4 was losing speed faster than the MiG 17.
He lowered half flaps, then made a looping turn at a right angle to the MiG's flight path.
When Cunningham saw the MiG's nose turn slightly, he extended his own turn to the outside of the MiG's flight path.
Remembering the previous escape maneuver, the MiG pilot also pulled up into a loop to counter.
Cunningham continued through the loop, extended out under the thrust of the afterburners, and was quickly out of range.
Neither pilot attempted to run; one plane would go home, the other would be shot down.
As the two planes headed toward each other in their final pass, Cunningham pulled up into a climb.
As it did, Cunningham pulled the throttles to idle, lowered the flaps, and popped the speed brakes.
The MiG pilot saw the F-4 cross into his plane's six o'clock position, then lost sight of the plane.
He made a maximum turn to the right to keep the F4 in sight, but the MiG 17 stalled.
Cunningham, his own plane near a stall, pulled up the flaps and air brakes, dove, and swung to the right to increase separation.
Both hydraulic systems failed, and Cunningham had to use the rudder, throttle, and speed brakes to control the plane.
Cunningham and Driscoll ejected and landed in the mouth of the Red River.
As American planes chased off patrol boats, junks, and a freighter, they were picked up by marine helicopters.
On May 10, 1972, eleven North Vietnamese MiGs were shot down— eight by the navy and three by air force pilots.
During the remainder of the war, the navy kill ratio climbed to 8.33 to 1.
In contrast, the air force rate improved only slightly to 2.83 to IThe reason for this difference was Top Gun.
The navy had revitalized its air combat training, while the air force had stayed stagnant.
Most of the navy MiG kills were by Top Gun graduates, Cunningham among them.
Top Gun was soon made a separate command, ending the need to beg, borrow, or steal aircraft, fuel, or supplies.
The air force also saw the need and, starting in 1975, began the Red Flag exercises.
These included the use of high speed to counter the MiG 17's maneuverability, the close head-on pass, turning away at a right angle to the MiG's flight path, and the pilot-RIO teamwork.
Cunningham and Driscoll had used all these to survive and triumph, even when outnumbered by seven or eight to one.
He was described as being the North Vietnamese air force's leading ace with thirteen kills.
The North Vietnamese were quite willing to describe the exploits of their pilots, even while the war was going on.
In the two decades since the dogfight, there has been considerable speculation about the identity of Colonel Toon.
The day after the fight, the North Vietnamese announced the death of Col.
It has also been speculated that he was a Soviet, North Korean, or even Warsaw Pact pilot.
In the early 1990s, former Soviet pilots stationed in North Vietnam indicated that Toon was actually the nickname given by the Soviets to a North Vietnamese pilot named Pham Tuan.
In 1980, he was selected by the Soviets to make an eight-day flight to the Salyut 6 space station.
From these fragments, it is possible to reconstruct the events of May 10, 1972.
The rank, timing of his death, type of aircraft he flew, and skill level all match.
More important, Colonel Coc was the North Vietnamese air force's highest scoring ace with nine kills.
The story of a North Vietnamese pilot with thirteen kills was apparently based on the photo of a MiG 21 with thirteen stars painted on its nose.
The thirteen kill markings were the total for the plane, however, and were claimed by several pilots.
It is possible that Tuan was aloft during May 10, 1972, and, with the confusion of the large numbers of North Vietnamese MiGs in the air, was mistaken for the pilot Cunningham shot down.
One need only recall the decades of confusion from the intercepts made during the shooting down of Powers's U-2.
In the end, all that matters is that the two best pilots met in the sky that day.
They flew their aircraft to their limits, and Cunningham won—thanks to a Black program.
Top Gun and Red Flag had their own ""Aggressor units,"" which used Soviet-style tactics.
Top Gun used A-4s to simulate MiG 17s, while F-5s stood in for MiG 21s.
They did not need the special security of the MiGs, and the flight characteristics of the aircraft were close enough for training.
During the early 1970s, the prototypes of the F-14, F-15, and F-16 fighters made their first flights.
This new generation of United States fighters was designed with the lessons of Vietnam in mind.
They were much more agile than the F-4; they also packed a 20mm cannon—something the original F-4 lacked.
This would allow development of tactics for the new fighters, much as the Have Drill tests were used to develop F-4 tactics.
It appeared that the United States MiG operation grew to squadron size.
The MiG operations were based at the former A-12 test hangars at the north end of the Groom Lake complex.
With a squadron-sized force, there was also need for a formal unit to operate them.
Tires were also a problem—they were good for only a few landings before replacement.
During the spring of 1977, a MiG 21 reportedly suffered a landing gear problem.
The air force pilot was able to keep the skid under control and fairly straight.
As during the Have Drill period, control of the MiGs was a source of conflict.
It was reported that the air force was barely able to retain custody of the planes and responsibility for their operation.
It may have been that the value of the MiGs for training and evaluation outweighed any use the CIA may have had for the planes.
It is worth noting that the Have Blue project was nearing its first flight.
The Have Blue was tested against Soviet radar; it would be probable that the MiGs would also be used.
In 1977 there was a second leak about the existence of the U.S.-operated MiGs.
It began, ""The United States has been flying a squadron of stolen or captured Soviet-built fighters for years.
Some of the planes are very recent models; others date back to the Korean War.
The article reported that the MiGs were being flown from ""at least one base"" in the United States to perfect air-to-air tactics.
Armed Forces Journal subsequently learned that the existence of the MiGs, as well as some test data from joint air force-navy tests, had inadvertently been compromised to a potentially unfriendly nation.
The article noted that estimates varied on the total number of MiGs the United States had.
The article also estimated that about one hundred United States pilots had flown the MiGs, while three or four hundred pilots were given the opportunity to fly against them.
The Have Drill flights were limited to Top Gun instructors, a few selected fleet pilots, and senior officers like Gen.
A more probable guess would be around seventy-five pilots involved with the MiG operations in one way or another by 1977.
In the late 1960s, the MiG 17 and MiG 21F were still frontline aircraft.
A decade later, they had been superseded by later-model MiG 21s and new aircraft, such as the MiG 23.
In the mid-1970s, relations between Egypt and the Soviet Union had become strained, and Soviet advisers were ordered out.
The Soviets had provided the Egyptian air force with MiGs since the mid-1950s.
Now, with their traditional source out of the picture, the Egyptians began looking west.
They turned to United States companies for parts to support their late-model MiG 21s and MiG 23s.
According to one account, two MiG 23 fighter bombers were given to the United States by Egyptian president Anwar Sadat.
The planes were disassembled and shipped from Egypt to Edwards Air Force Base.
The MiG 17 and MiG 21 were small, short-range, tight-turning, point-defense fighters.
They could be pivoted forward for takeoff and landing, then swept back for highspeed flight.
Unlike earlier Soviet fighters, the MiG 23 had a high-wing loading and thus poor maneuverability.
The 4477th TES was replaced by the 413th Test Squadron at some point in the late 1970s-early 1980s.
MiG 23 TRAINING The would-be United States MiG 23 pilot underwent a three-phase training program.
The pilot then underwent ejection seat training, three hours of cockpit training, and briefings on the local area traffic patterns, restricted areas, and navigation aids.
The United States MiG 23 pilot would then undergo written proficiency and emergency exams and an oral emergency exam.
In preparation for flying the MiG 23, the pilot would make a supervised engine start and then a high-speed taxi.
The pilot would have to demonstrate his knowledge of flight test techniques and effective aircraftsystems handling.
Phase III was continuation training, in which the pilot was required to demonstrate mission qualification events, approach, and a normal landing.
Clearly, the MiG program was more akin to the flight rates of the X-planes, rather than the day-in, day-out operations of a regular fighter unit.
Depending on the time elapsed, this would vary from reviewing the exams and procedures, then making a flight, up to undergoing nearly the complete training cycle, A United States MiG 23 pilot could also be upgraded to instructor following a single flight to demonstrate mission qualifications, instructional capability, and situational awareness.
All the pilots had to complete openand closedbook exams and make an annual qualification check flight.
In September 1978, a man named John Lear took a panoramic photograph of the Groom Lake facility from public land at the north end of the lake bed.
The following year came the notorious Las Vegas Review-Journal article on Groom Lake activities.
According to one account, there were about twenty MiG 21s and four MiG 23s in service by the mid-1980s.
Over all, United States Black airplane activities in the early 1980s rivaled those of the 1960s.
Not only the MiGs, but also the F-117A, HALSOL, and possibly another Black airplane were undergoing flight tests.
The MiGs operated by the United States during this time were ""new"" aircraft.
The other U.S.-operated MiG 21s were apparently retired, stored, stripped of useful parts, or scrapped.
Despite the leaks, only minimal attention had been drawn to United States MiG operations.
Three-star generals do not generally fly test missions, so Bond's death attracted press interest.
The fact that the air force also refused to identify the type of plane also raised questions.
It was said that the MiG 23 was used to test the Stealth fighter in simulated combat and that Bond might have been involved in such tests at the time of the crash.
Still later, it would be claimed that the crash was caused by a loss of control at high speed.
The mission was planned to include a high-speed run, followed by a systems-radar familiarization.
The two planes climbed to 40,000 feet while ground control reported they had about fifteen minutes of airspace time.
They had descended slightly to about 37,000 feet, and Bond climbed back to 40,000 feet.
Bond then reported to ground control that he had reached the planned speed without problems.
Ground control informed the T-38 pilot that Bond was twenty-two miles away.
Ground control warned the T-38 pilot that Bond's plane was nearly at the edge of the airspace.
The plane had hit the ground in a high-speed, 60-degree dive and was destroyed.
Three major sections were examined—the tail, the engine compressor and turbine blades, and the engine inlet.
Examination of the debris showed that all the damage was due to ground impact.
The engine was running normally, at a throttle setting of about 80 to 90 percent.
There was no evidence of fire, an ""overtemp,""” heat distress, or an engine stall.
Checks of the fuel, hydraulic fluid, and lube oil showed no contamination or abnormal wear.
The accident report concluded that the plane had crashed due to loss of control during high-altitude, supersonic flight.
Although United States MiG operations continued after the death of Bond, its days were numbered.
The TTR operations were closed down in the mid1980s, apparently due to the growth of F-117A activities.
It was reported that in late 1988 or early 1989, the MiGs were grounded.
Most of the planes were placed in storage at North Base at Edwards Air Force Base.
A MiG OF ONE'S OWN Ironically, as the United States MiG operations were ended, MiG 15s and MiG 17s began arriving on the civilian market.
Communist China and the Eastern European countries began selling the old MiGs to anyone with hard currency.
A MiG 15 could be bought for $175,000 (a fraction the cost of a flyable P-51 Mustang) and operated for about $10,000 per year.
Among those who took advantage of the privately owned MiGs was the United States Air Force Test Pilot School.
They were intended to be used in air-combat training for both United States and Allied forces.
One such exercise was reportedly held at Kirtland Air Force Base, New Mexico, in September 1988.
As rules were judged more important than results, the MiGs were put into storage at Kirtland until the legal problems could be sorted out.
Although primarily concerned with United States Navy air combat over North Vietnam and the founding of the Top Gun School, it did include material on the MiGs.
In March 1991, the Strategic Air Museum at Offutt Air Force Base received a call from the Air Force Museum at Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.
The next morning, when the SAC Museum employees arrived at work, they discovered four large crates had been dropped off by their back fence.
When it was put on display a year later, questions arose about its source.
A civilian employee of air force intelligence said that the United States government had agreed never to divulge the source of such planes, even years after the deal was made.
Still another MiG 21F was put on display at the USAF Armament Museum at Eglin Air Force Base.
A close examination showed the plane had Chinese characters inside some of the access panels.
Although some of the U.S.-operated MiGs were now on public display, they were still Black airplanes, in the darkest shades.
It is clear that the air force had created a security ""firebreak"" around the MiGs.
How the MiGs came into United States possession, or any records connected in any way with this, were out of bounds.
In some fifteen years of filing FOIA requests, this was the first time the author had run across information considered this sensitive.
Another reason the air force was so protective of a project that seemingly had ended became apparent in March 1994.
In an article on Groom Lake in Popular Science, a photo was published of an Su 22 Fitter in flight.
It is currently in frontline Russian air force service and has been exported widely to Eastern European and Third-World countries.
The article also said that MiG 23s had been seen flying above Groom Lake.
With East and West Germany now unified, there was an ample supply of both Soviet-built planes and the spare parts needed to support them.
There were also suggestions that operations were not limited to MiG 23s and Su 22s.
In October 1994, Aerospace Daily reported that ""reliable observers"" had sighted an Su 27 Flanker on two occasions.
It is in operation with both the Russian and Communist Chinese air forces.
The first sighting took place in late August near Lake Tahoe, while the second occurred near Yosemite National Park in September.
The F-117Awas flying in the opposite direction at about the same altitude as the Su 27.
These include Mi 2 Hoplites, Mi 8/17 Hips, Mi 24 Hinds, Mi 14 Haze, and a Ka 32 Helix.
The helicopters are flown out of Fort Bliss and Fort Polk and are used for training.
The pilots were particularly impressed with the Ka 32, due to its lifting power.
Although their existence is not a secret, some things remain classified.
A photographer was not allowed to go inside the helicopters, as this would indicate the country of origin.
During the early 1990s, this was budgeted at only a few million dollars per year.
The budget in 1993 for ""Foreign Material Acquisition"" was $500 million.
THE MiG CRASH AT RACHEL—A CAUTIONARY TALE In reconstructing the history of Black airplane programs that are still secret, such as the MiG operations, where reports are many, but the confirmed facts are few, one must take care not to be led astray.
One such cautionary tale is the report of a MiG crash that occurred near the town of Rachel, Nevada.
In 1994, an article on Groom Lake was published in the Las Vegas Review-Journal.
An individual went to Rachel and was able to track down the crash site.
It had been cleaned up very well; the only visible debris was tiny bits of aluminum.
The rake was soon pulling up compressor blades, hose clamps, and a data plate.
The way the debris was spread out was also consistent with a plane crash.
All this proved conclusively that the ""MiG"" had been built at General Dynamics Fort Worth.
Later, he found a person in Rachel who had kept a scrapbook of newspaper articles about the town.
The crash had occurred on July 10, 1986, (the day before the loss of Maj.
The F-16 impacted about seventy-five yards from two different trailers and three hundred yards from the town's gas station.
The Norwegian pilot landed safely by parachute and was picked up by one of the townspeople.
The local sheriff's office was called and told of the accident and that the pilot was safe.
No property on the ground was damaged, and the fire was allowed to burn itself out.
The sheriff, his deputies, the paramedics from Alamo, and the Lincoln County SWAT team all showed up.
Because of the possibility of toxic fumes from the burning metal, it was decided that people living in the immediate area should go to the Stage Stop Saloon.
The next day, the locals set up a picnic for the air force recovery crew.
Channel 8 from Las Vegas came out to film the crash site, and the Las Vegas Review-Journal called several people for interviews.
Letters of appreciation were sent by the Nellis base commander and the Norwegian pilot.
Despite the secrecy that still surrounds MiG operations, there is no doubt that the United States has owned and flown MiGs.
There are no photos of this Dark Eagle, no confirmation of its existence.
There are only vague stories of a plane whose shape seems to change with every telling.
Then I can assess the truth or falsity of the. . . statements and discriminate between what is substantial and what is not.
By the mid-1980s, with stories of the stealth fighter increasing in frequency, suspicions began to grow that there were other Black airplanes.
A small technology demonstrator like the Have Blue could be built at low cost and in a short time.
Speculation grew that there was a kind of Black X-plane program, where different stealth configurations could be tested—oneor two-of-a-kind prototypes or aircraft with a very limited production run.
Reports, stories, and sightings of still-secret Dark Eagles began to appear.
SHAMU The story of Shamu began with the June 1, 1981, issue of Aviation Week and Space Technology.
Northrop had lost the competition to build the Have Blue, but interest in stealth aircraft was not limited to attack aircraft.
A stealth strategic bomber could render the huge Soviet air-defense network useless.
As support for a ""stealth bomber” grew in 1980-81, Northrop soon emerged as the leading contender.
In the 1940s, John K Northrop had designed the XB-35 and YB-49 flying wings.
Perhaps the most graceful bombers ever flown, they were beset with a number of problems that prevented them from entering service.
The XB-35's propeller system was redesigned several times but never proved reliable.
With the emergence of jets, a propeller-driven bomber was considered obsolete.
The second prototype crashed during a stall check, killing the crew (including Capt.
Before the program ended, the YB-49 made several flights against a coastal radar site at Half Moon Bay, California.
Even given the primitive state of radar technology in the late 1940s, it was clear that a large flying wing had good stealth properties.
With RAM and the proper shape, a flying-wing stealth bomber could be as hard to detect as the Have Blue.
Both the Lockheed and Northrop Have Blue designs used faceting, in order to make RCS calculations easier.
Given the limitations of computers in the late 1970s, this would be much harder to design.
It was therefore assumed the ""Northrop"" aircraft described in the Aviation Week report was a Have Blue-like technology demonstrator, built to test smooth stealth.
It could also insure the stability system would overcome the control and stability problems that had doomed the YB-49.
SIGHTINGS AND REPORTS Several sightings were made in the 1980s of triangular aircraft from areas near Groom Lake.
Despite the Groom Mountain land seizure, Greenpeace continued efforts to infiltrate the nuclear test site.
During one such attempt, a group from Greenpeace was trespassing near the Groom Lake area.
They reported seeing a black, triangular-shaped aircraft flying slowly overhead.
Years later, several of the group said they thought it was a subscale flying prototype of the B-2.
In a book on the F-117A, it was stated that the project was under way in the early 1980s, the same time as the FSD tests.
Lockheed engineers nicknamed the plane Shamu, because it resembled the killer whale at Sea World.
According to one story, the Lockheed engineers were initially not cleared to see the Northrop aircraft, while the Northrop personnel were not to see the Lockheed F-117A FSD aircraft.
This disrupted operations for both programs, and each group was eventually cleared to see the other's airplane.
The Northrop aircraft is understood to have operated from a hangar at the south end of Groom Lake, separate from those used by Lockheed.
If Shamu really had a wingspan of 100plus feet, it was rather large for a subscale test aircraft, and far larger than the ""fighter-sized"" plane Aviation Week and Space Technology had described.
Over the years, a number of different reports circulated about triangular or manta-ray-shaped Black airplanes.
The sightings began in mid-1989, when daylight operations of the F-117A started.
The normal pattern was for several F-117As to fly the same route, separated by eight to ten minutes.
Observers would report that three or four F-117As would pass, then the triangular plane, then three or four more F-117As.
It showed a similar lighting pattern to the F-117As—amber lights at the wingtips and a red light near the nose.
As the ""history"" of the program was reconstructed, it is claimed that Northrop was awarded a contract in late 1978 to develop a stealth test aircraft.
In 1982, Northrop is described as receiving a contract to build a production aircraft, based on the test aircraft.
It was speculated its reconnaissance data and target information were relayed directly to the F-117As in near real time.
It was also claimed the TR-3A could designate targets for the F-117As, that is, illuminate them with a laser so the F-117A's LGB could strike.
Months before the B-2 made its first flight, sightings were made of a large flying-wingshaped aircraft.
Later, sightings were made of this aircraft on moonlit nights while the B-2 was grounded.
In one case, it was claimed that the aircraft turned 90 degrees on its wingtip.
Even more remarkable are claims of a huge black boomerang-shaped flying wing that moves silently at speeds as low as 20 knots.
Several Antelope Valley residents have reported seeing it slowly moving through the night sky.
The big triangle is also described as making such ""unlikely maneuvers"" as coming to a full stop, tipping upright, and hovering in this vertical position.
It is also claimed that a pattern of small white lights on the triangle's black underside provide ""constellation camouflage"" against the starry night sky.
Although noting this was ""a craft that simply strains credulity,"" and that ""such sightings encourage those who link the military with unearthly technology,” some suggest that it could be a lighter-than-air craft propelled by slowly turning propellers.
The vertical hovering suggests to some that it acts as a reflector for a bistatic radar system.
In this system, a transmitter emits a ""fence"" of radar signals, which is reflected back to a receiver.
It is described as being an equilateral triangle with the tips flattened.
At the center of the F-121's underside was a depression and a dome-shaped nozzle.
It is claimed that a squadron of the planes are based at the Northrop RCS facility at Tehachapi.
The plane is described as similar to the F-117A in shape; but at least 20 percent bigger, with a two-man crew and a larger bomb load.
The rear of the plane has several spikes, giving it the appearance of an artichoke.
It is further claimed that the design was tested with a subscale flying model about the size of the Have Blue.
There were the eyewitness accounts of both the Lockheed engineers and Greenpeace protestors.
THE ""NEW SHAMU"" In early 1994, all the assumptions about Shamu were challenged.
Rather than a flying-wing design, the ""new"" version of the Shamu story held that it was a Northrop design for a one-of-a-kind electronic warfare aircraft.
The aircraft was large and has been described as ""conventional""—one source likened it to the Boeing Stratocruiser airliner of the 1950s.
Like the Stratocruiser, the cockpit windows wrapped around the front of the fuselage.
The side of the fuselage was described as flat and covered with antennae for the jamming equipment.
The wings were said to be slightly swept and were set low on the fuselage.
According to another (allegedly) ""reliable source,"" Shamu looked funny.
By late April, reports began to circulate that the air force would soon unveil a ""fighter-sized"" Black airplane.
Tacit Blue began in 1978, when DARPA asked Northrop to develop a stealth reconnaissance aircraft.
It would have to operate behind front lines and carry radar able to detect armored units.
The plane's designers, John Cashen and Steve Smith faced a difficult task.
The F-1 17A was designed to have a minimum radar return from the front and back.
The Tacit Blue would fly in circles, and thus be exposed to radar signals from all directions.
They also had to fit a large radar inside an airframe that was about the same size as an F-15.
The pilot's windshield wrapped around the front like that on the Stratocruiser airliner.
The plane was 55. feet long, had a wingspan of 48. feet, and weighed 30,000 pounds.
As with the Have Blue, the Tacit Blue made use of existing components—F-SE landing gear, an F-15 ejector seat, and two Garrett ATF3-6 high-bypass turbofan jet engines from the Falcon 20 business jet.
The engines were supplied with air from a flush inlet atop the fuselage, while a slot exhaust was between the fins.
As with the other stealth aircraft, the Tacit Blue was highly unstable.
Ifallowed to ""weathervane"" in a wind tunnel, a model would actually fly backwards.
A General Electric digital quadruple-redundant fly-by-wire control system was needed to make Tacit Blue controllable.
Thomas, Cashen, and the rest of the team were keyed up the night before.
When two beers didn't help to relax them, Thomas and Cashen played a one-on-one basketball game until they both dropped.
It was designed, however, to use low power and techniques which made the signals seem to be only background noise.
Flight test showed the inlet worked well, but crosswinds on the ground caused stalls during engine startups.
Despite the success, it was soon clear the Tacit Blue would never enter production.
Five pilots flew the plane—Dick Thomas, Lieutenant Colonels Ken Dyson, Russ Easter, and Don Cornell, and Maj.
The ""F-121"" was described as taking off vertically with an anti-gravity engine.
On Saturday, May 4, 1996,1 was told that an individual found it suspicious that I had become interested in Black airplanes and UFOs, that my previous book, Watch the Skies!, had been published by Smithsonian Institution Press, that Dr.
Carl Sagan had liked the book, and that I had been right about Tacit Blue.
At the Tacit Blue press conference, the name of another Black airplane came up.
For the past several years, strange sounds have been heard coming from the skies above the western United States.
These sounds are described as a ""rumbling,"" akin to a small earthquake or like the sky is being ripped open.
The source of these sounds is claimed to be the ""Aurora""—a Mach 6 Black aircraft developed and flown in secrecy.
The Aurora's speed is such that it could, according to the stories, fly from Washington, D.C., to Baghdad in ninety minutes.
With its claimed top speed of 4,500 mph (six times the speed of sound, or 1.25 miles per second), the Aurora is seen as the epitome of a century of aerospace development.
These tales of darkness and shadows have been told in the technical press, weekly news magazines, and television news and entertainment programs.
The air force has repeatedly denied the existence of the Aurora, yet the stories have continued to spread and grow.
The stories have also spread worldwide—sightings and ""hearings"" have been reported from a remote field in Scotland and on a small island in the Pacific.
Aurora has also been used to raise questions about the development of such Black aircraft, and the role and necessity of such advanced weapons in a post-Cold War, one-superpower world.
While there, a Caltech graduate student told the author that he had heard that Lockheed was developing a high-speed, high-altitude replacement for the SR-71 reconnaissance aircraft.
In 1979, Aviation Week and Space Technology magazine published an article describing high-speed aircraft studies undertaken at the Skunk Works.
By the 1990s, the article speculated, a Mach 4, 200,000-foot aircraft could be developed.
The aircraft would relay its image and radar intelligence data via satellite in real time.
It would be powered by an advanced turbo-ramjet engine—a J58 with a ramjet surrounding it.
The main problem was cost—the engine alone would cost $1 billion to develop.
At the same time, the air force was looking at advanced bomber and cruise missile designs.
Since the mid-1960s, when the SA-2 SAM had chased them out of the stratosphere, bombers had gone in at low altitude.
The A-12/SR-71 showed a high-speed and high-altitude profile could work.
Some wanted to use a very high, very fast attack profile, harkening back to the B-12 studies.
At this time, it was assumed that any future Black airplane would rely on ever higher speeds and altitudes to survive.
It was not commonly understood that stealth and high speeds were incompatible.
Rumors of such high-speed projects continued to circulate during the 1970s and early 1980s.
This was also the time the Have Blue was flown, the existence of stealth was unveiled, and the stories about the stealth fighter grew.
The Department of Defense issued a budget document, a declassified version of the P-l1 weapons procurement document for fiscal year 1986.
The project would receive $80. million in fiscal year 1986, and $2.272 billion in fiscal year 1987.
This was an unusual amount—$80. million was a very small amount for an aircraft development program, while $2.272 billion was very large.
It was speculated that the Aurora entry should have been removed before the document was declassified.
On January 28, 1986, space shuttle Challenger was destroyed during launch, killing the seven crewmembers.
In the wake of the tragedy, there was discussion of possible future shuttle replacements.
They would take off from a runway, then accelerate to Mach 25 speed and go into orbit.
The technology necessary would be tested in the X-30 National Aero Space Plane program.
This scientific instrument was similar in design to the Lockheed Big Bird photo reconnaissance satellite.
Such a Black project, it was suspected, could have already cleared up some of the X-30's technological unknowns.
It was also noted that the air force wished to retire the SR-71 fleet due to cost.
AURORA In early 1988, there were several articles on the alleged Aurora.
The article quoted one official as saying, ""With the SR-71, they know we're there but they can't touch us.
The progress of the development effort, when it would become operational, and the specifications could not, the article said, be determined.
That same month, Armed Forces Journal published a financial analysis that indicated Lockheed's income far exceeded that which could be explained by the C-5B, C-141, or C-130 transport aircraft, TR-1 reconnaissance aircraft, P-3 antisubmarine aircraft, F-117A, or YF-22 stealth aircraft.
It was suggested that Lockheed was building a ""super-stealth"" replacement for the SR-71 and that flight tests had begun in 1987.
That was done by the third article, which was published in the February 1988 Gung-Ho magazine.
It described Aurora as being fueled by methane and capable of Mach 7 (5,000 mph) and 250,000-foot altitudes.
The aircraft was described as having a three-man crew and as being operational since the mid-1980s.
It was also claimed that inflight refueling was done by special KC-135Qs.
Among other things, the article quoted one official as saying, ""We are flight-testing vehicles that defy description.
Finally, a retired Lockheed engineer was reported as saying, ""Let's put it this way.
In 1989, an eyewitness came forward to claim, among other things, that he had seen Aurora close up while working at Groom Lake.
He described it as fueled by liquid methane and requiring the entire three-mile runway at Groom Lake to take off.
Aurora was described as able to reach speeds of Mach 10 and altitudes of 250,000 feet.
In 1989 and 1990, a number of reports began to appear that described a very loud, deep rumbling engine noise, sometimes punctuated by a onehertz ""pulsing"" sound.
The first reported sighting occurred in July 1989, at about 3:00 A.M., near Edwards Air Force Base.
On October 18, 1989, another ""hearing"" occurred during the early evening hours.
It was described as “extremely loud, with a deep, throaty rumble"" which shook houses sixteen miles away.
No light or glow was seen, but the roar continued for about five minutes; it seemed to be heading north and climbing into the sky.
Local residents said the sound ""was like the sky ripping"" and was unlike anything heard at Edwards for years.
One witness compared it to the Saturn 5 rocket engine tests of the 1960s.
Both were headed to the northeast, and it was not clear if the sighting was of one aircraft twice or two different vehicles.
All occurred between midnight and 5:00 A.M., and all the objects were headed northeast.
Similar sightings were also reported from central Nevada during 1989-90.
Again, it was a rumbling noise, with a one to two-hertz pulse rate and heard in the early morning hours.
The aircraft was reported to have left the Groom Lake range and overflown a small town.
The first appeared in the December 18, 1989, issue, against the background of the fall of the Soviet Empire in Eastern Europe.
Much of the article was a discussion of the role of Black development in the post-Cold War world.
These gave more details about the sightings and included artist conceptions of possible designs.
They also noted that many in government were ""extremely skeptical"" of the reports.
One official said he was confident that there was no such thing as a family of high-speed aircraft.
The vehicle was shaped like a flattened diamond or football—110 feet long and 60 feet wide.
The fuselage's edges were rounded, and the aircraft's contours were likened to a skipping stone.
The article said, ""They have a scorched, heat streaked appearance, and seem to be coated with a crystalline patina indicative of sustained exposure to high temperature.
The jet engines were shut down, and the inlet and exhaust ports were closed.
Misted fuel was sprayed from ports at the midsection of the fuselage and ignited.
The weapons were cone-shaped, like an ICBM's warhead, and sat in the ports nose down.
The outer cap was discarded, the weapon was ejected, and then a second tile-covered cap moved into position.
The aircraft was unmanned—it was preprogrammed, but could also be controlled via a satellite or ground station.
All these articles were written against the background of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, and the buildup of Allied forces.
Hard as it may be to fathom, there is reason to wonder whether complete knowledge of the most exotic aircraft may reach ""The Top,"" all for super-security.
One would like to think America's staggering black-world expenditures have yielded weaponry that could neutralize Iraq President Saddam Hussein's most valued military and political assets quickly.
Some say that capability is in hand and could be used ... if the right people choose to do so.
Following the flurry of reports in late 1990, there was a drop-off in articles during 1991.
What was being published was little more than a rehash of the earlier articles.
An investigation was launched at a high level, which, despite diligent effort, could not discover such an aircraft.
These were sparked by four ""brief rumbles"" in the Los Angeles area over a ten-month period.
The specific dates were June 27, October 31, and November 21, 1991, and January 30, 1992.
Believing they were earthquakes, radio station KFWB called Caltech's Seismo Lab for the location and magnitude of the quakes.
Caltech seismologists looked at computer records from a network of sensors and determined no earthquakes had occurred.
Jim Mori, a research seismologist at Caltech, concluded that the rumble was actually a sonic boom.
The seismic record of a sonic boom is different than a small earthquake, even though they have the same magnitude.
At first, Mori thought it might be from a meteor, but the regular occurrence, always between 6:30 and 7:30 A.M. and always on a Thursday, ruled this out.
Since there are no commercial supersonic aircraft, KFWB called local air force and navy bases.
In 1989, Mori had worked on a team studying seismograms recorded during space shuttle landings at Edwards Air Force Base.
Based on this, some information about the mystery plane could be determined.
It was possible to calculate how fast and how high the plane was flying, based on the pattern of the arrival times of the sonic boom across the seismic network.
By looking at the entire network, it was possible to determine the flight path and direction.
On three of the four days, the records showed two events, which means that there were two planes.
They flew about one minute apart as they traveled across the seismic net from south to north.
The planes traveled at about two to four times the speed of sound, at an altitude of 10,000 to 40,000 feet.
From the frequency of the event on the seismogram, we think that the aircraft is smaller than the Shuttle.
It appears that they did not land at Edwards Air Force Base, but kept going north to southern Nevada.
This included details on the rumbles and on the aircrafts’ flight path.
There was a brief film clip taken from a site near Groom Lake of a light hovering in the night sky.
The seeming public display of Aurora indicated to some that a disclosure was imminent.
The believers detected a ""subtle language shift"" in the air force denials.
Steven Aftergood, an analyst with the Federation of American Scientists—which had long opposed new United States weapons programs—said about the air force statement, ""it's a non-denial denial.
Aftergood continued, ""I would say the triggering of earthquake sensors is a leak from the air force.
Just when the ""unveiling"" of Aurora would come was unclear to observers.
Another reason for the belief in an imminent disclosure was reports of an Aurora sighting in Scotland.
It was claimed that in November 1991, a Royal Air Force air traffic controller had picked up a radar target leaving a NATORAF base at Machrihanish, Scotland.
When he telephoned the base to ask what the plane was, he was told to forget what he had seen.
It was claimed that Aurora took off from Groom Lake and headed west to a landing at Kwajalein Atoll in the Pacific.
It then continued west and overflew Iraq, using ""high-powered cameras and infrared radar"" before continuing on to Machrihanish.
After taking off, Aurora was refueled with liquid methane by tankers based in England.
The story crossed the Atlantic and the Antelope Valley Press carried a story on March 6, 1992.
On the first two nights, a KC-135Q took off at about 6:15 P.M., followed by the aircraft.
It had a red light near the nose, two ""whitish"" lights at the wingtips, and an amber light at the tail.
The plane then joined the tankers in a close formation and extinguished its lights.
On one of these nights, at 9:30 P.M., two T-38 trainers took off with an unknown aircraft between them.
The third aircraft did not turn on its lights until it was about three miles from the runway.
Finally, on February 27, a formation of a KC-135Q, two F-117As, and the unknown aircraft took off.
What was thought by some to be a ground test of the Aurora's engine was also reported.
Late on the night of February 26 (the second night of the sightings) a series of ""booms"" was heard coming from the base.
These occurred every two to three seconds and continued for around thirty minutes.
It had long been reported that Aurora left such contrails, but this was the first time it had been photographed.
The photographer later said he talked with an engineer at Convair Fort Worth, who said the contrails were formed only when the PWDE was operating outside its design parameters.
Another theory was that they became visible only when the aircraft descended out of the thin air of high altitudes and into the thicker air of low altitudes.
Two advisories were recorded—""You're at 67,000, eighty-one miles out,” and ""Seventy miles out, 36,000.
Fighter aircraft, such as F-15s and F-16s, do not fly above 50,000 feet, as they lack pressure suits.
When Aviation Week and Space Technology contacted Edwards Air Force Base, they said Joshua Control had no record of an aircraft with the call sign Gaspipe on those dates.
After the Scottish reports, drawings were published of a pure-delta Aurora.
On September 13 and October 3, 1990, sightings were made at Mojave in the late evening.
The final sighting occurred on July 12 at 11:45 P.M. at the Helendale Airfield, near Barstow, California.
This field is located next to a Lockheed radar cross section test range.
Lockheed aircraft land at the field to bring in workers to the test range.
The witness said the aircraft turned on its landing lights while quite high, then descended quickly in an S-pattern.
There was bright moonlight, which allowed the witness a good look at the plane as it landed.
Although the weather was clear at Helendale, there were severe thunderstorms in Las Vegas and the Groom Lake area.
On January 6, 1992, there had also been a sighting of a shape being loaded on a C-5 cargo plane at the Skunk Works facility in Burbank.
It was described as looking like the forward part of an SR-71 fuselage, except the chines were rounded.
The aircraft was described as having a large delta wing and a long forward fuselage.
The edges of the wing and fins had a black tile covering, while the rest of the fuselage was white.
The rear fuselage had a raised area with a black line extending down it.
Because some did not recall seeing the canard, it was thought to be retractable.
There were two rectangular engine exhausts, and it produced a ""very loud, low-pitched roar"" with a rhythmic beat to it.
The aircraft would reach a speed of Mach 6 to 8, then the second stage, attached to the raised section of the rear fuselage, would fire to put a small satellite into orbit.
It was noted that the Groom Lake facility had recently undergone an expansion, which believers pointed to as support facilities for the Aurora.
Four water tanks were built on the hillside behind the base for fire-fighting purposes.
There was also an extensive runway upgrade program, which included the addition of a second runway.
Another improvment was construction of a new fuel tank farm at the south end of the base.
It occurred at 1:45 P.M. on August 5, 1992, as the airliner was headed east out of Los Angeles International Airport.
The crew reported the plane was headed directly toward them and passed five hundred to a thousand feet below them.
The crew thought the plane was supersonic as the closure rate was two to three times normal.
They described the plane as having a lifting-body configuration, much like the forward fuselage of an SR-71 with some type of tail, and was the size of an F-16.
The FAA and Edwards radar records were examined, but no target was recorded when the crew said the near miss occurred.
In a letter to the Washington Post, he said, Let me reiterate what I have said publicly for months.
The Air Force has no such program either known as ""Aurora"" or by any other name.
And if such a program existed elsewhere, I'd know about it— and I don't.
When the latest spate of ""Aurora"" stories appeared, I once again had my staff look into each alleged ""sighting"" to see what could be fueling the fire.
Some reported ""sightings"" will probably never be explained simply because there isn't enough information to investigate.
Other accounts, such as of sonic booms over California, the near collision with a commercial airliner and strange shapes loaded into Air Force aircraft are easily explained and we have done so numerous times on the record.
While I know this letter will not stop the speculation, I feel that I must set the record straight.
On October 30, 1992, Rice said, ""The system that has been described in those articles does not exist.
It was suggested that ""We"" meant the air force, while Aurora was operated by the National Reconnaissance Office , which controlled spy satellites.
If there ever was a follow-on to the SR-71, that aircraft could be assigned to the NRO ... in the case of a hypersonic vehicle, as has been widely speculated—by which I mean a vehicle faster than an SR71—Mach 3, 4, 5, 6, 8—we at NRO have no such vehicle or under development.
I'm not aware of any such activity, and the Air Force has said the same.
I'm just saying that NRO doesn't have an ""Aurora"" or anything else like it.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology's Lincoln Laboratory was hired to analyze a seismic recording from Catalina Island.
Lincoln Lab concluded it was from an F-14 on a test flight off the California coast.
The October-November 1992 issue of Air and Space magazine published an essay on Black aircraft.
The cost of these programs must be enormous and the Pentagon is afraid that Congress might suffer an attack of sticker shock when they find out how much money the military is vacuuming out of the nation's treasury.
It could also be that buried in the budgets of black programs could be evidence of monetary fraud, kickbacks and wasteful expenditures.
The December 12, 1992, issue of Jane's Defence Weekly carried an account of a sighting by a North Sea oil-drilling engineer.
The witness said the sighting took place in August 1989 from the drilling rig Galveston Key.
The witness reported seeing a KC-135 tanker, two F-llls, and a triangular aircraft a little larger than the F-llls flying north.
The witness was also a twelve-year veteran of the Royal Observer Corps and had been a member of its international aircraft recognition team.
The aircraft was estimated to be 90 feet long, with a 45to 50-foot wingspan.
As with most of the speculated Aurora designs, it was described as burning liquid methane.
Reports also claimed sightings had been made at Kwajalein Atoll and that a loud sonic boom, which had caused damage in Holland, was from Aurora.
As the reports continued, believers became more strident in their attacks on the air force's denials.
It went on to say that ""the Pentagon continues to deny the existence of the Aurora.
And as with the F-19 kit, the idea of a Black airplane at your local hobby store attracted press attention.
THE END OF AURORA By late 1993 and early 1994, numerous articles about Aurora had been published.
There was a qualitative difference with the stories about the stealth fighter published during the 1980s, however.
The nightly flight activities at TTR clearly indicated the stealth fighter was operational years before the public announcement.
These were rich in details, many of which, in retrospect, proved correct.
The Aurora stories, in contrast, were fragmentary and stood in isolation.
The Aurora had a distinctive sound and left a distinctive contrail, both of which could be heard and seen for many miles.
Among some believers, the suspicion grew that all was not well with the Aurora project.
Plans to build several dozen production Auroras were abandoned by the NRO in 1989—90.
Aurora was depicted as yet another Black project that had ended in an expensive failure.
Even as Aurora faded away, attacks on Black projects became more strident.
He added, ""This is not a part of the official program of the United States government.
This is the story of Aurora, as told by some of the foremost magazines, newspapers, public interest groups, and aerospace writers.
Reading through the inch-thick stack of material, one might think the case for Aurora was proven beyond a reasonable doubt—that the United States had, in fact, built a remarkable aircraft, unlike any the world has ever seen, then systematically lied about it.
But perhaps the reader can think of another case where sightings were also made by ""reliable witnesses” of remarkable vehicles, capable of speeds and maneuvers beyond those of conventional aircraft.
These include 1,700mph speeds, at a time when manned supersonic flight had not yet been achieved, and right-angle turns.
In that earlier case, the air force also denied the sightings were valid, saying they were of conventional objects that had been misinterpreted.
Much time was spent examining official statements for any inconsistencies.
When a university study supported the air force position, it was also accused of being part of the cover-up—the air force cover-up of unidentified flying objects.
AURORA DOES NOT EXIST, ELVIS IS DEAD—ACCEPT IT Although many people have said that they have seen or heard Aurora in flight, there is only one person who has publicly claimed to have seen Aurora close up on the ground.
The Aurora I did see once on the way out there, and the only reason I say it's Aurora is, I was told by Dennis in the bus.
And it makes an unbelievably loud sound, and I think when I heard it I said, it sounds like the sky is tearing.
From what I understand, it operates on a liquid methane powered engine.
A lot of this information has gotten out in Aviation Week and Popular Science.
It looks like, if you know what the old X15 looked like—a very long slender craft with short wings on it—and a square exhaust that had little vanes in it ... it's quite large.
The original 1990 articles, including the ""flattened diamond"" Aurora, were based on the stories of an individual with no connection to the aerospace industry, but who claims that he was hired to design several diskshaped, antigravity-powered flying saucers for a shadowy military-industrial group.
He claims that he was once taken out to a test site to see the diamond-shaped Aurora.
He said it had steel wheels, like a Bonneville salt flats racer, because rubber tires could not withstand the very fast takeoff speeds it required.
John Lear also believed that in 1972-74, a huge underground base was built at Groom Lake.
Lear also believes that the aliens’ digestive system has atrophied and does not function.
To survive, the aliens take organs from humans and cattle, mix them with hydrogen peroxide, then spread the mixture on their bodies.
It was the landing light of one of the 737s used to bring workers to Groom Lake each morning.
The landing at the Helendale Airport is impossible for so large an aircraft.
An airport directory lists it as having two runways, one 3,800 feet long, while the other is 5,300 feet long.
These runways are too short and, being dirt, would not be able to support so large an aircraft.
The field also has no lights, tower, navigation aids, or instrument landing systems.
The drawing of the XB-70 forward fuselage being loaded on a C-5 is also questionable.
The witness did not get a good look at it, as the object was obscured by bright lights and obstacles.
The drawing made it look much more airplanelike than the evidence would suggest.
The other XB-70 sightings can be put in perspective by an experience of the author.
On January 12, 1993, the author saw the XB-70 flying at low altitude, heading west.
The author was quite surprised, as he had evidence by this time that the XB-70 Aurora stories were not to be relied upon.
At second glance, the plane proved to be an F-14 coming into NAS Miramar.
The Helendale sighting could have been a home-built Long E-Z light aircraft.
The photos of the doughnut-on-a-rope contrail has several internal inconsistencies.
As the size of the lens and the frequency of pulses are known, it is a simple matter to calculate the distance between each ""puff"" for a given altitude.
When the calculations are done, they indicate that if the aircraft was moving at supersonic speed, the puffs would be shooting out several hundred feet from the central contrail.
Blowups of the """"~f>iTuaJs-ars\rsn6V me regularity or me"" pulses breaks down.
The contrail itseir snows zigzags that are inconsistent with a very-high-speed object.
It is an example of how any strange sight or sound would be credited to Aurora.
The North Sea sighting was of a KC-135, two F-Ills, and a black triangle silhouetted against high clouds.
The angle of an F-I11 with its wings in the fully swept back position is 70 degrees.
In all probability, the Aurora was simply a third F-I1] with its wings swept back.
From far below, the nose and wings would blend together, and it would look like a black triangular flying wing.
READING BETWEEN THE LINES This evidence of Aurora's nonexistence has been amassed from different sources over the past several years.
Yet, even as the story was developing and spreading, it was possible to tell that belief in UFOs was closely connected with Aurora.
The February 1988 Gung-Ho article on Aurora said, ""Rumor has it some of these systems involve force-field technology, gravity-driven systems, and ‘flying saucer’ designs.
The author used the name Al Frickey; he has subsequently been identified by several sources as the author of books on stealth and Black airplanes.
An article on the ""skyquakes"" observed that earthquakes, meteors, or aircraft had all been eliminated as the source.
WFAA-TV of Dallas, Texas, carried a two-part program titled, The Aurora Project.
The Tester Corporation, which released models of the SR-75 and XR-7, followed up with another kit in the late summer of 1994.
The America Online BBS has two sections titled ""Area 51"" dealing with Black airplanes and ""Above Top Secret"" on UFOs.
Using screen names such as ""FR8Driver,"" ""Steve 1957,"" ""BlackSky,"" ""GrahamP,"" ""Stealth C,"" and ""VelvtElvis,” individuals can post messages and exchange information.
THE AURORA MYTH The myth of Aurora can serve as an example of how a belief system can develop and spread.
They did not take solid form until the name Aurora was publicized in 1985.
A close examination shows the difference between the Aurora myth and research into stories of real Black airplanes.
In historical research, the separate bits of information are assembled into a complete picture.
It is much like the pieces of a puzzle; individually they may seem meaningless, but together the pattern becomes clear.
These tales of darkness and shadows are without substance or coherence.
For example, the ""flattened diamond"" stories, which ushered in the first series of reports, are now passed off by believers.
The intercepted radio messages between Gaspipe and Edwards Air Force Base are now thought to be from security guards playing with their radios.
As with Aurora, the flying saucer myth had been developing for several years before the first widely publicized sightings in June and July 1947.
This was followed by a major upturn in 1992, which was an election year and a period of economic uncertainty.
In 1954, the noted psychologist Carl Jung gave an interview in which he expressed a degree of skepticism about UFOs.
As the behavior of the press is a sort of Gallup test with reference to world opinion, one must draw the conclusion that news affirming the existence of UFOs is welcome, but that skepticism seems to be undesirable.
To believe that UFOs are real suits the general opinion, whereas disbelief is to be discouraged.
This creates the impression that there is a tendency all over the world to believe in saucers and to want them to be real, unconsciously helped along by a press that otherwise has no sympathy with the phenomenon.
This remarkable fact in itself surely merits the psychologist's interest.
REVISIONIST AURORA On July 1, 1994, believers in Aurora suffered a stunning blow.
On that date the Senate Appropriations Committee added $100 million in funding to bring three SR-71s back into operation.
While the believers debated this question, a second blow came at the end of the year, with publication of Ben Rich's book Skunk Works.
He identified the Aurora funding item as being for the competition between Lockheed and Northrop for the B-2 contract.
Both companies came up with flying-wing designs and built one-quarter scale models for ground testing on a radar range.
Northrop's design was larger and had a heavier payload and a longer range.
The first example of this ""revisionist Aurora” was an article in the January 1995 Popular Science on the A-17—a Northrop stealth attack aircraft.
The article alleged the aircraft had a two-man crew, swing wings, and the ability to reach supersonic speeds without an afterburner.
The A-12's future home base was to be Cannon Air Force Base in New Mexico.
One suspects this was due to the challenge it posed to the ""orthodox"" Aurora.
A more significant problem was that it was inconsistent with the policy governing post-F-117A stealth aircraft.
Although the F-117A remained secret, the existence of the B-2, YF-22, and YF-23 programs were public knowledge.
Shortly before the aircraft were rolled out, artists conceptions were released.
Another negative factor is the sheer number of supposedly still secret Black aircraft.
From the published accounts, there are at least eleven such planes—two Shamus , at least three differing Auroras , the TR-3, the large delta wings, the very large deltas, the F-121, the Artichoke, and, finally, the A-17.
At best, the only one with any credibility is the ""funny-looking"" Shamu.
The situation is similar to the early 1950s, when numerous reports and blurry photos were published of ""new"" Soviet aircraft.
LOST IN DREAMLAND The tales of Aurora and captured flying saucers brought a degree of attention to Groom Lake that no real Black airplane ever had.
Soon, people were going to sites near the restricted area to watch the UFOs.
One popular site was ""The Black Mailbox,"" a rancher's mailbox that stands by the side of a highway.
Two hills, dubbed White Sides Mountain and Freedom Ridge, actually overlook Groom Lake.
These were the only sites from which a person could have a close look at the facility itself from public land.
Security guards, (originally in tan Broncos or Blazers, then later in white Cherokees and HUMVEES) watched the visitors.
When they observed a group climbing White Sides, the local sheriff was called.
The group was called down off the mountain, IDs were checked, warnings were issued about entering the restricted area or taking pictures, then the visitors were sent on their way.
Video cameras also were installed to watch visitors on White Sides Mountain.
The few foolish enough to enter the restricted area were arrested on the spot.
The fine was typically $600, but could run as high as $5,000 or a year in jail.
Throughout 1993, there was a standoff, which grew increasingly tense, between the viewers and the security guards.
Film was confiscated, and hikers were often buzzed by low-flying helicopters.
Rumors of a land grab by the air force of White Sides Mountain and Freedom Ridge began circulating in the spring of 1993.
As support for this, when Freedom Ridge was discovered, there were already survey stakes in the ground.
It was claimed that congressional personnel had already been warned that the seizure would be made in several months.
Three congressional groups were shown Groom Lake and came away ""dazzled"" by what they had seen.
In their handouts, they have depicted as absurd the idea of a secret base that anyone can see.
The following day, the Federal Register carried a notice of the withdrawal of 3,972 acres of public land in Lincoln County, Nevada.
The withdrawal would be until the year 2001, and the land would be closed to public access, mining, or any other government agency.
THE GROOM LAKE LAND SEIZURE The land seizure attracted both protests and media attention.
During early 1994, magazines such as Wired, Spin, and Nose carried articles on Groom Lake.
Groom Lake was described as equipped with defensive systems to protect against air and missile attack, including antiballistic missile launchers.
Throughout the end of 1993, the controversy over the Groom Lake land seizure built, with accusations that the air force's request was too vague, that illegal chemical waste burning had taken place at the site, and that civilian contractors had cheated on their property taxes for their facilities at the site.
The goal was to focus attention on Groom Lake, to make the land seizure more difficult, and to force the Bureau of Land Management to hold public hearings.
A radio talk show host from Alaska said, God knows what they're testing out there.
Adolf Hitler wrote the book, The New World Order, and he used the Big Lie.
He could not allow the people to go in and take a look at the camps at Nordhaus, Auschwitz, and Dachau.
There are missing children, a hundred thousand plus across this nation.
This had proven difficult, as, when approached, the guards would quickly cross back into the restricted area to prevent being identified.
When one of the white Cherokees passed their three-vehicle convoy, the vehicles turned diagonally across the road, trapping the Cherokee between them.
The following day, the group was on Freedom Ridge when they discovered they were being watched by a telescopic camera.
When they tuned a scanner to the sheriff's radio frequency, they discovered that search warrants were being issued.
When the sheriff's deputy found them, he bluntly told them to surrender their film or be held until search warrants were obtained.
On April 8, 1994, an ABC news crew was stopped, searched, and detained for two hours.
A video camera, sound-mixing equipment, tape recorders, microphones, batteries, cables, a tripod, radio scanners, walkie-talkies, and audio and videotapes were seized.
It included shots of the crew being questioned, a Russian satellite photo of the base on the XR-7 instruction sheet, and ""sound bites"" of enraged citizens at the public hearings.
Other than the satellite photo, there were no shots of the Groom Lake facility itself.
Then, during the weekend of April 8-9, 1995, the warning signs were put up.
During the standoff with the Branch Davidians in Waco, Texas, during early 1993, opinion in the town was solidly behind David Koresh.
President Clinton and the federal government are vehemently cursed and despised.
There was talk about ""Frankenstein experiments” being done to humans at the secret alien underground bases.
Robert Lazar also appeared and was mobbed by the faithful everywhere he went.
Lazar spent two and a half hours answering questions from the eager audience.
These covered such areas as how the saucers worked, antimatter generators, gravity waves, and, of course, Aurora.
He runs a group called Secret Saucer Base Expeditions, which has tours to the area.
UFOs represent only one strand of this web, which includes the death of David Koresh and the Branch Davidians, the B-2, the Council of Foreign Relations, Dreamland, and the local sheriff.
In late 1990, at the time the Aurora stories were published, there was a fad on the United States east coast for T-shirts with a black Bart Simpson.
With the turn of the century, and the approach of the 100th anniversary of the first powered flight, this is an appropriate moment to look back on the role played by the Dark Eagles.
As a result, the Dark Eagles are inextricably intertwined with the history of stealth's development and application.
In addition, beyond their importance in the history of both military aviation and reconnaissance, the Dark Eagles also provide a case study in the process of innovation.
Though stealth's first practical applications were made a quarter century ago, the seeds of stealth are as old as military aviation.
The concept had lain dormant, awaiting the circumstances that would finally transform it into an operational reality.
FROM THE GREAT WAR TO THE COLD WAR When World War I began in August 1914, the few operational military aircraft were slow, mechanically unreliable, and fragile.
Over London and other English cities, German Zeppelins and bombers attempted to destroy factories and break British will to continue the war.
One factor that affected both offensive and defensive efforts was the lack of longrange detection and tracking systems.
Although some work was done with sound detection equipment, this had only limited use.
The competing technologies to meet the need were the then relatively new concept of camouflage, and the more exotic one of the transparent covering.
The German Imperial Air Service's experiments with the first stealth aircraft ended in failure.
Translated into modern terms, although the transparent covering made the planes harder to see in some threat environments, such as clear weather, in others it was ineffective or actually made the plane more detectable.
The glint in bright sunlight, for instance, would have been detectable for tens of miles.
Today, it would be said that it reduced the planes’ operational readiness due to excessive maintenance downtime.
The technology that was finally selected to counter the threat of visual detection was to paint the aircraft in camouflage colors—blue underneath to blend into the sky, and multi-color patterns on upper surfaces—to make it harder for pilots of other planes to see them against the ground.
Zeppelins and night-flying bombers had their undersurfaces painted black to merge with the dark skies.
Such camouflage had limitations; an airplane silhouetted against a blue sky would be easily seen, while searchlights and even a moon-lit night sky could illuminate a blackpainted aircraft.
It did not have the technical and operational shortcomings of the transparent covering, however.
Ironically, today the German Imperial Air Service is best remembered for ""unstealth"" airplanes, such as those of Baron von Richthofen's Flying Circus.
Manfred was known as the ""Red Baron"" because his DRI triplane was painted red.
His brother Lothar's was red and yellow, while the squadron's other planes wore similar bright colors.
This built unit morale, allowed the pilots to keep track of each other in the swirl of combat, and to intimidate.
If the British pilots went into battle, they did so on the psychological defensive.
Among the lessons of the first World War was the importance of air power.
Although the amount of damage done by the German Zeppelin and bomber raids was, in retrospect, minor, but they had a great psychological impact.
The bombers would always get through, decimating their targets with chemical weapon attacks.
Some experts predicted that each air raid would kill tens of thousands of civilians, and within a few days there would be millions of casualties.
The horrors of the Western Front would be inflicted on civilians, who would be left psychologically devastated.
The appeasement of Hitler in the late 1930s was based, in part, on visions of this as the fate of London and Paris.
What this apocalyptic vision assumed was the continued lack of a long-range detection capability.
Interceptors would have to hunt for the bombers, and the probability of successfully engaging them was low prior to striking the target.
The development of radar in the late 1930s changed the nature of the threat aircraft faced.
As the formations flew towards their targets, radar plotted their course, and fighter units ahead of them were alerted to take off.
The controllers could then guide the fighters to intercept the bombers.
Because of radar, the air war over Europe was not the kind of devastating thunderbolt envisioned before the war, but, rather, a grim war of attrition.
Even as the Allied bomber force grew in size and experience, and new aircraft and technology were introduced, German air defenses expanded to keep up.
New fighter squadrons were added, the radar network was enlarged, and more flak guns were deployed.
The price paid by Allied bomber crews was high—the loss rate among United States Army Air Forces bomber crews was higher than that of the infantry—while Royal Air Force's Bomber Command suffered losses higher that those of British Army junior officers in World War I At the same time, their attacks were a Second Front in the air, drawing off fighters, guns, fuel, and soldiers from the battle fields.
The need facing the offensive air forces was to develop a means to hide the bomber formation from radar.
The technology selected was brute-force jamming of the radar echos, and dropping chaff to fill the screen with masses of false echos.
Air defenses attempted to counter these efforts with more sophisticated technology and experience.
The countermeasures equipment aboard the aircraft was also improved, to meet the changes in air defenses.
This on-going struggle between aircraft and air defenses became the pattern for the future.
Ironically, the ability of radar to detect aircraft at long range, and the attempts by the aircraft to drown out the echos, meant that visual camouflage lost its importance.
From the latter part of 1944 onward, United States Army Air Forces bombers and fighters were no longer painted in camouflage colors, but, rather, flew in bare-metal finishes.
The United States Air Force continued this practice through the Korean War, and into the early years ofthe Vietnam War.
It was also during World War II that the modern concept of ""Black Projects"" originated.
This was a fundamentally different kind of security than that normally conducted by the military.
It involved keeping secret, for example, the speed, altitude, range, and bomb load of a new aircraft.
With the Allied efforts to break German and Japanese codes, or to develop an atomic bomb, however, the existence of these projects had to be kept hidden from all but a select few.
The strategic advantages these technological breakthroughs gave the Allies would be lost if the Axis powers were to gain even a hint that they had been made.
To gain intelligence on the USSR, it was necessary to undertake covert overflights of its territory and that of its allies.
To be both effective and politically useful, these overflights would have to remain unknown to the Soviets.
It was a violation of international treaties to fly a plane in another nation's airspace in peacetime.
If the overflights were detected, the Soviets would make every effort to shoot the planes down.
Even if this failed, the inevitable Soviet protest would cause political problems.
The need for the overflights to remain undetected by the Soviets was thought to be satisfied by designing an aircraft able to fly at altitudes of 70,000 feet or greater, something that could be done with existing aviation technology.
This placed the aircraft above the reach of Soviet jet fighters, and, it was believed, would also make the plane difficult to detect by Soviet radar.
During World War II, American radar had been supplied to the Soviets, and, it was assumed, their radar would have similar problems tracking a high-flying target.
It was on this basis that President Eisenhower gave approval for development of the U-2.
The theory seemed to be confirmed when U-2 training flights began over the United States.
Even with advanced notice, it was difficult to spot the U-2, much less track ik Yet, on the first U-2 overflight of the Soviet Union, the Soviets were not only able to spot the U-2, but to track the plane and send MiG fighters after it.
The assumption had been that the Soviets would only detect a few unknown radar targets, and would not understand what was occurring.
The Soviet's ability to track the U-2 changed both the threat to the aircraft, and what was needed to counter it.
For the first time, an aircraft's Radar Cross Section had to be reduced.
Since the early days of radar, it had been known that not all aircraft echos were equal.
Rather, they would vary according to the frequency of the radar, as well as the size, shape, and orientation of the plane.
The first attempt, Project Rainbow, with its radar absorbing coatings, and special wires extending from the nose and tail to the wingtips, was disappointing.
The best that could then be done was to paint the U-2 with the sinister-looking black iron ferrite-based paint.
This reduced its RCS to a limited extent, and made the plane harder to spot.
The A-12 Oxcart depended on altitude, speed, a low RCS and countermeasures.
The A-12's altitude put it on the fringe ofa Surface-to-Air Missile's envelope, while its speed cut the time the SAM had to engage the aircraft.
This, along with the low RCS made the A-12 difficult to track and to gain a radar lock-on for firing.
During the development program, the air force was worried that if an A-12 carrying existing countermeasures equipment was lost over hostile territory, this would compromise the systems used by United States fighters and bombers.
Even if the countermeasures equipment was only similar, the Soviets would have an insight into United States designs.
The CIA started Project Kempster, which tried to develop ion guns that would be mounted on the A-12.
Kempster proved unsuccessful, and more conventional systems were developed for the A-12.
The later model Lightning Bugs carried additional equipment tojam missile radar, and a device that caused the drone to take evasive maneuvers when illuminated by a MiG's radar.
Despite the accomplishments of these aircraft, the inability of the available technology to meet the political need for an undetectable aircraft eliminated any possibility they would be used over the Soviet Union.
SAMS AND STEALTH While for the Dark Eagles a reduced RCS was a critical design feature, this did not figure in the design of operational fighters and bombers.
They, like the B-17s and Lancaster bombers of World War II, relied on conventional countermeasures packages to overcome air defenses, as well as such techniques as flying through gaps in radar coverage and attacks on air defense sites.
In addition to interceptor aircraft and anti-aircraft guns, United States aircraft now faced SAM missiles.
What was needed was the means to defeat a weapon that was faster than a conventional jet fighter, and which was guided to the target aircraft by radar.
This involved improved countermeasures, Wild Weasel aircraft to suppress the SAMs, and, finally, maneuvering to avoid any incoming SAMs.
Even with the proliferation ofnew Soviet SAMs, and improvements in radar technology, the opinion in the tactical units was that countermeasures, Wild Weasels, and maneuvering could still overcome the threat posed by any new enemy air defense.
They were ""Manly Men,"" who could out fly SAM's, given the proper warning.
The need, as they saw it, was more of the same— improvements in the existing technology.
Their threat assessment was not based on United States success against SAMs in Vietnam, but, rather, on the Israeli failure in the 1973 Yom Kippur War.
The threat they saw was that countermeasures were susceptible to technological surprise when faced with the multi-layered, interlocking network of SAMs, radars, and guns that the Soviets and Third-World countries were deploying.
What was needed against this threat was not the kind of incremental approach that the tactical units wanted, but, rather, a whole new approach.
To be effective, however, a level of reduction was needed which was ofa magnitude greater than that achieved with the U-2 and A-12.
Because of the A-12 and SR-71, the assumption had been that the key to survival was ever-greater speeds and altitudes.
The CIA had considered such possible high-speed replacements for the A-12.
In mid-1964 General Dynamics completed a feasibility study called Project Isinglass, which proposed an aircraft able to reach Mach 4 to 5 at 100,000 feet.
This was followed in 1965 by a McDonnell Aircraft design called Project Rheinberry.
This was to be a rocket-powered aircraft launched from a B-52 that could reach Mach 20 at 200,000 feet.
In the face of the threat of improved SAM systems, this faster and higher assumption had to be turned on its head.
Such speeds were incompatible with stealth, due to the sonic boom and infrared energy the vehicle would produce.
Rather than hypersonic, or even supersonic speeds, stealth required a subsonic vehicle.
Just as a submarine relies on silence while cruising slowly in the depths of the sea, a stealth aircraft would have to use a similar philosophy to conceal itself in the sky.
The question was one of whether the technology existed to create a truly invisible aircraft.
In the two decades since Kelly Johnson had begun Project Rainbow, the goal had proven to be as elusive as a rainbow's end.
How it was finally accomplished illustrated the changes made in those intervening years, including who made the innovative discoveries, how they did it, and the tools they used.
Bill Schroeder, a Lockheed math286 DARK EAGLES ematician, and Denys Overholser, a Skunk Works programmer.
To create a stealth aircraft, Schroeder turned the aircraft design process inside out.
What Schroeder did was to make the conceptual breakthrough that a complex shape such as an airplane could be simplified to a finite set of flat surfaces.
In effect, he designed a shape with the smallest possible RCS, then tried to make it fly.
This was far more efficient in the initial design stage than pole testing a model, and allowed the shape to be modified in the computer.
The result, the ""Hopeless Diamond,""with its wings made of flat plates, would never have occurred to an aerodynamicist.
But this was not about aerodynamics; it was about electrical engineering.
Yet all Schroeder's and Overholser's work would have meant nothing without another technological advance.
Despite its strange shape, the Hopeless Diamond was structurally similar to a conventional aircraft.
Had the shape been discovered in the 1960s, the basic airframe could have been built, but it would never have flown.
The aircraft stability control systems which existed in the 1960s, even the one developed for the A-12, could not have coped with the Hopeless Diamond.
It was not until the early and mid-1970s that the multi-axis computer control systems necessary for such an unstable vehicle were developed.
It was the computer revolution that made stealth a reality; without computers it would not have been possible to calculate the radar cross section of a given shape, or to make it controllable.
Despite the loss of both of the Have Blue aircraft during the test program, the RCS test results were phenomenal.
In the mid-1950s, for example, it was confidently predicted that ballistic missiles would make manned aircraft obsolete.
The problem is that the political, technical, and social factors which influence the future are so unpredictable as to border on the irrational.
In the world you know, Eisenhower is President, Elvis is king, both televisions and countermeasures use vacuum tubes, the transistor is still experimental, a computer is a huge mainframe unit which takes up a room, the B-52 is just entering service, airliners use propellers, the launch of the first satellite is still in the future, a manned flight to the Moon is the definition of the impossible, books are written on a typewriter and calculations are done with a slide rule.
I predict that in forty years, computers will be sold in stores and will be as commonplace as televisions are in the 1950s.
These computers will fit on a desktop, while others are small enough to sit in your lap.
All these computers are vastly more powerful than any existing 1950s mainframe computer.
Publishers require books to be prepared on these computers; the typewriter is obsolete.
These computers are linked together by a communications system called the Tnternet’ which allows you to send messages and do research at universities, libraries, and other institutions anywhere in the world.
If this had really been said to a mid-1950s audience of people working in the electronics field, they would have thought the speaker was out of his mind.
Yet the technical, political, and social trends that would create the PC were already developing.
Having given this cautionary tale, it has to be said that the future of stealth is a reflection of its past.
Have Blue was built with the sole purpose of finding out if stealth would work on a real airplane.
A few changes were made to correct defects found in the Have Blue, and to accommodate operational equipment.
Despite this, in the F-1 17A, stealth superseded other design considerations such as range or payload.
However, its stealth capabilities had to accommodate the long range and large payload of a strategic bomber.
They had also been built under the tight secrecy which enveloped stealth from the late 1970s to the end of the 1980s.
The effect of this secrecy was to make stealth a highly specialized concept, one that seemed to apply only to a narrow set of missions, rather than to aerospace technology as a whole.
In the decade which followed, and the first combat use of stealth, this changed.
Rather, it must be balanced with the more traditional requirements of speed, range, payload, weight, maneuverability, and cost.
The concept was now integrated into the mainstream of aircraft design, rather than being a separate ""Black"" aspect.
The F-] 17A, B-2 and the F-22 are all openly on display at the annual Edwards AFB air show, as are the stealth UAVs, the GNAT 750, Darkstar, and Global Hawk.
In today's air combat, the preferred method is a first-shot kill with long-range air-to-air missiles.
Historically, most pilots lost in air combat were shot down by planes they never saw.
The F-22's stealth features are an extension of this, giving it the ability to destroy an enemy plane, without warning, with a missile fired from miles away.
If the ability to make along-range kill was the only consideration, then a pure stealth design would serve.
In a close-in dogfight, however, a pure stealth-centered design would be at a disadvantage, as it could be slower, underpowered, and much less maneuverable than its conventional opponents.
In the case of the F-22, the designers were unwilling to totally compromise its performance in the name of stealth.
Several features of the F-22 increase its radar cross section, but that was the price for better maneuverability.
Although the basic shape of the aircraft may be the primary driver of stealth, the design considerations now include existing airframes.
An aircraft's RCS can come from relatively small features, such as a gap in an access door.
Subsequently the ""Have Glass"" program was undertaken in the late 1990s to add stealth features to F-16 fighters.
Although this cannot give an F-16 the tiny RCS ofa true stealth aircraft such as an F-1 17A or a B-2, Have Glass has made F-16s much more difficult to spot in air-to-air engagements.
The effect of both the more balanced design philosophy and the addition of stealth to existing airframes is to blur the boundaries.
In the 1970s and 1980s, there were stealth airplanes, and there were conventional airplanes.
The boundaries between them were fixed and rigid ones of secrecy and technology.
No, but they are stealthier now than when the prototypes made their first flights.
A different factor influencing the future ofboth stealth and military aviation is the increasing importance of cruise missiles and UAVs.
It entered production in the final months of the war, but did not see action before the Armistice.
During the 1950s and 1960s, the air force operated Mace and Matador cruise missiles, while the navy Regulus cruise missiles were based aboard ships and submarines.
They could only strike area targets, such as cities or airfields with nuclear weapons.
In the late 1970s, at the same time as the stealth breakthrough was made, the development of scene-matching guidance systems changed this.
The missile could now find its way to a target by matching specific landmarks, in order to correct its flight-path.
A navy Tomahawk or air force Air Launched Cruise Missile could navigate hundreds of miles, taking an evasive course to avoid air defenses, and then hit a specific building in the heart of a city.
They were seen as strategic systems, designed to attack targets inside the USSR with nuclear weapons.
Even their small size and low-altitude flight could not guarantee their survival in the face of hundreds of SAMs.
The need was to make the cruise missiles harder to detect, enabling them to strike even the most heavily defended Soviet targets.
The technology to do this had already been developed for the Have Blue.
Although this program is still Black, it is reported that the Senior Prom missile was a smaller version of the Have Blue.
It is further understood that the ""Hangar 18"" building on the Groom Lake flight line was actually built to support this program.
With the B-52 inside the hangar, the test missiles could be loaded aboard without being seen.
Just as Senior Prom used the Have Blue shape, TSSAM had the same shape as the Tacit Blue, only turned upside down.
According to one story, persons joining the program were given an initial briefing using a ""model"" of the TSSAM to illustrate its odd shape.
While the various attempts to build stealth cruise missiles have met with mixed results, with Senior Prom and TSSAM never entering production, and the number of ACMs built were limited, the role of the cruise missile has grown.
The scene matching guidance system was originally designed to allow a much more accurate strike with a nuclear weapon, increasing the probability of destruction.
This guidance system also allowed tactical strikes using conventionally-armed cruise missiles.
This increase in accuracy was essential for the missile to have any utility, due to the small warhead size.
Tomahawks and ALCMs were used in Desert Storm, and they have been the weapon of choice for reprisal raids, including Desert Fox.
They have the advantage of accuracy, to minimize civilian casualties, while being unmanned, their use does not pose the risk of United States pilots being captured or killed.
At the same time, stealthy UAVs were under development for reconnaissance missions.
Unlike the one-way missions of the cruise missiles, the UAVs would conduct their overflights, then return to a base for a landing.
As the name implies, this is a UAV with a role beyond that of passive reconnaissance, but, rather, active air-to-ground or air-to-air missions.
The concept of a UCAV has specific advantages and possible shortcomings.
It could, for example, be able to make 20-G maneuvers, allowing it to fly rings around a manned aircraft.
It would also not have to accommodate the volume of a cockpit, giving it the freedom of design to use unique stealth shapes, as well as reducing size, weight, and cost.
At the same time, there is the question of whether the cost savings of eliminating the pilot would not be exceeded by the expense of the systems needed to replace the pilot.
The missions envisioned for a UCAV are much more complex than flying from A to B and back again.
Some designs can fly at high altitudes and remain on station for a day or more over enemy territory, all without being detected by an enemy's air defenses.
Any military role for a UCAV should capitalize on such capabilities, rather than trying to simply duplicate what manned aircraft can already do.
A high-altitude, long-endurance stealthy UCAV could be fitted with long-range air-to-air missiles.
It would then patrol an area that would allow its missiles to cover a number of enemy airfields.
Other possible air occupation missions include suppression of air defenses, destruction of ballistic missiles as they are launched, attacks on ground forces, and sea control.
An enemy would have no way of knowing ifit is in the area until the missiles struck.
This would put an enemy on the psychological defensive, making him unwilling to expose his forces to destruction.
At the same time, manned aircraft would be undertaking those missions for which they were best suited.
The question becomes, however, if the perceived need for air occupation-type missions justifies the money, time, and effort required to develop a UCAV able to meet it.
Beyond this, there is the question of whether the existing technology is capable of meeting the mission requirements.
It might also use off-board sensors from a robot AWACS, as well as have the ability to receive data from ground-, air-, and spacebased systems.
During the Cold War, the threat was from Soviet-designed missiles and radar.
Today, United States and Allied forces must potentially face equipment from the old Soviet Union, from Russian and Western and Eastern Europe, from indigenous designs, and even American missiles and radars.
Desert Storm brought a realization of the threat from the spread of ballistic missiles, and nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons.
What were once strategic weapons restricted to the United States and Soviet Union are now found in Third World countries.
The strong men who rule these countries seem to lack any restraints on using them.
During the Gulf War, Saddam fired Scud missiles at Israel with the goal of provoking retaliation from a country which has long been reported to have nuclear weapons.
Various systems, such as bistatic radar or use of ultra-wide band frequencies, have been proposed as counterstealth measures.
As noted earlier, however, computer technology has advanced at a fantastic rate.
In such a case, we would have to revert back to classic countermeasures techniques.
It would be ironic if, after all the changes of the past 50 years, simple chaff would be the one constant.
Also, while an early warning radar with a huge antenna and massive computing capability might detect and track a stealth aircraft, the same might not be true for a missile with an antenna a few inches across.
One can speculate that super computers could also make possible ""smart"" stealth and countermeasures.
With the impending arrival of the 21st Century, all of us are setting sail on an unknown sea.
We do not know where that voyage will take us, but the stealth experience does offer a guidepost.
Stealth was created by a few men with vision, who saw both the need and the possibilities.
Their ideas were translated into reality by the support of others with the courage to try.
An idea is a fragile thing; it can be crushed by ridicule or extinguished by something as simple as neglect.
But it is ideas, in every field of human endeavor, which lead us toward the invisible horizons.
The Turbojet Conies To America,"" Society of Experimental Test Pilots 1992 Report to the Aerospace Profession, 247, 248.
It was General Electric's earlier work with superchargers that caused the British to recommend they produce the Whittle engine.
To avoid confusion, the later names of North Base, the Skonk Works, and Rachel will be used throughout.
The open cockpit did reduce the maximum speed and altitude the first XP-59A could reach.
The XP-59A did much to usher in the modern era of flight test instrumentation.
Today, hundreds of separate readings are transmitted to the ground in real time.
When the first XP-59Awas given to the Smithsonian, the observer's cockpit was removed and the aircraft was restored to its October 1-2, 1942, appearance.
It is often thought the fake prop was used as cover throughout the XP-59A program.
It appears, from photographic evidence, that it was used only during the move and while at Harpers Lake.
The photos of the plane with the fake prop have become a symbol of the secrecy that enveloped the project.
Tex Johnston tells of jumping a P-38 lining up for a gunnery pass; when the pilot saw him, Johnston tipped his hat and climbed away.
An aspect ofjet flight that prop pilots had to get used to was the slow throttle response of jet engines.
It took much longer for the turbine to spin up compared to a piston engine.
On the positive side, the jet pilot did not have to deal with prop pitch, mixture, manifold pressure, and the roar and vibration of a propeller airplane.
These early overflights took advantage of the commitment of the Soviet air force to the Korean War.
Between then and the spring of 1953, when the Soviet ""Honchos"" were withdrawn, a full twelve air divisions had seen action.
Richard H Kohn and Joseph P Harahan, ed., Strategic Air Warfare , 95, 96.
Curtis E LeMay later said that the loss rate of SAC bombers, had there been a war with the Soviet Union during the 1950s, would have been no higher than that of the peacetime accident rate.
Special Aircraft for Penetration Photo Reconnaissance, (Washington, D.C.: May 12, 1954). ll.
The History of the U-2 Spyplane (Shrewsbury, England: Airlife, 1989), 8.
This article is composed of the transcripts of the radio communications, notes, and LeVier's postflight reports.
Pocock, Dragon Lady, 19, 20; and Kenneth W Weir, ""The U-2 Story,"" Society of Experimental Test Pilots 1978 Report to the Aerospace Profession, 186.
Comparing the X-16 and the U-2 indicates just how farsighted Johnson was.
The X-16 represented aeronautical conventional thinking, a conventional aircraft that attempted to perform an extraordinary mission.
In contrast to the large X-16, Johnson used as his model the aerodynamic efficiency of a glider.
None of the U-2s lost over ""denied areas""—the USSR, China, or Cuba—was due to flameouts.
These requirements were a mixture of security and the demands of flying the U-2.
Because of the U-2's demanding nature, good ""stick and rudder"" men were needed.
This was for ""still air"" conditions only, as one member of the first group learned in early 1956.
After several relight attempts, it looked as if he would have to land on a dirt strip in the canyon.
Initially, Powers thought the eighteen-month contract was an unduly optimistic estimate of the U-2's lifetime.
Accordingly, the U-2s were flown only the mimimum necessary for training and test flights, to avoid wearing them out.
Of the fifty-five early-model U-2s built, only ten still survived when the type was retired in 1980.
One of these was Article 347, the first U-2 to overfly the Soviet Union.
It is now on display, along with a B camera, at the National Air and Space Museum.
Jane's Information Group, 1989), 37; and Shaw, ""Interview with Bissell,” 18, 19, 22.
It was initially thought Sicker had loosened his faceplate to eat when the engine flamed out.
The Kyshtym 40 facility outside town included reactors that produced the nuclear material, the weapon assembly facilities, and waste storage tanks.
Also in the area was a flight test center for trials of aircraft weapons systems.
The Su-9 and MiG 19s that tried to intercept the plane came from the test site.
This restored the altitude lost due to the weight of equipment added to the U-2, which included the midnight blue paint, ejector seat, and reconnaissance equipment.
The aircraft was also more demanding to fly; in some flight conditions only four knots separated the maximum and minimum speeds.
A The Soviets did not admit the loss of the MiG and its pilot, or the mass SA-2 firings, until 1990.
This was combined with claims the overflight was a plot by the CIA to sabotage the Paris Summit and prolong the Cold War.
It was not until 1992 that the Russian government admitted the Soviets had systematically lied about the shooting down of the airliner.
In the nuclear engine, a reactor heated water, turning it into pressurized steam.
This went through a steam turbine, which powered the compressor fan via a reduction gear.
The steam then flowed through a heat exchanger, which heated the compressed air to produce thrust.
The water then flowed back to the reactor to begin the cycle all over again.
To provide added thrust, such as for takeoff and the Mach 3 dash to the target, boron would be sprayed through an afterburner.
More Than My Share of It All (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution Press, 1985), 137, 138.
Ironically, given Sun Tan's secrecy, a number of aircraft projects during the 1950s had configurations similar to the CL-400.
This document was declassified when the surviving A-12s were given to museums.
A copy was sent to each museum as an ""owner's manual"" for the airplane.
The SA-2's booster rocket burns for four to five seconds, while the second stage fires for twenty-two seconds.
Thus, it would have to be launched well before the A-12 was within range.
The computer and guidance radar would have to direct the SA-2 to a point in space ahead of the A-12.
Johnson, ""Some Development Aspects of the YF-12A Inteceptor Aircraft,"" 5.
The two men who had done so much to bring both the U-2 and A-12 into existence, Allen Dulles and Richard Bissell, had both resigned following the Bay of Pigs disaster a year before.
Two of Skliar's classmates were Mercury astronauts L Gordon Cooper and Virgil I ""Gus"" Grissom.
The author has extensive contacts within the Black airplane community, both personal and through publications.
This provides an insight into both the latest information and the beliefs behind it.
In the event of an engine failure during the climb, the X-15 would have to land on dry lake beds scattered across the desert.
The high mountains to the west and east would have made the unpowered approach difficult.
On March 30, 1965, Article 126's right engine sucked off its manufacturer's nameplate during a ground run.
There was no intention of using the A-12 over the Soviet Union, except in a national emergency.
Satellites could provide routine coverage of the USSR with zero political risk.
However, in the 1960s, the number of satellites was too small to allow them to cover targets in Cuba, North Vietnam, or North Korea.
SR-71/A-12/YF-12 Flights/Checkout, Edwards AFB History Office, June 14, 1991.
Among Scott's classmates were NASA astronauts David Scott, James B Irwin, and Theodore Freeman, as well as X-15 astronaut Mike Adams.
Sullivan's A-12 was the only United States aircraft over Hanoi at the time.
Years later, the SR-71 operations building at Kadena was still known as the ""Oxcart"" building.
After nearly a quarter century in storage, JP-7 fuel was still found in the A-12 tanks when they were disassembled for transfer to museums.
Brugioni, Eyeball to Eyeball, 217, 254, 276, 277, 296, 363, 364, 452, 453.
Although only forty-five at the time of the missile crisis, Statsenko was retired soon afterward, apparently because of the shooting down of Anderson's U-2.
Ten air force U-2 pilots, Majors Richard Heyser, Buddy Brown, Ed Emerling, Gerald Mcllmoyle, Robert Primrose, and Jim Quails, and Captains George Bull, Roger Herman, Charles Kern, and Dan Schmarr received Distinguished Flying Crosses for their Cuban overflights between October 14 and 28.
Major Rudolph Anderson was posthumously awarded the Distinguished Service Medal, the highest peacetime decoration.
Interestingly, the text of the original memo was changed after it was typed.
The word ""could"" was crossed out and ""might"" was written in with an underline.
Clearly, at some point, second thoughts began to grow about the drones.
A The ""F-104"" should be ""RF-101""—no reconnaissance version of the F-104 was ever used over Cuba.
Also, the article implied that lowlevel flights were still being made in 1964.
Robert Zimmerman, ""Ryan Receives Contract for More Drones,"" San Diego Union, April 21, 1965, sec.
During the testing of the Rivet Bouncer system, an unusual incident occurred.
Due to a family emergency, a technical representative working on Rivet Bouncer was allowed home leave.
He did not check the route, sO was very surprised to discover its first stop was Hanoi.
The thoughts of Chairman Mao were described as better than compasses and radar.
The 147SC/TV did have a major problem—a tendency to just fall out of the sky.
The problem was traced to the fin-shaped antenna that transmitted the television signals to the DC-130.
It was found that the fin caused the drone to become directionally unstable.
In the 1970s, photos were published of a Chinese copy of reconnaissance drones very similar to the 147G/H high-altitude drones.
The launch aircraft was a Tu-4 (a Soviet-built copy of the B-29) modified with turboprop engines.
Wagner, Lightning Bugs and Other Reconnaissance Drones, 24, 25, 191, 192, 197, 199, 200, 209, 213.
This was a ground-launched drone able to fly both highand low-altitude missions.
Following a U-2 crash in the late 1950s, a small-town newspaper agreed not to publish a photo of the wreckage.
This included scenes inside the launch control officer's cockpit showing the control panel.
There are also shots of the wind-tunnel tests, a D-21/M-21 on the ground, refueling, and two successful D-21 launches from the onboard camera.
To put the 24,000-pound weight of each D-21B/ booster rocket in perspective, the Hound Dog missile weighed 10,140 pounds, the MK 15 nuclear weapon weighed 7,600 pounds, the MK 39 and MK 41 nuclear weapons each weighed 10,000 pounds.
In what may have been a sighting of the accidental D-21B drop of September 28, 1967, a student on his lunch break glanced up and noticed a large jet accompanied by four other, smaller aircraft.
He could barely see the shape of the large plane, while the smaller planes could be seen only because of their contrails.
The group was flying west and seemed to be directly over Torrance, California, south of Los Angeles.
He then noticed one of the large plane's contrails (the inner one, on the left side as he recalled later) began growing.
Suddenly, the contrail ""got huge"" and another contrail shot out ahead of the large plane.
The whole formation, new object included, began a gradual turn to the northeast.
The student, who was interested in space, thought he had seen an X-15 launch.
He had seen films of X-15 launches and knew several chase planes followed the B-52 drop plane.
According to one source, a D-21 launch had been made over the Los Angeles area.
The description is consistent with the large solid rocket used to boost the D-21B, but one problem is that he believes the sighting occurred during the 1966-67 school year.
The Skunk Works is unwilling to say where the September 28, 1967, drop occurred.
The lack of official confirmation, along with the witness's inability to remember the date, makes an exact identification impossible.
Anthony M Thornborough and Peter E Davies, Lockheed Blackbirds , 56, 57.
The Pentagon's Secret Hypersonic Spyplane (Osceola, Wis.: Motorbooks, 1993), 9.
Michelle Briggs, ""Classified D-21 Mini-Blackbird On Display at Arizona Museum,"" Pacific Flyer, November 1993, A39.
It was 95.12 feet long, with a top speed of Mach 2.55, a range of 1,620 nautical miles, and an operating altitude of 69,000 to 72,000 feet.
It was launched from a large trailer by its own KR-15 jet engine and two rocket boosters that separated after liftoff.
It carried three AFA-54 vertical cameras and one oblique camera in a detachable nose.
It was built by the Tupolev Design Bureau and operated by the Soviet army.
There is very little documentation about the German World War I ""stealth"" aircraft.
Bill Gunston, ""Back to Balloons and Gliders?,"" Air International , 228.
The German Go 229, another flying wing design, was nearly invisible to radar.
It was made of wood and had charcoal mixed with the glue to absorb radar signals.
Although described as being done for aerodynamic reasons, it would also cause the radar echo to be dispersed by 10 degrees away from the radar.
The third prototype, the YB-70, was to have had the canard sweep changed from 31 degrees to 51 degrees, which would bring the echo of the canards and wings into line.
Is Developing a Small Fighter Intended to Demonstrate Stealth, or Low Signature Technologies,” Aviation Week and Space Technology , 11.
Ralph Vartabedian, Now It Can Be Told—He Has the Right Stuff, Los Angeles Times, September 29, 1989.
The idea was not to ""hide"" the ships but, rather, make it difficult for a U-boat commander to determine the ship's speed and heading.
On an airplane, particularly one with an odd shape, like the Have Blue and F-117, a similar effect could be expected.
Ralph Vartabedian, Now It Can Be Told, Los Angeles Times, September 29, 1989.
The only date on the clipping is 1979, but the mention of a second crash suggests a date in the late summer of 1979.
William Moore wrote a book in 1980 called The Roswell Incident in which he claimed that the army air forces had captured a flying saucer in July 1947, which has been covered up ever since.
Several ""UFOlogists"" have claimed that stealth technology was actually developed from captured flying saucers.
Sweetman and Goodall, Lockheed F-117, 25, 26; and Cunningham, ""Cracks in the Black Dike,"" 18, 19.
Melinda Beck, William J Cook, and John J Lindsay, ""Unveiling a Ghost Airplane,"" Newsweek , 23.
Ed Vogel, ""Military reportedly moving in to stake claim on Groom Mountains,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, March 10, 1984, sec.
B; and Ed Vogel, ""Nevadans question Air Force seizure of land,"" Las Vegas ReviewJournal, May 20, 1984, sec.
Mary O'Driscoll, ""Reid backs USAF on land issue,""Las Vegas Sun, July 7, 1984, sec.
Ed Vogel, ""Nevadans question Air Force seizure of land,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, May 20, 1984, sec.
Mary Manning, ""Irate Nevadans 'march' on D.C. to protest federal land-grabbing,"" Las Vegas Sun, August 6, 1984, sec.
Timothy Good, Alien Contact , 148, 149; and Chris Chrystal, ""AF admits to illegality of NTS land grab,"" Las Vegas Sun, August 7, 1984, sec.
Kathleen Buckley, ""Wilderness tradeoff proposed,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, September 14, 1984, sec.
B; and Chris Chrystal, ""2-year limit in Groom Mtn. land grab bill,""Las Vegas Sun, September 14, 1984, sec.
Kathleen Buckley, ""Top secret maneuvers in jeopardy,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, September 19, 1984, sec.
Christopher Bell, ""Air Force will seek continued access restriction to secret base,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, October 11, 1987, sec.
B; and David Koenig, ""House panel drops plan for wilderness,"" Las Vegas ReviewJournal, November 19, 1987, sec.
David Koenig, ""Air Force seeks extension of closed area on Groom Mountain,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, March 18, 1988, sec.
David Koenig, ""Congress extends fed takeover of Groom area,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, April 2, 1988, sec.
David Koenig, ""House separates Groom Mountain pact from wilderness issue,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, June 15, 1988, sec.
William Scott, ""F-117A Design Presented Avionics Challenges,'Mv/ation Week and Space Technology , 43.
Harold C Farley Jr. and Richard Abrams, ""F-117A Flight Test Program,"" Society of Experimental Test Pilots 1990 Report to the Aerospace Profession, 144, 145.
Pace, Lockheed Skunk Works, 233; and Sweetman and Goodall, Lockheed F-117A, 29,30.
All the operational air force pilots received numbers counting from 150.
The effect of the phase of the moon on F-117A operations is not unique.
During World War II, RAF bomber squadrons stood down during the ""moon period” because it made the night sky too bright.
Michael A Dornheim, ""F-117A Provides New Freedom in Attacking Ground Tragets,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 106.
This book contains two interviews with Steve Paulson, one of the original 4450th Tactical Group members.
This information was obtained from a framed set of F-117A development patches shown at the Edwards AFB Air Show as part of the F-117 display.
Washington Roundup, Aviation Week and Space Technology (October 12, 1981), 17.
One version has it that Northrop wanted ""F20"" to symbolize a new generation of fighter.
Benjamin F Schemmer, ""Stealth Goes Public,"" Armed Forces Journal International , 23, 24.
Richard Barnard, ""AF Abandons Stealth Reconnaissance Plane; Deploys Fighter Units,"" Defense Week , 1, 6.
Ron Labrecque, ""Alone and without Stealth, John Andrews Makes Child's Play of the Pentagon's Most Secret Weapon,"" People (no date on clipping), 127, 128; and Cunningham, ""Cracks in the Black Dike,"" 20, 24, 25.
Washington Roundup, Aviation Week and Space Technology (September 14, 1987), 21.
The document control problem occurred because of standard Skunk Works practice.
When the air force showed up to conduct a classified document audit, they discovered there were no records of their destruction.
William B Scott, ""F-117A Crash Reports Cite Pilot Fatigue, Disorientation,” Aviation Week and Space Technology , 22; and Sweetman and Goodall, Lockheed F-117A, 81, 82.
Eric Malnic and Ralph Vartabedian, "" 'Stealth' jet said to crash in California,"" Boston Globe, July 12, 1986.
It has been claimed that the air force dug up a large area around the impact point to recover every scrap of debris, then scattered parts from an F-101 to deceive anyone entering the site.
Scott, ""F-117A Crash Reports Cite Pilot Fatigue, Disorientation,"" 22, 23.
Giangreco, Stealth Fighter Pilot, 50, 51; and Scott, ""F-117A Crash Reports Cite Pilot Fatigue, Disorientation,” 22.
Around noon, the announcer came on the public address system and said that the B-2 had just taken off from Palmdale and would soon be arriving at Edwards.
A few minutes later, it was announced that the B-2 would be making a flyby.
The punchline came at the 1993 Edwards Air Show—three B-2s , an F-117A formation flyby, and the HALSOL-Pathfinder.
John D Morrocco, ""USAF Unveils Stealth Fighter; Black Weapons Probe Likely,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology, (November 14, 1988), 28.
Mary Enges-Maas, ""Stalking the Stealth Fighter,"" Times-Advocate, Decembers, 1989, sec.
David F Bond, ""Six F-117As Flown in Panama Invasion; Air Force Broadens Daytime Operations,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 30.
A In all the adverse comments following the Panama mission, one aspect has been overlooked.
Even had the bombs fallen where planned, the United States had already lost the element of surprise.
John D Morrocco, ""F-117A Fighter Used in Combat for First Time in Panama, ""Aviation Week and Space Technology , 32.
Kenneth Freed, ""Panama Tries to Bury Rumors of Mass Graves,"" Los Angeles Times, October 27, 1990, sec.
The fact that the press continued to use the term into 1992 says more about their ""accuracy"" than that of the plane.
A; and ""General didn't report Stealth flaws in Panama,"" San Diego Tribune, July 2, 1990, sec.
A The final word on the F-117A's first combat mission came from a Newsweek press pool member.
The reporter told a Department of Defense public relations officer that he did not think the F117A attack was that significant, as no one could hear it coming.
Macy, Destination Baghdad, 19, 20; and Giangreco, Stealth Fighter Pilot, 86.
Joe Hughes, ""500 protest war threat at Balboa Park,"" San Diego Tribune, December 24, 1990, sec.
Thomas B Allen, F Clifton Berry, and Norman Polmar, CNN War in the Gulf , 119.
Saddam Hussein responded in the usual manner of dictators to the night of thunder.
He claimed over a hundred Coalition aircraft had been shot down, and he had Iraqi Air Force General Muzahim Saab Hassan arrested and executed.
Even if the Package Q strike had used LGB, the F-16 force would only have been cut to sixteen aircraft, and the tankers to eleven.
If military use known, why wasn't civilian role detected?,"" San Diego Union, February 14, 1991, sec.
As the bunker was being used as a military installation at the time, it would be considered a legitimate target.
And, as one letter writer noted, ""At least four internationally recognized emblems other than the red cross/red crescent can ... be placed on civilian shelters to indicate protected status.
He was driving his fuel truck across the desert when he saw two Iraqis beside an overturned jeep.
He never saw an Iraqi officer or NCO; they had fled, abandoning their troops in the desert.
David A Fulghum, ""Planners Seek to Exploit United States Technology Lead,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 52.
While the air force is deploying a second generation of stealth aircraft, the B-2 Spirit and F-22 Lightning II, the navy has yet to build even a first-generation stealth aircraft.
When the last A-6 Intruder is retired in 1999, the navy will be without a long-range, all-weather attack aircraft for a decade.
Stuart F Brown, ""The Eternal Airplane,"" Popular Science (April 1994), 73.
Michael A Dornheim, ""Raptor/Pathfinder to Test High-Efficiency Propulsion,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 60; and Brown, ""The Eternal Airplane,” 75.
Author's examination of the HALSOL-Pathfinder aircraft at the 1993 Edwards AFB Air Show.
Ballistic Missile Defense Organization to Curtis Peebles, reference FOIA Request 93-F-2470, February 16, 1994.
Brown, ""The Eternal Airplane,"" 75; and David A Fulghum, ""SolarPowered UAV to Fly at Edwards,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 27.
Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, ""Solar-Powered Pathfinder Soars on First Test Flight"" ; and NASA videotape of first Pathfinder flight, 1993 Edwards AFB Air Show.
Author's examination of the HALSOL/Pathfinder at the 1993 Edwards AFB Air Show.
Fulghum, ""Solar-Powered UAV to Fly at Edwards,"" 27; and Brown, ""The Eternal Airplane,"" 100.
David A Fulghum, ""Scud-Killing UAVs Now Science Tool,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 27.
Dale Tietz, ""Raptor/Talon Briefing,"" Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, 1993; and Dornheim, ""Raptor/Pathfinder to Test HighEfficiency Propulsion,"" 60.
AeroVironment Inc., ""Backgrounder—Pathfinder Solar-Electric Aircraft,"" 29.
Conversations with NASA personnel at the Pathfinder display, 1993 Edwards AFB Air Show; and ""Solar-Powered Spy,"" Air and Space (February/March 1994), Il, 12.
Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, ""'Pathfinder' Solar-Electric Unmanned Air Vehicle Data Sheet,"" 1993.
Ballistic Missile Defense Organization, ""Pathfinder Questions and Answers,"" 1993.
Murphy, ""AMBER for long endurance,"" 33; and Leading Systems, ""Amber Fact Sheet"" . *46vm 1 nrpff/,""*Afii'b£,K for long'endurarice,*' 34.
The most extreme example of this was by army intelligence officers in the field.
The result was that as late as January 31, 1991, they estimated the Republican Guard units were still at 99 percent effectiveness.
The goal of the Coalition air campaign did not lend itself to easy numerical measurements.
The number of tanks, vehicles, trucks, and artillery pieces destroyed did not determine whether the Iraqi Army would fight or even how well it would fight.
Its battlefield effectiveness would depend on the state of mind of Iraqi soldiers and their officers.
The GNAT-750 was actually part of a family of UAVs with similar designs.
The GNAT-BT ‘e""\""J}~""ird3hr'rrdi'fier_) wks besigriea to'train the controllers without risking me bigger UAV‘ 'IVwas 8 feet long and had a 13.1-foot wingspan.
This is half the size of the GNAT-750 and is rail-launched for short-range reconnaissance.
The Predator would carry a synthetic aperture radar with a resolution of one foot that would cover an 8,000-foot-wide swath from 25,000 feet.
A turret under the nose would also house three electro-optical infrared sensors with a resolution of six feet.
The data would be relayed to ground stations via a 30-inch-diameter satellite dish.
David A Fulghum, ""USAF Stresses UAVs for Recon,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 44.
John D Morrocco, ""Pentagon-CIA UAV Gains New Significance,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 28.
Fulghum, ""USAF Stresses UAVs for Recon,"" 44; and David A Fulghum and John D Morrocco, ""CIA to Deploy UAVs in Albania,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 20, 21.
The CIA GNAT-750 effort was Tier 1 of a three-part UAV development program.
Ten Predators would be built in a $31. million program, to be fully operational in 30 months.
Reports likened the Tier 3, in a broad sense, to an unmanned B2 in terms of size, complexity, and cost.
The technology was considered so sensitive that should one have crashed, the wreckage would have to be bombed to ensure it was destroyed.
The first involved a UAV for broad area coverage for a major regional crisis like the Gulf War.
It would fly at an altitude of 60,000 to 65,000 feet and carry a payload of 1,500 pounds.
The sensor payload would include such equipment as ELINT and multispectral sensors.
The other is a flying wing UAV with the stealth properties of the original Tier 3, but at a much lower cost.
Washington Outlook, Aviation Week and Space Technology (September 13, 1993), 19.
Fulghum and Morrocco, ""CIA to Deploy UAVs in Albania,"" 20, 21; and Morrocco, ""Pentagon-CIA UAV Gains New Significance,"" 28.
News Breaks, Aviation Week and Space Technology (December 1320, 1993), 21.
Washington Outlook, Aviation Week and Space Technology (February 14, 1994), 19.
David A Fulghum, ""CIA to Fly Missions from Inside Croatia,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 20, 21.
Washington Outlook, Aviation Week and Space Technology (June 6, 1994), 23.
Several sources have claimed that the MiG 21F has a center of gravity problem.
With over 25 percent of the fuel still remaining, the safety limit would be exceeded.
The plane would then pitch up, which the horizontal stabilizers could not counter.
The use of captured enemy aircraft did not start with Have Doughnut and Have Drill.
During World War II, the flight line at Wright Field was home to Zeros, ME 109s, FW 190s, and Ju 88s.
The British had a special unit to test-fly captured German planes, while the Germans had examples of nearly every Allied fighter and bomber.
The German's ""Rosarious Flying Circus"" took the captured planes to operational units for dogfight training.
As with Have Drill, selected German pilots were allowed to fly the P-47s and P-Sls.
The Japanese had examples of United States aircraft, including an early model B-17, a P-40, a P-51, and an F4U Corsair.
During the Korean War, the United States actively tried to get a Soviet MiG 15 pilot to defect, offering $100,000.
The MiG 15 was flown in simulated attacks on B-36, B-47, F-86D, and F-84F aircraft.
The difference between these earlier wartime examples and the Yak 23, Have Doughnut, Have Drill, and subsequent MiG operations is that the planes were ""acquired"" by secret means, in violation of the export agreement between the Soviet Union and client states.
If it was done without the knowledge of the client state's government, then the United States would not want this publicized; if it was done with the government's knowledge, then the client state would not want this known.
Intelligence arrangements between governments have always been considered particularly sensitive.
The Secret MiG Squadron,"" Armed Forces Journal International (September 1977), 26.
Sources differ on the total number of Israeli air-to-air losses in 1967.
Even with this, both the ""reduced"" kill rate and the speed of the war are a stunning contrast to Vietnam.
Industry Observer, Aviation Week and Space Technology (February 17, 1969), 13.
This item highlights the problems in reconstructing the history of the United States MiG effort.
It says the MiG 21 was brought to the United States in the spring of 1968.
It is also possible this is a reference to delivery of 007, and the dates were confused.
Marion E Carl, USMC , with Barrett Tillman, Pushing the Envelope , 112.
Wilcox, Scream of Eagles, 275, 276; and Hollway, ""Showdown between Two Top Guns,"" 43.
The North Vietnamese have complicated the search for Toon by being unwilling to give a true account of wartime events.
They claimed that 16 United States planes were shot down on May 10, 1972.
Even when there is a rough match between accounts, North Vietnamese claims have major discrepancies as to location and timing.
Robert S Hopkins HI, ""In Search of Colonel Toon,"" Journal of Military Aviation , 22, 23.
The Soviets traditionally looked down on Third-World pilots, but Tuan was described as an equal.
Between 1973 and 1975, he was at the Mary Air Base in the Kara Kum Desert, which was the Soviet counterpart to Red Flag/Top Gun.
That the epic Cunningham-Toon dogfight should have an element of controversy should come as no surprise.
One need only recall the debate over who shot down the Red Baron or Admiral Yamamoto.
Letters, Aviation Week and Space Technology , 146; and Talkback, Air International , 157.
In the three years before the crash, it had logged only 98. hours of flight time.
Between its filial inspection oh March 1984'and the crash, the plane had flown only 7. hours—a little more than one hour per week.
If it was a later-model MiG 21, it would indicate that the Egyptian MiGs were being delivered as early as the summer of 1978.
Peter W Merlin, ""Dreamland—the Air Force's remote test site,"" Aerotech News and Review , 1.
Phil Pattee, ""General killed in plane crash,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, April 27, 1984, sec.
The type and serial number of both the aircraft and its engine were deleted from the released text of the report.
Any specific details that might identify what type of plane was involved in the accident were also deleted.
This allowed the report to be released, even with the extreme secrecy surrounding the MiGs.
Conversation with student test pilot, Edwards AFB Air Show, October 18, 1992.
Letter, Department of the Air Force to Curtis Peebles, February 10, 1993.
Stuart Brown, ""Searching for the Secrets of Groom Lake,"" Popular Science , 56, 58 81.
Keith Rogers, ""Budget for hypersonic spy plane rivals Nevada Test Site,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, December 5, 1993, sec.
Keith Rogers, ""Groom Lake toxic burning alleged,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, March 20, 1994, sec.
Clarence A Robertson Jr., ""Bomber Choices Near,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 18, 22.
The article makes a number of dubious claims—that the July 1986 crash near Bakersfield did not involve a stealth fighter, but rather a plane ""that was more conventional, but just as black,"" or that the stealth fighter would be deployed in flight from a C-5.
The rear doors would open, the stealth fighter would be extended out into the airflow on a hook, the wings would unfold, and it would be released.
Once the mission was completed, another C-5 would make a midair pickup.
It also referred to Aurora and the possibility of captured flying saucers at Groom Lake.
Craig Covault, ""Advanced Bomber, Missile in Definition,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 113, 121.
This article was the first to use the term ""F-117"" for the stealth fighter.
The article claimed that aircraft had been developed that could change color to match their background and self-correct battle damage in flight.
It also claimed that the F-117 did not have an inflight refueling receptacle, as such a fixture could not be made stealthy.
Elaine de Man, ""Shooting the Stealth,"" Air and Space (August/September 1990), 93.
William B Scott, ""Black Programs Must Balance Cost, Time Savings with Public Oversight,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology (December 18, 1989), 42, 43.
William B Scott, ""Scientists' and Engineers' Dreams Taking to Skies as 'Black' Aircraft,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology (December 24, 1990), 41, 42.
Betsy Woodford, ""Phantom of the air tracked by Caltech's seismographic network,"" Caltech News , 9.
The author understands it is a common practice at some air force and navy bases to deny any knowledge when a sonic boom complaint comes in.
Bill Sweetman, ""Mystery contact may be Aurora,"" Jane's Defence Weekly , 333.
Christy Campbell, ""Secret United States spy plane is Kintyre's dark visitor,"" Sunday Telegraph, July 26, 1992.
Bill Sweetman, ""Clues hint of phantom spy plane,"" Antelope Valley Press, March 6, 1992, sec.
William B Scott, ""New Evidence Bolsters Reports of Secret, HighSpeed Aircraft,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 63.
Industry Observer, ""Combined Cycle Powerplant,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 13.
Scott, ""New Evidence Bolsters Reports of Secret, High-Speed Aircraft,"" 62, 63.
William B Scott, ""Recent Sightings of XB-70-Like Aircraft Reinforce 1990 Reports from Edwards Area,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 23, 24.
William B Scott, ""Secret Aircraft Encompasses Qualities Of HighSpeed Launcher for Spacecraft,"" Aviation Week and Space Technology (August 24, 1992), 25.
Rice's Media Availability, National Contract Management Association Conference, July 23, 1992, Los Angeles.
William B Scott, ""High Demand Stretches NRO Intelligence Assets"" Aviation Week and Space Technology , 52.
The NRO itself was founded in August 1960, but its existence was not officially acknowledged until the fall of 1992.
The claim that a sonic boom cannot be heard at long range is incorrect.
On several occasions in 1985 the author heard the double sonic boom of the space shuttle over Edwards AFB from Long Beach, California.
Steven Aftergood and John E Pike, ""The High Cost of Secrecy,"" Air and Space , 46, 47.
Russ Britt, ""New Dawn for Aurora?,"" Daily News, May 17, 1992, Business sec.
AJanuary 13, 1993, article in Aerospace Daily indicated that the Skunk Works had studied a Mach 45 replacement for the SR-71 during the 1980s, but abandoned it about 1986 as impractical.
The aircraft would have been about the size of the B-1B, with a long, tapered fuselage, and would have had an intercontinental range.
Model depicts spy plane, but Air Force denies it exists,"" The Bakersfleld Californian, November 29, 1993, sec.
A; and Michael Sweeney, ""If you want to see the SR-75, you must settle for the model,"" General Aviation News and Flyer, 1 November 1993, A-30.
Gary A Warner, ""Model maker's latest guessing game involves Air Force, secret spy planes,"" San Diego Union-Tribune, December 25, 1993, sec.
Shawn Pogatchnik, ""Magazine says United States is flying new spy plane,"" Las Vegas Review-Journal, Decembers, 1993.
Stuart F Brown, ""Searching for the Secrets of Groom Lake,"" Popular Science , 54.
Supposedly the USAF recovered the debris and the bodies of aliens near Corona, New Mexico, in July 1947.
It is possible that the USAF are trying to 'reverse engineer’ the Roswell spacecraft and what people are seeing are examples of man-made copies of alien craft.
However it is also possible what they are seeing is conventional secret stealth prototype aircrafts of earthly origin.
The author had received copies of this person's saucer designs long before they were published.
Betsy Woodford, ""Phantom of the air tracked by Caltech's seismograph network,"" Caltech News , 9.
Author's printout of computer messages, America Online, June 26 to October 15, 1993.
There was quite a controversy over whether it was a good idea to discuss Black projects, like Aurora, in so public a forum.
Rereading the printout indicates the material came from published accounts and Black buff rumors.
One example of this was a September 19 message that claimed people at the site wear ""foggles"" to prevent them from seeing anything other than the project they are working on.
Foggles are standard safety goggles with the plastic scratched so you can see only your feet.
The author should note that the vast majority of Aurora sightings were made in good faith.
I have talked personally with four people who heard the ""Aurora roar,"" and I have no doubt they are honestly describing what they experienced.
The problem, as with UFOs, is that the sky has an infinite number of tricks of light and shadow.
It is ironic that in 1983, as the super-high-speed airplane stories were spreading, the real Black airplane was the HALSOL—a plane made of clear plastic and styrofoam, that could be outrun by an electric golf cart.
Warren Bennett, Commander 554th Range Squadron, Caliente Land Withdrawal Hearing, January 31, 1994.
Industrial Outlook, Aviation Week and Space Technology (April 18, 1994), 13.
ABC News Groom Lake transcript, quoted in The Groom Lake Desert Rat, no.A, April 20, 1994.
The broadcast did not include the statement about the ""New World Order"" or the reading from the Koran.
The resulting impression of the hearings was less colorful than the actual event.
This chapter is a revised version of a speech given at the 7th Annual Technical Symposium of the Eglin Chapter of the Association of Old Crows, October 16, 1996. wish to thank them for their interest, hospitality, and the chance to meet the people who made the history I write about.
This is actually Chapter 6 of the CIA's official history of the U-2 program.
It was declassified separately, and is not included in the published version of the U-2 history.
Whoever came up with the code name ""Senior Prom"" must be found and stopped.
Barry, 69 Goodpaster, Gen Andrew, 38 Goudey, Ray, 30 Grace, Frank, 35 Grant, Lt.
