Norris Cotton of New Hampshire reminded his constituents a week after President John F Kennedy had dramatically announced that the United States was imposing a quarantine against Cuba to force Soviet missiles from the Caribbean island.
Barry Goldwater of Arizona, like many others, suspected that the Kennedy administration had played politics with foreign policy to help Democrats in the congressional elections of November 6.1 The claim and fear that presidents play politics with foreign policy, especially in electoral seasons, is familiar and often well founded.
Throughout American history, suspicions have flourished that presidents take unusual and sometimes extreme diplomatic or military steps, utter hyperboles, practice deceit, or manufacture foreign crises to improve their own and their party's chances at the polls.
Like political leaders before him, Kennedy had invited imputations that he exploited foreignpolicy issues for political gain or that he made diplomatic decisions in response to domestic political pressure.
American Jews had lobbied intensely for the sale; some of them had even withheld contributions from congressional candidates until they saw Kennedy act on the deal.
The Story ofthe Draft Goldwater Movement , 82; and Frank S Meyer, ""The 1962 Elections: The Turning of the Tide,"" National Review, Dec., 1962, 434.
Many congressional manuscript collections contain letters from constituents who chargedJohn F Kennedy with political gamesmanship in his handling of the missile crisis.
But ""the reason it was done was politics,"" the United States ambassador to Egypt, John S Badeau, later concluded.
The president and his aides eagerly looked to the forthcoming elections to produce a more sympathetic Congress.
Yet the Democratic administration could never count on a working majority for its domestic proposals.
House committees were chaired by conservative southerners; and in the Senate, Republicans and southern Democrats often teamed up to thwart Kennedy's requests.
Medicare failed by a 52 to 48 vote; the farm bill lost by five votes in the House.
In 1961 only 48. percent of Kennedy's legislative initiatives gained approval; in 1962, 44. percent.
Democratic gains or the prevention of losses in the 1962 elections, then, pro ,to ease or at least not to aggravate Kennedy's struggle with Congress.
James A Nathan, Barton J Bernstein, and others have suggested that Kennedy boldly confronted the Soviets and initially eschewed quiet diplomacy to resolve the conflict because a forthright, public display of toughness would disarm Republicans who had been lambasting the administration over Cuba and would improve Democratic chances in the congressional elections and because private talks could not be kept secret leaks would be inevitable and politically damaging to the administration.
Sorensen and Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., in contrast, have downplayed or discounted politics in their accounts of presidential decision making during the crisis.
But even they have noted a linkage between the election results and the crisis.
But Hilsman's memoir nonetheless stressed questions of strategy and international prestige over domestic politics, and he later explained that by ""domestic politics"" he meant, not the forthcoming elections specifically, but genera bureaucratic politics within the administration and relations with Congress.
Soviet wor found Kennedy's behavior rooted in United States intentions to crush the Cuban Revolution, not in American politics.
Scholars cannot now be definitive about the relationship between politics and the Cuban missile crisis.
Presidents, moreover, necessarily make decisions that derive from a complex mix of private thoughts and public pressures that the historian cannot easily disentangle.
A-kd American voters are usually influenced by many issues -some personal, some local, some national, some international.
Still, by posing precise questions and by applying extensive and heretofore largely unexplored research materials, scholars can refine the problem.
We address it here with five sets of questions, organized chronologically.
President Kennedy's National Security Council Executive Committee also held ""informal meetings"" for which there appear to be no records.
In the elections the Republicans lost four seats in the Senate and gained only two seats in the House an unusually poor performance in midterm elections for a party out of power.
Prospects for 1962 The political climate appeared favorable to the Republicans in 1962.
Only once in the twentieth century, in 1934, had the party of an incumbent president improved at midterm its position in the House of Representatives; and not since that year had the party in power in the White House enhanced its strength in the Senate.
In fact, in midterm elections from 1938 through 1958 the party out of power had gained 75, 46, 55, 28, 21, and 50 House seats and 7, 9, 13, 5, 1, and 15 Senate seats.
In 1962 Republican leaders privately projected gains of 10 to 20 House seats for their 6 The 1962 ""campaign kit"" of the Democratic National Committee, for example, was devoted almost entirely to the Medicare issue.
The historian and presidential assistant Schlesinger urged Kennedy to distance himself from the elections so as to avoid being personally blamed for the expected defeats.
With his legislative program under attack and fearing the loss of 15 to 20 House seats, the president decided instead to campaign actively.
The nature of the Kennedy victory in 1960, for example, sugges that midterm election tradition was likely to be broken.
In 1960, for the first time in the twentieth century, the party that regained the presidency after being out of the White House failed to increase its congressional representation.
Kennedy ran further behind the congressional candidates of his ticket than any other president elected since the beginning of the two-party system.
John Blatnik of Minnesota believed that in his state the congressional candidates actually helped Kennedy more than he helped them.
On a national basis in 1960, Democratic House candidates ran five percentage points ahead of Kennedy.
Normally the successful presidential candidate attracts the votes of both party loyalists and independents and carries into office marginal nominees of his own party.
Then, in the midterm contests, the marginal candidates must run without the benefit of the presidential coattails, and many lose.
In 1960, however, Kennedy did not help to elect such vulnerable representatives.
Thus the type of person most likely to be defeated by Republicans in 1962 was not holding office.
From that perspective the probable outcome of the midterm elections was a new Congress that would resemble the old one.
American voting behavior, especially that of the independent voter, also suggested that the Democrats would score gains in 1962.
One-fifth of the electorate that year considered itself independent of party affiliation.
Independents of that time were less prone to vote in off-year elections than were people who identified themselves as Republicans or Democrats.
One analyst for the Democratic National Committee read this to mean that the Democratic party, as the more popular party by a four-to-three margin in registrations, would actually pick up seats in both houses.
And, he advised, given the fading of the religious issue, Democratic gains would be made among voters who had cast ballots against Kennedy in 1960 because he was a Roman Catholic.
I United States Bureau of the Census, Department of Commerce, Historical Statistics of the United States, pt. , 1083; Congressional Quarterly Almanac, 1962 , 1034.
Polling data also revealed the improbability of a Republican victory in 1962.
Throughout the year George H Gallup's organization measured party preference.
The polls released by Gallup on October 24 and November 5 were particularly telling.
The interviews for the October 24 release were conducted between October 1 and 7; polling data for the November 5 release were obtained between October 29 and November 2.
Thus Gallup completed one set of interviews after Cuba had become a serious campaign issue but before the missile crisis and another set after both Kennedy's public confrontation with the Soviets and the Soviet decision to remove the missiles.
Gallup also asked Americans which political party they thought ""could do a better job of handling"" the country's problems.
On that question, too, the Democrats consistently outscored the Republicans .11 Another polling organization, Louis Harris and Associates, Inc., directly supplied the president with data and recommendations based on its findings.
In an October 4, 1962, memorandum Louis Harris told Kennedy that he was ""more in control of this election than ever before,"" provided that he continued to stress the Republicans' dangerous partisanship on foreign and domestic issues.
By early October, Harris reported, civil rights, war and peace, and medical care had emerged as dominant issues.
Democrats could therefore emphasize the need for the type of strong leadership Kennedy had demonstrated by his sending of federal troops to Mississippi, as well as hit Republican obstructionism on other domestic issues, such as aid to the unemployed, depressed areas, the ill, and college students.
Still, a majority opposed going to war in Cuba, and majorities ranging from 70 to 80 percent applauded Kennedy's toughness in holding the line in Berlin.
Overall, then, the pollster Harris sketched for the president a rosy election picture just a couple of weeks before the missile crisis.
Nowhere in the document was there the slightest hint that another foreign crisis, well managed by the White House, would improve already good Democratic chances in November.
The precrisis information from analysts thus pointed to an impressive Democratic performance in the midterm elections.
When the Republicans were making foreign policy under President Dwight D Eisenhower, Democrats had asked why Castro and the increasingly radical Cuban Revolution were permitted to rise and flourish.
When the Democrats under Kennedy were formulating foreign policy, Republicans charged that the administration was doing too little to unseat Castro and was allowing the Soviets to convert the Caribbean island into a Communist outpost.
The next month President Eisenhower ordered the Central Intelligence Agency to train anti-Castro Cuban exiles for an invasion of their homeland.
Injuly, in an attempt to cripple the Cuban economy and thus to weaken Castro, the administration cut Cuba's sugar quota, virtually stopping imports from the island; in October most American exports to Cuba were prohibited.
Those events in the deterioration of Cuban-American relations sparked debate in the United States, particularly in the campaign of 1960.
Kennedy repeatedly upbraided the Republicans, charging that they had let Cuba become a Communist satellite.
Just before leaving office, Eisenhower broke diplomatic relations with Cuba.
In April 1961 came the bungled CIA operation at the Bay of Pigs and swirling debate over its failure.
The clandestine Operation Mongoose, begun in late 1961, included sabotage, paramilitary raids, disruption of the sugar trade, circulation of counterfeit money, and other so-called dirty tricks.
The secret war against Cuba did not weaken Castro's hold on the island, and it probably stimulated Cuban requests for Soviet protection.
Nor did the covert operations disarm the Republicans, because the Kennedy administration, of course, could not take public credit for such activities.
Then came the United States-engineered expulsion of Cuba from the Organization of American States inJanuary 1962 and the imposition of a complete United States embargo on trade with Cuba the next month.
As Cuba inched toward a closer relationship with the Soviet Union, the State Department, in March, complained about ""SinoSoviet bloc"" military aid to Cuba.
The question of a Soviet arms buildup in Cuba took on serious political dimensions in the summer of 1962 when Republican leaders began to mount an unrelenting attack against the Kennedy administration.
The growing Soviet military presence in Cuba, of course, held significance in itself as a challenge to United State hegemony in Latin America.
But it also provided an effective campaign issue that probed one of the administration's most vulnerable spots.
And it served to divert attention from Republican vulnerabilities stemming from their opposition to popular New Frontier programs.
Republicans thus strove to make Cuba, not Medicare, the leading topic of the congressional campaigns.
Whereas Kennedy argued that Soviet technicians had been stationed on the island, Republicans called them troops.
Decrying a Soviet besmirching of the Monroe Doctrine, Republicans demanded immediate action -either a blockade or an invasion of Cuba.
Uneasy Democrats dismissed such pleas as election-year high jinks but could not shed the charge that Kennedy was timid in curbing the flow of Soviet arms and personnel to Cuba.
Kennedy himself admitted at a press conference on August 22 that supplies ""in large quantities"" had reached Cuba.
Homer E Capehart, who was seeking reelection in Indiana, the president insisted that technicians, not troops, were accompanying the arms.
In speech after speech Keating presented details that made him appear authoritative.
On September 4 in the Senate, Keating added more details on the Soviet military buildup and claimed there were missiles in Cuba, although as was common for him at first, he made little distinction between short-range, ""defensive,"" surface-to-air missiles and longer-range, ""offensive,"" surface-tosurface missiles that could reach the United States.
That day the president tried to quiet the clamor by meeting with congressional leaders of both parties and by stating that neither Soviet combat troops nor ground-to-ground missiles existed in Cuba.
Containing the Public Messages, Speeches, and Statements of the President, January 1 to December 31, 1962 , 638, 652.
Although former President Eisenhower warned against making Cuba ""an object of partisan fighting,"" many Republicans were determined to do just that in the congressional campaigns.
Even if there were threatening missiles in Cuba and he denied that there were the United States could destroy them in one day.
One should not ""lose a night's sleep worrying about the might of Cuba,"" Humphrey remarked.
Unmoved, on the next day three Republican senators proposed amendments to the reserve mobilization bill; they would empower the president to ""take such action as is necessary"" to prevent the violation of the Monroe Doctrine in Cuba.
Still, the Republicans pressed the attack, with Keating claiming that the short-range missile facilities in Cuba could be transformed into intermediate-range sites.
On September 29 the Senate adopted the Cuba Resolution expressing United States determination to use arms if necessary to prevent Cuban subversion or aggression in the hemisphere and the island's conversion into an externally supported military base endangering United States security.
Mail poured into politicians' offices demanding forthright action against Cuba.
In the Times Square subway station in Wow York City, a ""Directomat"" machine that gave Republican Sen.
Professional polls showed that Cuba had grown intd a prominent issue for the American electorate.
In a campaign swing through the Midwest on October 5-7, the president barely mentioned foreign policy.
In that speech Keating boldly claimed that intermediate-range missiles, capable of striking targets in ""the American heartland,"" had been installed in Cuba.
He possessed no conclusive evidence about Soviet ""offensive"" missiles in Cuba.
On October 14 intelligence officials learned from photographs taken during a U-2 surveillance flight that such missiles were in Cuba.
Had bad weather on October 11, 12, and 13 not prevented the U-2 aircraft from flying over Cuba, intellegence officials could have had hard, confirming evidence at just about the same time Keating was making his public case about intermediate-range missiles.
United States officials had all along been monitoring (U-2 planes made runs over parts of Cuba on August 29, September 5, 17, 26, and 29, and October 5 and 7) the flow and positioning of Soviet weapons.
When they discovered the ""offensive"" missile sites in western Cuba, they acted vigorously against them, as they said they would if and when they received proof.
But the president, recalled Secretary of State Dean Rusk, needed more than ""speculation, guesswork, fears""; he had to have ""very clear and precise and hard information"" that ""offensive"" weapons were in Cuba before he could confront the Soviets and rally other nations behind United States action.
A Minneapolis Tribune poll of late September found that 78% thought Cuba a ""serious threat"" to the United States.
Once during his campaign swing, Kennedy criticized the Republicans for having ""ignored"" Latin America in the 1950s.
He may have received information from Florida-based Cuban exiles and their organizations or from officers in the Department of Defense.
On the eve of the missile crisis, then, the Republicans seemed to have outmaneuvered the Democrats over Cuba, but not so much so, analysts and pollsters reported, to deny the Democrats an impressive showing in the forthcoming midterm elections.
By mid-October, in fact, monotonously repeated Republican accusations had lost some of their punch, press coverage of Cuba had decreased, and other events Mississippi, Berlin, and an Organization of American States meeting had diverted attention.
Still, the new information discovered by the U-2 might boost the Republicans by demonstrating that they had been right all along.
October 16-October 22 From the presentation of the aerial photographs of missile sites in Cuba to the president on the morning of October 16 to Kennedy's nationally televised speech in the evening of October 22, a specially constituted group of advisers, later called the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, met frequently to debate courses of action.
The options of invasion, bombing, blockade, and diplomacy were explored in exhausting sessions often marked by frank disagreement and changing minds.
The chief decision was to quarantine Cuba to prevent further military shipments to the island and to impress the Soviets with the serious American intention of forcing the missiles out.
The second major deci26 Only the Sept. and Oct. flights covered the western portion of the island (where the Soviets were deploying the missiles), because United States officials feared a plane would be shot down by a surface-to-air missile.
Intelligence data from a variety of sources, including U-2 flights, reached top-level officials such as Vice Pres.
McCone interview by Joe B Frantz, Aug., 1970, John A McCone Oral History Interview, ibid.
Yet the transcripts of the two meetings of October 16, Sorensen's private papers, National Security Council documents, a postcrisis internal report, Defense Department briefings, former President Eisenhower's memoranda of conversation with Kennedy and CIA officials, notes or recollections of such legislative leaders as Sen.
Richard B Russell of Georgia, oral histories, memoirs, the president's appointment books and ""doodles,"" and other materials suggest that politics was very seldom discussed a did not determine the choice of the naval blockade.
Nor do the historical records indicate that the tactic of a surprise television address rather than a private advance warning was shaped by politics, although questions cloud this issue.
For many reasons Kennedy felt compelled to act decisively against the Soviet emplacement of missiles in Cuba.
First, he felt tricked, for the Soviets had told the United States on more than one occasion that they would not put into Cuba missiles that could reach the United States and that they would refrain from actions that might aggravate international tensions before the fall elections.
Kennedy was, of course, also cognizant of his Repub29 The October 16 transcripts , National Security Council minutes, Sorensen's papers, various oral histories, Frank A Sieverts' report, ""The Cuban Crisis, 1962$' and the president's appointment books and ""doodles"" are in the Kennedy Library.
To the extent that presidents must always act in a political arena and to the extent that politics refers to the politician's desire to fulfill promises, politics demanded that Kennedy remove the missiles.
But presidents have always enjoyed considerable freedom of action in the making of foreign policy, and, in this case, politics or anxiety over the congressional elections did not decide specific courses of action.
On October 16 Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara appreciated the distinction between acting in general and acting in particular when he recognized that the administration had ""a domestic political problem"" on its hands because of previous presidential statements.
McNamara, for one, preferred a blockade of Cuba instead of military options.
At the two ExCom meetings of October 16, there was scant political discussion.
In the first meeting the advisers worried about keeping the news secret until they had decided on policy.
Keating's name came up, prompting speculation about his sources of information.
The participants in the meeting largely discussed the operational status of the missiles, alternatives for removing them, and Soviet motives.
Nowhere in the transcripts of the two October 16 meetings are there comments to the effect that the administration or the Democratic party would suffer in November or after if a certain decision, such as one for an air strike, was not made.
While his advisers puzzled over policy, the president went on the campaign trail.
Campaign plans had called for Kennedy to travel across the nation, especially on weekends in late September and October.
Until October 20 Kennedy kept his political schedule; on that day, feigning a head cold, he canceled his politicking and returned to Washington.
His speeches before then, as Harris had advised, recommended the election of Democrats to insure the passage of critical domestic legislation.
Kennedy gave little attention to foreign policy and gave no hint of an impending crisis.
He did not try to entice Republicans into statements they would find embarrassing after the missile crisis became public.
This curious document is one of the few time-of-crisis records that speak directly to the relationship between politics and decisions.
It came from a Republican serving in a Democratic administration-a Republican who seemed strangely to favor a Republican defeat in November.
Actually, Dillon was using the political argument only to move the advisers toward his hardline position that decisive military action must be taken against Cuba -a position that was losing ground to the option of a blockade.
Dillon apparently concluded that the president was not thinking politically and that a political case would persuade him to accept the use of substantial military force.
The president and his other aides, of course, may have pondered the impact of their decisions on the congressional elections, but neither their records nor their decisions demonstrate such.
And they did not accept Dillon's recommendation for an air strike, which would have conceivably proved more attractive to voters than a quarantine, which held the potential of a drawn-out crisis, and which in itself could not prevent the continuing assembly of missile components already in Cuba.
As Dillon knew, moreover, Kennedy had no intention of ever accepting operational missiles.
The question was never whether to act but, rather, when to take which action.
Meanwhile, politicians not privy to the secret deliberations of the president's advisers continued to spar over Cuba.
The Cuban issue, Kennedy remarked to Sorensen on October 20, was ""very harmful to the Democrats,"" because it proved that the Republicans had been right.
And whereas some critics would condemn the Democrats for having been ""soft"" on Communism and Castro, others would soon denounce them as a war party.
Kennedy believed ""that whichever way he turned it was politically damaging at home,"" Sorensen recalled.
But on the next day, Eisenhower, having not yet been consulted or briefed by Kennedy officials but, like the press, perhaps sensing forthcoming momentous decisions regarding Cuba, quarreled with his party chairman's designation of Cuba as the dominant issue of the campaign.
At least I hope so.""37 western states, did speak about ridding Cuba of Castro and the Soviets.
But his speeches were probably prepared before October 16 and were not coordinated with missile crisis officials in Washington.
At noon the White House had announced an important 7:00 P.M. presidential speech, and journalists had already determined that Cuba was the topic.
Some twenty congressional leaders -Congress was not in session, and the members were campaigning or vacationing -were summoned to the nation's capital for a special meeting with the president.
First, at 3:00 P.M., Kennedy convened the full National Security Council.
Rusk's comments suggest that some administration officials worried that critics elled DNC headquarters to ""kill"" the paper.
According to Sorensen, Kennedy said little about the political ramifications of the crisis during the crisis.
The president may have thought simila P.M. legislative leaders' meeting to explain his ultimatu position of a naval blockade.
The Republicans in the g some Democrats, in a tense exchange with the presiden ator Russell, chairman of the Armed Services Committ chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee, advocat sell went further.
One scenario included approaches to Nikita S Khrushchev and Castro; they would be told of American plans to force the missiles out of Cuba, and if no satisfactory reply was received within forty-eight hours, Kennedy would go on television to announce the installation of the blockade.
But in the end the president and his advisers decided to surprise the Soviets with a public address.
It was believed, too, that a dramatic media speech exposing Soviet perfidy would rally world opinion to United States policy.
As well, ExCom members feared that Khrushchev himself might issue a ""blustering ultimatum"" and delay negotiations until all the missiles became operational.
William Fulbright believed that an invasion would be less likely to lead to nuclear war with the Soviet Union because it would pit American soldiers against Cubans rather than against Russians, who might stand aside.
It is difficult to understand the importance of ""initiative"" in this crisis.
Indeed, United States military superiority in the region was never doubted, and any shift in initiative would have been short-lived.
The journalist Walter Lippmann published a widely read column of October 25 criticizing the president for suspending diplomacy-for not showing Gromyko the photographs and informing him that the United States would soon announce a policy to force the dismantiling of the missiles.
Moreover, Gromyko's prevarication in that meeting -that the Soviets would not place offensive missiles in Cuba -convinced some Kennedy officials that private diplomacy would not work.
Although little evidence is now available to sustain such an argument, it is plausible that the vehicle of a surprise, public television speech was selected for its anticipated domestic political impact.
First, a dramatic speech announcing bold action would surely rally Americans around the Democratic administration.
Second, a tough-minded speech would take the campaign issue away from the Republicans and possibly disarm critics who thought Kennedy pusillanimous toward Communism.
Third, Kennedy might have reasoned that quiet, private negotiations could not have been conducted in secret for very long.
The inevitable leaks would perpetuate charges that the administration was concealing information and underplaying the military threat.
And even if the negotiations proved successful, Republicans would sneer that unsavory deals with the archenemy had been struck in secret or that opportunities for purging the Western Hemisphere of Castro and the Soviets had been squandered.
Whatever the case, the speech's effect warmed Democrats, for the public response to the president's stand was positive.
October 23-October 28 After his televised statement Kennedy and his aides waited anxiously for the Sov response.
Khrushchev and Kennedy exchanged letters, and Soviet officials met secretly with Americans in Washington.
On October 28 the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw the missiles, and the United States promised not to invade Cuba in the future.
That promise did not spring from domestic political calculations but from a desire to end a dangerous crisis.
A pledge not to invade Cuba, after all, would hardly satisfy Republicans, who could be expected to argue in the 1964 presidential campaign that Kennedy had permitted the ""Red menace"" to remain in the Western Hemisphere.
Preoccupied with the danger of nuclear war, exhausted from the ordeal of decision making, fearful that some naval officer on patrol in the Caribbean might make a military mistake, wondering whether Castro might escalate tensions by seizing control of the missiles, and pressed by some advisers to act militarily because they believed the Russians were stalling, the president, not surprisingly, spent little time on political considerations.
But he did work to reduce the partisanship over Cuba, hoping to create a national consensus.
Not only would such unity at home signal Khrushchev that he could not count on exploiting divisions within the United States; it also would take the issue out of the congressional campaign.
For the most part, Republicans quickly endorsed the president's policy.
As much as they backed Kennedy's policy, however, Republicans also grumbled that the crisis was politically motivated.
Some crowed that the president would not have acted had it not been for the opposition party's pressure, and others criticized the administration for not going all the waygetting rid of the Castro regime.
The release of low-level photographs of the missile sites ""to prove to laymen existence of missiles"" might help, thought the Kennedy advisers.
He called Eisenhower and urged Republicans not to make the Cuban crisis partisan.
In another effort at bipartisanship, Kennedy sent the respected Republican public servant John J McCloy to join Ambassador Adlai Stevenson at the United Nations.
Nearly every account of the crisis quotes a discussion of October 24 between the president and his.brother Robert, which the latter related in his memoir, Thirteen Days.
At the time Soviet ships were heading toward the naval blockade; violent confrontation seemed possible.
Actually it demonstrates little, because President Kennedy intended to act, to force the missiles from Cuba, from the moment he learned about them.
He never hesitated in that intention; thus impeachment for inaction was a farfetched notion.
Assuming that the conversation occurred exactly as reported, it was an exaggeration perhaps induced by the tensions of the moment.
If the president engaged in political partisanship during this period, it was understated.
On October 25, for example, he wrote a letter intended for public release to Gov.
Gaylord A Nelson of Wisconsin, who was running for the Senate against incumbent Republican Alexander I Wiley.
Since there could have been no doubt about the nation's ""critical test"" at that moment, the letter amounted to a campaign document exploiting the Cuban crisis to help a Democrat.
Even Lyndon B Johnson, the most political of politicians, jotted down nothing of a political nature during highlevel meetings in that period.
October 29 to Election Day, November 6 From the time of the American-Soviet agreement to the day of the midterm elections, the politics of the Cuban question heated up again.
Cuba remained a Soviet military ally; the Monroe Doctrine stood repudiated; Castro still sat atop a Communist regime, bent on subversion in Latin America; and one way of ousting both the Castroites and the Soviets from the island in the future invasion had been denied by presidential pledge.
Furthermore, with Castro's obstruction of onsite inspection by United Nations officials, suspicions grew that the missiles were not being removed.
Unsubstantiated stories circulated by Cuban exiles suggested that the missiles were being hidden in caves.
At the November 6, 1962 ExCom meeting, Kennedy called attention to such stories, which, he was told, were never substantiated.
And to gather evidence of dismantling, American surveillance planes crossed Cuba, always with the risk of being shot down, as had happened once already, on October 27.
Kennedy now approved such intelligence flights on a one-byone basis, apprehensive of an attack that would inflame Cuban-Soviet-American relations, force him to retaliate, and spark war.
The political damage at home would also be great, for it would seem to confirm Republican complaints that Kennedy had not really solved the Cuban problem.
The former president had not long before urged that Cuba be taken out of the campaign, but now he turned partisan.
Only Republican prodding, evident in the Cuba Resolution, he argued, had enabled Kennedy to act forcefully in the crisis.
The next day several right-wing Americans organized the Committee for the Monroe Doctrine.
Backed by some Republican congressmen, by pundits such as William F Buckley, Jr., and by former military officers such as Adm.
Arthur W Radford, the committee protested that Kennedy had guaranteed a ""Communist colony"" in violation of the Monroe Doctrine's invocation against the extension of a foreign ""system"" into the Western Hemisphere.
Bob Wilson, chairman of the House Republican campaign committee, to ask the president to abrogate the agreement with the Soviet Union.
They did, but they were puzzled about how to go about it without appearing to be crass.
The Democratic National Committee prepared drafts of some ""fairly rough speeches"" on Cuba for candidates, but whether they were used is not clear.
From the beginning of the crisis, the White House had managed the The president restricted his advisers, telling those present at the ExCom m of October 30, for example, that all discussions with the press had to hav authorization.
He wanted a consistent story to come out of the State and th fcaw departments, and he also sought to prevent Cuban exiles from buying tine to attack United States policy.
Kennedy's aides thought that a large voter turnout on November 6 would help the Democrats.
Secretary of Agriculture Orville Freeman proposed that friendly commentators be encouraged to urge citizens to vote Democratic in ""this hour of crisis"" to demonstrate to the world national backing for the president's policy toward Cuba.
In response the council prepared several announcements and on October 29 sent them to every television and radio station in the United States.
Pleased with the project, Press Secretary Pierre Salinger then asked the council to produce a one-minute film of former President Eisenhower's appealing for a large vote, to go along with a similar film, provided by the White House, of Kennedy's saying much the same.
Through that supposedly nonpartisan effort, the administration effectively linked the president's successful handling of the crisis with the elections.
Yet analysts remained uncertain how the Cuban crisis would affect voters.
Kennedy decided on November 5 not to release pictures or information gathered from aerial reconnaissance missions on November 4.
Surely the Republican and the Democratic manipulations of the Cuban issue just before the elections aroused voter interest.
The Outcome of House and Senate Races The elections of 1962 barely changed party alignment in the House.
On the whole incumbents did well, and because most incumbents were Democrats, Democrats did well by the measurements of previous midterm elections.
Thus the Democrats lost only four seats, and the Republicans gained only two.
Domestic-policy issues, local political peculiarities, the nature of the 1960 election, the strength of the Democratic party in voter registration, reapportionment, and the ancient practice of gerrymanderingnot the Cuban missile crisis -best explain the Republican party's failure to make significant gains in the House.
Reapportionment had allocated ten additional congressional districts to the West, and the Democrats won all but one of those new districts.
Eight of the new districts were in California; Democrats won seven of them in large part because of a radical gerrymander.
Rousselot, a first-term congressman and member of theJohn Birch Society, represented Richard M Nixon's old district.
After gerrymandering, this conservative Republican district was transformed, with the Democrats enjoying a 62 to 38 percent advantage in registered voters.
Democratic State Assemblyman Ronald B Cameron defeated Rousselot by earning 53. percent of the popular vote.
Hiestand, another John Birch Society member, was a sixth-term congressman who lost to Everett G Burkhalter of the Los Angeles City Commission.
After the state legislature altered Hiestand's district, it had 37,000 more registered Democrats than Republicans.
McDonough, an eighteen-year House veteran, suffered as well from the gerrymandering of his district.
He found himself with a new district in downtown Los Angeles, politically inhospitable for a conservative Republican.
The state assembly had given his opponent, Edward R Roybal, a liberal on the Los Angeles City City Commission, a Democratic lead of 47,000 registered voters.
Wilson and Richard T Hanna, both of whom won House seats by comfortable margins.
Certainly the missile crisis affected voters in California and elsewhere in the West, but the intrusion of the crisis into the campaign season may not necessarily have helped Democrats.
In the West both successful Republicans and successful Democrats had favored a strong stand against Cuba.
When he analyzed the outcome, Keller concluded that voters on the whole preferred incumbents, regardless of party.
First, the briefing the administration gave to incumbents such as Younger ""hurt,"" because it marked them as leaders.
Second, the crisis caused the president to cancel his campaign visit to the Golden State.
On the other hand, the missile crisis may have set back Nixon's California gubernatorial candidacy.
Walter H Judd of Minnesota, a prominent, conservative Republican spokesman on foreign policy and a twenty-year veteran of the House, had to seek reelection in an altered district.
His district was changed to include all of Minneapolis, including the Democratic Farmer-Labor party stronghold of North Minneapolis.
In an atlarge election, Democrat Neil Staebler beat his Republican opponent largely on domestic issues.
Kennedy's handling of the Cuban issue before and after the crisis produced mixed results, according to Staebler's postelection analysis.
Before October 22 Staebler had opposed a naval blockade of Cuba, scolding his Republican rival for advocating one.
Then, when Kennedy imposed a blockade, Staebler had to struggle to ""minimize the damage"" to his campaign.
He believed that the Cuban crisis was ""a very helpful emotional stimulant, arousing many more people to vote""; it meant ""a net change in our favor"" but not enough to have decided the election.
In Michigan's Sixth District, the incumbent Republican candidate won, and domestic issues were preeminent; ""the Cuban triumph"" yielded very few votes for the Democrat.
In Kansas incumbents Robert Dole and J Floyd Breeding were pitted against one another in a new district.
Breeding campaigned in support of the farm program; he not only lost to Dole -he also failed to carry twenty-one rural counties from his old district.
Peter F Mack, Jr. was upended by Republican Paul Findley, another incumbent.
Findley's active opposition to the farm bill apparently secured his victory.
Overall in the nation every Republican incumbent from a farm district who sought reelection was victorious.
In Washington, for example, Democratic candidate Alice Franklin Bryant lost very badly to Republican Congressman Thomas M Pelly.
In Montana, both incumbent Congressmen won -one a Democrat and the other a Republican, and Cuba was only one of many issues.
In the First District, succcessful liberal Arnold Olsen ran on a platform of support for Kennedy's domestic legislation.
In the Second Dristrict, conservative Republican James Battin targeted Kennedy's farm program.
In the Sixth District Republican Charles E Chamberlain beat Democrat Don Hayworth.
Votes for Republican candidates surpassed previous levels throughout the region.
Seven southern states suffered an attrition of eight seats in the national redistribution, and all those seats were Democratic; but Florida gained four seats, Maryland one, and Texas one.
They also gained one seat each in West Virginia and North Carolina, where reapportionment matched incumbents in redrawn districts.
Finally, in the East, as elsewhere, the Cuban crisis was but one of several influences on voters choosing members of the House.
As for the Senate races, five incumbent senators were defeated in 1962 -three Republicans and two Democrats.
Republicans Capehart of Indiana and Alexander Wiley of Wisconsin lost for reasons not directly related to the Cuban issue.
If anything, the missile crisis may have helped both to better showings.
The defeat of the third Republican, Joe H Bottum of South Dakota, was due to a combination of factors, only one of which was the Soviet-American confrontation over Cuba.
He was actually an interim senator who had resigned the governorship to be appointed to the national position.
Milward L Simpson, was a popular figure who campaigned on a states' rights, anti-Communist, be-tough-with-Cuba platform that also included rejection of Medicare.
Although Dominick had hammered Carroll for not having earlier taken a hard stand against the Soviet military buildup in Cuba and although Carroll had tagged his opponent a ""junior warhawk,"" public dissatisfaction with long-term Democratic control of state politics and perhaps anti-Catholic bias decided the election.
A closer look at the losses of the Republican incumbents reveals that while Cuba was an issue other issues counted as much or more.
Francis Case died inJune 1962, the governor turned the choice of a successor over to the central committee of the Republican party.
Many candidates vied for the position, and after a rancorou meeting lasting ten hours, Bottum won the interim seat and was duly appointed.
The Republican party was rife with squabbling factions, and Bottum, who had a reputation as a ""hatchet man"" for his party, proved a weak and vulnerable candidate.
George McGovern also ran an effective campaign, which included a Charles Guggenheim film, The Dakota Story.
With a substantial lead at the beginning, Bottum slipped in the polls before the Cuban missile crisis.
By election day McGovern had taken the lead, helped in part by Kennedy's handling of the crisis.
He, more than anyone else seeking reelection, had spoken to the Cuban issue.
The White House also asked Louis Harris to conduct an intensive survey of Indiana voters.
Harris discovered that Capehart's lead over Bayh was modest in the early stages of the campaign, despite the fact that Capehart was a three-term incumbent with name recognition.
Harris learned too that Capehart evoked little enthusiasm among the electorate.
Capehart, moreover, had a negative rating on taxes, Medicare, unemployment, and inflation.
Some complained about the senator's ""intemperate views on going to war with Cuba,"" but in the Harris poll only 1 percent of his constituents saw Cuba as the paramount issue of the campaign even though Capehart tried to make it such.
It does not appear that voters turned Capehart out because of his stand on Cuba or because of the president's stewardship of the crisis, but because Capehart failed to establish a positive image on the issues and as a personality against a young, energetic candidate who ran a high-exposure campaign.
The Cuban missile crisis may have actually helped Capehart because it permitted him to use the ""I was right all along"" refrain.
Age, asperity, and the issue of Medicare best explain the defeat of the dean of Republican senators, Wiley of Wisconsin.
Throughout the campaign Wiley displayed a grumpy explosiveness and carelessness.
In early October a reporter asked him whether he had changed his opposition to Medicare.
About two weeks later Wiley told reporters before a press conference that he wanted questions ""without any nigger in the woodpile,"" and he shouted down still another reporter.
Before the missile crisis Nelson believed he had Wiley ""on the run,"" in part because Congress had recessed and Wiley had come home to display his offensive style But then the Cuban missile crisis intruded.
But Wiley claimed headlines, making much of his supposed importance during the crisis.
One press release rea ""Re-called to Washington by the President for consultation on the Cuban situation Senator Wiley also has been conferring with top defense and intelligence officials.
The Cuban missile crisis may have reinvigorated Wiley's campaign, but Democrat Nelson won nonetheless with 52. percent of the vote.
The president's handlin of the crisis, then, actually boosted a Republican-just as Kennedy had feared might happen.
In New Hampshire a fractured Republican party permitted Thomas J McIntyre to become his state's first Democratic senator since 1932.
In Idaho the two incumbents, Democrat Frank Church and Republican Leonard B Jordan won.
Gracie Pfost even though her record on foreign and domestic issues was similar to Church's.
In Utah it was only one of several issues, but Republican incumbent Wallace F Bennett, who had urged a blockade and war against Cuba before the missile crisis, exploited his initiative on the Cuban issue, and it may have helped him.
In South Carolina local Democrats believed that the missile crisis augmented Sen.
Olin D Johnston's vote count by diverting attention from the Mississippi controversy.
AsJohnston told the president by telephone in the midst of the missile crisis, ""Your stand . . . meant a lot to our party down 65 MilwaukeeJournal, Oct., Oct., Oct., 1962; Chicago Tribune, Oct., 1962, pt., 6.
For criticisms of Alexander Wiley, see also Sheboygan Press, Oct., 1962; and Janesville Daily Gazette, Oct., 1962.
Johnston's drawing of 57. percent of the vote, however, suggests that he had the election well in hand before the Cuban crisis.
Finally, to cite another senatorial contest, incumbent Republican Dirksen, Senate minority leader, defeated Democratic Rep.
But by then the senator's reelection seemed certain, and Kennedy had given only lukewarm support to Yates.
The state's other senator, Democrat Paul H Douglas, concluded that Dirksen and Kennedy had essentially struck a bargain wherein the president would not work to unseat the senator.
At one point during the missile crisis, Kennedy had remarked personally to Dirksen that he did not need to campaign.
The press had picked up this bit of news, speculating that Kennedy had written off a member of his own party.
A familiar theory holds that voters tend not to favor newcomers in times of crisis.
To the extent that this is true, the Cuban missile crisis benefited Senate and House incumbents-and 1962 was a good year for incumbents.
Thomas B Curtis of Missouri later explained, the missile showdown ""gave all the incumbents running for reelection a great build-up.
This is what saved the Democrat controlled Congress, the great plus given to incumbents.
In some cases, moreover, such as in North Carolina and Kansas, congressional reapportionment had paired incumbents against one another in new districts, ensuring the defeat of some.
The crisis helped some Democrats and hurt some Democrats; it buoyed some Republicans and weakened some Republicans.
The historian cannot identify one election in 1962 decided by voter reaction to the missile crisis -not a single outcome where the Cuban issue made the difference between victory and defeat.
Kennedy did not engage Cuba and the Soviet Union in the missile crisis in Oc67 Congressional Quarterly Almanac, 1962, 1032; William 0.
As Kennedy knew before October 16, the Democrats already enjoyed a formidable position in the elections.
Republicans had taken the initiative on Cuba through their constant scolding of the administration, but they had not persuaded voters to dump Democrats.
The Democrats had no political need to manufacture a war scare, and Kennedy did not welcome a new Cuban crisis.
From October 16 to October 22, Kennedy's choice of the quarantine was not dictated by politics, although the tactic of the television address may have been.
From the alarmist speech to the fading of the crisis on October 28, Kennedy ruminated about the political effects of the imbroglio, but, again, his decisions did not reflect a partisan stance; he did not, for example, shift from the potentially unworkable and slow-paced quarantine to immediate and decisive military action.
From October 28, when Khrushchev capitulated to Kennedy's ultimatum, to the election on November 6, both Republicans and Democrats exploited Cuba for political advantage.
Neither party, it seems, particularly profited from the Cuban missile crisis on election day The politics of the Cuban issue in the fall of 1962 was spirited and acrimonious but had limited impact on either the president's momentous decisions after the secret debate in Washington or the voter's decisions after entering polling places in every district in the United States.
As for what did shape President Kennedy's decisions in the Cuban missile crisis, scholars will find the answers, as they have already begun to do, in the study of his personality traits, calculations of national security and hemispheric hegemony, and perceptions of international power, prestige, and credibility.
