And though he was the superintending audrama held challenges of diplomatic strategy thor of Profiles in Courage, he was not the writer of it (Ted and political calculation far more complex than the military Sorensen was), as Herbert S Parmet showed in Jack.
Through various asserted that Moscow’s placement of nuclear missiles in Cuba errors of his own making, Kennedy himself helped to bring would have no effect, none “at all,” on the strategic balance of on the collision—the ramming of his nimble little PT boat power with the Soviet Union.
But President John F Kennedy by a big Japanese destroyer—that subsequently called forth disagreed.
Kenwithout a nuclear war—and without seeming to yield to nedy was “obsessed” with appearances, Vidal wrote, a man nuclear blackmail.
Reading several excellent accounts of “compulsively given to emphasizing, often with great charm, those famous thirteen days in the fall of 1962, I was struck the division” between how things looked—or could be made by the way illusory appearances serve as a leitmotif in the to look—and how they really were.
The Kennedy whom Americans came to know when he The run-up to the missile crisis involved some illusions ran for president in 1960 was an avowed liberal, but one conjured up, perhaps cynically, for political gain.
During who had been a war hero and—in unspoken contrast with the 1960 campaign, Kennedy had charged—falsely—that the liberal champion, Adlai Stevenson—gave the impresthe Eisenhower administration had allowed a “missile gap” sion that he would be suitably tough as president.
October 26, 2012 zer Prize–winning book, Profiles in Courage, to his credit. of medium-range ballistic missiles , with a reach Movie-star handsome, he had a beautiful, intelligent wife and of 1,000-plus miles, targeted on Europe, and once some one child, with another on the way—the apotheosis of the of these were redeployed to Cuba, as journalist-historian happy American family.
Michael Dobbs observes in One Minute to Midnight, they In the decades after Kennedy’s assassination, Americans were “magically transformed into strategic weapons,” able learned more about who he really was.
Even so, the United States remained in and vigorous, he had Addison’s disease, severe back pain, and an overwhelmingly superior position militarily, more than other ailments; only powerful drugs allowed him to simulate sufficient to withstand a Soviet first strike and still devastate the Soviet Union—which was Robert McNamara’s point.
Robert K Landers is a former reporter for Congressional But if the nuclear missiles in Cuba would add little to the Quarterly’s Editorial Research Reports and a former senior already existing threat posed by ICBMs based in the Soviet editor of the Wilson Quarterly.
Union, their presence surely would loom large in the minds 20 John F Kennedy shakes hands with Nikita Khrushchev, June 3, 1961 of Americans.
The appearance, illusory but unavoidable, Cuba as part of the Soviet bloc, Khrushchev viewed such that the missiles made a significant strategic difference efforts as “a grave challenge to personal authority.” would enhance the Soviet Union’s political position in the Khrushchev made his own errors.
In his mind, the misworld and strengthen Cuban leader Fidel Castro’s efforts to siles in Cuba were not meant to be used, but rather were export communism to other nations in the region—which “defensive,” deployed in order to ward off an American was Kennedy’s point.
Unbeknownst to him, Soviet leader Nikita cept it as a fait accompli, just as the Kremlin had tolerated, Khrushchev had already ordered placement of the missiles. however resentfully, the presence of United States nuclear missiles in On October 16, after learning of the missiles and launch Turkey.
Doing mistake, he lacked a plan for what to do if the Americans nothing in response to Khrushchev’s stealthy maneuver was discovered them first. never a realistic option.
When the missiles Kennedy had contributed to the making of the crisis in and sites were detected, Kennedy and his advisers viewed other ways.
At their June 1961 summit meeting in Vienna, he Khrushchev’s secret move as unprovoked aggression, and had given Khrushchev the impression of weakness, confirmwere especially angry about the deceit involved.
Furthermore, Kennedy had ploy and announced the blockade of ships angered the Soviet leader with his determined efforts to get heading for Cuba in a television address to the nation on rid of the Castro regime.
After the Bay of Pigs disaster, he Monday, October 22. and his brother, Attorney General Robert Kennedy, “pushed A the CIA to use whatever means necessary—includfter he spoke, Americans felt for the first time that ing probably assassination”—to accomplish that objective, nuclear war was more than just an abstract possibilhistorians Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali write ity.
Having publicly welcomed Castro’s quiet dread evident everywhere I went in Providence.
The when Fidel Castro urged Khrushchev to use his nuclear Jupiters’ deficiencies were not news to Khrushchev, according weapons, and when the Kennedy brothers secretly offered to Fursenko and Naftali.
He knew from KGB sources that to get rid of United States missiles in Turkey in exchange for a Soviet NATO had little confidence in the missiles’ deterrent value withdrawal of the offensive weapons from Cuba.
Any one of these warned that removing them now, in the middle of the Cuban incidents could have led to a nuclear exchange between crisis, would spark outrage among the NATO allies.
Kennedy and his advisers strained to discern the intentions, It’s irrational and it’s crazy, but it’s a terribly powerful fact.” and anticipate the responses, of the other side.
Much was Instead, Bundy suggested—he was the first to do so, despite murky.
Though the quarantine had been effective—the Soviet war could be untied if the United States would pledge not ships had turned around—it could not get rid of the missiles to invade Cuba.
In exchange, he seemed to suggest, the already in Cuba, he pointed out.
They had to assume “We all know how quickly everybody’s courage goes when that nuclear warheads for the missiles were available.
When they start these things and thereafter, via the news media, came a puzzling report that they grab Berlin, everybody’s gonna say, ‘Well, that [CubaKhrushchev was sending another letter to Kennedy, this one Turkey trade] was a pretty good proposition.’” offering removal of the weapons if the United States withdrew And so, in his written response to Khrushchev, Kennedy its missiles from Turkey.
NATO countries irrevocably to the security of the United The message was directly transmitted to Moscow that States,” Dobbs explains.
As the ExComm meeting broke up, Kennedy invited stalled only recently, they were already obsolete.
But JFK also wanted his brother to say more postpone, or at least question the advisability of potentially to Dobrynin about a Cuba-Turkey trade.
It was a superb performance, as the that Bobby say that there could be no public deal, but assure record of ExComm deliberations makes clear; and one wonDobrynin privately that the president would withdraw the ders how many of those who followed Kennedy as president Jupiters soon after the Cuban crisis was resolved.
However, could have so coolly combined toughness and restraint with if the Soviets made any reference to this assurance in pubshrewd diplomacy to avoid what he ominously called “the lic, it would be null and void.
All present agreed to tell nedy, ever conscious of appearances, told Schlesinger he no one about the confidential assurance being offered to feared people would wrongly conclude that in dealing with Khrushchev.
And so Robert Kennedy went off on his mission. the Russians, sheer toughness sufficed.
Yet his enhanced JFK’s quest for a peaceful outcome did not end there. reputation for being tough with the Russians was politically Later that evening, with his other advisers absent, Sheldon useful, and he intended to use it—and not merely to help Stern writes, Kennedy “worked secretly with Dean Rusk, him win reelection in 1964.
Rusk would arrange it so that if Khrushchev fect the limited détente that Khrushchev had rejected in rejected Kennedy’s terms, United Nations Secretary-General Vienna,” the historians Naftali and Fursenko write in ‘One U Thant would publicly call for the two superpowers to Hell of a Gamble.’ remove their missiles from Cuba and Turkey.
Turkey trade, he acted to squelch them, according to Naftali Khrushchev’s acceptance of Kennedy’s offer the next mornand Fursenko, by contriving to blame them on his United ing, Sunday, October 28, obviated the need for JFK’s secret Nations ambassador, Adlai Stevenson.
Worried that a United States invasion was in the offing, preparing an inside account of the missile crisis; one of them, the Soviet premier had decided to accept Kennedy’s offer Charles Bartlett, was a close Kennedy friend, and Kennedy of a no-invasion pledge in return for removal of the Cuba authorized Bundy assistant Michael Forrestal to tell him that missiles even before he received word of Robert Kennedy’s rumors of the Cuba-Turkey connection were “all Adlai’s fault.” private assurance on the Turkish missiles.
Behind the scenes, both Khrushchev and Kennedy had The article appeared in the Saturday Evening Post of Debeen looking for a way out.
They were rational, who had read the article before publication, let stand—was intelligent, decent men separated by an ocean of misundergrossly unfair to Stevenson.
That appraisal Schlesinger to “tell Adlai that I never talked to Charlie or goes too far in rehabilitating Khrushchev—a henchman of any other reporter about the Cuban crisis, and that this piece Stalin’s, after all, complicit in his murderous crimes.
Still, does not represent my views.” humanity remains in Khrushchev’s debt for backing down Not his views, perhaps, but certainly his interests.
The from his rash scheme. article caused a stir, embarrassed Stevenson, and—in a fitAs for Kennedy, he emerged from the ordeal with his ting coda to this game of shadows—it achieved Kennedy’s reputation greatly enhanced—and rightly so.
Schlesinger Jr., praised his “combination of toughness supreme crisis, the president had simply been tough.
