View of Photographic evidence, brought back by the U-2, showing Soviet missiles being set up in Cuba.
President John F kennedy broadcasts to the nation about the crisis on October 22, 1962, announcing measures being taken by the USA to address the situation.
Air Force Sergeant, photo interpreter, reading wet film in a base laboratory.
United States Naval officers and sailors in Command Center viewing large wall map of the world.
View of a Soviet ship bound for Cuba being monitored by a United States aircraft overhead.
Helicopter flying over sandy beach area of Hyannis Port, Massachusetts.
The helicopter parked and Undersecretary of State, Averell Harriman, steps from the helicopter and is later seen with President Kennedy, and Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, at the President's Weekend White House.
Harriman reports on the successful negotiation of a limited nuclear test ban treaty.
United States Secretary of State, Dean Rusk, Soviet Foreign Minister,Andrei Gromyko, and British Foreign secretary, Alexander Douglas-Home, are seen signing the document for their respective nations, August 5, 1963.
Although they were married since 1952, She was billed as Nancy Davis in the film.
Best Man, William Holden and his wife, Ardis Ankerson share the moment with them.
Next he is seen in a chair on the set of the TV series,""General Electric Theater,"" which he hosted from 1953 until 1962.
He also toured General Electric plants to talk about the benefits of the free enterprise system.
He is seen seated sharing a meal and posing with women employees of General Electric.
Film shifts in time to the year 1932, when Reagan was first eligible to vote.
Camera focuses on men's feet and they shuffle on a line at a soup kitchen.
President Franklin D Roosevelt is seen, seated in an open car chatting with people surrounding it.
On inauguration day, March 4, 1933, he and his Vice President Henry Wallace are seen in the back of an open car.
President Harry Truman being sworn in by Chief Justice of the United States Fred Vinson, January 20, 1949, for a second term as President.
Views of the Republican National Convention in 1952 when the party chose Dwight D Eisenhower as its candidate for President.
Supporters walking with Republican Presidential candidate, Richard Nixon, whom Reagan favored over Democrat John F Kennedy in the 1960 national election.
Views of Goldwater at the convention and stepping from an airplane during his campaign.
Still photo of Goldwater next to Reagan, and then of Reagan defending Goldwater in a nation-wide address.
View of Reagan and wife Nancy, and son, Ronald, walking together across field at their ranch in California.
Billboard advertising Reagan for Governor, and views of him on the campaign trail.
Views of Governor Edmond Brown surrounded by his supporters during the campaign.
Reagan speaking during the campaign, and then seen with Nancy when he won the gubernatorial election.
United States Date: 1980, December 4 Duration: 3 min 23 sec Sound: No Color: Color Clip Type: Edited Language: English Clip: 65675044187 Story of Cuban missile crisis in the month of October.
Ben Bella is then seen with Cuban leader Castro who receives him in Cuba.
Scientists in America reviewing designs for fallout shelters and visiting banks, stores, and municipal buildings and garages to assess them for worthiness as bomb fallout shelters.
Then the fallout shelter supplies are seen transported by rail to defense department warehouses for distribution by local authorities to Community Fallout Shelters.
Forklifts working at Naval Supply Center Oakland in California to arrange supplies for shelters.
View of American Legion meeting where former President Harry Truman makes a speech.
Former President Eisenhower gives a speech in Connecticut endorsing some candidates.
Air Force helicopter flies overhead and then seen landing on White House lawn.
Historic view of soldiers marching beside monument to Battleship Maine in Havana.
Crane atop monument as a wing is cut off; scenes of destruction of monument to Battleship Maine in Havana.
Fidel Castro and Che Guevara marching into Havana in 1959 with cheering throngs after succeeding in revolt against Batista.
Fidel Castro and Soviet leader Khrushchev greeting one another at United Nations in 1961.
Soviet deputy premier Anastas Mikoyin greeted by Castro and crowd at Havana airport in 1960.
Cuban refugees in small boats being rescued by United States Coast Guard.
Views of military specialists examining films of aerial views of suspected missile installations in Cuba.
Strategic Air Command begins dispersing aircraft to possible needed locations.
Officers of STRAC or Strategic Army Corps seen meeting after being assigned to the new command of United States Forces Atlantic.
Alerted U.S Army units on training exercise to maintain combat readiness.
Then a MATS C-124 again is seen overhead.st Armored division tanks being loaded onto rail for transport from Fort Hood Texas to Fort Stewart Georgia.
A USAF F-104 Starfighter supersonic interceptor aircraft makes a landing.
USAF F-105 Thunderchief supersonic fighter-bombers are armed by airmen at an airfield.
Barbed wire obstacles are set up along a beach by United States troops.
A USAF RB-66 Destroyer reconnaissance aircraft takes off from an airstrip.
United States Marines reach United States Navy Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba.
View of a long touchdown run in a college football game between Northwestern and Ohio State teams.
Chuck Hiller, a Giants player makes the first National league grand slam ever in World Series play.
As play shifts to San Francisco, it rains for a long time delaying continuation of the series.
A crowd cheers at a baseball game between the Yankees and the San Francisco Giants.
The First Lady of the United States Jackie Kennedy with children of foreign diplomats.
