Decisions are seldom final and tend to lack concrete beginning and ending points.
There is an imperfect link between the policy process and the policy outcome.
It\u2019s criticism is based on the same fact and the realization that decision-making is much more complicated than just weighing external factors.
Dangers of worst-case analysis and wishful thinking Specific and cumulative historical experiences.
The individuals who share power disagree on what should be done because they are located at different places in the government and see different aspects of the problem.
They are merely constellations of loosely allied organizations on top of which the government leaders sit.
The constellation acts only as component organizations perform routines.
To ensure predictable performance, the standards are often limited, unduly formalized, and sluggish.
A free and open exchange because there will be no organizational interests to protect.
What social practices enabled people to act, frame policies as they did, and wield power as they did.
Leads them to value the status quo and be risk adverse with respect to gains and risk accepting when it comes to losses.
Take more risks to defend the state\u2019s international position than to enhance it.
Pluralist and bureaucratic models help explain why policy makers act as they do once they are in place, but tell us little about how they got there.
The more open the policy process and the longer the agenda is on the policy agenda, the more useful will be the bureaucratic and pluralistic models.
In 1959 Fidel Castro was able to mobilize the disaffected rural peasants in Cuba and topple Fulgencio Batista\u2019s US-supported and anticommunist regime.
Castro assumed dictatorial powers and announced his goal was to create a society based on Marxist principles.
The invasion took place at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961 and proved to be a disaster.
Instead of rallying to the invaders, the local population supported the Castro government.
The failure embarrassed the United States and weakened President Kennedy in the eyes of the Soviet Union.
However, it strengthened Kennedy\u2019s personal resolve to act more vigorously in any future crisis.
In Oct 1962, United States spy planes discovered missile sites under construction in Cuba.
In fact, on Sept 12 a CIA agent had observed the rear profile of a strategic missile, but transmission time to Washington of such information routinely took 9 to 12 days and was not available for the USIB to consider.
The USAF argued that the increased danger of the U-2 being shot down necessitated a uniformed rather than a CIA pilot.
The Navy saw issue as implementing the blockade without meddling and interference from political leaders.
Anderson picked up the Manual of Navy Regulations, waved it in McNamara\u2019s face, and shouted, It\u2019s all in there.
McNamara replied, I don\u2019t give a damn what John Paul Jones would have done; I want to know what you are going to do, now.
Cuba was Kennedy\u2019s political Achilles heel The Bay of Pigs had left Kennedy looking weak.
Khrushchev had directly challenged Kennedy where he knew the President was most vulnerable after assuring him he wouldn\u2019t.
George Ball, Under Secretary of State for Economic, Business, and Agricultural Affairs.
