General Parker Admiral Sharp General Burchinal • General Hayes Subject: Chronology of JCS Decisions Concerning the Cuban Crisis 1.
Subject chronology comprises the important decisions of the Joint Chiefs of Staff relating to Cuba taken during the period 15 October 28 November 1962, including summaries of pertinent intelligence data and implementation of decisions where considered appropriate and informative.
It also contains as Appendices a list of highand low-level reconnaissance flights over Cuba, and brief resumes of Service activities during the crisis.
Decisions taken by the Joint Chiefs of Staff during executive sessions.
Decisions and actions of, or guidance given by, higher authority, except in a few instances where inclusion was considered necessary?. to explain JCS actions.
Routine decisions, or decisions of so minor significance as not to warrant inclusion. o$ JL :-• • DISAjDFWSW) <P7,TS-££ £7~i »/^k~^ js^sssc 4.
Also attached is a draft report of the operational aspects of the Cuban Crisis prepared by j'-3 for submission to OSD for use by the Secretary of Defense in Congressional meetings.
It was based on the attached condensed version of the Chronology and a Cuban Chronology prepared by the Department of the Navy.
It is requested that you review the attachments in order to discuss at an early meeting the terms of reference desired for the formulation of Congressional presentations for the members of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in connection with the Cuban Crisis.
It is further requested that the attached documents be returned to the Secretary, Joint Chiefs of Staff, as soon as practicable.
Beginning mid -July 1962 an unusual number of i voyages of Soviet passenger and cargo ships to Cuba were observed, with evidence of military cargoes on cargo ships, including vehicles and construction and electronic 3 gear.
On 5 August a high-altitude reconnaissance £ flight failed to reveal any significant military buildup.
On 13 August DIA reported indications that C Soviets were possibly equipping Cuba with.ECM equipment.
In 31 *r-4*ijGi> £:ellminary interpretation of highaltitude photography of 29 August revealed the first glgnif leant developments in Cuban military posture. seven SA-2 sites.
Further analysis in following days revealed an additional site, a possible MIG-21 and 5 aircraft crates, and a possible SSM missile site, further ar.alv^is confirmed, on 27 September, that last was a coastal -defense, cruise-missile site.
Also reported indications of heavy tanks, artillery, etc., all evaluated as defensive in character.
Two high-altitude reconnaissance missions were s flown on 26 and 29 September.
On 4 October, in recognition of the developing C Cuban situation and in order to focus the DIA effort on Cuba, the DIA established a special Cuban Situation Room with personnel and facilities for a 24-hour operation.
On 10 October Director, DIA sent a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff which stated that these crates had been equated to the type used to carry IL-28 fuselages, and that this information was the first hard evtd indicating th* probable a *n^ „ of IT ,. 9ft ., „„ ^ Cuba. 4 top qyrnrcr /The two reconnaissance missions flown on 5 and ;' v^ober, peripneral missions around the eastern end n£ -Ii» island, lUscioaed evidence bringing the total of 3A-2 sites to 20.
On or about 10 October the preceding information, together with a summary of the preceding Cuban missions during August and September, was briefed to the 0A3D/ISA and Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Scarf.
On 12 October, pursuant to a policy decision that i the Department of Defense would assume operational responsibility for reconnaissance flights over Cuba, the SAC was instructed to prepare for a tf-2 overflight of Cuba, to be flown the first available date beginning 14 October 1962.
SAC was instructed to penetrate and exit Cuba at specific coordinates which would entail photographic coverage of the previously mentioned Pinar del Rio search area, which DIA had selected as an area suspected of being associated with MRBMs.
It consisted of a single pass across the western end of the island in accordance with the above instructions.
This mission 5 TOP SECRET did not elicit any defensive reaction from Cuban air defenses.
Immediately following the successful mission of 14 October, SAC was authorized to conduct several additional missions with a view toward obtaining complete photographic coverage of the island as quickly as possible.
To ask CINCONAD for estimate of the air TS defense situation in the South East CONUS and recommendations on further steps.
Planning for operations against Cuba TS should assume some form of mobilization initially not to exceed the 150,000 authorized by the current Congressional Joint Resolution.
The maintenance of secrecy with respect TS to any projected operations against Cuba was fundamental to success, particularly between the time of decision and the time of Initial air strike and implementation of the invasion plans.
Photographic evidence of an aircraft fuselage, probably an IL-23, and 21 aircraft crates was presented.
Selective MRBM strike dangerous not eliminate total missile threat, Cubans may attack United States and Guantanamo, high combat losses, loss of surprise.
Must also strike tanks and all other significant military targets -.those which can affect United States or its forces.
What air defense measures should Oe Augment orbiting patrols to 75 vs 2 a 12.
Up to 150,00C Consideration should be given to declaration of emergency.
Cuba waS sufficiently great to w-rant attac* even af.er "" the missiles were operational.
That CINCONAD was to be authorized to augment the air defense of southeastern United States implementation On 17 :ctober, JCS directed TS CINCONAD to taKe necessary a:tion without delay and to advise the JCS of his plan, its effective date and what aid was required.
Sovietreaction to United States action in Cuba could be additional pressure on us (Berlin, Quemoy, Iran, Turkey, Korea) most likely place Berlin.
Implementation The JSSC produced a study, which the Chairman, JCS, took to a meeting of the ""Inner Council"" at 1600.
MR3M jii/cj m Implementation In a memorandum for the Secretary of Defense, the JCS confirmed their viev/s, presented orally the day before, advocating air attack against all missile sitrs, all -cmbat aircraft and nuclear storage,, •toTibas ships, tanxs, and other appropriate rralisary targets in Cuba, in --on junction with a complete blockade; opposing a strike against IREMs alone; and advising that the elimination of the Castro regime would require an invasion, preferably under OPLAN 314.
The total launcn sites identified co date were two confirmed and one o-obable MRBM sites and two MR/IR5M sites under construction; in 29 August photographv, only the initial construction of one of the MR/IRBM 3ites had appeared.
Li: it was decided that only an air attack would be executed against ni3sile sites, IL-2Sa should also be hit.
Implementation CJC3 to present this view to State and Defense Departments.
Implementation Decisic . overtaken by cancellation of Exercise on 20 Octcoer.
Implementation CINCLANT completed negotiation for use of JBH^HHHSitf on 22 October; -used as a staging and supply base.
October Analysis of 17 October photography revealed two more MRBM field launch sites, of which there had been no evidence as late as 5 September.
The total MRBM field launch sites now numbered four confirmed and one probable, with a total of 16 MRBM launchers and an expectation of 8 more launchers soon to be deployed, Sixteen 1100ra. missiles were considered operationally ready, capable of being launched 18 hours after decision to launch.
Additionally, the two MR/IRBM sites reported on 18 October were now evaluated as probable 2200m.
Implementation -On 20 October Navy became engaged in preparation of position and policy papers, a scenario, and implementing instructions re limited blockade; position papers completed and provided to White House on same day.
United States must realize strain would be placed on United States alliances and problems would arise with respect zc Berlin.
Implemencacion jcs provided tneir individual and corporate views to the President at 1000 hours on 19 October.
Requirement existed for movement of one TS *• SAC authorized to move aircraft from TS Implementation On 19 October CINCSAC directed movement of nonalert aircraft from TS 5.
To approve a ""Cuban Scenario,"" for white House use, which listed JCS actions taken and projected through 29 October.
To approve warning order to CINCSTRIKE regarding his Army and Air Force units passing to CINCLANT in event latter «s OPLANS approved for implementation.
Implementation in accordance with JCS directive, appropriate STRICCM Army and Air Force units put under OPCON of CINCLANT on 21 October.
Implementation After approval of SecDef PHIBRIGLEX cancelled on 20 October.
The total number of MRBM sites remained at five, four of which were confirmed; but it was now estimated that two of the confirmed sites had an emergency capability to launch some of their missiles eight hours after the decision to launch, and that the other two confirmed sites could be operational by 26 October.
To approve a ""Military Scenario for Use TS of Armed Force Against Cuba,"" which outlined the action already taken by the JCS and the actions requiring JCS approval, on a daily basis, between 20 October and 2 November; CJCS authorized to use scenario, in his discussions with President. raw -ag3.
Certain tasks would :e assigned, as follows J Preparation of acinar ic «si^port blockade plan Navy.
Preparation of ne. air strike plan against missiles Air Force. c Preparation of details blockade plan Navy.
Preparation of air defense plan to protect United States territory and shipping Air Force and Navy.
A total of -wo :.:r.:irmed and one possible ri:c-iJ I.12M sites, and si/, fielj :iH5M 3ites containing f:ur ii-^icner3 2acr., had been idsntifiad.
Implementation SAC ini.rv.te2 ;n TS 22 October; by 24 OctoberJH_fl Hjwere dispersed.
CINCLANT to prepare f:r prctecti.cn of United States shipping in Florida Straits, winder* Passage, and Yucatan.
Implementation CINCLANT instructed on 22 October; air and surface fcrtes already assigned task on 21 October.
Implementation On 22 October Air Force and S FAA representatives agreed to scope of MEZ, but i'tEZ never established; instead ""Special Civil Air Regulation"" issued by FAA on 24 October.
Emergency operational capability as of 17 October; POC as of 22 October.
There were ""clear indications"" available on 22 October chat at least five Soviet missile regiments would become operational in Cuba, each regiment to have eight launchers and at least 16 missiles.
This represented a first salvo potential of 40 missiles, with a refire capability of another 40.
Finally, another possible nuclear weapons storage site was discovered, for a total of two identified to date.
To hold up ann.*v*v:'eras*it of extension TS of enlistments until reserves call* i up.
Implementation Reserves not called up, r; except for Air Force units indicated above, but tours of duty of Navy and Marine Corps personnel extended indefinitely on 23 October.
Security code word category to be eliminated unless SecDef feels it should be retained.
USCINCEDR to be instructed to destroy TS or make inoperable JUPITERs if any attempt made to fire them without specific authorization of President.
Latin American and NATO attaches and TS NATO Military Committee to be briefed prior to President's speech.
Implementation Task Porce CHARLIE began TS departing Port Hood on 23 October, closed Port Stewart on 29 October.
CINCLANT go be requested to modify his TS message concerning command set-up for CINCLANT OPLAN 314.
JCS answer to President's question conTS cerning action in event Soviet build-up in Cuba continues to be that blockade should be stepped up and decision on general attack reviewed, sither well in advance of IRBM operational date or Khrushchev's next estimated political move against Berlin.
To send message to Chairman, United States TS Delegation IADB, requesting him and Lt.
SAC, at llacretlon, to lmpleaen* dt„ Persal plans for B-47 f „„„ „ 1S "" October. be81nnln8 1S0 ° h °««< 22 "". c 0""«> to lapi^e,,, pi2n 19.
Implementation Recommendation overtaken by guidance from higher authority; on 24 October CINCLANT instructedthat, in event U-2 shot down, President to be informed through SAC/150D channels; recommendation would probably be for immediate retaliation against most likely surface to air site, and probably u-2 flights would be continued.
Regarding CINCONAD's requirement for 3 IS HAWK Battalions, Air Force to check with Air Staff and air defense experts, Tmpiftimmtation On 23 October CSA directed S to provide 1 HAWK Battalion and CINCSTRIKE 1 NIKEHERCULES Battalion to CINCONADj HAWK Battalion in place on 2 November, and NIKE-HERCULES Battalion on 31 October.
Inform CINCLANT, CINCONAD, and NASA TS immediately of White House authorization to execute six low-ievel reconnaissance flights at once.
To amend and approve message directing TS increased security at United States domestic bases.
Recommend to SecDef on urgent basis that TS Presidential authority be obtained to load multi-stage nuclear weapons on United States strike aircraft on QRA status under USCINCEUR's command.
USCINCEUR notified, 27 October., . Restricted Dcia Aiomic Energy Act cf 38 1S54 JQg flEOniifP6.
Continuing analysis of photography taken between 14 and 20 October had revealed a total count of 33 MRBMs and 23 erector/launchers; the ultimate total was estimated to be 48 such missiles and 24 erector/launchers.
The first low-altitude photography indicated, moreover, that camouflage was in use at several sites.
CStf to answer o«e ^ . m responding that iiuw dentine Mr W W reap T£ WPt informea. moWllz atlon, CS* to *»• 3 . ln event or ^ ^^ „ M avaal-xe^^-^ ' onhlsplan8 ,anaon affects Oi l^6WO queried on eii« October, parities ne naa Xnaica^a on ^^^ Tmol amen tat ion CX2IC0NAB y-er.ac :r.
Implementation On 26 October JCS informed CINCLANT that a revised Army Task Organization for CINCLANT OPLAN 3l6-6l was approved; the revised Task Organization increased the combat TS TS ^3 ■ TOP SECRET 26 October „« « jAjest information, derived basically from 25 October low-level photography, indicated that rapid construction, apparently directed toward achieving POC as soon. as possible, was continuing at each of four MRBM sites.
Although no additional missiles or erectors had been seen, neither was there evidence of any intention to move or dismantle the sites.
That the Chairman, JCS would present to the Secretary of Defense and the White House the views of the JCS concerning a United States suggestion that the Brazilian Ambassador in Havana discuss with, Castro alone, Cuba's predicament resulting from its Soviet ties.
To approve a memorandum for the SecDef concerning a Brazilian proposal for a nuclear free zone in Latin America and Africa, in which they reaffirmed their orally expressed views that the United States should neither propose nor accept any discussion of such a proposal.
They recommended discussing only the immediate objective prompt removal of the missiles. 44 -*™» ""wp TS 3.
Two MSTS transports on the West Coast were subsequently diverted to routes from which they could be rapidly shifted to the Cuban operations if needed.
Approved a memorandum, transmitted 29 October to SecDef, expressing the opinion that the current crisis had demonstrated again the Jwhxzr TS TS-RD -rep-Mr shortage of sequential timers for low-level nuclear weapons.
The JCS recommended that the Atonic Energy Commission be urged to accelerate production of the item.
To direct CINCLANT to abandon further TS planning and preparations for OPLAN 314* Instead to concentrate on OPLAN 316.
To recommend public announcement that TS the United States was going to start around-the-clock reconnaissance.
To present to the SecDef an analysis of TS actions that might be taken against Cuba should the quarantine not result in the removal or withdrawal of offensive missiles.
Seen ji.m hi in rr 27 October The previously reported rapid pace of construction at Cuban missile sites was confirmed by analysis of 25 and 26 October low-level reconnaissance.
There continued to be no evidence of any intention to halt construction or dismantle or move the sites.
Five of the six MRBM sites were now considered fully operational and the sixth would probably achieve this status ou 28 October.
At that time, the capability would exist to launch 24 1100m. missiles within six to eight hours of a decision to launch, and to refire with 24 additional missiles within another four to six hours.
Photography of 25 October had confirmed the presence in Cuba of PROG tactical missiles, unguided rockets with a range of 20 to 25m.
A probable PROG launcher had been detected in a large camp and vehicle park, in company with 31 probable T-54 medium tanks and at least 31 other armored vehicles.
Possible nuclear warhead storage sites had been identified at five of the launch sites, as of 25 October.
Pour long-range conventionally powered Soviet torpedo attack submarines had been observed near quarantine area in recent days.
In a memorandum to the Chairman, JCS, DIA concluded that the Soviets had staged their buildup in Cuba probably because l) they desired to improve their nuclear attack capabilities against the US, and 2) they estimated that the United States could not prevent the advance of Soviet offensive power into the Western hemisphere.
That, on further considering responsibility for reconnaissance missions, the JCS would assign missions through the Joint Reconnaissance Center, CINCLANT would conduct operational planning and exercise operational direction, and the DOD would obtain approval for missions.
In response to an Inquiry raised by t>7 higher authority on 22 October, to forward an outline operation plan for an air quarantine of Cuba to the SecDef.
Implementation Plan submitted to SecDef for approval on 29 October; copies forwarded to CDfCSAC, CINCLAirr and CINCOMAD for development of supporting plans.
To seek approval to drop six million <*s leaflets over Cuba explaining the cause, purpose, and scope of the quarantine.
Implementation Program for project submitted to SecDef/ on same day, but on 29 October project cancelled and on 7 November CINCLANT authorized to destroy leaflets.
That, if the pattern of actions elsewhere in the NORAD/COMAD system indicated the existence of a Cuban and Sino -Soviet attack, nuclear weapons could be used to destroy hostile aircraft.
Implementation By a message the next day, TS 28 October, the JCS advised CINCONAD to the above effect, emphasizing that CINCONAD' s authority under his ""Rules for Engagement"" (NORAD Regulation 55-6) had not been changed by the Cuban contingency plans.
This message, the JCS further advised, did not change the rules of engagement in the contingency plans, prescribing non-nuclear armaments.
The JCS recommended rejection of all except the last, approval of which they recommended. im plementation Memo provided Chairman for use as he saw fit.
In view of recent intelligence data on Soviet equipment in Cuba, to request recommendations from CINCLANT on any changes necessaryti^H B/ particularly whether United States invasion and supporting forces should be equipped with tactical nuclear weapons.
Implementation Message dispatched the same day; CINCLANT replied that ,e considered it prudent that United States air and ground forces earmarked for Cuban operations have an atomic delivery capability and that he intended to modify his plans accordingly.
Tentatively to schedule four low-level reconnaissance flights for late afternoon, one of which would cover eastern Cuba, and that they would fly through any fire encountered.
That Chairman should recommend that TS announcement should be made that reconnaissance over Cuba would continue until UN observers arrived and that the United States would strike any missile sites that fired on United States planes.
To draw' to the attention of the CINCs TS operational commanders the latest Khrushchev message, which the JCS thought might be an insincere proposal intended to gain time.
That in response to CINCLANT' s request TS for use of Key West International Airport as a staging field for Army aircraft, it was not necessary at this time to obtain the airport.
Implementation On 31 October, the JCS TS decided to authorize CINCLANT to commence negotiations with local authorities for the use of the airport.
By a message on 3 November, CINCLANT was given discretion to preposition 53 — -BOr 3ECTE T TIM CtfflCT logistical support and to make ready she operational facilities at the airfield, after he had completed the necessary arrangements with County officials, but that no aircraft were to be moved to the field.
Camouflage and other concealment measures were becoming more effective.
The latest photography, taken prior to the Soviet statement, showed that construction was proceeding rapidly.
To conduct aerial reconnaissance of TS Cuba during this day, but without UN observers in aircraft, and that the UN shpuld be so informed.
To forward to the Secretary of Defense an outline plan for the UN to use in connection with inspection for offensive weapons.
The plan provided for ropssagr aerial, ground, and port inspection by technically qualified UN personnel.
The JCS recommended that the 03 fleet remain deployed as it was, that OS reconnaissance flights be continued, and that the existing covert intelligence efforts continue.
That if the UN undertook photo-reconnaisTS aance flights over Cuba in c-l 3 0's with Indonesian crews, the United States should insist for reasons of safety, on having a United States pilot aboard the aircraft, and also a us photographer, if possible.
That suspension of United States air reconnaissance TS for two days would be acceptable, but resumption on third day would be necessary.
To CINCONADfs rotation and reduction in TS dispersal of aircraft necessary to maintain combatready posture in view of maintenance needs of aircraft and weapons, short of complete cessation of dispersal.
That the Services should continue the T S current level of activity in exploiting training benefits of Cuban contingency force movements, without starting new projects.
That CO, CONARC should be TS instructed to plan but not to implement a scheme for deploying the School Brigade from Ft.
The elimination of all nuclearcapable delivery systems, including sur face-to-surf ace missiles , bomber aircraft, bomb., air-to-surface rockets and missiles, warheads for any of these weapons, supporting and operating , equipment, and missile fuel.
Members of any UN inspection team should come from neutral or non-aligned countries and rot from the Communist bloc and any inspection must include ports and airfields as well as missile sites.
The withdrawal of United States forces or the reduction of the build-up until the United States has been assured of the elimination of Cuba's offensive weapon capability. 58 te g aEewDg ^ Cubans n whej *<V7 Any restrictions on the rights of Cubans ""wherever they may be"" to determine for themselves the political future of their country.
Conditions for raising quarantine should be effective inspection team support and clear evidence of outward shipping.
For verifying the removal of offensive weapons, a practical system of inspecting outbound shipping at the ports was necessary.
Air reconnaissance should resume on 1 November and continue as needed until all offensive systems were removed.
In the event UN pilots were used, United States personnel should plan the flights and operate the photo equipment.
United States policy towards Cuban refugees should be the same as towards other national groups, and no aid should be given to groups like the Alpha-66.
Available evidence still did not indicate S Soviet preparations for dismantling or vacating the offensive missile sites.
Although many of the missile erectors had been removed on 29 October from their hardstands, this was not believed to have had any effect on their full operational capability.
There was no evidence that the Soviets were dismantling their offensive weapons in Cuba; Thsre was evidence of additional construction as well as of extensive concealment measures • 4.
S Pour Soviet cargo ships and 5-« tankers were continuing toward Cuba; Five other dry -cargo ships were apparently continuing toward Soviet ports; Fourteen Soviet dry -cargo vessels, one passenger ship, and three tankers were presently in Cuban ports.
To recommend a maximum air reconnaisTS sance on 1 November, and, in view of incomplete radar coverage of 17-2 that was shot down, an airborne radar watch, tracking by Guantanamo radar, and a fighter CAP accompanying lew-level flights.
To approve CINCLANT's recommendation in TS a message of 31 October that public release be made of information that a significant number of Soviet 3 ubmarines had been positively identified off the United States East Coast.
The Df » ^^g^H.itw in Cuba were now being or had been ^""mantled according £ e f ££ royed had stopped and installations had been partially destroyed. probable nuclear warCuba-was capab^of carryin^ S s orttBMs below deck.
Jcs oonoluded ^ sine, there were nuclear-capable delivery systems ., Cuba the possibility of enemy uae of nuclear weapons to repel Invasion had to be accepted, although OS could respond with overwhelming nuclear force against military targets, m a0 re lively case that no nuclear weapons would be used, present plan of Invasion was adequate and feasible, despite Increase In Cuban con . ventlonal capability.
Medical plans drawn up to accommodate 18,500 casualties m first ten days assuming nuclear weapons not used, although It was not expected that this figure would be reached.
TS for verfying the withdrawal of Soviet offensive weapons in three phases.
In connection with the plan the JCS advised that the threat from Cubanbased offensive weapons could not be entirely eliminated until a friendly government controlled the island, for the weapons in question could easily be hidden.
That the deployment of additional air TS defense artillery units to the southeastern United States was not necessary at this time, but that, if circumstances changed, up to three HAWK battalions would be made available to augment CINCONAD forces.
Implementation A message to the above effect TS was dispatched to CINCONAD on 3 November.
An increase in missile -related equipment had been noted for the first time at Mariel port.
This was the first indication that the equipment was on its way to ports, of which Mariel is at least one.
Two aircraft were not flyable, five, were in varying stages of assembly; and there were 19 shipping crates dispersed through the area.
Implement ati on The San Julian area was ""TS photographed on 3 November.
The pictures, taken at low altitude, disclosed the presence on a nearby railroad siding of four IL-28 shipping crates apparently en route to the airfield.
That the 5th MEB should continue through ""TS the Panama Canal into the Caribbean, without change of destination and mission.
That, as a result of the recall of U-2 flights because of apparent firing preparations at 71 Cuban SAM sites, thre-s flights would be scheduled for 7 November so as not to expose more than one plane to hostile fire at any one time; and that in the future TJ-2 flights wo'.:ld abort only when actually fired upon, instead of on notice of significant change of activity in the Cuban air defense system, as called for by existing procedures.
Tc continue to hold MSTS troopships in TS port on standby for OPLAN 316.
To approve CINCONAD *s request for authorTS ity to implement his OPLAN 1-62, including Rules of Engagement and institution of MEZ-SCAT, upon implementation ef any option of CINCLANT OPLAN 312, instead of only on the full implementation of OPLAN 312.
That procedures for checking outbound, missile -bearing vessels should extend beyond alongside observation and photography and should include boarding vessels for close observation of missiles.
Implementation Apparently above merely constituted guidance for future discussions.
On 5 November four possible MIG-213 were seen at San Antonio deles Bancs, the first noted in the western sector of Cuba A general dispersal of MIG aircraft might be uSe^ay^ncT three MIG-15S had been seen at Holguin.
Three Soviet snips which had been loading missile-associated equipment at Mariel might have left.
A new cruise missile site had been identified frcm photography of 4 November, at La Sierra near the port of Cienfuegos.
It appeared to be operational and contained the same essential elements as those found at the Banes site.
That the need to establish whether, or not any offensive weapons were held back and concealed in Cuba justified recommending a higher level of reconnaissance effort; 8 November reconnaissance should ^^^ comprise 5 U-2 flights and 1U aircraft for low-level reconnaissance, the latter to cover ports, Isle of Pines, and 7 caves Identified as possible weapons storage sites.
Implementation The reconnaissance approved TS for 8 November was 5 U-2 and 10 low-level (unless Havana was to be included, in which case, 12); 2 U-2 and 12 low-level missions were actually flown.
Protest to the USSR representatives ■ at the UN; and either; Full attack on all airfields and air defense weapons systems in Cuba, and consideration of additional measures, if hostile act Judged to be part of deliberate program of resistance to United States air surveillance, or If the hostile act was Judged to be an isolated incident, limited retaliatory action, preferably against the responsible enemy weapons site or airfield, Implementation A memorandum embodying the above recommendation was submitted to the SecDef on 7 November.
S^oo self-propelled lo T-54 medium tanks, an d ninS -^ <&„.--» Issault guns.
Two obviously finable IL-28s had teen seen; two ethers were probably flyacle, and five more were in various stages of assembly.
The current location of four IL-28 crates observed at railhead on 3 November was not known.
U An .estimated total of 39 MI'J-21s had been seen at three airfields in quantities suggesting that one squadron was based at each field.
Five others, previously leaded, were now at sea heading for Soviet ports.
As CINCSAG had requested SAG authorised T3 to reduce ifc3 alert status effective 15 November while maintaining 1/8 airborne alert.
B-47B to occupy all disp~r 4 Agre ed that ,^r objections to paper by TS „ e^itlea ■*. -oval of IL-aS's fro.
Attack all 3AM3J Attack all IL-2Ss; Attack all air defense syabws. ^tmptatct, ~>ft 9 November* proTn^i mentation CINCLANT, — > ^ded tne required information.
At Mariel port a total of 17 erectors had been observed, but no missile transporters have been seen.
At Casilda port eight transporters and seven erectors had been observed.
The total number of MRBMs observed to date at the ports was 31; the total erectors, 25.
Photography of 7 November indicated the continued assembly of IL-28s at San Julian.
Seven planes now appeared assembled* while two others were in early stages of assembly.
Eight of the nine ships designated by the Soviets to remove missile-associated equipment were believed to be under way this date.
Soviet troops associated with the SA-2 system and the cruise-missile sites in Cuba were estimated at about 4,400.
Personnel associated with the former MRBM/IRBM sites were probably in the process of leaving Cuba; there were strong indications that some had already left.
Twenty -four SA-2 battalions, together with support personnel— an estimated 3*900— were located at the 24 SA-2 sites and the three SA-2 support sites.
The Soviets were believed to havs at least an additional 1,230 troops, formerly used for defense of the MRBM and IRBM sites.
The tank battalions were located at Remedios, Artemisa, Holguin, and Santiago de las Vegas.
The FROQ battalion had been located at 82 Artemlsa on 6 November and the possible SNAPPER unit had been last seen near Remedios ^ 25 October.
Since the beginning of the dismantling of the known MRBM/IRBM sites, there had been a report S of a ship departing Havana with decks crowded with Russians.
It would be preferable if IL^'s reTS mained in Cuba, relieving United States of obligation concerning guarantee of Cuba.
Implementation CINCONAD was asked on 21 November for his recommendations on permanent augmentation of southeastern defenses, after the Cuban crisis ended.
Revised Course of Action in Contingency that a Surveillance Plane is Shot at or Destroyed.
The JCS recommended, however, an amendment outlining reaction to an indication of general intention to resist United States air surveillance.
I To continue seeking authorization for largest possible number of low-level reconnaissance TS ^ im plementation There was, however, no ^ increase in the number cC low-level flights during the period ending 15 'Jovember, the usual number being ten.
After amendment to avoid implication IL-28's TS only offensive weapons United States believes remain in Cuba, approved ASD paper ""Draft Presidential Statement Summarizes Si^ir,n fte Cv.ba,"" which reviewed partial fulfillment of Soviet ple-iges and called for completion of offensive weapon remr-val and of arrangements for UN verification; United States quarantine suspension would be extended briefly to permit progress on above, but aerial surveillance to continue as needed.
Addressing situation if IL-23's could not be removed by negotiation, memorandum recommended accepting IL-28's as Cuban, not Soviet, responsibility, thus disengaging Soviets and UN from issce and leaving so United States and OAS; no noninvasion guarantee to be given and surveillance to continue. implementation Memo reconsidered on 12 TS November; revision approved but subsequently cancelled when substance incorporated in Talking paper approved on i6 November.
Photograohy of 10 November indicated that air-to-air missiles apparently were being readied for mounting on MIG-21 aircraft at Santa Clara.
Photography of 9 November showed no additional IL-28s uncrated at San Julian and none of the IL-28 crates opened at Holguin.
At San Julian work apparently was continuing on engines of three of the IL-2 s^ ^^ ^^ ^ MIG-21s and 13 mig-15s/17s at Santa Clara.
All but one of the nine Soviet ships carrying offensive missile components out of Cuba had been inspected by United States ships.
Photography had confirmed a total of 42 missile transporters carried on eight of these ships.
Canvas covers had been removed from at least some missile transporters on all ships inspected.
The military camp near Holguin, photographed on 9 November, contained nine canvas -covered SU-100 assault guns, four PT-76 tanks, and nine possible SNAPPER antitank missiles mounted on armored vehicles, in addition to 31 canvas -covered tanks.
As of 11 November a total of 34 missiles and 26 erectors had been observed at the ports.
Assembly of the IL-28s was continuing at San Julian airfield, but there was no evidence of assembling the IL-28s at Holguin Airfield.
Low-level photography over the four major military camps revealed detailed in£c-rm a * io on modern equipment to include T-54 tanks, PROG missiles, and SNAPPER antitank missiles.
Air-to-air missiles had been identified for the first time at Santa Clara Airfield.
To concur in a memorandum from the ™o to the SecDef on ""Quarantine Operations,"" which was in response to an ASD request for a olan for quarantine more effective than the current ""hail and pass"" procedures.
Otner boards wouia os announced as they occurred. 92 •j k Mflvember ^^ at1on derived «nine ^-fS f PllT^ «Sff ■ erectors hed ^Sffi^ ""^Jk^^""St-air missiles.
After being informed of hig-ierlevel deciTS sion to cancel low-level flights for 16 November in view of • a-ro threat, to recommend low-level reconnaissance flights for 17 November, the number and routes to be based en CINCLANT's recommendation, after CIHCLANT was advised to expect hostile reaction, to omit the most hotly defended targets, and to ready GREY W0 LF mission.
To recommend to SecDef that existing force levels of GFLAN 3l6 be accepted as probably adequate, but that the 5th Infantry Division and a C:d»at Command of 2d Armored Division be earmarked as ready reserve, without movement until directed, and that National Guard divisions not be called up to reconstitute strategic reserve until needed, but that two :I0 divisions for occupation duty be alerted on S-day of OPLAN 312.
Further, to advise the SecDef that they considered the existing Guantanamo Defense Force, with 7.-:l«r aviation and naval gun fire support, adequate for defense of the present perimeter, but that there was an immediate requirement for activation of 11 LST's. a cost estimate of which was included.
Tm plementation A memorandum to the above effect was dispatched to the SecDef on 20 November.
The total SA-2 sites now identified are 27, of which three were apparently alternate, unoccupied sites.
Eleven were. assembled, or nearly so, but determination of assembly status was hindered by camouflage.
That CINCONAD 1 s proposals for the force posture that could be indefinitely maintained should be approved,e., CINCONAD was to be authorized to maintain the current deployment .in southeastern US, but elsewhere to recall fighter-interceptor aircraft to their home bases, to maintain operating capability at dispersal base3, and to restore individual proficiency training and resxune unit training under direct CINCONAD control.
To provide CINCONAD, CINCLANT and CINCSAC with the text of the JCS memorandum on ""Status of Readiness for the Cuban Operation,"" which had been discussed with the President on 16 November, and to instruct the three commanders to maintain the current readiness posture described therein.
To reaffirm their views on ""Recommended United States Reaction to Hostile Attack of United States Reconnaissance Aircraft over Cuba/' which they had forwarded to the Secretary of Defense on 7 November.
To recommend for 21 November a larger TS number of reconnaissance flights than usual involving 16 targets and 16 aircraft.
To confirm concurrence in rules of engageTS nent promulgated by CINCLANT in situations requiring measures of self -protection in peacetime. im plementation A message to the above effect TS had been dispatched to CINCLANT on 20 November as an interim reply, which was confirmed by a message on.
There was no photographic evidence to substantiate a report of a Soviet submarine base being located at Cayo Largo.
There was no photographic evidence to substantiate a report of unusual military activity in Las Villas Province.
CINCLANT : on the DEFCON and return of units, assuming relaxed reaction times as follows: U-2 flights an average of no more than two per day in any 10-day period and no more than 5 in one day.
Local reprisal strike aircraft same readiness as BRASS KNOB and BLUE MOON missions plus two hours.
CINCONAD:on the permanent augmentation of air defenses in southeastern United States following termination of Cuban incident, and on the phasedown of the current reinforcements of the area, assuming normal status by 20 December.
CINCSAC:on the level f readiness for SAC during the next 30 days, sx:.udlng U-2's.
All three commanders:-n intelligence objectives requiring aerial reconnaissance during the next 30 days.
That a report by SACSA on ""Cuba Planning"" had been overtaken by events.
In , . or3 ip.-.ed should be under«— Wl * 0aUt T', r .nCl vers!., nr « P— -tt,dM T^«^ ^considered. ^^^iia---— ^ 4MSeCDef on 3 November.
These views to .;e used by CJCS in possible discussions at higher level.
To defer reexami nation of the requirement for retention of the United States Naval Base, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, until such time as required by the international situation.
After making amendments, to approve a n^morandi^ to SecDef on r» a ::ir.ess posture requirements.
Alert pasture Hhl* ^ ^t an average * ,-, r^« per *, « , „..«. ^ ve thftr a maximum of fi/e .any 10-day period and n,t <n„re U-2 lights on any one day.
All of the ar echelon and about half of each of the other components, however, ».« directed to stag, from home bases, and so did not have to move.
They began leaving their home stations on 23 October and had all arrived at designated stations by 7 November.
Group headquarters, one HAWK Battalion , TS one NIKE -HERCULES Battalion , and one automatic weapons battery were stationed at Homestead Air Force Base.
These deployments began on 22 October and had been completed by the 31st.
By JCS directive of 28 November, all deployed TS Army forces except certain headquarters elements were directed to return to their home stations.
Of fensive weapons were defined to include surface-to-surface missiles, bomber aircraft, bombs, air--o-surface rockets and guided missiles, warheads for any of the above weapons, and mechanical or electronic equipment to support or operate the above items.
Ships that refused to stop when ordered to do so would be forcibly halted.
If the crews offered organized resistance to boarding parties, the ships would be sunk.
On 25 October, eight Soviet merchant ships that had been sailing towards Cuba reversed course.
Her cargo was checked visually and determined to contain no contraband.
The following day the Lebanese -flag, Soviet -chartered, freighter Marucla was intercepted and boarded.
She, too, was found to be carrying no contraband and was cleared to proceed.
This vessel was the only one boarded by United States naval forces while the quarantine was in effect.
By this addition, the perimeter of the Intercept area was extended to 2500 nautical miles.
On 30 October, a shorter quarantine line, running from a point Just north of Puerto Rico and extending to a point off the Florida coast, was put into effect.
This line contained only eight stations and could be manned by fewer ships.
The quarantine was suspended from 30 October to 1 November during U Thant's visit to Cuba and at his request.
On 20 November, after the Soviets had agreed to remove all IL-28 bombers from Cuba, President Kennedy ordered the quarantine ended.
All were cleared to proceed after their cargoes had been determined to contain no contraband.
The Navy, in addition to conducting the quarantine TS operations, sent all seven operational Polaris submarines to sea fully armed.
By 26 October, all the boats were on their assigned stations and on 15-mlnute alert.
The Navy also furnished Carrier Air Group 10 to TS CINCAFLANT as a component of the attack forces required by OPLAN 312.
Another Naval mission, carried out by Navy and s Marine F-3tJs, was low-level aerial reconnaissance of Cuba.
The first sortie was flown on 23 October; by the end of November, 82 sorties had been flown.
The first group, designated Landing Group Vest, All of the units of the Force/ were deployed afloat between the 26th and 31st of October.
A second force of Marines] TS was assigned to reinforce the Ouantanamo Bay Naval Base and arrived there on the 22nd and 23rd.
These reinforcements brought the total M arine strength at Ouantanamo to aboatl ^ Landing Group last which was to effect a landing TS Vwa. ordered » «*•« which -*««< ab0U *""^f.a lll n 8 ord.ra on *. on a October.
It ***"" ' ^ Mtvie . n «. 5 th and — tranSi "" ed "" Reeded — * 9O8lU0r ' S 7th of November, ana p ln « •*»— • ^ £oree , ^» ««316 ' s In addition to thea fcABMi of ^ C«. supplemented * ^ ^ ^ ^ „■*— . — ^^.a Cr o» 0eor 8 e ^ rX""n, on the 33* « -* California *o Cherry auan tana»o.
By the end of October, 26 had been flown; and during November, an additional 67 sorties were carried out.
During October 16, sorties were flown; during November, there were 68 sorties.
Surveillance of Atlantic warsrs by SAC in support of CINCLANT's quarantine operations began on 25 October employing 21 aircraft, in addition, B-52s in flight on their regular missions reported on shipping when flying over Atlantic waters.
Prepositioning of materiel began on 1^ October and had been completed by 20 October.
By this date, most of the requirements to support the plans were in place, Including a sevenday supply of munitions, fuel tanks and pylons.
The Air Porce also took steps to bring air TS defenses of the United States to inaximum readiness.
Such measures included the dispersal and placing on alert of the CONAD interceptor force and reinforcement of the air defenses in the Florida area.
Of this force J^BUere in Florida, m ^rere on 5 -minute alert^J^n 15 -minute alert, and l-to-3 hour alert.
The Strategic Air Command also took steps to achieve the highest possible state of readiness to execute its mission.
Readiness measures began on 22 October when one eighth of the B-52 bomber force went on airborne alert.
Selected elements of she B-47 force began Jisp ersal and completed their movemendCB^^te ^i^^^^^^^f|24 hours later.
With the beginning of the naval quarantine of Cuba on 24 :ctober, SAC readiness was stepped up by declaration of DEFCON 2, resulting in the ground alert o ^BBalrcraft in addition to thrf| ^Qon airborne alert.
Between 2 and J No vember, the airborne alert figure was increased tc^^s the B-52H modification program made more planes available.
Additional measures to improve combat readiness included the deployment on 22 October TS further deployment on 29 October of ff*as reflex force in t h alio Increased bjJ^Bfcircraft.
The Air Force began to stand -down from its alert posture on 20 November, the date when the quarantine of Cuba was ended.
On that date, the JCS directed SAC to return to the airborne alert status in effect prior to the Cuban crisis.
On the 24th, the JCS authorized SAC to terminate the dispersal of the B-47 force.
