The ensuing crisis proved to be the closest approach to a superpower nuclear war during the entire Cold War era.
The crisis pitted Kennedy against Nikita Khrushchev, the leader of the Soviet Union, and Fidel Castro, who had seized power in Cuba in 1959.
This process is experimental and the keywords may be updated as the learning algorithm improves.
This is a preview of subscription content, access via your institution.
At 2:30 this afternoon, the Attorney General convened in his office a meeting on Operation Mongoose… 2.
The Attorney General opened the meeting by expressing the “general dissatisfaction of the president” with Operation Mongoose.
In order to do this, he will hold a meeting every morning at 0930 with the Mongoose operational representatives from the various agencies.
Uh, we’re impressed, Mr President, with the great importance of getting a, a strike with all the benefit of surprise, uh, which would mean ideally that we would have all the missiles that are in Cuba above ground where we can take them out … the other optimum would be to get every missile before it could, becomes operational.
I would also mention among the military actions we should take that once we have destroyed as many of these offensive weapons as possible, we should, should prevent any more coming in, which means a naval blockade.
The establishment of a “trading position” to force removal of United States overseas bases and Berlin.
However, the United States should not act without warning and thus be forced to live with a “Pearl Harbor indictment” for the indefinite future.
Give them 24 hours to commence dismantling and removal of MRBMs, coastal defense missiles, surface to air missiles, IL 28s and all other aircraft which have a dual defensive-offensive capability, including MIG 21s.
Notify the American public and the world of the situation created by the Soviets.
If Khrushchev and Castro fail to act at once, we should make a massive surprise strike at airfields, MRBM sites and SAM sites concurrently.
Letter from the United States Ambassador to the United Nations Adlai Stevenson to President Kennedy, October 17, 1962 Dear Mr President:I have reviewed the planning thus far and have the following comments for you:…I know your dilemma is to strike before the Cuban sites are operational or to risk waiting until a proper groundwork of justification can be prepared.
But the means adopted have such incalculable consequences that I feel you should have made it clear that the existence of nuclear missile bases anywhere is negotiable1 before we start anything.Our position, then, is that we can’t negotiate with a gun at our head, a gun that imperils the innocent, helpless Cuban people as much as it does the U.S., and that if they won’t remove the missiles and restore the status quo ante we will have to do it ourselves—and then we will be ready to discuss bases in the context of a disarmament treaty or anything else with them.
In short it is they, not the U.S., that have upset the balance and created this situation of such peril to the whole world.Yours,Adlai S Stevenson 1The word “negotiable” is double underlined in the source text.
Let me just say a little, first, about what the problem is, from my point of view.
If we go in and take them out on a quick air strike, we neutralize the chance of danger to the United States of these missiles being used.
And we prevent a situation from arising, at least within Cuba, where the Cubans themselves have the means of exercising some degree of authority in this hemisphere.On the other hand, we increase the chance greatly, as I think they—there’s bound to be a reprisal from the Soviet Union, there always is—of they’re just going in and taking Berlin by force at some point.
Which leaves me with only one alternative, which is fire nuclear weapons—which is a hell of an alternative—and begin a nuclear exchange, with all this happening.On the other hand, if we begin the blockade that we’re talking about, the chances are they will begin a blockade and say that we started it.
So I don’t think we’ve got any satisfactory alternatives.I just wanted to say that these were some of the problems that we have been considering.
Well, I would just say one thing and then turn it over to General LeMay.
But I think we’d all be unanimous in saying that really our strength in Berlin, our strength any place in the world, is the credibility of our response under certain conditions.
I’d emphasize, a little strongly perhaps, that we don’t have any choice except direct military action.
If we do this blockade that’s proposed and political action, the first thing that’s going to happen is your missiles are going to disappear into the woods, particularly your mobile ones.
But the way they’ve lined these others up, I would have to say, it’s a small possibility.
If they were going to hide any of them, then I would think they would have hid them all.
So the only danger we have if we haven’t picked up some that are setting there in plain sight.
If we do low altitude photography over them, this is going to be a tip-off too.Now, as for the Berlin situation, I don’t share your view that if we knock off Cuba, they’re going to knock off Berlin.
If we don’t do anything to Cuba, then they’re going to push on Berlin and push real hard because they’ve got us on the run.
I don’t think they’re going to take any reprisal if we tell them that the Berlin situation is just like it’s always been.
Now I don’t think this changes the Berlin situation at all, except you’ve got to make one more statement on it.
James G Blight and Janet M Lang, The Fog of War: Lessons from the Life of Robert S McNamara , 64.
I ask you to recognize clearly, Mr Chairman, that it was not I who issued the first challenge in this case, and that in the light of this record these activities in Cuba required the responses I have announced.I repeat my regret that these events should cause a deterioration in our relations.
This letter was received at the State Department between 6 P.M. and 9 P.M., October 26, 1962 Dear Mr President:I have received your letter of October 25.
James N Giglio and Stephen G Rabe, Debating the Kennedy Presidency , 8–9.
Sorensen also helped Kennedy write a book, Profiles in Courage, describing how eight United States senators had risked their careers by upholding their personal beliefs.
