Even in his final decade of illness, the iconic revolutionary was still actively fighting; writing articles on international politics and upholding the cause for socialism.
One measure of his historical significance is expressed in the fact that he outlasted 10 United States presidents by the time of his official retirement from politics in 2008 due to declining health.
Counting incumbent Barack Obama, Fidel’s political life spanned 11 United States presidencies.
All of them oversaw a barbarous policy to economically strangle Cuba with a trade blockade on the tiny Caribbean island nation.
Several of these United States leaders sanctioned criminal plots to assassinate Fidel and incite regime change.
Castro beat them all and died peacefully in his bed having lived his life to the full.
As news of his death reverberated around the world, even Western countries which had conspired to varying degrees to thwart the Cuban revolution were compelled to acknowledge Fidel’s towering legacy.
America’s CNN and Britain’s BBC immediately ran biographical portraits of the man and his revolutionary past.
Among the predictable slights referring to an «authoritarian figure», even the Western propagandists had to admit that Fidel liberated his people from squalor and poverty, bequeathing Cuba with immense social development, and, probably more importantly, giving the world’s people monumental inspiration to continually strive in order to make this world a place of justice for everyone.
To the end, he championed socialism, while denouncing capitalist exploitation, destruction and its imperialist warmongering.
The use of the word “dictator” was gratuitous and doubtless intended to slur the man’s greatness even at his moment of death.
But its florid words of apparent tribute contained the poison of defamation.
It wasn’t Castro who brought the Cold War to the Western Hemisphere, nor was it he who nearly incited nuclear war.
Yet, insidiously, the United States media impute Fidel with the evil of their own governments.
In 1960, months after Fidel overthrew the corrupt US-backed dictator Fulgencio Batista, the leader of the revolution made an official visit to the United States in a gesture of regional friendship.
But he was snubbed by then President Eisenhower who refused to meet him.
Eisenhower then enacted diplomatic and trade embargoes on Cuba in revenge for Fidel’s economic policies aimed at lifting the majority of Cubans out of decades of US-induced poverty.
In April 1961, under the new presidency of John F Kennedy, the CIA and Pentagon launched the Bay of Pigs invasion with a private mercenary army made up of Batista loyalists.
JFK backed down on a full-scale military assault and Fidel’s forces eventually routed the attackers.
The CIA and Cuban exiles never forgave JFK for this «betrayal» and exacted retribution by blowing the president’s head off as his motorcade drove through Dallas on November 22, 1963.
Contrary to the above portrait in the NY Times, it was the United States under Eisenhower and subsequently Kennedy that brought the Cold War to the Western Hemisphere.
If Castro responded to United States aggression by embracing the Soviet Union and its nuclear missiles, it was evidently a policy of self-defense.
The Cuban missile crisis during October 1962, when JFK and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev faced off in a dramatic nuclear showdown, was the outcome of the United States having already embarked on a war policy against Cuba.
The installation of Soviet nuclear weapons on Cuban territory 90 miles from the United States mainland was first of all a legitimate act of sovereignty by the Cuban government, and, secondly, a reasonable act of self-defense given the United States criminal aggression the year before at the Bay of Pigs.
It was United States aggressive policy towards a newly independent impoverished nation whose people exercised their right to self-determination by supporting a socialist government.
US official vanity likes to recount that JFK forced the Soviets to withdraw their nuclear missiles from Cuba.
But an important overlooked fact is that the deal to avert nuclear war worked out by Kennedy and Khrushchev relied on a commitment from the United States to abandon its covert war plans against Cuba.
The United States never fully lived up to its promise to leave Cuba in peace.
Assassination plots against Castro and other Cuban leaders continued during subsequent United States administrations, as did other acts of state-sponsored sabotage and terrorism such as the downing of a Cuban civilian airliner in 1976.
The US-imposed trade embargo on the island nation of 11 million people that began in 1961 continues to this day under Barack Obama, albeit with a slight – some would say “cosmetic” – loosening.
However, one small mercy that came out of the «brink of nuclear war» in 1962 was that the United States desisted from repeating the kind of overt aggression that was seen in the Bay of Pigs.
He was a giant of intellect and humanity, whose compassion for the oppressed and their liberation from under man-made exploitation and hegemony was as luminous as in the days of his youth.
Fidel was a light for the world, and even in death his light for social justice shines on.
Not even formidable political enemies can diminish this radiant revolutionary.
Fidel didn’t bedevil them; he transcended all of them and their malfeasant schemes with a humanity that outshines their corruption.
Of his splendid legacy, perhaps one attribute is that Fidel’s life and struggle demonstrates with eloquent clarity the aggressive, destructive, warmongering nature of the United States political system.
In his lifetime, the world can clearly see that, despite the attempts to slander, it was the United States governments that unleashed Cold War hostility and that were criminally reckless enough to push the world to nuclear war.
This is an historical lesson bequeathed by Fidel that is as important now as it was then.
The aggression that the United States inflicted on Cuba is extant today in its belligerence towards Russia, China or any other country that defies its hegemonic conduct.
Understanding the history of Cuba and Fidel Castro’s defiant revolution empowers us to understand the real cause and culprits of aggression in the world today.
So a few coins in our jar to help us keep going are always appreciated.
This embargo is easily circumvented and there is also the ease of substituting products from other countries.
I hear that German machinery and Japanese electronics are not too shabby.
The removal of the blockade in the 60s was not down to a change in United States policy towards Cuba.
The chaos wreaked on Cuba was hidden in the 70s and 80s by the USSR paying for Cuban soldiers to fight its wars and by European bankers lending money to Cuba.
When Cuba defaulted in 1986, it had the highest debt per capita of any Latin American country.
When these sources of subsidy disappeared, Fidel decided in 1994 to sponge off the capitalists by inviting tourists to Cuba, turning a blind eye to prostitution and by encouraging his brightest and best to work in the Us and Europe, knowing that they would send money back to their relatives.
Fidel’s inept management was so staggering that the Revolutionary Armed Forces under Raul have become increasingly involved in the economy.
Anything that works in Cuba was probably built before Castro came to power, owned by foreign companies or run by the military.
The only difference between the average Cubans narrative of what is going on and what you are saying is that the Cuban leadership is itself in on creating conditions of modern technological scarcity.
I guess that they, the United States oligarchs and their allies and vassals, just don’t like dealing with ‘regimes’ wherein there is a cleavage, however overt or hidden, between the leadership and the people, eh.
From “Terry” Of all the innumerable brilliant things Fidel did over the decades, perhaps my favourite was when then United States President Jimmy Carter started mouthing off about all the prisoners in Cuba being “Political Prisoners”, and stated he would welcome them all to the glorious USA if only that horrible criminal Communist slavemaster Castro would free them.
And the Cubans emptied out their prisons and drove them to the port of Mariel where they were loaded onto the waiting United States ships and set free in Miama to rob, rape, kill, cheat, and carry on whatever criminal activities had originally landed them in prison.
Of course, the United States Govt. soon realized they had shot themselves in the foot, and demanded that Cuba not send any more criminals to Miami.
But Fidel just grinned from ear to ear and “We have no common criminals.
Only political prisoners.” and kept shipping them, and the United States was forced to keep accepting them.
It saved the Cuban economy a fortune by getting rid of thousands of vicious criminals being fed, clothed, and housed at the expense of the Cuban people, and permanently dumped the criminals in the USA, which was much better pickings for them, so they had no desire to return.
I visited Cuba in 1986, a few years later, and just for the heck of it walked into the local jail in the town I was staying in.
I asked to see the cells and the desk sergeant said “OK” and took me back there.
I do wish someone would collect all the funny stories about this guy and publish a book about it.
Honestly, this story really illustrates why he’s so hated by the usual suspects.
On another note, since disparaging Fidel as a dictator clearly isn’t working, some disinfo trolls are now trying to “prove” that Fidel was a CIA asset all along, because hey–the CIA has a 100% kill rate, they are always perfect, and they never make a mistake.
Sarcasm aside, I do think the CIA is overwhelmingly successful in getting you dead, if that’s what they want.
Apparently, he was controlled opposition all along, and maybe there will be files and incriminating pictures that show he was part of the shadow elite, participating in pedo orgies and satanic rituals, fully owned by the rothschilds or whatnot.
I don’t know what’s funnier, the true stories about Fidel’s wicked clever moves, or his detractors pathetic attempts to discredit him.
Lorenz had lived in Cuba as Castro’s mistress until she became pregnant and suddenly fell ill.
When she returned to the US, the CIA told her that Castro had secretly arranged for her to have a late term abortion.
They convinced her that she had to return to Cuba to assassinate her former lover for the good of America.
Frightened she would be discovered by Cuban customs, Lorenz resorted to one more subterfuge and hid the pills inside her pot of cold cream.
However, Castro found out about the attempt, and allegedly handed her a gun and told her to shoot him, which she said she could not.
Lorenz ejected the bullets and fell into his arms …” 00 Reply Jen Nov 30, 2016 10:59 PM Reply to Jen Incidentally those poisoned pills that Lorenz hid in her face cream ended up dissolving.
The fact that the Media apparatus of the Right Wing West has recycled, amplified and maintained “The Miracle of Marita and Fidel” story, jut like a tale out of the New Testament, for 56 years, shouldn’t be a red flag to any naive member of the “Left” who’s wearing the Goofy Goggles of the Believer.
And, of course, Fidel is the only “enemy of Capitalism,” heading a totally defenseless country, on Washington’s back doorstep that they just could. not. kill.
Which was quite hilarious; I had “Lefty” acquaintances who fell for that one hook, line and sinker.
The “Left” is so smug and absolutely convinced in its self-perceived superiority that the Ultra Right PTB uses this arrogant naivete against us… one of the CIA’S greatest tools is the Incompetence Alibi.
If he was, he was better for Cuba than Batista; and if he wasn’t, he was better for Cuba than Batista.
Or maybe he was a triple agent, for the Americans, for the Cubans, for the Russians.
Or maybe he was in it only for himself, for the cigars and the women and the killing and lording over everyone and even doing at least some good because, well, he just fancied tha.
What matters is that the Cuban revolution kicked the American mafia bums out and actually improved the lives of millions of people.
And as for revolutions, they don’t happen without a great many players playing.
Everyone who has the means and the motives participates, and these capitalist motherfuckers who are trying to con everyone sometimes end up themselves being conned.
I think most of us can agree on the pernicious effects of “American” Empire.
What we’re disagreeing on is the width, depth and extent of this Empire.
I’m saying that, having been raised within this Empire, and born after it was well underway, it’s very difficult for us to identify the Empire’s limits or even all of its processes.
The Empire was your first teacher … The Empire provided your first and favorite entertainments.
Yet the most famous “anti-Capitalist” of the century was allowed to run his little Kingdom for decades, right in Washington’s back yard, without being killed/ deposed/ discredited/ imprisoned… in fact the propaganda arm of the Empire spread romantic legends about this famous “anti-Capitalist” to burnish his legend.
Common sense indicates that the “anti-Capitalist” wasn’t an anti-Capitalist at all.
He was playing an important part in the layered Realpolitik of the Era and the Region.
Perhaps he was his own man while performing this function, since we have no real idea who he was.
So many of you are so touchingly naive that you believe in Speeches and Gestures.
When I was young I sometimes argued with Scientologists who approached me on the street… or with Jehovah’s Witnesses who made the mistake of knocking on my door.
People are merely clumping together and singing the old songs … you’re indulging in the tribal pleasure of focusing on an Ideological Enemy and calling me names and hugging each other.
You are saying the Teflon Commander Castro was CIA, and it that it really matters that he was.
I’m saying it doesn’t fucking matter and, anyway, you don’t know that he was or wasn’t any more than I do.
Well, I just did point to one tiny little contradiction in your thinking, of which you seem to make a great deal, even if I’m not here addressing the Really Big Contradiction on which you are so intently focused.
And no, I’m not going to spend too much time picking your “common sense” apart.
Suffice it give this little exchange a pause right here, to give you a bit a pause.
Well, then, “we” — who are your Ideological Enemies — do sincerely apologize.
Although I don’t know if my ideological comrades are comfortable with me speaking on their behalf.
And now that he is dead, well they can scratch off their list, no matter how far down it was.
It would only suggest that the CIA had had better things to do than expend any serious and immediate efforts offing the man.
Now in every story, a little exaggeration, a little embroidery creeps in.
And you accuse us, your Ideological Enemies, of being so touchingly naive.
You can build consensus around common sense but they aren’t the same thing.
You see, just because the CIA doesn’t off you, it doesn’t necessarily mean that you are CIA or their friend.
I mean, the company hasn’t murdered me and a lot of other people — yet.
I said the “638” was a random number; it’s bullshit; it’s part of the myth.
I said that the Castro myth is so full of contradictions that it’s absurd, and that people who resist or at least question the legitimacy of Empire should, first of all, wean themselves from the stories that Empire tells them.
We see what happens to prominent anti-Capitalists: they’re killed/ deposed/ discredited/ imprisoned by powerful techno-fascist “American” forces all over the Western Hemisphere.
So according to you, Fidel was either his own man, in which case he was a useful idiot — like the rest of us who are your Ideological Enemies — or he was very much in cahoots with the masters of the Empire of Chaos.
But obviously, if the masters of the Empire of Chaos had really wanted him dead – well, they would have had him dead.
Because, as you point out, they have often traveled half way around the globe to destroy entire societies far more capable of defending themselves than Cuba ever could.
So from this you conclude that obviously the masters of the Empire of Chaos didn’t want Fidel dead or Cuba destroyed, but just as he and Cuba were, which proves, according to you, that “e was playing an important part in the layered Realpolitik of the Era and the Region,” either consciously or not.
That Fidel and his Cuba were not destroyed proves that Fidel was pro-capitalist, that is, that he was all about granting a certain coterie of individuals the legal right to own everything and to profit thereby at the expense of the Cuban majority.
But being ‘half in and half out’ of our brainwashing, “we” just don’t see it, but you do.
As powerful as the United States is, it’s resources aren’t infinite, and resource allocation is a matter of prioritizing tasks.
Furthermore, not every problem to be resolved is as urgent as every other.
Maybe Fidel and the Cuba he lead survived as long as he and it did for nothing more than being a low level priority for the hegemon.
Or maybe the United States couldn’t actually muster the Cuban compradors it needed to properly manage the island on its behalf, as this class of collaborators had been liquidated by the revolution, while elsewhere in the world such collaborators were more aplenty.
The old order was overturned and a new one put in its place to better serve by orders of magnitude, despite all attempts to economically strangle the island nation, the Cuban people, a thing this new order has done and continues to do.
If Castro was, as you claim, pro-capitalist, the revolution itself wasn’t.
And if Castro had persisted in his pro-capitalist aspirations as leader of the revolution, the revolution itself would have sealed his fate long ago.
It is far more likely, therefore, that Fidel faithfully served his mandate as the leader of the revolution heart and soul than duplicitously.
That Cuba stands in defiance of capital is not an illusion, and that Castro stood with Cuba is also not fantasy.
As much as he may have survived for as long as he did because the United States didn’t really prioritize his murder, he likewise could not have ruled Cuba for as long as he did if he had in any way significantly betrayed his promise to his people.
Castro did not betray the revolution, but for the Cuban people, embodied and inspired it.
Listen, this comment thread isn’t really set up to facilitate a conversation/debate with so many responses.
Laugh Your reading of my argument still diverges from my intended points, in places.
The end result being that after a mere 16 years, or so, the United States regains influence in Ethiopia for the first time since Selasie’s decline , the USSR dissolves, weakened by that and the quagmire in Afghanistan… the entire episode played out in a classic Brzezinski-Hegelian way.
Now, either Castro very stupidly let his ideology blind him when he threw his military weight behind that bloody fuck Mengistu , or he was playing a deeper game, and helping The Capitalists turn Ethiopia into an exploding cigar that blew up right in Moscow’s face.
Fidel “helped” Africa, in that case, by facilitating the slaughter of hundreds of thousands of Africans.
Castro was big part of the reason why thousands of our people died and millions more became refugees in the late 1970s.
Many more died of thirst and starvation trying their best to get away from his troops who were unleashing hell in western Somalia.
Those who managed to escape his troops – only to waste away their lives in Luuq Jeelow and Qoryooley refugee camps – will tell you Castro should have been taken to the ICC before he died.
After reading about Fidel a little deeper, since Chavez’ death, I’m come to the conclusion that Fidel was a Mole who worked with Capitalist Intelligence Structures as controlled opposition, keeping radical activities South of the United States Border under surveillance, diluting Revolutionary efforts in Cuba and the region, and helping, very subtly, to fuck with Moscow.
In exchange he was installed as the King in his tiny Kingdom, an experiment that was never meant to outlive him.
Like so many politicians, he was power-mad; ideology was his mask and shield; he was very good at crafting a Global Media Persona to hide the obvious contradictions.
Duh People need their Campbellian Hero Tales and Fidel gave them a good one.
I have a Lebanese friend who assures me that “most” Lebanese people backed Israel’s bombing of that country a few years ago , whereas an international poll showed that some 80 percent opposed it.
I have a friend who traveled to Russia and assures me that “most” Russians dislike Lenin and Stalin after he spoke to a few Moscow liberals, whereas an international pole found that over 50% viewed Stalin favorably.
The Cubans did back Mengistu at first because they saw him as Ethiopia’s best hope among the assemblage of competing forces, but they later regretted their decision when his unsavory aspects became apparent and undeniable.
You see, wages and salaries, which are the wherewithal of the consumer class, are a ‘cost of production,’ and one of only many items in the column of the ‘costs of production’ cannot possibly equal the overall ‘cost of production,’ so that there is always an insurmountable shortfall between the aggregate purchasing power in any society operating on capitalist principles and what the capitalist class wants for its products, eh.
With or without a conspiracy afoot, and there are always a great many, capitalism, too, is a movie, eh, to echo Mr Bunny’s sentiments about delusions more generally.
Lefty Spin and Myth-making are generally lots less toxic than Righty Propaganda , but, for me, as a Lefty , Lefty Spin is more exasperating.
Castro was a fighter from day one, and he wasn’t afraid to get his footsies dirty.
Whether it be helping them “poor” Africans fight the imperialists or getting medical aid to them “filthy” untermenschen in Haiti.
Fidel, R Ron Hubbard, Reagan, Marx, Trotsky, Obama, Gandhi, Mandela, Kerouac, MLK, Mx, Zizek, Miles, Jesus, Kanye… it’s all the same.
What you’re not able to do is step outside of your deep conditioning and ask yourself how, exactly, you heard of their wonderful feats in the first place.
Yeah, you’d be surprised how similar, to your touching, wide-eyed, prayer for St.
Ditto the stuff I’ve had to hear about Hillary Clinton or Donald Trump these past few weeks.
Good luck convincing any of them otherwise, though it would be cool to see you all in a room together, wearing your various t-shirts and brandishing your various megaphones.
I haven’t done a damned thing for “the world”, and neither have you… but at least I don’t work for the CIA/NSA/Pentagon/ Goldman Sachs.
L Ron Hubbard 00 Reply StAug Nov 30, 2016 6:18 PM Reply to Anthony B “Oh yes, he did even speak with those places where they adore that “Sky-giant” too, here he is in a Harlem church…” Newsflash, Candide: that’s exactly the kind of Photo Op Politicians thrive on.
The good stuff was useful … but LBJ remains LBJ, another power-hungry Daddy.
That has nothing to do with “beliefs”, the data is all there for anyone to see, facts that an Easter-Bunny super-thinker should appreciate.
If you had spent all of 2 minutes “thinking” of how the Cuban political system is organized, you would have realized that the “average Joe” in Cuba has much more control over his life thrug. the local CDR committees, who have to answer to their neighbours, not some corporate lobbyist.
No, Mr Easter Bunny, I find your allergic rant against “passion” and your rather trollish attitude here rather self-serving.
Of course Fidel was a “fighter”… but what you’re too brainwashed to see it what he was “fighting” for.
It’s just glaringly obvious that if Fidel’s supposed mission had been his actual mission, a generation of hand-picked Revolutionaries would have come up under his rule, educated by “anti-Capitalist” principles, come of age and been ready to take over by the time Fidel was too old to continue ruling.
You’ll tie yourself in rhetorical knots as self-contradicting as any number of Mainstream Myths rather than give up on the precious fantasy.
A fantasy, ironically, that’s as Bourgeois as its main proponents and beneficiaries.
I was called a “troll” by Clintonites and Trumpers all last week and I consider it a badge of honor.
Only adolescents need the chummy affirmation of consensus; grownups know that pointing out the Emperor’s naked ass is a tough gig.
