The effects will vary according to a broad variety of circumstances and interactions, some of which are not well-understood.
Likewise, mitigation is not well understood, and will not take place quickly.
Public awareness should follow a coordinated strategic communication plan that focuses on maintaining credibility.
The alternative approaches and cost-benefit analyses must be run to establish what can be done, when, and at what cost.
I happened on it one day while looking for some information about something else.
That was the summary of a 4 page article that discussed the implication of the global climate change.
The Strategic Studies Institute is part of the United States Army War College.
It was just an ordinary day, I had to get up at the crack of dawn when the grandchildren decided to have a riot in their bedroom and Missy decided to join me in bed.
The parts came for the hot water heater yesterday and they installed them.
Yesterday was Wednesday and we'd been without hot water since Saturday.
They were bringing a new one today for only $20 more than we'd paid for the now totally broken one.
We were hard up as usual and I told Sharon to not bother filling my prescriptions, which would pay for most of it.
The night before I watched an interesting show on TV about earthquake storms.
The Landers Earthquake was a magnitude 7. earthquake that occurred on June 28, 1992.
Many people were awakened in Las Vegas, with many reporting dizziness or trouble walking.
Reports were filed as far north as Carson City, Nevada, where one woman reported waking up, hearing chimes in her house ringing.
The Hector Mine earthquake was the largest earthquake in that area since the Landers earthquake of June 28, 1992.
Foreshocks were felt from as early as 7:41 PDT on October 15, with the largest foreshock measuring at 3.8.
Nearly no damage was reported in the immediate area of the earthquake because it was centered on the Mojave Desert with no settlements for 14 miles.
Amtrak's westbound Southwest Chief was an unusual victim of the earthquake.
The combined force of the quake and train caused several rails to come loose and the train derailed.
Only minor injuries were reported, and the train suffered repairable damage.
An earthquake storm is a recently proposed theory about earthquakes, where one triggers a series of other large earthquakes within the same tectonic plate as the stress transfers along the fault.
This is similar to the idea of aftershocks, with the exception that they take place years apart.
These series of earthquakes can devastate entire countries or geographical regions.
Possible events may have occurred during the end of the Bronze Age, and the latter part of the Roman Empire.
It has been suggested that this is what may be occurring in modern day Turkey.
Remotely triggered earthquakes have also been characterized as the very long reach of very large earthquakes.
Fundamentally, it is postulated that large earthquakes can have an influence outside of the immediate aftershock zone, and actually activate other earthquakes at considerable distance.
The further one gets from the initiating earthquake in both space and time, the more controversial is the association.
Most earthquakegenerating zones are in a state of being close to failure.
If such a zone were to be left completely alone, it would generate significant earthquakes spontaneously.
Remote earthquakes, however, are in a position to disturb this critical state, either by shifting the stresses statically, or by dynamic change caused by passing seismic waves.
The first type of triggering may be due to static changes in the critical state.
Landers earthquake struck California in 1992, it is said that the earthquake map of California lit up like a Christmas tree.
This event reinforced the idea of remotely triggered earthquakes, and pushed the hypothesis into the scientific mainstream.
It is inevitable that final earthquake of the current series will occur close to Istanbul, although, as always, the exact timing is unknown.
There is scientific evidence for a long reach, mainly in the form of discrete element modeling used in the mining industry.
If rock is modeled as discrete elements in a critical state, it is amazing at how far a single disturbance can influence the mass.
It becomes much more controversial as claims are made, for example, that recent seismic activity in California has been activated by an earthquake in Chile.
Although there have been many such associations in the historical records, the physics is difficult to justify.
Global climate change, also called global warming, has to do with our air and the greenhouse gases.
True, but so are volcanoes and volcanoes add a lot of greenhouse gases to our atmosphere.
Etna is a volcano and the most recent eruptions occurred in April 2007, with the three recorded so far, the latest being on 30Apr07.
If you check your sources, you'll learn that during the past week, about a dozen volcanoes were erupting somewhere in the world.
It would seem that the planet, with or without our help, is going to go through a climate change; that's MY assumption.
If we stopped emitting all greenhouse gases in an instant, we'd still get global warming, with or without Al Gore.
It's still a couple of years away, but we could end up with a witch riding a broom in the White House.
A word of warning, get all your guns and ammo bought before January 20, 2009.
Between the Islamic extremists, who mostly moved to the US, the illegal aliens surging though our borders and them all holding a protest 2 days before, I became convinced it wasn’t if, just when and what, not that I hadn't had the thought before.
His opposite number, Vladimir, was much more of a certainty; he was the same old thing in a new suit.
In many ways, this was like the late 1930s, the economy was a disaster, a new war was starting up over there and the guy in the White House was cozying up to his opposite 3 number.
Different names, Roosevelt and Stalin instead of Bush and Putin, and Blair instead of Churchill.
Today, we already had two wars over there, one in Afghanistan and one in Iraq.
To top it off, Iran had a nuclear weapons program, Syria was getting ready to invade Israel and North Korea had tested a nuclear weapon.
Iran had announced production of nuclear material at an industrial rate and Venezuela nationalized that last privately owned oil operations.
People were complaining about $2.60 gas when we were paying $3,299 in Kalifornia.
Plus the National Science Foundation was worried about wind turbines killing birds.
Most experts expected a nuclear terrorist attack on the United States before the end of the decade.
There was a growing unrest in the country and a person could sense that something was looming and whatever it was, it wouldn't be good.
America had become a divided camp; one with good, decent Christian values who just wanted the country to return to what it had been when they were growing up.
The other camp representing much of what was wrong with society, liberal attitudes, pro right to choose, with many more than willing to openly embrace illegal aliens, terrorists and the Good Lord only knows what else.
Nobody should have a semiautomatic anything when it came to guns, they claimed.
Using his new authority as Fuehrer, Hitler invoked article 48 and became a dictator for life.
Of course, things are far different here; this is a free country, with just a few rules.
Tax firms that have complete copies of the IRS code and regulations plus the state codes and regulations need a small room to hold it.
If you had a full copy of the United States code and regulations, the clerk should be able to keep up, but you'll need a larger room.
Everyone who knows my work knows that I'm superstitious and believe that bad things happen threes.
As improbable as some of the happenings, they're always possible, if somewhat unlikely.
As a result of the terrorist attacks on 9/11/01, the United States went to war, first in Afghanistan and next in Iraq.
That was a dirty trick he pulled on us to make us buy a new hot water heater.
I hope the bank will let us have the money to get your cataracts fixed.
For two, I can fix them up nice and buy some 30 round Pro Mag magazines.
I have to swap out my MIA Muzzle Break for a flashhider with the bayonet lug.
Better still, Mossberg sold the ghost ring sight kit and I could get a gunsmith to install it.
Fine in theory, but Derek was in Fiippin and we were here, in Palmdale.
The refineries couldn't produce gas fast enough and the price in Kalifornia went over $4 a gallon before the rest of the nation hit an average of $3.50.
I occurred to me that John didn't understand how Medicare part D worked.
My prescriptions ran about $1,000 a month without insurance and that little gap in there took food off our table.
He talked about a storm, but I'm not sure it's the same storm this story is about.
So we wait until I was over the hump on the prescriptions and then for the shotguns to be on sale.
I'd often spared with my amigo over the phone insisting I'd never buy a Mossberg.
I don't have a SU-16 like he does, but Ron's got one and I got some 30 round M-16 magazines for him.
Well, I guess they are, I got them before the year 2000 and no one can prove otherwise.
By the time summer was over, we had a case each of Brenneke slugs, 00 Buck and #4 Buck.
In the world of Atlas Shrugged, society stagnates when independent productive achievers began to be socially demonized and even punished for their accomplishments, even though society had been far more healthy and prosperous by allowing, encouraging and rewarding selfreliance and individual achievement.
Independence and personal happiness flourished to the extent that people were free, and achievement was rewarded to the extent that individual ownership of private property was strictly respected.
The hero, John Galt, lives a life of laissez-faire capitalism as the only way to live consistent with his beliefs.
It portrays fascism, socialism and communism any form of state intervention in society as systemically and fatally flawed.
However, Rand claimed that it is not a fundamentally political book, but that the politics portrayed in the novel are a result of her attempt to display her image of the ideal person and the individual mind's position and value in society.
Rand argues that independence and individual achievement enable society to survive and thrive, and should be embraced.
She argues that, over time, coerced self-sacrifice causes any society to self-destruct.
She is similarly dismissive of faith beyond reason, in a God or higher being, or anything else as an authority over one's own mind.
The book positions itself against religion spe9 cificaiiy, often directly within the characters' dialogue.
It was around the same time that I read her older book, The Fountainhead.
Fie first called me a liar and next asked me when I'd pulled my head out of my butt.
I told him the story about the women wanting guns and how for half the money of two Mini-14s, we'd gotten the 3 590A1 s and 3 cases of ammo.
Fie asked when I was going to get a Glock and I told him as soon as they started to make them out of metal.
Fie also quotes Get yourself a Glock, and lose that nickel-plated sissy-pistol! Tommy Lee Jones United States Marshals.
Somehow I think the sissy pistol was about right for Robert Downey, Jr.
Damon and Fleataxi got to be good friends and they talk on the phone more often than Damon talks to me.
Russ said I should get the hell out of the PRK, but we couldn't do it because of our finances.
Thank God he keeps me up to date on the stuff I miss on the World Wide Web.
If Bush persists in putting missiles in Europe, we'll start the Cold War back up.
In 1961 the United States started deploying 15 Jupiter IRBM nuclear missiles near Izmir, Turkey, which directly threatened cities in the western sections of the Soviet Union, including Moscow through its 1500 mile range and flight time of about 16 minutes.
These missiles were regarded by President Kennedy as being of questionable strategic value; an SSBN was capable of providing the same coverage, with both stealth and superior firepower.
Khrushchev had publicly expressed his anger at the Turkish deployment, and regarded the missiles as a personal affront.
Khrushchev had previously expressed his doubts to the poet Robert Frost about the readiness of the liberal United States to fight over tough issues It was in this environment that Cuba and the Soviet Union agreed to place nuclear weapons in Cuba, with the understanding that an invasion would potentially be met by a nuclear response.
Khrushchev devised the deployment plan in May of 1962, and by late July, over sixty Soviet ships were en route to Cuba, some of them already carrying military materiel.
I read something called Space War and they've commented on this extensively.
Putin has already said that they will abrogate the Treaty to stay out of Europe if we put ABMs in Europe.
Russia is building new SSBNs of the Borei class that are smaller than their Typhoons.
Not only are the Russians going to build a new class of SSBN, they're also going to upgrade the Typhoons to use the Bulava.
The Bulava was successfully fired from a Typhoon class sub in late 2005.
Russia had some adjusting to do, that war in Afghanistan had destroyed the economy of the country.
All they needed was a small dose of capitalism and 15 years after the Berlin Wall fell, they were ready to resume their goal of global denomination.
They had money now, from oil and gas, gold and diamonds, with hydrocarbons being their main source of income.
Ours was the oldest Republican Democracy in the world and had outlived all of the historic Democracies.
However, like those Democracies, we too had proven to be our worst enemy and our Republic was beginning to collapse.
The Dutch West Indies remain an overseas territory of the Netherlands to this day.
Generally, scholars define an empire as a state that extends dominion over areas and populations distinct culturally and ethnically from the culture/ethnicity at the center of power.
Hegemony is the dominance of one group over other groups, with or without the threat of force, to the extent that, for instance, the dominant party can dictate the terms of trade to its advantage; more broadly, cultural perspectives become skewed to favor the dominant group.
Pax Americana is a term to describe the period of relative peace in the Western world since the end of World War II in 1945, coinciding with the dominant military and economic position of the United States.
It places the United States in the military and diplomatic role of a modern-day Roman Empire, succeeding the British Empire.
The United States is often criticized of not taking up the mantle following the disintegration of Pax Britannica before the First World War due to inward-looking isola11 tionist policies.
During this period, no armed conflict has emerged among major Western nations themselves, and no nuclear weapons have been used, although the United States and its allies have been involved in various regional wars (such as the Korean War, the Vietnam War, the Falklands War, the Gulf War, the Afghanistan War and the Iraq War) and have maintained espionage and covert operations in various other areas.
The Bush Doctrine is the name given to a set of guidelines first unveiled by United States President George W Bush in a speech given on 01 Jun02.
The policies, taken together, outlined a broad new phase in United States policy that would place greater emphasis on military preemption, military superiority , unilateral action, and a commitment to extending democracy, liberty, and security to all regions.
It allowed me to review most aspects of the American experience while it occurred.
While Sharon didn't totally buy into my paranoia, she was a good wife and tried.
Although I was pretty much crippled by the diabetes, barely able to carry my new MIA rifle, she allowed me to pursue our feeble attempts to be prepared.
In many of my stories, I'd had to come up with a gimmick to allow us to build that bomb shelter in the backyard.
Without the gimmick, we were just like everyone else, we couldn't afford a shelter.
It wasn't something you could get a bank to finance, either you had the money or you didn't.
If you wanted to risk going further into debt, you could refi the house.
When you're living hand to mouth, you save that equity for something important, like fixing her eyes.
She got enough for her eyes, $4,800, and a little extra I could spend on preps.
But, you can buy the AV-150 and the blast door for half of that; $5,200 for the AV-150 and $2,500 for the UT1 blast door, plus shipping.
I had plenty of time to stake out the spot in the backyard where I wanted to put the shelter.
There was enough money left to get the hole dug and the dirt stacked so we could put in a 10' dirt cover over the shelter.
There are approved formulas for calculating the depth required, however, a rule of thumb for calculating the depth of a floor joist for a residential property is; half the span in feet plus two inches.
Half of 15 is 7V2 plus 2 equals 91/2, so I probably could have gotten by with 2x1 Os, but for the difference in cost, I figured to go with the strength.
I still had about $3,000 left, but need a gasoline tank, a water tank, a waste tank and a sewage pump.
My generator used about 1 gallon per hour at full power, but if we went with a 12 volt system except for the stove, and had some batteries, we could use the built in charger and maybe get by for V 2 gph.
With the price of gas at $4 a gallon, it would almost take a bank loan to fill a 1,000 gallon gasoline tank.
I decided I could use plastic tanks for water and sewage and would only need a 1,500 gallon metal gasoline tank.
I put an ad in the paper stating I wanted to buy a used 1,500-gallon gas tank.
On the 7th day, the last day the ad would run, I got a call from a fella who said he had a tank but it would need to be sanded and repainted.
After being assured it didn't leak, I told him to bring it over and I'd write him a check.
I was down to $2,000 and a hole in the ground, but closer than I had been.
With copper running about $4 a foot, I'd have to get by with galvanized pipes.
Plus, I'd have to start taking vitamins to have the strength to build the shelter and install all of the plumbing.
I wanted the sewage tank below the shelter, so that meant digging another hole.
Ron came by a couple of times and watched me digging the hole, but didn't offer to help until I was ready to install the septic tank.
We have 18 of those small canned hams, 24 cans of Spam, 30 cans of chicken, 30 cans of beef and 48 cans of tuna.
We have enough for the five of us, but if you come, bring an air mattress or something.
There are still a few details to work out, but we have duplicates of almost everything in the kitchen.
I ended up buying one wall at a time, it took a lot of wood when you were spacing everything 12"" on center.
It also made the walls very heavy, Ron and I couldn't lift it once it was complete.
I hammer an anchor into the ground and tied rope at intervals then used a winch with a long arm to raise the first wall.
Then we hammered nails into the sill-plate anchoring the first wall in place.
We added 2 diagonal support boards to keep it from tipping over and I waited for the next check to buy more lumber.
By this time, I was getting around pretty well, I only had a hammer to drive the nails and my waist was 2"" smaller and my arms 1"" larger.
That stuff may be made out of wood chips and glue, but it's very heavy.
In my 'down time' I install the gas tank, and water tank and ran the pipes.
When that happened, I could buy something extra for the shelter, like the shower, stool or bathroom vanity.
We moved the garage refrigerator and freezer to the shelter before the overhead went on.
Sharon bought new shelves for the garage and I used the old ones to furnish the storeroom in the shelter.
The final task was to roll on a heavy coat of a tar like substance to seal the shelter from outside water.
Once we had that done, all we had to do was move the dirt back into the hole and the shelter was essentially finished.
We used that winch to lower things through the blast door into the shelter and my little cart to move them where they needed to go.
Although we had a schedule that was supposed to tell how much money to expect each month, it wasn't up to date and we got a surprise in October.
I’d changed my mind and sent Derek money to buy me a Taurus PT1911 with 3 extra 8 round magazines.
It took it almost 4 weeks to come in, but when it came, I had everything else and my gun collection was almost complete.
I/we also had a CD V-717 and it was installed, ready to go with the addition batteries.
Since I got the .45 and .22 early, all I got for Christmas was some new jeans, shirts and a pair of new work boots.
The boots were Corcoran Men's 10"" Black Legendary Leather Side Zip Jump Boots.
If she hadn't gotten the zipper kind, I probably never would have gotten them on.
Rule of thumb says that the price of gold is about 50 times the price of silver.
The sentiments of the American people pushed Hillary Clinton to the forefront of the Democratic candidates and Ruddy Giuliani was the Republican leader.
It was still months before the conventions and Osama Obama was doing his best to get the lead from Hillary and Romney was trying to catch up to Ruddy.
Romney was the former governor of Massachusetts and their record on firearms isn't any better.
Ron Paul wouldn't take away the guns, but he was out of consideration and Tom Tancredo from Colorado was a ways back in the running.
From what I'd read on the various forums, many of my compatriots preferred one or both of them.
We'd see how it would turn out in January and February of 2008, when most of the states were now having their primary elections.
The Dow Jones had tried to keep up with inflation and had moved closer and closer to $14,000.
There was enough money to let me buy two ham antennas and I went with the MFJ-1798 10-band antenna and a Comet tri-band.
I was counting on the next big payment from the trust to allow me to buy the Kenwood radio.
We were even on our bills and had about $2,500 left after we'd done all the grocery shopping.
It was just a card that you added and I could consider it later, she said.
It showed up 3 days later from Las Vegas and I spent the day hooking it up to the antenna switches and even listened for a while, noting some channels being used by locals.
I put it away and sat down to go through our medical supplies, making a list of things we needed.
It wasn't a long list and I got her to take me to Wally World so we'd have the stuff if we needed it.
I really wanted more 7.62x51 mm ammo, but nobody had any that was affordable.
I won't pay a buck a round for surplus ammo, even if it is on stripper clips.
We had what we had and that would probably be all there was until the price came down or we got a big pile of money.
With the odds of winning the Lottery as high as they were, we didn't waste our money on tickets.
The COLA adjustment on Social Security was lagging way behind inflation, too.
Iowa didn't make COLA adjustments on IPERS, they just paid a bonus at the end of January.
As far as meds went, I had some extras but only about an 8 month supply on most things and only a one month supply on Plavix.
I'd been cheating on the Zoloft for several months, only taking half a pill a day and saving the rest so maybe I had enough for 8 months if I kept taking the smaller dose.
As far as completing the shelter went, Ron had helped some days shoveling the dirt back in the hole and tamping it a little.
I misted it some and that settled it a little more, but we still had a mound over the shelter when we were done.
I just hoped the occasional rains we got would help to settle it some more.
It wasn't full yet, not with gas over $4 a gallon, but we were getting there at the rate of 10 gallons a week.
I now had a gallon bottle of PRI-G I'd gotten from that place in Oregon and had to use some of it because our pint bottles were used up.
This year, the Democratic Convention was Monday, August 25, through Thursday, August 28, 2008, in Denver and the Republican National Convention was planned to start just 4 days later, on September 1, in St.
The main news was that the Supreme Court had upheld the Appellate Court in the DC case involving the 2nd Amendment.
Meanwhile, the state of California had outlawed even more firearms, this time semi-auto handguns.
We had 4 semi-autos, 3 of them hand guns, my .45, my .32 and that Sterling .22.
The only one there was any record of was the .45 and it was in Derek’s name.
We compromised on our computer setup and my desktop and Amy's laptop went into the shelter while Amy's and Sharon's desktops stayed in the house.
It weighed in around 375#, not counting paper or the spare toner cartridge.
I screwed something up moving it and it cost me a $250 service call from Hewlett Packard to get it to work.
My computer was connected to internet using the Ethernet 5e cable from Staples.
By now, we had as many supplies in the shelter as we had in the garage when Ron looked last summer.
I kept my eye on the news and the worse things got in the Middle East, the more food I moved to the shelter.
In April of 2007, I told Sharon to buy me 6 cartons of Kool’s every month.
What I didn't tell her was that I only smoke 1 carton a week and kept the extra cartons locked up in my supply cabinet.
After the shelter was done, I moved them down there because she never came down but once to look around.
I screwed up one other thing; the blast hatch wasn't large enough to get the twin mattresses down.
We found some 3”x36” cot mattresses and put them on the beds I'd cobbled together out of left over lumber.
It wasn't all that comfortable, but with 10' of earth overhead, we would be well protected in case of a war.
From what I was hearing, it seemed more and more likely we'd have a terrorist attack using nuclear weapons.
However, with the recent buildups by Russia and the Chinese, there was about an even chance they might attack.
The WHO never really got a handle on H5N1 and there had twice as many cases during the last year, with the same 60% fatality rate.
Gas in Europe cost about 3 times as much as it did in the United States and the Europeans were really complaining.
If you sat back and looked at the bigger picture, you could see the storm coming.
And like a tsunami, as the waves approached the shore, they'd begin to pile up, making it seem like we were getting hit by several disasters all at once.
It wouldn't take much, the economy was already in the toilet and gas was halfway between $4 and $5 a gallon, national average.
That meant that some states were still just under $4 a gallon and some were over $5, like Kalifornia, in places.
In early May of the previous year, gas was $2.50 in Palmdale before Mother's Day.
We'd robbed Peter to pay Paul and short changed him, making minimum payments.
I'd used treated lumber for the floor although it was sitting on a sheet of plastic and the plastic was attached to the side walls to keep water from getting to the floor.
Where I had to go through the plastic with pipes, it was carefully sealed.
The only good Republican candidates didn't appear as if they could bail the water out of the boat fast enough.
Like the TV ad said, I'd earned my disability by paying in for 24 plus years.
We cut travel to a minimum, keeping the value in the Rondo and putting our gas money in the tank in the backyard.
The only pills available contained something akin to aspirin and I couldn't take those because of the stomach.
When the pile of dirt settled as much as it was going to, I got Ron to help me and we repaired the sprinklers, then spread the dirt out, leveling the backyard.
We got another large check from the trust and I bought canning jars, extra lids, a pressure canner and a 19 large supply of heirloom seeds.
Ron took me to Lowe's and I got one of those rototillers and tilled the soil for a garden.
I planted corn, potatoes, plum tomatoes, bell peppers, green beans, cucumbers, radishes, carrots, lettuce, cabbage and onions but not all the seeds in the packet.
I didn't realize how big a project the garden would be, but having the tiller helped.
The dogs weren't happy because we couldn't let them out into the backyard until I put up a fence across the patio.
The small jars were for pickles and the large ones were for vegetables.
I could do all the canning on the patio using the old gas stove and not heat up the house.
When the batches were big enough I used the 30 quart canner and when they weren't I used the 18 quart Presto canner.
We didn't can any ground beef because I didn't buy any wide mouth jars.
Watching the sales, she added about 48# of bacon, 8 whole cure 81 hams, about a case of whole chickens, 4 pork loins that I cut into chops and some vegetables to the freezer.
Working like I had through the summer, I barely had the time to keep up with the news.
I came to depend on Russ Williams’ emails to keep me up to date on breaking news and things I should worry about.
No way could I pick up 100# so I had to have help, but the storeroom was just about full.
The shelter's utility room had the little PowerBOSS, extra oil, gardening tools and anything that I didn't want to risk storing in the shed or the garage.
Patti also grew tomatoes every year and we traded her some Roma's for some of the beefsteak.
Chris still commuted to Hollywood but he added 2 riders to share gas costs.
We got two cords of firewood we stored on the patio and took the gas log out of the fireplace.
In the first place, I think the Democrats will win the House, Senate and White House in November.
We have about seven hundred bases overseas and I expect they'll shut most of them down.
The shelter was dry, there isn't much water in the ground in the desert and my backyard was no exception.
I'd done everything I could think to do to make sure it stayed that way, especially since it was wood construction.
I think the overhead would have supported much more weight than the soil that covered it.
The United States color scheme is counterintuitive, in most countries, blue represents conservatives and red liberals.
On November 5th, Ron called and wanted to store some stuff in the shelter.
Because the feds probably visit the forums, all of our weapons and ammo had been in the shelter since the previous evening.
I told him if there was anything we wanted, we probably had until January 20th to buy it.
The best night vision would be a Raptor and those cost as much as the rifle.
We scurried trying to get everything in place before Obama became the new President.
I think that everyone who owned a gun must have had the same idea, the most anyone would sell me was 1,000 rounds of each caliber.
I told the kids that they'd better get their guns now; Obama was bound and determined to take them away.
I asked him if he could get me any .50 caliber Raufoss and he was quick to say no.
I called Damon to see if he had gotten the shotgun and he said no, but he had the money.
If his background check failed, send Derek the money and have him buy it.
Last year when the tornado hit Greensburg, Kansas, someone asked on one of the boards whether they should rebuild the town.
On May 15, 1968, Charles City, Iowa was hit by an F-5 tornado that killed many and injured more.
We don't need the government to bail us out, though a little help would be nice.
Communism is an ideology that seeks to establish a classless, stateless social organization based on common ownership of the means of production.
Maybe we'd get lucky and our new shelter won't collapse, but I wouldn't count on it.
Ron and I were about as prepared as a person could be in the circumstances.
I kept out the Nazi .32 and did the same with the remainder of our firearms.
Actually, after spreading out the remaining dirt, the shelter was covered with about 11' of dirt; make that PF 16,777,216.
Obama gave a speech similar to Michael's Douglas's speech in The American President and said he was going to get the guns.
As Commander in Chief, he gave the Pentagon 60 days to get our troops home from Iraq and Afghanistan.
The Joint Chiefs must have been expecting it, they had ships pre-positioned to haul our equipment back home.
It would take anywhere from 6 to 10 years to restore the broken equipment they were bringing back.
Al Qaeda didn't wait for us to repair our equipment; I now believe they followed us home.
I personally have nothing against Muslims and Mexicans, everyone should own a few.
Last year when the LAPD tried to disperse the protesters, they used rubber bullets.
Gates is considered the father of SWAT, which established specialized units dealing with hostage rescue and extreme situations involving armed and dangerous suspects.
Ordinary line officers, with light armament, limited weapons training, and no instruction on group fighting techniques, had been shown to be ineffective in combating snipers, bank robberies by heavily armed persons, and other high-intensity situations.
In 1965, Officer John Nelson came up with the idea to form a specially trained and equipped unit, intended to respond to and manage critical situations while minimizing police casualties.
As an inspector, Gates approved this idea, and he formed a small select group of volunteer officers.
The first SWAT team, which Gates had originally wanted to name ""Special Weapons Attack Team,"" was born LAPD SWAT, D-Platoon of the Metro Division.
This first SWAT unit was initially constituted as 15 teams of four men each, for a total staff of 60.
These officers were given special status and benefits, but in return had to attend 25 monthly training and serve as security for police facilities during episodes of civil unrest.
SWAT was copied almost immediately by most United States police departments, and is now used by law enforcement agencies throughout the world.
Like his mentor Parker, Gates made every attempt to shield the force from political influences for good and for ill.
He publicly disdained community policing, usually electing not to work with community activists and prominent persons in communities in which LAPD was conducting major anti-gang operations.
Coincidentally, at the time of the Rodney King beating, Gates was at a community policing conference.
There is no accurate count of the number of Muslims in the United States, as the United States Census Bureau does not collect data on religious identification.
Ron and I started to take in more meetings and eventually we ran into Clarence.
His health had been poor lately, but we were all in our mid-sixties, so that was to be expected.
Ron had been experiencing clogged blood vessels for 2 years and his doctor wasn't anxious to clean them out again.
It took a Committee less than a week to work out the differences and the new bill passed both the House and Senate.
Being a Patron member of you know who, I figured, in for a penny, in for a pound.
When some extra money showed up, I bought a Browning Hi-Power and a Surefire suppressor for my Ml A rifle.
In April, the trust distributed a capital gain and we were flowing in money.
He called in late May and said he'd have to drive out to bring the rifle and a few other things.
He said they'd be here by the 15th and it was up to us to pay for the motel room, he was short on money.
I gave him the money you sent me and the list of things you've always said you wanted.
Next he unloaded several cases of M855 and an equal number of the Ml 93 ball, plus Ml 18LR and 40mm grenades to shoot from the M203s.
My barrel had 1 turn in 11 and you really needed 1 turn in 10 to use it.
They usually blow in from the west, arriving at the prevailing wind speed.
Storms are created when a center of low pressure develops, with a system of high pressure surrounding it.
This combination of opposing forces can create winds and result in the formation of storm clouds, such as the cumulonimbus.
Small, localized areas of low pressure can form from hot air rising off hot ground, resulting in smaller disturbances such as dust devils and whirlwinds.
A tornado is a violently rotating column of air which is in contact with both a cumulonimbus cloud base and the surface of the earth.
Tornadoes can come in many sizes, but are typically in the form of a visible condensation funnel, with the narrow end touching the earth.
The tornado that hit Charles City was a multiple vortex tornado, a type of tornado in which two or more columns of spinning air rotate around a common center.
Multivortex structure can occur in almost any circulation, however it is very often observed in intense tornadoes.
There are more kinds of storms than thunderstorms, like earthquake storms.
I suspect that if the volcanoes in the Cascade Range began erupting, one after the other, someone might call that a volcano storm.
The government didn't wait very long after July 1,2009 to begin to implement the gun grab.
Obviously, I wasn't the only person in Moon Shadows who had some guns; I was the fifth house they hit.
I don’t have them; I sold them in a private sale after the new law passed.
Marigolds are relatively pest free and many people interplant them in their vegetable gardens to deter insect pests.
While the data is lacking as to whether marigolds actually deter insect pests, they definitely attract beneficial in30 sects such as lacewings, ladybeetles, and parasitic wasps.
The depth range of GPR is limited by the electrical conductivity of the ground, and the transmitting frequency.
Higher frequencies do not penetrate as far as lower frequencies, but give better resolution.
Optimal depth penetration is achieved in dry sandy soils or massive dry materials such as granite, limestone, and concrete where the depth of penetration is up to 15 In moist and/or clay laden soils and soils with high electrical conductivity, penetration is sometimes only a few centimeters.
I put in a foot of clay soil about 6' down and covered it top and bottom with galvanized screening.
If Wiki was right, that would short circuit the radar and they wouldn't discover the shelter.
I had gone door to door during March and warned everyone about the new law and how the feds would probably use ground penetrating radar to look for buried firearms.
I told everyone with guns in the shelter to tell the government that they sold them to John Doe.
Plus the sprinklers automatically watered my backyard not long before they came.
Sandy Storm had a fire sale of sorts, unloading all of her ammo and every firearm in the store.
It was ok, though; they only sold to regular customers and had run background checks on them before.
When the feds showed up to grab her guns, all she had left was the legal stuff, like gun oil.
As far as I could tell, I was the only NRA Life member in the housing tract.
I was prepared to go to jail if I had to, riding in my wheelchair, of course.
I asked him what he'd done about the new law and he told me about the break-in and how they'd cleaned him out.
I asked if he would be able to get more guns now and he said no, that was far beyond his means and the guns weren't insured.
Even if the Sheriff found them, he'd would have to turn them over to the feds.
He asked about mine and I told him I'd managed to get them sold at a premium and I guessed we'd have to get crossbows or something they hadn't outlawed yet.
He asked what our plans were and I told him we'd probably go to plan B According to the TV, the military had complied with the C in C, and all troops were now home from Afghanistan, Iraq plus Kosovo and South Korea for good measure.
Our only foreign military presence was in Germany and Japan and as soon as the Japanese Self Defense Force completed development on their project, those troops would be home too.
During WW II, three countries had atomic weapons programs, the US, Germany and Japan.
The only two nations who tested nuclear weapons were the United States and the Japanese.
Japan holds a few tons of plutonium and they have some of the finest engineering minds in the world In Japan, as of 2005, 55 nuclear reactors account for 30% of its electricity generated. 32 80% of its energy is being imported in the form of fossil fuels.
In August 2005, the Japanese Prime Minister, Junichiro Koizumi proposed an amendment to the constitution in order to increase Japan's Defense Forces' roles in international affairs.
The second paragraph, forbidding the maintenance of ""land, sea, and air forces, as well as other war potential"" is replaced by an Article 9-2 which permits a ""defense force"", under control of the Prime Minister, which defends the nation and may participate in international activities.
This new section gun, (army or military), which has been avoided under the current constitution.
Members of the Japanese Self-Defense Forces are currently tried as civilians by civilian courts.
The stated reason had to do with threat posed by North Korea and China.
In 1-2 years, they could design and build more nuclear weapons than Israel has, if they chose to do so.
It is, however a myth that Japan renamed the town ""Usa"" following WW II so that goods exported from Japan could be labeled as such.
The town had this name long before the war, at least from 8th century, and is not where the majority of Japanese industry located.
Meanwhile, most foreign countries had divested their dollars, opting instead for Euros.
The government only seized a portion of the hundreds of million firearms in the country.
In Palmdale, Ron pitched in during the summer of 2009 and helped me with the garden.
He had more money than I had so he ordered a gross of regular quarts and a gross of wide mouth quarts, plus more lids.
In the past, he mowed his own lawn, but this year, he hired a gardener.
This year, we continued to watch the sales and canned beef stew, beef chunks and ground beef patties using wise mouth jars.
Sometime after Independence Day, the feds showed up again and used a different kind of ground penetrating radar, with the same 33 results.
Israel accused Syria of a cross border incursion and Iran still refused to allow UN inspectors in despite the sanctions that had been imposed.
I figured it was just a matter of time before the Middle East exploded and for once, Ron agreed with me.
He said he didn't really want to garden, but with the spiraling inflation, he didn't see that he had much choice.
Patti, Linda and Sharon now went shopping together and only bought things from the new Eastside Costco and Sam's Club on 10th Street West.
I'd have to agree, I don't think God is stupid and I'm sure He had a plan.
Although we were harvesting seeds from the garden, I didn't take a chance and ordered more of the seed packages from The Ark Institute.
We could add the chopped stalks to canned or frozen stew and collect the seeds to flavor the potato salad.
It's supposed to be popular in Holistic medicine, but I'm not into that.
I figure Montel Williams probably had a wart on his butt, Sharon and I get excited over different things.
It wasn't planes crashing into the WTC, but it was the next best thing, terrorists detonated a ~1 Okt atomic bomb in Atlanta.
Ron and I sat down to watch TV and Shep Smith was just explaining, when, poof, the channel went blank.
I fired up the generator and pulled the main fuse, so you have power to the appliances.
We could either run the air conditioner or everything else and I didn't put it up for a vote.
If they wanted to 35 cool off, the shelter was in the high 50s/low 60s.
I heard Chris fire up his portable generator and then Dick and Dave started the generators in their trailer/motorhomes.
I let Dave and Dick get the folding tables out of the shelter, it was a real chore making the turn to the blast door.
We are getting reports of a possible 5th bomb in the Bay area and one in Chicago, but those are unconfirmed.
We were notified that the President will have a message on the EAS, shortly, please stay tuned.
Early reports claim the LA bomb was detonated in the San Fernando Valley, not downtown.
Edison says it will take hours to divert power from the Tehachapi wind turbines to the Antelope Valley and Bakersfield.
He got a new computer and he paid for 5 cans for me setting up his computer.
Just before sundown, we talked it over and it was decided that since I had the meter, I'd get to stay up and wait for it to begin clicking.
Lucky me, I knew there was a reason why I shouldn't have purchased the meter.
I kept the radio on while I was watching the CV-715, but they couldn't confirm either San Francisco or Chicago.
Figuring we were about 50 miles from the Valley, the radiation should have hit by 10pm at the latest.
I took the survey meter to Lance at 11:55 and it was still not reading any increase.
I quickly brought him up to date and said just knock, the dogs would wake us up, if there were any change.
My routine sleeping hours are 1 am to 11 am, like a baby who has his days and nights mixed up.
Sharon woke me early and suggested I get a shower, the ladies wanted to make one more trip to the stores before the situation changed.
Normally, I get up at 11, spend an hour waking up and then do whatever I need to do.
I quickly showered, dressed for a change and got my rifle out of the shelter.
The President moved to Cheyenne Mountain and issued a statement around 4am.
The indication is it was terrorists and they mention al Qaeda, but no one has claimed credit.
He declared martial law until the matter is sorted out, probably 96 hours.
One other thing, the LA area airports are closed and relief flights are coming through the Palmdale Regional Airport.
He said His generator ran out of gas during the night but they didn't have a problem.
Chris’ radios were fully charged and I swapped the batteries to charge the second set.
Time Warner restored service just before noon and reported that power had been restored.
I expected the women would be back shortly and either Amy or Ron could run me to the stations to refill the cans.
I wasn’t sure how much money was left in the checking account and would have to let Sharon get home to find out.
They stopped at Patti's and unloaded her stuff and then came home and unloaded our stuff.
She bought 4 bundles of Charmin, 12 cans of coffee, 50 pounds each kind of bean a bag of rice.
She also had 2 bottles of chili powder, 2 8# bags of macaroni and 3 cases 39 of vegetables.
I told her we need gas to top off the tank and asked if there was enough money in the checking account.
They had filled Amy's tank and there was just enough to top off her tank.
Just when I was beginning to believe we'd dodged the bullet, the CD V-715 started to rise.
If it went much higher, we'd have to use the shelter for a few days at least.
People from southern LA County and Orange County were headed south, while people from the west valley, ergo Thousand Oaks, etc. were headed west.
We were getting people from the eastern Santa Clarita area and those from the western area were moving up 1-5 towards Gorman and Bakersfield.
The LACSD had -8,400 Deputies to cover 3,171 mi 2 , divided up among 25 substations.
It had to be a nightmare for Law Enforcement and the Governor had quickly activated the CNG, dividing them between the Bay Area and LA Area.
The greater San Bernardino area had their problems, too because they'd be getting fallout from the ground level detonation.
Lance contracted people he knew with the Sheriff's Department and suggested that our housing tract could provide its own security, provided the Department could either provide a Deputy or swear him in as a temporary Deputy.
They were hard pressed and sent by a patrol car to swear him in as a temporary Reserve Deputy with power to recruit qualified residents to aid him in his duties.
He quickly passed out badges and swore in residents who had firearms stored, you know where, just to make it at least semi-legal for us to be armed.
As the wind changed direction, we began to receive a small amount of fallout and residents were advised how to shelter in place by the CNG and California State Military Reserve.
All citizens who are not felons and possess a high school diploma are eligible though military veterans and those with special skills are preferred.
The enabling legislation for the California State Military Reserve provides for a naval branch.
The California Naval Militia was reactivated in 1976 by the Governor of California.
With the power restored, we had phones and I got a call from Fleataxi inquiring on our condition.
I brought him up to date and explained that we were getting a very small amount of fallout because the wind had changed.
However, we were fortunate because 40 49 hours had passed between the explosion and the wind change and under the 7/10 rule it appeared that our level might not exceed a few Rads.
I know the term is dated, but if you don't like it, convert it to the new term, my equipment is old and all says Rads.
He offered to come down to help out, but I suggested that he didn't want to get caught up in the mess and could do more good by staying where he was and keeping us updated on what was going on around the country.
I also explained that some of us had very temporary credentials from the Sheriff's Department that allowed us to protect the housing tract.
The only problems was we might have to shelter for a few days, leaving us dependent on the Sheriff and the military.
A person can spend half his life imaging what it might be like when TSHTF, but until it actually happens, you never really know.
With so few cities attacked, his highness was able to shift active and reserve forces to aid.
However, we all saw what happened in New Orleans and that wasn't really reassuring.
The bottom line was we were our first line of defense against fallout, bad guys and the natural shortages that would occur.
In a country already enduring a gas shortage and rampant inflation, it could only get worse, not better.
As close as I'd ever come to something like this was back in '68 when I went home to help out after the tornado.
Back then, I was 25 years old and in good health and reasonable condition.
Back then, I walked a guard tour on my Dad's property with my model 12 loaded with 00 Buck.
Now I had several firearms to choose from but wasn't nearly as fit or mobile.
The tornado hit town a week to the day after Joyce and I were married, a very long time ago.
Ronnie Ray-gun space wars and George Sr. with his New World Order talk scared many.
If I had to pick, I'd pick Osama Obama, he'll con the whole world into believing whatever he's doing is good for them.
Sooner or later someone is going to realize that we're getting fallout and they'll panic.
By the way, if the phones stay up, Fleataxi will keep us informed about what's happening outside the areas they attacked.
However that darned John Warner Act allowed him to federalize the rest and he suspend Posse Comitatus for the duration plus.
In an unprecedented move, the Governor suspended the California firearms laws and people began dragging long forgotten firearms out of closets, from caches and from who knows where.
We who live here were so accustomed to gang problems we hadn't realized how bad it was in the large cities.
The steady stream of trucks supplying the local Vons, Albertsons and Stater Bros, stopped rolling and the population of the AV, having suddenly grown from Vz million to close to 2 million was up to its collective hind end in alligators.
Trains rolled in delivering supplies to distribution points, but the fuel shortage made distribution difficult.
The school bus usually parked near the entrance of the tract was still there, but crossways, blocking the street.
We carefully washed the garden plants eliminating the fallout as it accumulated.
The ladies took over canning the produce as it was harvested and everyone shared what they had.
I usually got stuck making the macaroni salad, one huge bowl full at a time.
The problem wasn't macaroni, we had plenty, it was the sliced black olives and pimento.
The recipe called one can each of those, celery, green onion, green pepper, grated cheese and the elbows, plus mayo.
On the days I made it, it was only one large stainless steel bowl, 10"" deep and 18"" across.
We alternated that with potato salad plus whatever the others contributed.
We generally used two gas grills and the oven in the patio stove to keep the house cooler.
I have no idea how it came to be that we did this on our back patio, probably because the shelter was close by.
The badges actually said Reserve Deputy and they must have been the edge that kept people from trying to take us on.
Some Muslim group I'd never heard of was claiming credits for the attacks, but no country claimed knowledge of the group.
First, everyone who supplied crude to the United States has stopped shipping to us claiming it's too risky.
I had the impression that they might head out there, but he didn't exactly say that.
Third, the Muslim declared nationwide martial law with a dusk to dawn curfew, with exceptions for transportation.
Derek was out here a while back and we have things we shouldn't so security shouldn't be an issue, for now.
We're still harvesting from the garden and unless they've done a flyover, they don't know about that.
We've had rolling blackouts since the bombings, but usually get a minimum of 6 hours of power a day.
There's another one up by Bakersfield that didn't get hit as far as I know.
We have CNG and State Defense Force here plus about a million and half refugees.
I didn't know it at the time, but the terrorist attacks were the clouds on the horizon, signaling the beginning of the storm.
We kept almost everyone but some of the older men in the shelter until the radiation level was back to 50mR and falling.
We worked in those 6 hour shifts and everyone logged their radiation doses.
We only used the older men because we were past our prime and, in general terms, mean.
We'd seen enough of life that we didn't book any chit; it was our way or the highway.
Arnold was re-elected in 2006 and would serve from 2007 until 1/5/2011.
Many of us thought he was a RINO, but with the attacks, he acted more like an American than an Austrian, quickly losing the RINO label.
It's just a shame he can't be President, I think now, he'd be a good one.
On the other hand, I'm a free thinking Methodist, for whatever that's worth.
However, I believe in the right for a woman to choose to have an abortion in the case of rape or incest, so I suppose that affects my conservative credentials.
I don't believe in abortion for sex selection or failure to use birth control; if you voluntarily made the baby, you get to raise it.
Moreover, if the truth be told, I hate people who put values behind being politically correct.
The only fuel available was for the military and law enforcement and we were told that wouldn't change in the near future.
If we could get what we couldn't grow from Target, Costco and Sam's Club, we should be ok.
Those FEMA folks, who actually showed up, complained a lot about our firearms, but because of Arnold's decree, there wasn't a whole lot they could do.
We only carried firearms that would have otherwise been legal in some states before the new law.
He was caught between a rock and a hard spot, ergo, MS-13 and the California Survivalists.
There are probably as many of us as there are of the gangsters; although, most of them are better armed.
Between what we could get from the stores and what we could produce ourselves, we'd eat.
We still kept the school bus across the entrance of the tract, a person couldn't be too careful.
Sharon and I were still getting our trust income, social security and pensions but they didn't stretch nearly as far as they once did.
The only gas available was black market gas that ran about $10 a gallon.
We used some of the gas we'd stored for the generator and limited our travel to stores or walked when we could.
We had to limit our purchases to one grocery cart per person; it's a long way to push a heavy cart.
My list included smokes, toilet paper and ammo if it ever became available again.
It wasn't if, but when, the fault was trying to ease the strain, but only a large earthquake would work.
I got a building inspector to look over the shelter and recommend anything we needed to do to make sure it didn't collapse.
He hung a red tag on it, not because it wasn't safe, but because it wasn't approved.
When I explained how it was built, he said he'd have to inspect it behind the OSB before he could approve it and I'd have to pay some fees.
Over the next 2 months we had an earthquake swarm but never a really big earthquake.
With the exception of fuel, the cities were being cleaned up, food was generally available and the troops and cops maintained order.
They didn't say from what, so I should have known that it didn't mean much.
Sharon even began to make homemade mayonnaise from egg yolks, Dijon mustard, vinegar and oil.
Fuel suppliers began to increase the portion of ethanol in the gasoline.
Iowa went to 20% and most states went to either gasohol all the way up to E-85.
The difference between a flex fuel vehicle and a standard vehicle is the fueling system.
E-85 vehicle have a different tank and lines plus a special computer chip.
North American vehicles from approximately 1980 onward can run on gasohol (10% ethanol/90% gasolinee., E-10) with no modifications.
Originally, sensors in both the fuel-line and in the exhaust system were used for flexible fuel vehicles.
In recent years, manufacturers have instead opted to use only the oxygen sensor in the exhaust manifold, before the catalytic converter, and to eliminate the fuel inline sensor.
As E-85 and M-85 are more corrosive, special fuel system materials are also required.
Some manufacturers also require special motor oil be used, particularly in vehicles using methanol fuel.
Recently United States companies are offering products, originally developed in Brazil, which will convert gasoline-only, fuelinjected vehicles to flex-fuel vehicles.
Typical conversion packages include an electronic device to increase injected fuel volume per cycle (because of the lower energy content of ethanol) and in some cases a chemical treatment to protect the engine from corrosion.
OL Taurus LX, SE and SES sedan 1999-2000 • 3.0L Ranger pickup 4WD and 2WD • 3.
Fleataxi told me that talks about the North American Union broke down, explaining why we had been invaded by Mexico.
He said they wanted our corn before we converted it to fuel; they were starving without corn to make masa and then tortillas.
The 41 -member group convened last month in Washington to discuss ways to improve the emergency response to such an attack, based on the premise that nuclear terror prevention efforts are inadequate.
Sponsored by Stanford and Harvard universities, the meeting included directors of United States nuclear weapons laboratories, Homeland Security Department officials, and current and former top military officials, according to the Chronicle.
Organizers have begun to prepare a summary paper that recommends several civil defense measures, including building bomb shelters, setting rules to strictly limit citizen movement after an attack to keep roadways open and lifting radiation safety rules for emergency responders, the Chronicle reported.
We have had glimpses of something like this with Hiroshima, and glimpses with 9/11 and with Katrina.
The group discussed a scenario in which terrorists detonate a 10to 15-kiloton nuclear weapon, comparable to the United States bomb dropped on Hiroshima in 1945.
Some participants argued that those consequences would be so enormous that greater efforts are needed to prevent such a scenario.
Those Mexicans were meeting resistance all along the border, from more than just the Minuteman Project.
A new non-profit has been formed and it had acquired essentially all the assets of the former organization.
As I said earlier, I have nothing against people living in Mexico, as long as they stay there or immigrate legally.
Yes, that's obviously rather narrow minded, but not for someone who lives in a housing tract that's increasingly becoming inhabited by illegals from south of the border.
They buy a home and move 3-4 families in to be able to afford the payments.
After that, they develop an attitude that we should learn to speak Spanish and adopt their culture.
I might be willing to learn a little Spanish, provided they learned a little American English.
Fleataxi said that other Governors had also issued Executive Orders refuting the new law, provided that the weapons were used to protect the United States of A I find it interesting that the federal laws regulating firearms are all based on the power of the government to regulate interstate commerce.
The laws are generally contained in Title 18 of the United States Code.
To the best of my knowledge and belief, all other federal criminal laws are based on the 49 Commerce Clause.
I quit law school because I wanted an honorable profession, like tax auditor.
That's not the bad part; the bad part is that Obama is President and he's enacted the worst gun control law in history.
The good part is that several Governors are ignoring him and have issued Executive Orders that temporarily override the stupid federal law.
The other good part is that we're well armed, as usual, here in Moon Shadows housing tract.
No doubt those Executive Orders will soon be tested in federal court and will found to be excessive.
Clarence has taken off for parts east and our new good buddy is Fleataxi.
He's keeping us up to date from where he lives outside of where the nukes were detonated.
I still don't like Glock's, but we did buy 3 Mossberg 590A1 I hope you've got that because it's time for the fun to begin.
The International Committee of the Red Cross has sought to have the ammunition banned, due to concern over the incendiary and explosive components and their effect on personnel.
Trials conducted by Forsvarets Forskningsinstitutt (Norwegian Defense Research Establishment) has concluded that the ammunition most likely does not have an unlawful effect if unintentionally used against personnel, as the round will have penetrated the body and exited on the other side before the fuze of the weapon trigger the incendiary and explosive components of the round.
If detonated, the round will have a significant fragmentation and incendiary effect in a 30 degree cone behind the struck target, and this might affect others standing in the vicinity.
The ICRC conclusion is that the ammunition is illegal against personnel, and the concern is how to prevent the projectile from being used in an anti-personnel role in the event of war.
Most nations using the round train their soldiers not to deploy the projectile against personnel, but in the heat of battle such regulations are easily overlooked.
Also, many parties currently fielding the ammunition have no such regulations.
The official stance of the Norwegian Government is that the 12. mm MP round should not be used against personnel.
Giuliani restated his personal opposition to abortion but support of a woman's right to choose.
These targets had a 3"" red bullseye, and were black out to a 9"" circle and the 5 ring was a 16"" circle.
I waited while he replaced the targets, then we measured out an additional 600' in 100' increments.
With the scope on maximum magnification and adjusted to 1,000-yards, the 16"" ring wasn't really large enough.
We left before a LEO showed up and wanted to examine my rifle and Ron's 20-round magazines.
I can tell you, I'm going to be very careful shooting my shotgun, it hurt.
Some claim that shooting a .50 caliber rifle is like shooting as 12 gauge.
A 4 gauge is the largest 'shotgun' made; 3 gauge and larger are called 'punt' guns.
I'd ruined my hearing when I was in the Air Force, using cigarette filters as earplugs.
I had ringing in my right ear until about 2004, when I started to go deaf in that ear.
You younger guys should take heed, life's a bitch and then you get old.
I said the storm clouds were on the horizon, as indicated by the terrorist attacks.
The United States dollar took another pounding on German, French and British exchanges this morning, hitting the lowest point ever known in West Germany.
It has declined there by 41% since 1971 and this Canadian thinks it is time to speak up for the Americans as the most generous and possibly the least-appreciated people in all the world.
As long as sixty years ago, when I first started to read newspapers, I read of floods on the Yellow River and the Yangtse.
They have helped control floods on the Nile, the Amazon, the Ganges and the Niger.
Today, the rich bottom land of the Mississippi is under water and no foreign land has sent a dollar to help.
Germany, Japan and, to a lesser extent, Britain and Italy, were lifted out of the debris of war by the Americans who poured in billions of dollars and forgave other billions in debts.
None of those countries is today paying even the interest on its remaining debts to the United States.
When the franc was in danger of collapsing in 1956, it was the Americans who propped it up and their reward was to be insulted and swindled on the streets of Paris.
So far this spring, 59 American communities have been flattened by tornadoes.
And now, newspapers in those countries are writing about the decadent war-mongering Americans.
I'd like to see one of those countries that is gloating over the erosion of the United States dollar build its own airplanes.
You talk about American technocracy and you find men on the moon, not once, but several times ... and safely home again.
You talk about scandals and the Americans put theirs right in the store window for everybody to look at.
They are right here on our streets in Toronto, most of them... unless they are breaking Canadian laws... are getting American dollars from Ma and Pa at home to spend here.
Let someone else buy the bonds, let someone else build or repair foreign dams or design foreign buildings that won't shake apart in earthquakes.
When the railways of France, Germany and India were breaking down through age, it was the Americans who rebuilt them.
I can name to you 5,000 times when the Americans raced to the help of other people in trouble.
I don't think there was outside help even during the San Francisco earthquake.
Our neighbors have faced it alone and I am one Canadian who is damned tired of hearing them kicked around.
And when they do, they are entitled to thumb their noses at the lands that are gloating over their present troubles.
And finally, the American Red Cross was told at its 48th Annual meeting in New Orleans this morning that it was broke.
This year's disasters... with the year less than half-over... has taken it all and nobody... but nobody... has helped.
I oft times think the Canadians appreciate America more that we Americans.
Now don't misunderstand, neither Ron nor I favor the North American Union.
We barely made it back before dark, saved only by daylight savings time.
Chris and Dave were out of work and Dick was only working 3 days a week.
Once rebuilding started, assuming it did, he’d make up for it, probably working 14 hours a day.
Compare our situation to the days after 9/11, the country didn't stop, it simply slowed down.
When you realize how much debris they had to remove from the WTC site, they didn't slow down for long.
We didn't have peace for long, the interval between the troop withdrawals and the invasion our southern border was far too brief.
They probably assumed that the new gun law had eliminated the firearms in the hands of private citizens.
They’d done better to remember the words of Yamamoto, about waking a sleeping giant.
Our equipment might have been beat up, but most of it still worked and I wouldn't have gone up against an Abrams even if it needed an overhaul.
He completed the MSO school and only recently got his promotion to Sgt.st Class.
He wanted to know if we were ok and I explained that Ron and I sighted in the rifles and that Tac-50 was just too heavy for an old man.
The Mexican Army had reported copied the G36; they were a better rifle than our Ml6.
On February 1,2007 a meeting was held in Mexico City, attended by representatives of the Mexican Defense Ministry and Heckler and Koch.
After an inspection and exhibition of the weaponry involved, the HK representatives decided that the FX05 wasn’t a copy of the G36V and dropped the dispute.
All soldiers have some sort of firearm, the real test is the soldier, not the gun.
Their guns had the new 52 caliber barrel, replacing the 39 caliber barrel.
He had some souvenirs, some of those FX05 ""Xiuhcoatl"" rifles, the assault rifle version with the longer barrel.
Derek said little about Kosovo, less about Iraq and refused to discuss this latest war he'd been involved in.
They could presume what they wanted, but they never found out which backyard held it.
I had a bit of a problem with my blood; the doctor in Lancaster said I'd killed too many red cells from fallout and should take iron and eat meat, especially liver, to get back up to snuff.
The real reason I wanted the Tac-50 was because it was illegal, cheaper and more accurate than a Barrett.
I hoped once I got my blood straightened out, I'd have more strength and could carry it, if needed.
The follow up blood test showed a minor improvement in my blood and the doctor said to keep doing whatever I'd decided, it was working.
The Angeles National Forest was red level dry, as was the Los Padres, Yosemite, and the others.
The fires built from individual, regional fires to a firestorm and the haze filling the AV made it nearly impossible to breathe.
West of Palmdale, when we went shooting at Christmas 2006, everything was burning and it was working its way closer to town.
I’d seen it burn at Avenue S and 10th Street West back when I was living on the Westside.
That fire was south of our house maybe 3 miles and came up to the aqueduct.
It wouldn't be the first time a fire down there (it's the Angeles National Forest) jumped the aqueduct.
The rule of 3s; we've had 4, so we have 5 more to go, provided, of course, we get through this.
If you back the map out about 4 clicks you'll see Avenue S Clarence and Shirley's home is west of 47th and south of Avenue S Ron and Linda live off of Avenue R-4, 4 blocks south of me and east about 6 blocks.
They put in a fire line along Pearblossom Road and managed to stop the fire there.
The rifle can then be mounted in any Mil Spec pintle socket for ease of transport and immediate operation.
We have a fair stockpile already, but you can never have too many guns or too much ammo.
After talking to Derek, I'm not sure we'd want up armored HMMWVs, they're awfully heavy.
The extras double the previous quantity of the things he'd given me before, exclusive of the A3s but with 12 nearly new Mexican Assault Rifles and 2 full cases of magazines.
I assume Derek sent all of them to him and he got the pick of the litter.
What we got wasn’t in bad shape, the rifles hadn't been out that long and hadn't really been used that much.
Those guys on the east coast who got busted for a few grenades had nothing on us.
Derek's estimate of the load I'd be carrying was about as much as I weighed.
Ron even laughed about my MIA, claiming the rifle and ammo were more than my limit.
I told myself I wouldn't get even when he started lugging around the Super Match.
We kept everything clean and oiled, and tucked away where they hopefully wouldn't find it.
Now that things had finally settled down, I was back to my usual position sitting in front of my computer in my robe, checking whatever news I could find on the internet and speculating about what would happen next.
In March of the current year, I checked my new government approved California ID card, just to see how old I really was.
I'm sure it must have one, Kalifornia would never 60 miss a chance to take away more of your rights.
Near as I can tell, BB guns are still legal, but you must be 18 to buy the BB's.
Flea's sweetheart, Fineswine, introduced legislation banning .50 caliber rifles in mid-2007.
Apparently, cops were worried the gangsters might buy one and shoot holes in their LAVs.
On March 31st, they sealed off the housing tract and announced they were staying until they got the guns.
It was warming up, so Ron came over and we rototilled the backyard getting ready to plant.
We had the money, so I ordered another 30 quart All American pressure canner.
However, by limiting the number of crops we planted, we were able to more or less maximize output.
I didn't plant much corn, it takes way too much space for what you get.
This year would be Roma tomatoes, potatoes, onions, cucumbers, green beans, green peppers and little of the other crops.
Well, maybe a row of beets, a few pints of those will last forever; I may be the only one who likes them.
It was cheaper, even now, to buy quart jars of peaches and pears from Costco than can them.
The problem, of course, was that as long as the Gestapo was here, we couldn't store the food in the shelter, forcing us to stack it on the back patio.
I don't know why, but Sharon insisted on loading up on more toilet paper, coffee and important stuff than in previous years.
Maybe she knew something I didn't, or, maybe she finally got the message, but don't count your chickens.
I let my whiskers grow, cut them back weekly with a hair trimmer, then shave.
This year, we planted Kennebec oblong, late, eyes shallow, high specific gravity, good chipper, general purpose use.
They gave a pretty good yield and kept well, but did better up north, not really a baking potato.
We didn't need to plant many crops, it was easier to go to Costco or Sam's Club.
We bought 100# bags of pintos from Albertsons and 50# bags of rice from Costco.
I love Mexicorn, but we can't buy it by the case, unless we order a few cases.
Cigarettes came from them too, but required several trips through the checkout lanes due to their 2 carton limit.
One would have thought they'd eliminated that because of our troubles, but they didn't.
However, we knew the clock was ticking, those A-Rabs wouldn't be happy until we were either dead or converts.
We both monitored the news, but he subscribed to some sources I didn't.
We were waiting for chemical warfare attacks, a pandemic, WW III, or worst, a natural disaster that couldn't be blamed on anyone.
These things are always somebody's fault, even though it's the sheeple who aren't prepared.
A 3 day supply means you're basically out of what you need, a 3 month supply means you've been paying attention.
The first clue I had that the next disaster had arrived was when I woke up to find myself laying on the floor.
The house didn't come down and all those preparations we'd made when we'd had the swarm, helped.
I got dressed, grabbed a new pack of smokes and headed to the kitchen slider.
All the light poles were down and our front patio cover wasn't looking too solid.
I half expect the back patio cover to be down, but as I made my way to the backyard, I discovered it was still up and looked more solid than the front patio cover.
Rule of thumb is if the quake doesn't bring things down, it loosens them and the first aftershock brings them down.
Unlike the homes you often see on TV, our fireplace chimneys didn't come down because they built from wood and are an extension of the house.
That had to do, I suppose, with these being relatively inexpensive homes.
She told me to fill the urn and we'd figure out later how to get it top side.
The main problem with being the neighborhood preparedness nut is they all show up when something happens.
So far, the only problem I see is the front patio cover looks loose and the sliding door is stuck.
It went on all day, the aftershocks generally becoming smaller as time passed.
Dick told me he wouldn't rest the earthquake valve on the gas line until it settled down.
Lance had switched his standby unit to propane and Dick had gone around and shut off the gas valves for all of the homes.
Patti fixed her grill potatoes and Sharon pulled out a couple of tri-tips to thaw.
Dick checked later that afternoon and we didn't have gas coming into the housing tract.
We didn't have water either, but I hadn't noticed due to our water tank.
KTPI said that the fracture ran from southeast of Palmdale all the way to Gorman.
They're Palmdale studio is out on Sierra Highway, south of Avenue M I can’t explain why we didn't have electricity; our sole source was the wind turbines at Tehachapi.
They also reported another declaration of a state of emergency; I guess we didn't rate a live feed.
It seems that even your humble servant occasionally asks a semi-intelligent question.
Unfortunately, I don't know the answer; I haven't gotten to that part of the story, yet.
The thrust of that was, regardless of the cause, global climate change has major security implications.
Another report from another source pointed out around the same time that Khan was still, possibly, helping countries to develop nuclear weapons.
In the discussion following the movie '10.5' it was suggested that no number of nuclear weapons could either trigger or halt earthquakes.
That Whittier Narrows quake shook the crap out of our condo in Panorama City.
The Palmdale earthquake is still shaking, but it probably shook the hell out of all of southern California.
They could be bringing aid, but I think it more likely they’re bring back the troops.
Law and Order seems to be the order of the day whenever there is a disaster.
In Kalifornia, the Governor suspended gun laws after the terrorist attack, go figure.
We're the disaster area, but I haven't heard whether or not the Governor did that again.
Kali is unique, the slogan, the land of fruits and nuts describes both agriculture and many of the people.
Flea couldn't call and see if we were ok because the phones were out, again.
I guess we should have had both cable and telephone based internet access.
The only thing working is my battery powered radio, full time and the other radios when we can spare the power.
All he has is 2 meters and that's basically line of sight radio, so I couldn't call him on the Kenwood, either.
We're over the hump, but nothing really terrible had happened to us, yet.
We did end up getting a low interest loan, the damage was less than the deductible.
The house was tweaked and none of the windows or doors would open or close.
I like that picture from space, it makes the house look twice as large as it really is.
If we could sell it based on that picture, it would bring a half million easy.
The point is that it doesn't matter what the disaster is, if you're involved it means everything, to you.
On the other hand if you're a long ways from your shelter when the twister comes by bend over and kiss your butt goodbye.
That kept the stove on the patio working with a line from the generator and a set of jets.
Getting into the shelter when we had no power was almost a double whammy.
We were so focused on our immediate problems, we had no idea that the world was getting ready to explode.
The dollar wasn’t worth the paper it was printed on and the new favorite currency was the Euro.
The Chinese were still building their military, using up their dollars before they lost all of their value.
I'm always tempted to say Iron Eagle when I see one; either that or Tomcat.
Congress started in 2007 when they cut a billion or so from the Future Combat Systems.
Derek agreed with me, it made too much sense to replace the Ml 6 with the XM8.
Best piece of mobile artillery... but, they could build 3-4 Ml 09A6s for the price of one Crusader.
Crusader displaces the M109A6, Paladin, SPH and M992, Field Artillery Ammunition Supply Vehicle.
In 1996, the Army reduced the force structure from battalions of 24 guns each to battalions of 18 guns.
Improvements will be made based on soldier and test feedback before the final three-months of operational tests, which began in fall 2004.
The final decision will be up to the Army's senior leadership, but in early 2004 weapons officials said they were confident the XM8 weapon system will be adopted.
If all went well, the XM8 would be ready for fielding by late summer 2005.
In 2004 Congress denied $26 million dollars funding for 7,000 rifles for a test fielding of the XM8 in 2005.
The battery life had been extended, and a more heat-resistant plastic hand-guard added.
But the rifle still had goals that were unmet, primarily associated with the weapon's weight.
The 66 weight of the carbine prototype has since grown to 7. lb according to a brochure released by HK and General Dynamics in January 2005.
During 2004 the Army came under pressure from other arms makers to open up the XM8 to competition.
Their main arguments were that the weapon being adopted was substantially different from the original XM29 competition that ATK and H&K had actually won.
In addition, the Army has a legislative obligation to give preference to US-based manufacturers, and also had an agreement with Colt Defense that required the Army to involve Colt in certain small-arms programs.
On 31 October 2005, the XM8 program was formally suspended, ""pending further United States Army reevaluations of its priorities for small caliber weapons, and to incorporate emerging requirements identified during Operation Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom.
It is constructed almost entirely of a tough, glass fiber reinforced polymer material.
The main weapon components consist of glass fiber reinforced polymer with stainless steel inserts.
This has enabled weight to be kept very low without sacrificing strength, durability or robustness.
Thanks to the self-regulating gas block, the gas-operated weapon works extremely reliably and only requires a minimum of maintenance.
Even during the use of practice ammunition, the G36 works absolutely reliably without using any muzzle attachments.
I'm not so sure about those Beta-C magazines though, think feed problems.
The rifle is capable of firing tens of thousands of rounds without having the need to clean.
This is in contrast with the direct impingement system of the Ml 6, which requires more frequent cleaning to cycle reliably.
COLUMBUS, Ind., May 13, 2007 When National Guard planners set in motion a training exercise to test the force’s abilities as the first military responder to a catastrophic nuclear explosion, it was destined to fail.
H Steven Blum said yesterday his staff deliberately put together the worst possible scenario that would test the limits of the Guard’s ability to respond to such a disaster and interact with other state and federal agencies.
That scenario played out on a sprawling, 1,000-acre rural training area just outside of Indianapolis, Ind., as more than 2,000 National Guard troops and hundreds of state and federal emergency response agencies worked through the disaster scenario of a 10kiloton nuclear explosion in Indianapolis.
Named “Vigilant Guard,” the exercise put into place new capabilities and technologies nearly all of which have been developed since 9/11 that have yet to be tested in an exercise of this scale.
In fact, even as early communications problems were overcome, Blum said they would continue to stress any successful solutions until they, too, would eventually fail.
As military helicopters circled the skies of the self-contained city-like training area at Muscatatuck Urban Training Center, the sights and sounds certainly resembled that of a disaster area.
Smoke rose from rubble piles as jackhammers blasted away at the piles of concrete.
Satellite communications gear poked up outside a city of tents and travel trailers that served as command posts.
Those simulating being injured cried as they were carried to decontamination tents where their “wounds” could be cared for.
Nearby, a crew extracted a person from a multi-story high rise by strapping her to a gurney and lowering her down the side of the building.
He said the only things missing from the training, thankfully, were actual injuries.
There’s nothing simulated about the perspiration and the fatigue that they’re feeling while doing this,” Blum said.
The adjutant general said that his state simulated a request for about 80,000 guardsmen to respond to the disaster.
In reality, guardsmen from surrounding states responded, including Kentucky, Ohio and Illinois.
He said that this training is critical to establishing the relationships that would be needed during an actual emergency.
Prior coordination makes actual relief efforts seamless and instills confidence in the community, he said.
One of the things that we know at the local level is that, if those threads do not connect in a common way, the citizens will ... start to lose confidence in the local units of government,” Morgan said.
Kim Sencingiver said efforts to extract simulated victims were working well between the civilian and military responders.
The National Guard and the local responders have been doing an excellent job,” she said.
They are doing exactly what they are trained to do better than anybody expected,” said Army Sgt.st Class Ted Blanford, a member of the search and extraction team from the 1194th Engineer Company from Ohio.
We know that we are here to save lives and that’s what we’re doing,” he said.
Train them to the most demanding standard you can, and give them the best equipment you can find in the world, and then you have a capability that hopefully can save you and your family when you need it,” he said.
Northern Edge started May 7 and runs through May 18 and is a joint training exercise in Alaska in which military and civilian agencies respond to multiple simulated terrorist incidents.
Hurrex ran from April 30 to May 10 and was a command post exercise simulating three hurricanes striking the New England states.
Victor E Renuart Jr. said lessons learned from the exercise will benefit the entire country in establishing how his command will respond to disasters.
Speaking of which, you know it's coming and you hope deep down in your soul it isn't.
God knows our souls and no doubt hears our prayers, be they spoken or not.
I'd felt that way once before, during the month of October in the year 19 and 62.
I can't remember the Tech Sergeant's name, but he came around and told us to listen up, President Kennedy would be making an announcement.
There was a lot of speculation, and some of those civilians had fought in WW II or Korea or both.
SAC ended up at DEFCON 2, the highest we'd ever been, as far as I know.
Like I've said, I would see the B-47s with their nuclear weapons from our barrack's room window.
Congress says we can't build the reliable replacement warheads and we have to keep nukes on all of our D-5s.
Aw hell, round it off at 4,000 because some of the fighters can carry nukes, too.
No one in their right mind would start a nuclear exchange with someone who has 4,000 nuclear weapons they can deliver in waves.
He doesn't have as many, but he does have this tremendous military buildup.
Add to that a crackpot in Tehran, another in Pyongyang and a third in Caracas and a bunch of radical Muslims scattered all over the globe and you have a recipe for disaster.
I somehow think a pandemic might be better, not that it's a good choice.
There all kinds of disasters and I've considered most of them, written about them and still, I come back to a nuclear exchange.
Whether it's by accident, or on purpose, once the missiles start to fly, it's all over except for the dying.
I've often said being dead, wouldn't be bad; it's the getting there part that most of us fear.
It could be slower and you'd die of radioactive poisoning in a couple of days.
For most folks, those are the obvious choices; because they didn't prepare.
If they don't hit your house or even your city, it starts to get interesting.
I've sent out a few hundred copies of my seven_ten_rule.xls spreadsheet.
It's the others you need to worry about; they'll panic, maybe get their hands on a weapon and take what you have.
And then, there are all of those downloads I've done there are about 600,000 files on this computer.
I haven't done as much as I probably should have, but it's more than most people have done.
If the day comes that there are missiles in the air, you'd best have the knowledge to go with that AR-15 and the Radway ammo.
The M4 has a ""S-1-3"" trigger group, while the M4A1 has a ""S-1-F"" 71 trigger group.
If you want a real 5.56x45mm, get an H&K G36, it doesn't care if you don't clean it.
Thousands of American troops searched on Sunday for three United States soldiers missing in Iraq after an ambush in which al Qaeda said it seized ""crusader"" forces, while a suicide bomber killed 50 people in the Kurdish north.
A separate, associated company, Heckler & Koch Incorporated serves the commercial and local/regional law enforcement markets and has offices and a distribution facility in Trussville, Alabama.
There was little talk among the two dozen scientists and other specialists about carbon taxes, alternative energy sources, or the other usual remedies.
Some were simply contemptuous of calls for international cooperation and the policies and lifestyle changes needed to curb greenhouse-gas emissions; others had concluded that the world’s politicians and bureaucrats are not up to the job of agreeing on such reforms or that global warming will come more rapidly, and with more catastrophic consequences, than many models predict.
If we opt for getting them now, I think the best plan would be to not repaint them.
If we leave them in their military paint scheme, we can hide them in plain sight.
It became a struggle about whether we wanted the Hummers bad enough to simply steal them.
If we took them before the war, it was stealing; if we waited, it was strategic reallocation.
I concluded that it was really only a matter of timing, stealing is stealing, regardless of what you chose to call it.
Engine: 6. liter Turbo diesel 190hp Transmission: 4-speed Automatic Suspension: Independent Double A-Frame Brakes: Hydraulic Power Disc Max Speed: 78mph 73 Weight: 12,100 lbs.
If China or Russia does attack us, that means that the government failed to provide for the National Defense, a duty of the government.
If they're not going to do what we pay them to do, I want my money back, with interest; and not in the nearly worthless money they're printing.
Soon it was time to think about planting garden and with that looming, we wouldn't have time to run up to Barstow.
It made sense to park them at the entrance of Moon Shadows Housing tract, most people would just assume the military was there checking on something.
As insurance, we had Chris installed an under-dash cutoff switch; trite, but it worked.
We kept the M240s in my garage with several hundred rounds of belted 7.62x51 mm.
It indicates that attack upon the continental United States, Canada, or United States installations in Greenland by hostile aircraft or missiles is considered probable, is imminent, or is taking place.
When I came down the street with the Hummer, yelling at people, we soon had a line down the sidewalk of people wanting in the shelter.
We ended up with the usual crowd and had no more than locked the blast hatch when the ground shook, not unlike an earthquake, but different.
About the only thing most of them had of their own in the shelter was a few changes of clothes, firearms and whatever they brought from their refrigerators.
I learned a lot of new card games, but really had trouble concentrating.
I was worried that we might lose water and the garden wouldn't get irrigated.
I was even worried that someone might figure out the cutoff switches and steal the Hummers.
I didn't understand how those security devices that Chris used worked, or I wouldn't have been worried about the vehicles.
It was one of those 1990s security devices that you had to insert a link in, probably a coded link of some kind.
Don't get me wrong, I expected it anytime and had made all the preparations that time, money and stealing allowed.
There are two types of preparation, physical, ergo food, shelter, etc. and mental and that requires no description.
Some of us, the Squirrels, TB2Kers, those at War Rifles and even Minion Report were probably as ready as we could be, under the circumstances.
It began to get warm in our hole in the ground, but all we could do was run fans and move the hot air around.
I'd considered that, but to have air conditioning in the shelter would have required a much larger generator.
Apparently A Friend got his large shelter facility ironed out, he hadn't said otherwise.
Flea was up in the mountains but I couldn't recall if he had the basement.
The hands on the clock seemed to slow down as the shelter heated and the outside radiation level rose.
During the first 2 weeks, I didn't bother to connect the antennas, assuming there would be too much static to raise anyone on the ham bands.
Fortunately, Chris took over the duties of keeping the generator oil changed and someone had brought a case of Miller Genuine Draft.
In the end, I settled for a Coca-Cola Classic, I didn't want to go where a bottle of beer would take me; they only had a case, after all.
I could smoke in there and maybe I just felt better cleaning the guns and making sure we were ready when the time came to leave.
Of all the people in the shelter, only 4 of us smoked, Ron, Linda, Amy and me.
Our first stop wouldn't be MCLB, Barstow, it would probably be an archery shop.
If the damage to this country was as extensive as one might imagine, in time, firearms would become nothing more than clubs.
We also had a discussion of the TTAPS study and how that projection would affect global warming.
We still have a climate change, but the majority felt the temps would go down, not up.
When they were all satisfied that they were right, I mentioned nuclear summer.
I had enough files and studies on my computer to convince Albert Einstein that time warp was possible.
I printed out one copy of some of them so they could become better informed.
Unfortunately we were near the peak of the solar cycle, that didn't help.
It was time to see if we could get the school bus to run and put it across the entrance to the housing tract.
That and the Ml 114s, should make someone think twice about trying to come in.
What I didn't expect to happen at all happened next, about a week later.
They had 10 reloads for the gun and enough 7.62 and .50BMG to last until the guns wore out.
My favorite ET and his 3 kids came along, in a separate vehicle of course, a tanker full of JP8.
It was a commercial double bottomed tanker like most often seen out here on the west coast.
Because he had the only Deputy's badge, we'd moved everything over there after we came out of the shelter.
I hadn't expected my boys to show up; however, LEO or one of those military units could always come and visit.
While Ronnie Barrett wouldn’t service LEO owned M82A1s, I'm sure he would service the Ml 07s, if the need arose.
We weren't taking any chances; until the LA County Sheriff returned our badges, we limited ourselves to staying close to the law.
When you consider that, there really wasn't a reason to do so, not after WW III had happened.
It would still take 3 people to man the armor, a commander, loader and gunner.
As a Sergeant First Class, Derek technically qualified as a tank Platoon Sergeant.
He said if he moved back to Iowa, and returned to his old unit, he wouldn't be well received because he'd advance 2 ranks in a different unit.
We did talk and he explained that the current move was to perform maintenance on all of the Ml A1 s, upgrading them to Ml A2SEPs.
The best we could hope for now was perhaps completing the vehicles already at the civilian company performing the upgrades and even that seemed unlikely.
When he saw the bows and arrows he asked if I was planning for the long term.
Here it is, a company in Fontana named Associated Power that 79 carried all kinds of MQ Whisper Watt generators in sizes up to 1875kva.
By now, you should have noticed this piece is more philosophy oriented and less oriented to entertainment.
There is no shortage or more entertaining stories out there, Fleataxi, Greene, ChiliPalmer and several other authors can write the entertainment and I'll continue to stress survival philosophy.
If you can get your hands on something by Halffast, AT Hagan or TS Sherry, they're better reads.
If you draw a line from Dave to Dick's, the house in between is Jose and his new girlfriend.
You have probably noticed the absence of my favorites, the cowboy guns, ergo, single action revolvers and lever action center fire rifles.
I like them and will keep an eye open in case I get the chance to strategically reallocate a few, but they're impractical because on the reloading time.
I do know where to look, The Gun Shop, they usually have dozens of them, mostly used.
I wasn't the same man I had been 10 years before and had nothing in common with the boy I was in the Air Force, save my love of firearms.
When someone suggested simply helping ourselves to whatever was available, I opposed the idea.
I explained that I saw a difference between looting and strategic reallocation.
If you acquired necessities that no one was claiming, it might qualify as the latter.
If you confronted someone to take what they had, probably so you would have more, it was looting, pure and simple.
The garden had to be replanted with short season crops, I can only assume the fallout got to the emerging vegetables.
We traded for 2 steers and while it was a mess, I got them cut into something edible, barely.
Jose had a rooster and the following year produced a lot of eggs and some meat.
A hog produces 2 large hams and 2 smoked picnics, plus a fair amount of slab bacon.
Two Hummers equipped with M240s and backed up by a 120mm gun, a Ma Deuce and 2 7.62 machine guns must have kept them away.
The fences in the center of the tract came down, making way for a very large garden, planted the following year with heirloom seeds.
Eventually, the remaining residents located their kids and placed them in the empty houses in the tract.
Realizing we were actually short on armament, we made one trip to MCLB, Barstow.
We recovered Ml 4s, Ml 6s and an assortment of other weapons plus a lot of ammo.
We cleaned out what remained of Cold Steel in Ventura and worked over several abandoned pharmacies, assuring us a 5 year supply, at least.
We had some things, they replaced the downed towers and lines, giving us electricity, from the wind turbines, for the near future.
The population of the Antelope Valley dwindled, eventually falling to under 100,000, possibly fewer.
While he had recovered from the Whipple's Disease, he lost his job when they nuked Salt Lake City.
I talked to him on the 75-meter band, he was trying to reach me using a neighbor's ham rig.
I always figured that if anyone could do well after the war, it would surely be the Mormons.
As long as we could get water, the AV would continue to produce crops and raise livestock.
There was quite a bit of Jet A available in the AV, enough to run the few Hummers we recovered.
We didn't require an alarm siren in the tract, all one had to do was grab a gun and ammo when he/she heard the turbine whine up on the Abrams.
Eventually, somebody opened a new locker plant and processed the beef, pork and poultry, for a share.
Damon became the wealthy one in the end, he wasn't afraid to shop LA and found a lot of gold and silver, especially coins.
We managed to gather a fair amount of staples, cigarettes and especially toilet paper.
The city of Palmdale had managed to repair the water and sewer lines damaged in the earthquake before the war.
Ron showed us a little known propane storage facility, giving us gas for our gas appliances.
Dick didn't have enough jets to convert everything, but he knew where to get what he needed.
I was able to refill my gasoline tank and find enough PRI-G to stabilize it until it ran out.
When, in time, we lost electrical power, we had several large diesel fueled generators and the equipment to synchronize them, thus retained power.
We would do so until we were out of Jet A, #2 diesel and parts to rebuild the generators.
Chris welded together a gun rack of sorts mounted on a cart I could pull with my chair.
With my chair set to the slowest speed, I could make dozens of laps around the housing tract, checking on people and keeping an eye out for would be thieves.
Stated another way, I got a lot of visiting done and never once fired a weapon.
They had moved into Moon Shadows after the war, mainly for security, I suppose.
I still had almost 1,000 rounds of that South African surplus left over to go with the military ammo we'd picked up.
I gave Derek my Loaded and kept the Super Match, telling him it was his when I went.
Derek disposed of the LAWs and grenades when he thought they were no longer safe to use.
We were careful to preserve our ammo and only shot enough to stay proficient with our weapons.
Because we never heard from Clarence again, or from Fleataxi, I presumed I was the remaining amigo.
What little shooting I did do showed that I was far better with iron sights than those darned scopes.
Eventually, Derek and I swapped rifles and I told Damon he could have the Loaded when I went, if he wanted it.
I ran out of Humalin and was forced to manage my diabetes with diet only, even the pills were gone.
I didn't have much pancreas left, but that little that was left seemed to work fine and 98% of the time, I was able to keep my blood sugar under 200.
They say that old age serves to restore the memory, in some cases, and it did with me.
I can tell you that because somehow I managed to keep my old Dell computer running, as well as the HP laptop that Amy gave me to use.
Damon had found enough toner cartridges so I could get to 1. million copies with my printer.
That included one maintenance kit to be used at 600k copies, with instructions on how to install the kit.
There were several pallets of 3 hole drilled paper and a few cases of ring binders.
One of these nights, I was going to go to bed and not wake up the next morning, it was my turn.
I sat Derek down one night and had him repeat the story of the development of the current main battle 82 tanks, the Abrams, Challenger, Leopard and the Leclerc.
I knew the story, but it was one of those stories you could never get enough of.
The British developed the armor, the Germans the gun, we developed the engine and the French developed an autoloader.
As you know, the British developed the first tank during WW I and the French went with smaller, medium tanks.
During the 2nd war, the Germans had a jump on the Allies, especially in their guns.
They had the biggest and meanest tanks in that war, but they never had a chance to really develop and refine them, mostly because of that madman they had running the country.
The Russians and United States far outstripped German tank production and while they were under gunned and armored, they were able to overcome the German tanks.
They ended up with 4 models I mentioned, each country favoring their version.
In the end, we went with the Abrams using our own gun and British armor.
The British and Germans also went with their particular model, both using the British armor.
Our gun was too small and targeting system unrefined, leading to the Ml A1, with the German gun, heavier armor and an improved fire control system.
The UK, Germany and US, went to an improved model, the Challenger II, Leopard II and Ml A2 Abrams.
We came up with the SEP, a partial upgrade, mostly of the targeting system.
We had intended on using the new engine developed for the Crusader to replace the Abrams turbine, but that fell by the wayside when the Army dropped the project.
What we should have done was replace the engine with the Crusader engine and the gun with that L55 gun the Germans use.
Anything you'd find would be seriously out dated and I doubt it would do any good.
We visited a while longer, him telling war stories and me recounting my life.
The next day, when I hadn't gotten up to get ready for guard duty, Sharon checked on me.
Because we all recovered, I worked a deal, a few hundred years of shoveling coal and we get to go upstairs.
