V "" : THE ATLANTIC COMMAND Headquarters of the Commander in Chief Norfolk 11, Virginia LETTER OF PROMULGATION Serial: OOOI 19/J09H 29 April 19*3 From: Commander in Chief Atlantic To: Distribution List Subj: CINCLANT Historical Account of Cuban Crisis 1962, promulgation of End: CINCLANT Historical Account of Cuban Crisis 1962 1.
The objective of the subject record is to present a comprehensive account of the actions taken within the Atlantic Command to meet the requirements of the situation created by the introduction of Soviet offensive weapons into Cuba in the fall of 1962.
Further objectives are to note the achievements of and the cooperation accorded by associated and subordinate commanders in the critical test of the Unified Command, Atlantic.
The commands making extracts shall be responsible for the security control thereof.
TTKODUCTIO:i On the evening of 22 October 1962, President John F Kennedy, sneaking to the Nation on radio and television, described an ominous build up of Russian missiles in CubaThe President announced the establishment of a naval quarantine to be effective as of 0900, 24 October.
The quarantine was to prevent the shipment of additional offensive armaments into Cuba* The President also made clear that he intended to assure the removal of Russian missiles from Cuba.
If necessary, the United States was prepared to take additional action.
While the immediate background of the crisis widely described as the most serious since the end of World War II was one of steadily deteriorating Cuban United States relations, the President made clear that this was 'far more than a Cuban United States crisis.
It was* in fact, a direct confrontation between the security of the United States and the challenge posed by the Soviet Union.
The President dramatised this fact by asserting that any missile fired from Cuba against a country of the Western Hemisphere would be considered a direct atteck by the Soviet Union.
For the public,. the President's address was the first alarm bell of danger.
But for many days the Commander in Chief Atlantic had been preparing to counter this newest aspect of the Russian build up in Cuba.
Eventually there emerged under CINCLANT's command a many-sided and extremely complex military organization involving over 400,000 personnel of the Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps.
It. covers. the period from 1 October when subordinate commands were notified of the requirement for increased readiness to 1 December when IL-28s were being removed from Cuba.
While it has been prepared primarily from the stand■ point of the Headquarters of the Unified Command, the integrated CLNCIAOT/CINCLANTFLT Staff necessarily placed greater emphasis in this docwsesrt on details of naval activities than on the Army and Air"" Force Components.
At the beginning of October the Atlantic Command was in its normal peacetime configuration.
Headed by Admiral RoDert L Dennison, United States Navy, its Headquarters was in Norfolk, Virginia.
A JCS conducted world-wide CPX of the build up and initial phaaea of gaaeral war * ' h * d Deen completed * n lace September.
Units of the Command soon to be involved in Cuban Contingency Operation* were carrying out or preparing for routinely scheduled exercises upkeep, overhar'i and deployments.
Exercise ""BLUE WATER,"" a CFX of Commander Joint task force FOUR plans, was conducted from 2 to 5 October In Puerto Rico.
Of the seven CVAs In the Atlantic Fleet, three were in the Mediterranean on 1 October.
ENTERPRISE was scheduled to return to Norfolk and arrived one day early on 11 October.
Of the six cruiser types, two were in overhaul and two in the Mediterranean throughout, leaving CANBERRA and NEWPORT NEWS available.
In the Amphibious Force, the only AGC immediately available was MT MeKINLEY, participating in FHIBRIGLEX-62.
POCONO was sailed back from SIXTH Fleet arriving Norfolk on 12 November.
All three LPHs were available. iX Amphibious Brigade Landing Exercise was routinely scheduled for the period 15 October 3 November.
The mission was to train and exercise naval forces in the conduct of amphibious assault and associated naval operations.
In all, about 20,000 naval personnel and 4,000 marines were to participate.
Seventy-four FMFLANT Troop Carrier Helicopters of the eighty-six available had been deployed to Mississippi in early October.
Loading of these helicopter squadrons along with 4th Marine Expeditionary Battalion Headquarters and Battalion Landing Teams 3/2 and 1/6 in PHIBRON TWELVE ships conmenced 15 October.
Embarkation was completed on schedule on 17 October when the force sailed for the objective area.
After skirting Hurricane ELLA, the forces sailed on 17 October from the Camp LejeuneMorehead City area and were due in the Exercise Objective area on 22 October.
It is of interest that as early as about 10 October the National Military Connand center began inquiring informally of CIKCLANT as to the nature and scope of PHIBRIGLSX-62.
Without ever relating the exercise to the Cuban situation, there. were indications of high-level interest in it.
This support started with economic assistance and trade agreements, and then expanded to Include military equipment of a defensive nature, such as small arms and machine guns.
Eventually, armored hieies, tanks, and more complex weapons were introduced lets the Ca b as armed forces, and finally, Soviet offensive weapons were Included in the military buildup of the island.
On achieving power in 1959, Castro openly collaborated with the Csaxrzziats and allowed them to operate as a political power* Relations of the Z£th cf July movement with the Communists were at times strained during the early perlrd cf the regime, especially in coapetiticn for control cf the natiassl labor organizations.
The USSR -watched and waited until February i960 before responding to Castro's growing need for its support.
This Bias assistance was indispensable to the survival of the Castro regime and bad the effect cf Cuba' 6 alignment with the Bloc.
In the early part of 1962 the old line ^caacsists attempted to gain ascendancy over Castro.
Whether the move was Massaw directed cr net is unproved but there is little doubt that the Soviet's felt uneapy dealing with Castro.
Pages a coMunist state In Cuba and his increased anti"" United States f pro-Communist actions also justified our increased surveillance and intelligence in the Cuban area.
June 1962 was marked by an increase in physical harassment of the Naval Base, Guantanamo -a 6 mile area around the base was declared a ""militarized"" zone, families were removed, farms vacated and travel restrictions on roads to and from the Base were imposed.
On 2 July 1962, Raul Castro arrived in Moscow for two weeks of tali.s with Khrushchev and other high ranking Soviet officials.
This was correctly deduced as an attempt to secure additional military equipment.
This meeting resulted in an immediate and complex military buildup in Cuba that was not to end until the sighting of offensive missiles in Cuba in October.
A large-scale increase in Soviet ship movements to Cuba became apparent in July 1962.
The buildup was continued into October, when 40 Soviet ships arrived in Cuba,, despite the fact that, on the institution of the Naval Quarantine, 16 Soviet ships believed to be headed fcr Cuba turned back to Soviet ports.
Approximately four flights a day were flown between Guantanamo Naval Base and Key West for shipping surveillance.
Strategic material was photographed inbound to Cuba but was not associated with the buildup of offensive weapons, until Ju6t prior to October when intelligence confirmed that fact.
Blue shipping, other than Soviet, arriving in 3uba remained at a fairly censtarit level, with an average of about eight ships arriving per month.
During the key menths of August and September whan Scviet shipping activity was at its highest, cniy eight Bloc ships, othsr than Soviet, arrived in Cuba.
Army There were Soviet Bloc military personnel in Cuba prior to August 1962.
A large Influx occurred during August and September, when a total of 9 Bloc passenger ships arrived in.
By 13 November 1962, it was evident that Soviet military personnel were present In Cuba in much greater strength than previously estimated.
Subsequent intelligence showed that there were about 21,000 Soviet military personnel there.
Following the removal of the missiles and light bombers about 4,000 missile personnel and airmen departed.
There is no indication that Soviet ground forces or naval personnel have departed or intend to depart.
Ca the contrary, the construction of permanent barracks type buildings at Soviet camps 'indicates a prolonged stay.
The breakdown of the estimated 17,000 total personnel indicated 7,500 with the Ai2 Force* 7,500 serving with the ground forces, and approximately 2,000 with the Cuban navy.
Although Bloc arms deliveries to Cuba commenced in 1960 and continued throughout 1961, it was not until January 1962, during the New Year's Day Rarade, that the extent of these deliveries could be ascertained.
During the period January through March 1952, the consolidation cf Cuban Ground Forces into three distinct elements was confirmed — 78,000 in the standing Army; 100,000 in the ready reserve; and 100,000 comprising the Home Guard.
Analysis of photograph* taken in August 1952 cf iario-;8 deck loading of Scviet merchant ships revealed an impressiva supply c-f advanced militarjwsapons.
The introduction was confirmed cf Soriet and Czechoslovakia Page _6 of 17A Pagis multiple-barrel, truck-mounted, barrage-type rocket launchers aew to Cuba.
In September Soviet amphibious vehicles and armored per serine 1 carriers were added to the growing arsenal* Wavy Prior to 1962, Cuba's Havy consisted of obsolete United States supplied vessels, 3 FF boats, and 2 PCE boats.
A few had undergone overhaul and modernization in the United States in 1954 and 1955.
During the first months of 1962, a buildup_of the Cuban Naval Forces beqan.
From 15 January to 26 March, various Soviet merchant shipt delivered a total of 12 P-6 Class PT's and 6 KRONSTADT Class Patrol boats.
These modern ships provided e significant increase in the Navy's coastal defense capability.
The normal method of transfer was by means of a merchant ship carrying 4 Pi's on deck and a KRONSTADT in tow.
Between 12 and 18 August, two Soviet merchant ships were photographed enroute to Cuba with strangely configured crates on deck.
Preliminary analysis showed thatthese crates contained Soviet KOMAR Class Missile. launching boats.
This was later confirmed when the first KOMARS were photographed on 26 September operating in Cuban waters.
Twelve of these missile-equipped boats were delivered to Cuba by September 1962.
On 18 October, 4 of the boats departed Mariel and operated from the port at Bancs, about 75 miles northwest of the Naval Base at Guantanamo.
They remained there during the quarantine, operating from the port, and only recently returned to Mariel.
It is not confirmed that Soviet personnel are sole operators of these boats.
They are still Soviet controlled and Cuban personnel are being trained in their operation.
The KOHaR class is basically a PT hull on which 2 missile tubes have been installed, It is estimated that the missile utilized in the KOHARs has a line of sight range of 10 to 12 nautical miles probably contains an automatic pilot, and carries a warhead of 2,000 pounds of high explosives.
By January 1962 the Cuban Revolutionary Air Force had abcut 60 KIG-type jet fighters.
Intelligence substantiated the return to Cuba during the summer of 1961 of approximately 75 Cuban pilots who had received M1G jet training in Czechoslovakia.
Under Soviet tutorage, a pilot training school was established near Havana at San Antonio de Los Banos Airfield.
In preparation for the MIG fighters, Castro's airfields had undergone major improvements.
Runways were lengthened, new airfields were constructed, and refugios, or revetments were built.
By October 1962, Castro had 20 airfields able to support the operation of MIG fighters.
On 10 September 1962, it was confirmed that MIG-21 jet fighters were in Cuba.
This is a Mach 2 fighter, one of the Soviet Union's latest and most modern day fighters.
F*«m-2 IpTiotographs of Santa Clara Airfield taken in October, after the quarantine was established and later , it wti ^ confirmed tha^a total of 42 <£*«9 the new generation fighter intercepter.
Also, from thiagame phfcto. graph, it was found that these TTTP ""V.'i'i n . n ill Till »ri""fnr1nt f 1m ti by experienced Soviet pilots.
The Cuban Revolutionary Air Force is patterned aftsr its Soviet benefactor.
At the present time the entire MIG fightsr force occupies four airfields— San Antonio de Los Banos, where its headquarters is located, Santa Clara, Camaguey International and Holguin in Orients Province only about 70 nautical miles from Guantanamo.
The buildup of Castro's Air Force fighter intercepter capability was probably motivated by his concern over ""ir.vasi.ch and by Moscow's determination to retain him in power, and for the defense of the later discovered MRSM and IRBM sites.
The buildup was quickly followed by missile systems of a defensive nature.
In early September 1962, the existar.ce of surface-to-air missiles in Cuba was confirmed.
The missile used at these sites and referred to as the GUIDELINE, or SA-2, is capable of an erf ectivs altitude cf 60,000 feet vith a limited capability up to 80>000-set, ar.d a minimum altitude capability of 1*200 to 1,500 feet.
Three cf the 24 sites have since been moved short distances to provide better coverage in more poorly defended areas.
On 19 September we were able to confirm another type of missile located at Banes.
Although our information regarding the capability of this missile is limited, we know that it is a cruise, or air-breathing missile, and is employed for coastal defense, probably against amphibious landings and ships at sea.
Two additional sites of this type were found on 28 September, and the number had grown to 5 by the middle of October.
All of the defensive missile sites were manned by Soviet personnel and will probably remain so for at least a year since adequate training will take that length of tine.
There is no information that the Cubans have started such training. g« Offensive Threat.
It is now clear that the Soviet Union undertook to establish a Soviet offensive capability in Cuba during the spring cf 1962.
The introduction of a mixed-force of offensive aircraft, the IL-28 , light J at bomber, and medium range missiles closely fcllow5§*-the defensive buildup.
It had been suspected that the EEAGZ<ES migh* be enrout* to Cuba when we photographed Soviet ships on 16, 28 and 29 September and on 2 October, because cf the size and shape of the crates on deck.
In a photograph of San Julian Airfield taken on 6 November an assembled BEAGI£ can be seen being towed down the taxiway and others in various stages of assembly.
The existence of 9 additional crates of BEAGI£S at Holguin Airfield near Guantanamo was later confirmed.
Of a total of 42 crated bombers, 20 were in various stages of assembly before being shipped back to the Soviet Union.
It is estimated that the construction of the Medium Range Ballistic Missile sites began, in early September.
Confirmation of the existance of the sites was made on 14 October of the San Cristobal missile Complex which consisted of 4 sites* each with 4 launch positions.
Two additional sites at Sagua Grade were confirmed on 17 October, bringing the total of 6 sites, or a total of 24 launch positions.
The missile used at these nites is known as the SS-4 and has a range capability of about 1,100 nautical miles.
Photography was taken oh 1 November of the Caimito Site, one of two such sites in the Guanajay Complex, the other identified site was at Remedies.
A total of 42 MRBM missile transportars and seme other missileasscciated equipment have been removed from Cuba aboard eight ships.
Photographic verification has been obtained of the missiles on these transporters.
Some were probably on the. large hatch Soviet merchant ships enroute to Cuba that turned back when the quarantine was sstshiishsd.
Naval patrols kept this ship under surveillance as it wcrked its way tc the southwest.
The effort was rewarded' on 22 October w*ten the TJRZxI x;as sighted in the vicinity of the Azores refueling a ZU^L' type s&suai'Sfi.
These reports took on added significance with the discovery of the medium range missiles in Cuba and the large buildup of defensive weapons.
The discovery of the ZULU submarine indicated that the Soviets might be deploy L-; some submarines to the western Atlantic on covert patrols.
Anti-submarine warfare ccasnandsrs at sea were alerted to this possibility.
Altogether there were 6 positive sightings of Soviet conventionally-powered submarines in the approaches to the Caribbean.
United States Navy aircraft and ships followed it until its return was assured.
Although there were six positive sightings in the quarantine area, it is probable that not ever four submarines were deployed into this area.
The fact that these submarines were sighted so soon after the quarantine was established shows that they had left their Northern Fleet bases in early October.
Time and distance factors require this if they were to have made an undetected passage to the sighting area.
From 1 to 20 October, routine peripheral photo missions were -flown around Cuba.
Photo missions were also flown inside the fence line at Guantanamo Naval Ease.
In addition, high altitudeU-2 photo missions over Cuba were flown in October and it was by this means that the offensive threat was discovered.
On 14 October sufficient infermation was obtained from the U-2 flights to confirm that offensive missile bases were completed and that other bases were \rader construction* Pags IXcf VU Pages 2.
Ewits front 20 October to 1 December, The President is announcement of the naval quarantine put an additional requirement on the intelligence effort.
Most significant was the need for information concerning ship cargoes, locations of ships, 6tatus of missiles and bases in Cuba, and the Cuban armed forces order of battle.
When the quarantine was put into effect, suspect ships were designated by the JCS and CINCLANTFLT and located by surveillance aircraft or surface vessels prior to interception.
The basis for designation was the capability to transport missiles below decks.
Sixteen Soviet 'ships enroute to Cuba altered course away from Cuba shortly after the quarantine was put into effect indicating that these ships were carrying cargo that the Soviets felt would net pass the quarantine, -wo ships stopped dead in the water for several days prior to proceeding into the quarantine area.
Some sort of cargo was transferred by high line from a Bloc ship headed for Cuba to one that was enroute from Cuba.
One Swedish ship did not stop when requested and would not reveal har cargo.
No acticn was taken by the intercepting ship and the suspect ship proceeded into Havana harbor.
It was later learned that the Captain mis«mderstood instructions from his company that he was to submit to' inspection and reveal his cargo.
Existence of 48 Cuban divisions and 3C0 battalions, (some of which were subordinate to the 48 divisions), was verified 'iri the period 20 Octsber to 1 December.
On 25 October, the Soviet FRGO-i'rae Riakat Over Ground— uuguided field artillery rockets and the SNAPPER wire-guided, antitank, scout car-mounted missiles vere seen at Remedies ir.
Central Cuba, and tha modern Soviet T-54 medium tanks were confirmed at Santiago de Las Vegas.
Page 12 of JL7£_ Pag 3 These observations and other intelligence available through lowlevel photographs indicated the presence in Cuba of Soviet ground Jorce -troops drawn from Elite Guards units.
A medium tank battalion , and armored reconnaissance company, an armored infantry company , a multiple rocket launcher battery, a nuclear-capable FROG artillery battalion , and a SNAPPER anti-tank company with about nine triple launchers.
It is believed that the FROS's and SNAPPER'S are under Soviet control and are maintained principally at the four camps mentioned.
In addition, a ' family of tracked and wheeled armored personnel carriers was verified in Cuba.
Although it is believed that most of these are connected with the four Soviet . camps, it is possible some of this new equipment may have been issued to Cuban Army units.
Evidence indicated that the Cuban Army division may have begun to assume control of operations over subordinate units.
Previously, it was estimated that the Cuhan Army battalion, was the parent ground force unit.
Demobilization was begun on 2223 November and it is estimated that the demobilization prsce. was completed on approximately .25 November.
Cuban Army activities during, the mobilization period indicated that training under Soviet and 3 lcc advisors paid. off.
Cuban Army units mobilized and assumed defensive positions quickly and with a minimum of confusion.
This mobilization was carried out in spite of the logistic deficiencies which continusd to plague the Cuban Army.
These deficiencies consisted principally of a shortage of motor transport, lack of proper individual field' clothing and equipment, and lack of adequate provisions for tactical feeding in the field.
Unvarifisd reports allege that several Cuban Army units left their field pcsititCiS without authority when they experienced hardships due to lack of feed and proper rainwear.
Hcwevsr, on 1 November initial evidence was cbtainsd by lr.w livsl aerial pictography that dismantei"" 13 ,„ f rr4_ lag had begun on the MBfiM bases and construction had stopped on the IR3K bases.
All the missiles from the KRBM sites have probably been removed from Cuba.
Some were photographed in the dock areas prior to being loaded for shipment.
The Soviets, cooperated to a degree in the verification of missiles leaving Cuba.
The names of the missile-carrying ships and their positions for intercepts were given to the United States authorities.
Although much information given on the positions was erroneous, all the ships were located and photographed by United States forces.
The missiles were transported as deck cargo and were covered by canvas cv*r the shipping crates and transporters and by a tight-fitting plastic covering over the missile.
While the Soviets removed the entire canvas coverings, the plastic coverings were never removed.
The only verification was that the objects on the ships conformed outwardly to the known shape of the suspect missiles.
Enclosure of this chapter is a picture of the missiles aboard the ""BRATSK"" enroute from Cuba.
J Photographs of the suspect ships were taken by a P27 equipped with infrared photographic equipment.
No significant results were obtained by this method and flights were discontinued. d « Aerial Photographic Reconnaissance.
After the locations of the missile bases were known, low level photo missions over Cuba were commenced to obtain accurate information on the status of these bases.
These low level flights plus the continued high level photo reconnaissance proved extremely valuable in information obtained.
Oae mission of two planes was fired u>on by anti-aircraft weapons believed to be 57tan.
The other incident involved the sighting by the reconnaissance pilots e£ a MIG-21 which appeared to be on an intercept course.
The plane followed the flight -.-itborad from the target but no hostile action was taken.
The most significant aad unique aspect of the photo reconnaissance was the rapid development of the films, movement by jet courier to photo interpretation centers, and availability of interpretation results for use in military planning and diplomatic negotiations.
The IL-28 BEAGLE/MASCOT medium bombers introduced in Cuba were first seen on high-level photography at San Julian Airfield in shipping crates.
Assembly began in mid-October and continued even after the missile bases were being dismantled.
A total of 11 BEAGLE /MASCOTS were completely assembled and two were in various stages of assembly when the decision was made to disassemble and remove them from Cuba.
On or about 4 November the first IL-28 fuselage crates were observed at an airfield other than San Julian; nine crates were 1 located on the field at Holguxn, but none had been opened and assembly had not commenced.
These nine aircraft i;ere never assembled and were removed from the field on or about 25 November.
Photographs were also taken of the fuselage crates in the dock areas prior to being loaded for shipment and also aboard the ships while being taken back to Russia.
The MIG-21 aircraft in Cuba were assemblsd in greater numbers during this pericd.
There wers sr.trai r i? :rts by fighter pilots of pcssibla firings of these missiles iN— _-eber.
The pilots observed an object trailing flame which evantually burred z-iz and disappeared.
An Air Quarantine was also proposed to prevent entrance of prohibited material into Cuba by air.
The_inteiligence support for this proposed quarantine was also adequate.
The routes that could be utilized were limited both by capabilities of the Soviet aircraft and the landing facilities available.
Pages Enclosure CD Co Chapter 1 Boelorarv tffChcpear 1 STATUS OF CUBAN CONTINGENCY PLANS The build up of Cuban military capability which threatened the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay combined with the danger of Communist aggression In the Caribbean and Latin American areas required that the United States be prepared to conduct military operations against Cuba if necessary.
Supporting plans for Cuban contingencies were prepared by CINCIANT Service Component Commanders, Commander Joint Task Force 122, and designated Army, Navy and Air Force Task Force Commanders.
These plans were either tentatively or fully approved by the JCS and provided for various degrees of response and reaction for Cuban operations.
It also provided for a variety of. requirements ranging from strikes against a single target to wide spread air attacks throughout Cuba.
Thus the mission could be limit"" ed to the destruction of a SAM site or the destruction of several missile sites or large scale attacks against targets thatpcsed a threat to the United States or other countries in the Western Hemisphere.
This change was Annex L to the basic plan and was devoted to the defense of the Guantanamo Bay Naval Base.
The Commander Antilles Defense Command was charged with the overall defense of the base.
CINCAFLANT acted as target coordinate and would conduct operations with his forces when directed.
It was also necessary for the JCS to make the decision to relocate SAC aircraft from those SAC bases in southern Florida required to support AFIANT forces.
Naval forces, including the CVAs i INDEPENDENCE and ENTERPRISE with Air Groups SIX and SEVEN embarked were deployed as a part of Naval Ta6k Force 135.
One Marine A4D squadron consisting of 20 light attack aircraft was embarked in ENTERPRISE instead of the regularly assigned Heavy Attack Squadron.
This action bolstered close air support capability in the eastern Cuba area.
CJM>, Rear Admiral Allen H Smith, USN was responsible for the-.i.-.nos:i Guantacamo.
The plan called for a simultaneous amphibious and airborne assult in the Havana area by a Joint Task Force within eighteen days after the receipt of the crder to execute.
Supporting plans by subordinate coscnaiiders had b^en prepared and were capable of being executed if directed.
CINCIANT advised the JCS that it would be necessary for the XVIII Airborne Corps to reschedule their movements to utilize the additional two days made available by the change from a five day to seven day plan.
The delay of D-day by two days in effect st:\-*d the fellow on forces and equipment two days sooner after B-da-jV This s-jrengthendd and enhanced the ground forces capabilities.
The additional two days permitted a slight margin for delay due to weather or other contingencies in the movansn^ cf ir-i-ial combat forces.
CHiCAFIANT would be responsible for air operations in the Western Zone of Cuba, less the amphibious objective area.
Air operations in the amphibious objective area would be carried out through the appropriate Amphibious Task Force Commander.
I Upon activation of Commander Joint Task Force Cuba, the Commander Air Force Task Force would control all air operations in Cuba for CJTF Cuba.
In addition Commander Joint Unconventional Warfare Task Force, Atlantic was included in planning and would conduct operations, as directed by CINCLANT'hen activated.
CINCSTR5KE also performed augmentation force planning involving Army and Air Force units assigned to the United States Strike Command.
The Commanding General United States Continental Army Ccmnand, , General Herbert 3.
Powell, and the Commander Tactical Air Command, , General Walter C Sweeney, Jr., were designated as Commander in Chief Army Atlantic, , and Commander in Chief Air Force, , to assist CINCLANT in contingency planning.
Operational control of Air Forces related to the defense of Guantanamo uould be ezetcised by CINClANTFLT through the Commander Nava 1 Task Force.
NWPT IN PORT Enclosure. Ohopt II ""r, rw IIYNAN DD-732 ASWFORLANT TG 123.
PERRY DDR-883 2ND FLT CHARLESTON IN PORT STEINAKER DDR-863 2ND FLT TG 123.
MAYPORT IN PORT QUILLBACK SS-424 SUBLANT TG 123.1* GTMO IN PORT ATULE SS-H03 SUBLANT TG 123.
KEY WEST IN PORT TIRANTE SS-420 SUBLANT TG 123.1* KEY WEST IN PORT 9-. rs** Enclosure Chapter II »^-\' SEA LION APSS-315 PHIBLANT TG 123.
NORVA IN PORT Enclosure Chapter II rw VERMILION AKA-107 PHIBLANT TG 128.
NEWPORT IN PORT Enclosure Chapter II /■**£ J WILLIS DE-1027 CRUDESLANT TG 128.
Actual deployment of TAG forces to Florida was directed by TAC FRAG ORDER NO. 2 to AFLANT OPIAN 312.
Full utilization of all available Defense Communications System circuits aras planned.
The inter-area Single Sideband Net, , and the Atlantic Area SS3 Net, , was available fcr voice communications.
The fleet Broadcast, Naval Teletype Net, NA707NET, STARCOM and AIRCOMNET were operational and prepared fcr increased traffic.
Army Signal Radio Propagation Agency and other crgar.izaticr. attended, and aside frcm developing communications requirements the conferees also benefited by becoming acquainted and working together.
Although the conraand structure was changed later, this preliminary planning facilitated the expansion of CINCLAST communications which followed.
The command reorganisation tc dire-.t Cu^en C:r.tir.ger.cy Operations was approved by the JCS and placed in errs it en 20 October 1962.
The major changes in the communications plans had been made and all essential actions initiated by this date.
Planning and implementation were intertwined, with orders, changes and directives going forth, by telephone, message and sometimes courier.
This period can best be presented by a brief discussion of the following subjects.
Communications between CIMCLANT, component commands and forward Mobile communications.
In order to satisfy the communication requirement in the event of major changes in organizational structure and to provide the necessary communications with the commander in the objective area numerous full duplex, direct, on-line, top secret circuits were established from CINCLANT Headquarters to all probable key subordinates.
While this provided excess circuit capability in some instances, it had the highly beneficial effects of insuring redundancy for stability and reliability so essential to the control of operations.
There was insufficient mobile equipment to meet demands, ^Communication sets available had to be held in reserve for possible deployment to the Cuban area.
Common user circuits in operation were committed to use where possible.
The flow of operational and coordinative types of information generated a need for some special circuits.
Messages could be sent via common user routing to most locations Page J25 of 17& p ages bu* would have been inadequate during the crisis, creating treffic backlogs at'oaay cojBnucicatiors canters and providing unsatisfactory service.
A good example of limited communications available car. be found in the study of the Key West development.
Classified messages were sent over the Naval Operation Net, which was on-line 1 but required the isesMses tc be retransmitted through the Naval Communications Station, Serf elk.
The Naval S231 teletype system was available fcr passing unclassified traffic to stations in the system, .he communications building at Key West hid tc bs modified before additional circuits for handling classified traffic oruld be installed.
JCS policy for a jcint c;urcand tc obtain leased circuits is for the re* quest to be submitted to the Daftr.
Agency; which allocates circuits end provides information where circuits must be engineered and provided by the commercial telephone company.
Time was a critical factor since mast cf the circuits had nnvar bean engineered.
MA scr.t representative to provide direct liaison with DCA in masting CTKCIANT circuit requirements.
Massages are received and then placvi on an enccde/deccde device to obtain the clear t2>:t.
These lengths are scheduled to bs-.-.ti* a -part -f a consists circuit when call up is received.
The two s:\ds cf the -.:.r:uit^ are installed to the two respective military bases.
In some areas throughout the southeast there is a shortage of available circuits and/or circuit terminal facilities.
However, the commercial companies provided excellent support and met every request with min imum delay.
AFLANT had also established some of the required circuits in advance of this period.
The Command had a plan named ""ROCKPILE"" with the objective of complete destruction of the Cuban air order of battle.
Communications requirements to support this plan had been started in anticipation of having the plan approved.
The. rapid increase in commercially leased circuits occurred during the latter part of October.
Military installations in the forward area required voice and teletype circuits with CINCLANT and/or the component commands.
The Naval Base at Key West required an increase in communication facilities since reconnaissance ASW and air defense activities operated from there.
This created a requirement for circuits with their rear area Headquarters, with CINC1ANT and with other operating locations in the forxcard area.
Bragg, North Carolina was tied in to ARLANT, AFLANT, , and other terminal points.
Installations for conducting air operations, staging of troops and supplies, logistic support and other, functions were brought together by voice and teletype circuits to handle the flow of administrative and operational traffic.
MacDill, McCoy, Opa-locka, Eglin and Seymour -Johnson Airi Force Bases; Jacksonville NAS, Port Everglades and many other locations.
Full cooperation was obtained from all military and civil agencies while obtaining circuits.
The establishment of voice circuits to C0MANTDEFCOM required a circuit from Norfolk to Cape Canaveral which extended on to West Palm Beach, where it entered an AT&T cable to San, Juan.
A 10 kilowatt mcbiia transmitter located at Cape Canaveral was cffered to the Naval Communiiatirr.a Station San Juan, by the Air Force.
These included DCA circuits into Washington, Puerto Bico, Guar.tar.amo , Panama, Key West, Camp Lejeune and others.
The CZNCSAC SS3 radio net was available for use and had stations in Florida and San Juan where entry to other SAC installations could be made.
Page T-2 Engineered for passing a 3000 cycle signal, , with niinin-ja delay distortion.
Page 29 of 17& Pag-s This mad shuffle and installation of cryptographic equipment started early in October and continued with the Cuban build up, reaching the final stages of installation about 25 October as the peak flow of classified traffic hit the circuits.
By then an excellent nstwork of secure circuits had been developed using land lines and single sideband radio where required.
Facilities were needed to increase the number of circuits from CIKCLANT to San Juan and Guantanamo, and to immediately establish communications back to CINCLANT when forces were landed.
Some flexibility of communications between installations along the east coast of the U S. was also necessary.
These functions called for employment of mobile communication equipment.
At a conference between CLT and component representative it was determined that very little equipment was available to meet C1NCXANT requirements due to internal requiremsnts of each Service and because of commitments for other contingencies.
Equipment utilization was also affected by the lack of compatibility between sees of the Service organisations.
There was a general shortage of single sideband sets, since this type equipment had only recently been included in unit tables of allowances.
The dilc-saa was solved by obtaining 4 airborne transportable communication units from the Navy.
These were on standby at Washington, Norfolk, San Juan and Balboa, C 2.
It was decided to move the ATCU-100 from Balboa to Key West for extending circuits into Guantanamo.
This lick would provide 16 channels for Voice and/pr teletype, with 5 channels terminating at Key West and the rzst patched through to Norfolk and the Washington area.
This system would also provide alternate routing for the Guantanamo Ban Juan Washington circuits.
The ATCU-100A in Washington was deployed to Glynco for standby and possible circuit termination requirements.
The AT-V-100A at Ncrfclk was used for training and was scheduled for. movement into the objective area.
The ATCU-100A was to be air transported fri-a Norfolk as soon as an airfield was secured.
Circuits would then b* routed back to the east coast for tie-in to the north-south relay system between Fort Ritchie and Fort Bragg.
Four teletype and two wire circuits between CINCLANT and Fort Lee were leased to retain flexibility in case the Fort Leavenworth entry had to be switched to Fort Ritchie or Fort Bragg.
The ATCU-100A at Norfolk was a good example of Joint coordination to accomplish a task.
While the equipment was furnished by the Navy, the Army gathered an operating team to train on the set and to accompany it to Cuba, had it been deployed.
Training was also conducted by the Navy team manning the ATCU-ICOA at Glynco.
During the readiness period communications was established with the Midwest Relay and other DCS entry points.
One additional facility was brought into the operation to insure flexibility and reliability of command communications.
The Navy brought the ATCU-200 from the Pacific area for additional support.
A diesel generator is mounted aboard the aircraft for the power supply.
Communications can be maintained while airborne and continued immediately upon landing.
Plans called for landing the aircraft as soon as an airfield was secured, to provide communications back to CINCIANT while the ATCIH100A was being air-shipped and placed in operation.
The crew manming the ATCU-200 conducted training exercises in preparation fcr the operation, flying to San Juan, Key West and Bermuda.
Voice and teletype communications were established with Fort Leavenworth, Fort Bragg and the Norfolk Communications Station, gaining entry at these locations into DCA circuits.
As combat units moved into Cuba they were to be supported communicationswise by their organic personnel and equipment, maintaining links with their respective Task Force Comaaaders until such time as the Command Headquarters wsr.t ashore.
Single sideband oultl -channel equipment with teletype channels secured by cryptographic devices was planned where possible, with operational and authentication codes available for passing information over voice circuits.
Other tactical equipment such as the AN/GRC-10 and AN/TRC-24 was planned fcr field communications.
A tactifcfl Radio Relay Net fcr command and functional use was to be established in accordance with the SCPs of the tactical units.
As commercial facilities located in Havana and oihsr areas cams under military cer""* trol they were to be rehabilitated and placed into uss.
Fleet Communications , The Naval Coainunication Systam had been in operation all along and little change or adjustment was necessary to handle increased requirements for the Quban activity.
However, the reliability of communications with the various shore commands and task force coamsinders was effected by programmed changes in progress and by those immediate changes directed by CNO and CINCIANTFLT to solve operational exigencies.
The Washington Broadcast did not complete the change until 25 October, the work having been expedited in order to be ready for increased traffic.
As a result, many ships were copying Norfolk at this time and didn't swing to Washington until later directed.
All this occurred during the build up period and contributed to tha backlog of traffic.
As Fleet ships changed to the Washington Broadcast and ware more evenly distributed among other stations, the traffic flow improved.
Ships in the Atlantic normally select the shore broadcast by the Atlantic area of operation.
However, flexibility is permitted depending on the propagation characteristics and other factors affecting the ability to copy.
Tha increased amount of traffic did not permit this wide latitude in the selection of the station broadcast.
All amphibious forces afloat were assigned to the San Juan Broadcast and the Quarantine force was retained under the Norfolk Broadcast.
A special broadcast at NAvCOMSTA Nrrfolk, , was placed int operation during October.
Flexibility was obtained by establishing ship/shvre c-.ircn-.-.icaticr.s with any or.r cf the shore stations in the Naval Operaticr.
Coincident with the establishment of an ASW Barrier off Newfoundland, a special broadcast was activated at Argent ia, Newfoundland, for the submarine barrier operations to provide a facility which would *~e ■• adiately responsive for the ASW Barrier Commander.
The Caribbean Emergency Network was also brought into use with COKNAVBASE, GTMO at the Net Control Station.
This was a S5B simplex voice/CW network with the Key West Naval Station, Naval Mission Haiti, AKCONGEN Santo Domingo and COMCARIBSEAFRON in the net.
Ship/shore communications with the cossnands afloat and tactical communications between the task force units were excellent throughout most of the period of crisis.
Radio propagation phenomena and other factors affecting reliability caused less than 107. outage on radio circuits.
Losses were attributed to mutual interference, noise generation aboard ship, equipment, propagation and HERO restrictions.
Cosmunication personnel and equipment aboard fleet ships were heavily tasked especially on some of the destroyers.
The need for additional SSB sets v:as brought to the attention of CKO \:ho obtained release of 45 sets for install lation aboard destroyers.
This project was not completed before the end of activities due to the wide dispersion of ships.
Their transmitter originally in use was limited to a power output of 1 kw.
Engineers from Headquarters, NAVCOMSYS installed a 10 kw transmitter and then ■ modified and reworked the antennas increasing their output efficiency.
New equipment also provided an increase in the number of channels fromC 6 to 16.
Upon completion of this work the team moved to San Juan to improve the installation.
Facilities for classified communications with Bouth American ships were Hero Restriction When carriers are arming aircraft on the flight deck, electronic radiation must be restricted to reduce the possibility of triggering a missile or other armament.
All transmitters aboard ships cease operaticr.. during the loading operation.
Paga 33 c f 1'^ Pages in the process of completion when the operation ended.
Teams of U3N communications personnel were to be placed aboard with ADONIS cryptographic equipment.
The Balboa transmitters were placed In operation to broadcast COMSOLANT traffic.
These additions would have provided improved communications for the quarantine operation.
Occasional changes of command ships by the commands afloat caused communication difficulties.
All fleet ships are not fully equipped to handle increased communications requirements brought en by placing a task force command aboard* When the Commander SECOND Fleet t 5 passed the Quarantine Command to COMCR^UESFLOT SIX, , on 13 November 1962, there were not sufficient aboard to provide covered circuits with Norfolk.
The changing commands also created routing problems with the Army and Air Force relay centers not fully understanding these changes and not keeping abreast of the Navy temporary cn-lir. routing indicators.
The CINCLANTFLT Communications Center solved the problems by temporarily accepting all the traffic for further relay.
CINCLANTFLT communications center had prigresssd through several stages of expansion and change since its inception and was in the middle c-f another modification when the Cuban crisis developed.
The results of Exercise ""HIGH HEELS"" had indicated that the facility in its present state could not handle a large increase in traffic.
A conference with representatives of Headquarters NAVS3MSYS was called early in October to analyze and resolve JINClANT/OIi'HLANTFlT requirements to be provided by this communication center ar-d/or NA7C0MSTA Norfolk.
It was decided to move the SU3LANT circuits out of the CINCLANTFLT Wire Room for more space and t;. terminate additional circuits there.
The advent of the Cuban bv.ild up escalated the rata of progress with the work reaching completion ar;<und 20 Cctiber 1962.
Many new circuits were being installs Cs. the wire room while the traffic build up was developing, causing some debase in handling efficiency.
The additional onlice circuits had ir-r.-sassd f::rm:i>tJ 30, creating a re.
Teletype and cryptographic equipmer.t was .Stained from every available scurce.
The CINC1ANT operations cr.tar owit :'.:'.; aard, (nar.ua i>, was expanded to a maximum uith a subsequent .>:re3ae in coerator service.
Internal offj.ee ar.d war room changes generated a vast amount of telephone installation wcrk.
The classifiia ar.d reclassified message centers kept four duplimat machines in striae y :p <.--.-:».--. during peak periods of heavy traffic.
This increase facilitated more rapid processing of messages but occasionally contributed to inefficiencies.
Multilith macs were used or incoming teletype machines with the mat passing immediately ta a multilith machine for reproduction of the desired number of copies for internal distribution.
These many change^ expeuitSd traffic hut also contributed to poor message accountability, caused ar. ir. :rea;>e in the number of service massages and generated quiri^s on tran 3 oiibsion and delivery information.
Minimize was implemented by CIS :M^a^ 6633, 222300Z October 1962 and CNO message 222328Z October l')62.
This '-a* proposed to reduce the flow of non-essential traffic leaving the "".ir-v.:.t; available for passing important information.
Tne communicator is mere iihely t"" striver v:-_'l.:i'v.t circuits to satisfy the user's demands, while at the same time praying for the originators to givs some thought to communications economy.
Messages with a precedence of ""Elash"" or ""Emergency"" wtre processed and delivered very rapidly.
The next lower level""9perational Immediate"" became so commonplace that 8-10 such messages would arrive simultaneously at the classified message center.
All work on messages of lower precedence is supposed to stop until the processing of a high precedence message is completed, but xjhen previous messages are of the same precedence, processing is done in order of arrival.
During periods of heavy traffic screening of high precedence messages was attempted to expedite those of greatest importance.
Over-classification of messages was attributable to the nature of the contingency operations.
At the same tLa-s over 165,000 copies of SECRET messages were produced and distributed.
As the installation of on-line cryptographic equipment progressed message classification became less important, however, the high precedence plagued the hard working communications personnel throughout the whole period.
Previous message traffic averaged 34^00 messages per month and increased, to 115,700 during November.
Shortly after this date the results cf the intsrnal communications changes began to take effect, nawn sen*».e 1 became familar with their duties and the backlog of traffic started to decline.
Communication service to CINCLANT, though much expanded, resumed a degrsa of normalcy.
The Cuban crisis had demonstrated that military op-sratie-is of a contingency nature tend to involve all g;v?.rnmsr.tal ag.ir.ciss and military departments to the degree that control must be exercised at the highest level cf the Government.
Communication facilities must be flexible, reliable and immediately responsive to such command and cr.t.-cl requirements.
For purposes of economy the r squired circuitry nhruld b* designated b::t net engineered.
Msbile equipment with 'trained"" teams ""'of < personnel .must be T^adily : iop^\t^^0^-i.
Communication *«5y.; ^ links from the battlefield to the rear area are already provided by the tast^al||^^ \* units and their support organizations.
All services and major commands should implement the use of cite ¥ numbers in messages; for ready reference, to standardize procedures and L to insure correct delivery to the office of action, | 4.
Joint communication procedures should be followed by all communicatisr. > centers co assure similarity of operational procedures and to prevent delays I in passing traffic.
Tactical frequencies assigned organizations for use at the scene of t action must be thoroughly coordinated at the joint level to eliminate f . intercomponent frequency conflicts.
A joint frequency panel has been f established at this command to assist task forca commanders on all frequency | matters.
Some commercial circuits required for continued use are still being leased.
Many communications personnel from all services experienced the pleasure of working together to build and operate a large communication system.
It was in these three weeks that Command and Staff actions were taken, relating directly and indirectly to the Cuban situation, with minimum public notice, to improve the readiness posture of the Atlantic Command.
The need for secrecy was dictated by the fact that while increasing evidence of a Soviet offensive build up in Cuba accumulated, the Soviet government continued its protestations that arms shipments to Castro were all defensive weapons.
Within the Staff the information relating to reconnaissance operations and the build up was extremely closely held, being disclosed on a strict ""need to know"" basis.
During this period normal command and staff activity continued and served in many instances to provide ""cover"" for initial actions in our build up.
It was not until 20 October that routine functions were overtly subordinated to the requirements of Cuban Contingency Operations.
Further, the boundary between Joint Zones East and West would be moved to the East to permit the Naval Task Force to concentrate on supporting the Guantanamo Naval Base.
CINCLANTFLT and CINCAFLANT were directed to recommend jointly the new boundary line.
Prepositioning of necessary aviation ordnance and support material was directed in advance of tha JCS approval of the modified plan.
CINCLANTFLT was further directed to report any required movements not possible within currently allocated operating funds.
Pursuant to this ^directive for increased readiness, Navy forces were earmarked for 6, 12 andj^4 hour reaction times with a record kept in the CISC* LANT/CINCLANTFLX War Room of units designated, locations, and types of aircraft.
They were, however, the fcrerunners to the quarantine operations which were ultimately placed into effect.
T and the need for prompt information on these ships required that the VP Patrol effort in the Key West/Caribbean Area be increased.
Along with the increase :in surveillance, arrangements were made for the quick delivery of significant photographs by jet aircraft to CINCLANTFLT and CNO if required.
The change was generated due to the acquisition of new military equipment in Cuba which improved enemy ground air defense and long range fire power at sea for the ""K0MA& PGM"" boats.
Because of developments in Cuba and the increasing air capability of the Cuban forces, CINCONAD, on 5 October directed that the southern Florida picket ship be retained on station for an indefinite operiod, in lieu of a previously planned withdrawal.
The 26th CONAD Region was directed to continue to provide the necessary picket ship to the 32nd CONAD Region.
In a message to CG XVIII Airborne Corps, CINCLANTFLT and COMTAC, , and sent for information to C INC STRIKE among others, CINCLSNT called attention to t'ne requirement for relocation and prepositioning of troops, aircraft, ships, equipment and supplies.
It was suggested that much of this could be accomplished with minimum distrubance to current operational and training commitmants and within budgetary limitations.
In addition, it noted that consideration should be given to the amount and nature of prepositioning that could be profitably accomplished in the event of lifting budgetary limitations as necassary.
CINCLANT requested recommendations by 15 October as to the feasiaility, of tnis action and an estimate of the readiness posture which could b* achisv-sd aicng with additional costs involved.
A CVA with an embarked Air Group should be maintained In, or south of the Jacksonville-Mayport areas on a continuing basis along with supporting ships.
The relocation involved prepositioning a Marine Air Group at Key West and the assignment of an additional 1/3 Marine Division/Ming Team to the Atlantic Command along with appropriate amphibious shipping.
It was further recommended that one VMA squadron be maintained at Roosevelt Roads along with one GV for aerial refueling.
Prepositioning of additional ground support personnel and aerial tankers would be required to increase readiness.
On 9 October CINCSTRIKE informed JCS, CINCARSTRIKE and CK'CAFSTRIKE that the response to CIKCLANT's message of 6 October on increased readiness inso* far as it applied to STRICOM forces would be prepared by his Headquarters since the action addressees were not in a position to assess the overall impact on the command.
On 8 October JCS referred to CINCLANT a memorandum from the SECBEF concerning ""the contingencies under which military action against Cuba may be necessary and toward which our military planning should be oriented.
Soviet action against Western rights in Berlin calling for a Western response including among other actions a bl&ckada of Communist or other shipping enroute to Cuba.
Evidence that the Castro regime has permitted the positioning of bloc offensive weapons on Cuban soil or in Cuban harbors.
Page 41 of '-TPages An attack against the Guantsnams Naval Base or against United States slants or vessels outside Cuban territorial air space or waters.
A substantial popular uprising in Cuba, the leadjsrs of vhich request assistance in recovering Cuban independence from the Castro Soviet puppet regime.
Cuban armed assistance to subversion in other parts of the Western Hemisphere • A decision by ths President that the affairs in Cuba have reached a point inconsistent with continuing I'.?, national security.
The preparatory actions which shcuid new and progressively in the future be undertaken to improve United States readiness to execute these plans.
The consequences cf the actions on the availability of forces and on our logistics posture to deal with threacs in otner areas,e., Berlin, Southeast Asia, etc.
The removal of the threat to United States security of Soviet weapons systems In Cuba, or The removal of the Castro regime and tne securing in the island of a new regime responsive to Cuban national desires.
He further Indicated that huad &sic«d the Cific* of Incer-national Security Affairs to initiate disc^ssicn wi:n cne Sc«tc L-epar cmen t as to the political actions which should precede or accjnparv •_-,© \anous military actions being planned.
Item By special operation order establish a patrol to prevent continued traffic.
Without unduly derogating training or readi.iess for other critical missions, commence prepositioning of forces.
MSTS shipping should be designated for required lifts and operated in a manner to insure their availability.
Preposition Army heavy equipciant to staging bases. of l7L Pages Tliis reduces transportation requirements for ground s*jppsr£ £*ar.
CINCLANTF1T has already pr-rridsd t'cr maintaining a CVA ready in the Mayport area.
The alert should not interfere with training unless it Is unduly pro* longed.
Iar. both under current budget ceilings and with budgetary restrictions 'lic'red.
In the meantime «he JCS had queried USCINCEUR and CINCPAC as to availability of amphibious forces assigned to them for implementation of CINCLANT contingency plans.
In reply both noted the impact that transfer of troops would have with CINCEUR stressing the effect on allies and CINCPAC on training and rotation of forces to Uest Pac.
Preclude simultaneous, , reinforcement of either CINCEUR or CINCPAC using troop carrier or MATS aircraft.
Make inadequate for reinforcement of CINCEUR the available logisitc support units for filling the port package.
Selected ammo stocks for Navy and Marine forcesre prepositicned at Florida and Caribbean bases and available in AE and CVA type ships.
Action was underway to position Marine aviation support equipment from available resources without reduction of normal operations.
For the Air Force, selected items of equipment and initial requirements of war consumables were being prepositioned.
It was estimated that essential requirements would be in place about 20 October.
Prepositioning of 64 units with equipment, supplies and increments of resupply to assume a D-5 posture.
Commensurate wi':h the GIKCLAXT requirements for Increased readiness posture for Cuban contingencies, the Second Marine Air Wing directed Marine Air Groups 14 and 31 to preposition certain aviation equipment at the United States Naval Air Station, Key West on a priority basis.
T to provide information on his civil affairs requirements and tne lengtn of time civil atfairs companies might be required for Cuban contingencies.
On 17 CctoDer CIUCLAVT advised the JCS that one civil affairs area headquarters, four civil affairs groups, and eight civil affairs companies would be requiredThese units would be employed for a period of about six months.
To assist in developing an adequate air defense post are in the sou tnea stern United States, the JCS approved several specific actions as requested by che Commander Continental Air Defense Command.
Additional fighter aircraft were deployed to Homestead and Patrick Air Force Bases and those units based at Tyndali were placed in and alert status for augmentation as necessary.
A ""avy F4D Squadron was ordered to Key West t-> augment Air Defense fortes in tne arsa.
CINCCXAD ccjrdinated air defense requirements for soucnern Florida .with CE'C'lAJir -to ensure maximum effectiveness and utilization of forces.
Javy 3 Air Force and Marine units using Key -vest facilities was required.
The shortage of equipment at Key West, made it necessary tor units to provide some cf tn'iir own ground handling equipment, bedding, see. ferieir forces.
Coordination of all air reconnaissance operations in the Cuban peripheral area.
Assistance in the identification of air reconnaissance flights penetrating the ADIZ and provided clearance for such flights through the Key 'Jest warning areas.
CINCOUAD provided representation In the Center to facilitate the interchange of intercept information.
Heavy base loading and saturation of facilities was not limited to Key West.
The conclusions reached indicated that every available military air installation in Florida would be required to carry out the Army Concept of Airborne Assault.
The naval Air Station at Sanford, Florida was approved for use as an additional staging base and direct liaison between COMTAC and CO, NAS, Sanford was authorized for planning purposes.
The CG XVIII Airborne Corps stressed the need for Opa-locka Airfield near Miami to support Army Forces.
CINCLANT negotiated for the use of the field which permitted its ultimate use for prepositioning of materials.
The use of Strategic Air Command bases at Homestgad, MacDill and McCoy -wasrequired by CINCLANT forces.
In order to accommodate the AFLA.NT units at these fields, action -was initiated to relocate SAC aircraft from these bases.
Subsequent arrangements were made between the Strategic Air Command and the Tac tical.:Air Command and SAC aircraft evacuated to ether airfields.
Complete cooperation between SAC, CINCLANT, TAC and the Department of the Air Force enabled CIKCAFLANT to preposition his forces and materials at these vital installations for the possible execution of Cuban Contingency Plana.
CLANT and the evacuation of SAC ~ aircraft reduced the risk to some extent.
It was considered that the action would provide the United States with an unparalleled Page . ui cf__ \ii^ Eages _ ^~ .^^ opportunity to incraase knowledge of Soviet SAM capabilities end, thus, would assist the over all general wa# capability.
The scheme for the operation as proposed by CETCLANT would be intone of two options.
Option one consisted of not launching air strikes against a selected SA-2 site. j Under Option two, two SA-2 sites would be selected.
Precise eir attacks would be launched to destroy only the fire control system on one site and only the launchers and missiles on. the other sites.
The scheme was forwarded to CINCAFLANT and CINCARLANT for coordinated comments on the feasibility of the concept.
CINCAFLANT and CINCARLANT stated that option one might be feasible with seaborne forces but would fae extresaly hazardous if attempted by airborne forces.
As far as option two was concerned, these commanders agreed that, this option was theoretically feasible, but impracticable.
The fine target selection required in this type of maneuver was considered impossible due to the Inter-related proximity of components.
Furthermore, enemy capability could include launching a missile from one site using fire control radar from another site.
CINCAFLANT/CINCARLANT recommended that all SAM sites be destroyed as forcefully and rapidly as possible in the initial assault.
It was pointed out that ifc might be possible to locate remaining unassembled components in Cuba for post hostility study.
This placed a heavy additional requirement on the CINCLANT Headquarters.
It was readily apparent that augmentation of the CINCLANT Staff would be required.
Truman to report to CINCLANT as Deputy Chief of Staff for Cuban Planning and Operations.
Truman would become the CINCLANT Chief of Staff for Cuban Contingency Operations, and that a separate CINCLANT Contingency Staff would be organized.
Officers not assigned to. the Contingency Battle Staff were assi.'vned supervisory, administrative, intelligence, planning or communications. duties.
All other CINCLANT responsibilities were retained by the integrated crTCLA'TT/ClNCLANTFLT Staff.
Through a process of adjustment, evolution and arbitrary decisions the two staffs arrived at satisfactory working arrangements.
The danger of escalation, particularly in the initial stages, made it imperative that full CINCLANT capabilities for general war be maintained while at the same time the requirement to operate the Contingency'ar Room had taken the services of four of the twelve officers assigned to the CEXLAIlT/Cr'CLAMTFLT Joint War Room, including the Army, Air Force, and Marine officers.
The contingency staff gradually merged with the Cr:ClAUT/CElCLA^TFLT Staff with cooperation and coordination so outstanding that it was difficult to distinguish between them.
In recognition of this* the Contingency Battle Staff went to a four section vatch on 1 November and was gradually reduced in size from then until its disestablishment on 3 December.
During the build-up of forces and the preposition ing of materials for the execution of Cuban Contingency plans, it became apparent that a shortage of amphibious shipping existed.
Also the existing military airfields in southern Florida were saturated.
This saturation resulted in a heavy r;-k in the event of a successful air attack or missile bombardment of tl ese fields.
Initially four LST's were allocated to ARLAT'T to deliver Task Force CHARLIE to the objective area.
During the build-up of forces, elements of Task Force CEARLIE conducted training operations in the Georgia-Florida area.
During these exercises it was evident that additional LST's would be required to transport the armored units to the objective area if they were to arrive when needed.
Since there was no additional LST shipping available in the Atlantic Fleet, it wa6 necessary to charter four commercial LSTs for a period of 60 to 90 days.
It was determined thfit the original four LSTs allocated and the four chartered LSTs were still insufficient to meet ^rmy requirements.
In order to alleviate the shortage of ISTs the Commanderin-Chief, United States Atlantic Fleet recommended that the Chief of Naval Operations activate eleven LSTs from the Atlantic Reserve Fleet.
These eleven LSTs would require rehabilitation and, when activated, they were to be manned by a minimum crew ready for immediate use.
A determination was made also that more emphasis should be placed on 1ST types rather than on rollon roll-off types.
As planning developed it became apparent that it would be necessary to charter twenty commercial cargo ships and preposition them at ports for outloading to reduce reaction times.
Action was taken upon CIKCLANT's recommendation to do this on .26 October.
At this time Military Sea Transportation Troop Transports were removed from schedule trips. and held in east coast ports ready for outloading.
The question of operational control of MSTS commercial shipping was not ..resolved in aarly planning.
This problem was eventually resolved and it was apreed that the appropriate MSTS commander would sail ships upon request to a designated control point where the ships would report to a designated force commander for operational control.
In the area of Air Defense, the rules of engagement for operations in the Key West-Cuban area ware confusing and unclear.
In an. area such as Key West which lies within. a few minutes of Cuba by jet aircraft, it become abundantly clear that the rules of engagement needed clarification.
JINCLANT took action on the problem by issuing a directive which set forth protective measures to be taken in the event of attack and which defined hostile acts committed by eiusmy forces.
This directive was approved by the JCS and promulgated for compliance by all concerned.
Initial plans for defense of the Key West area did not earmark a specific ""HAWK* 1 unit for deployment.
Although this problem was solved with the deployment of an Army Hawk unit to the Key West area, the assignment of a ""HAWK"" unit in plans would have been appropriate.
Air Defenss radar facilities at Kay West Ground Control intercept site wsra inadequate in terms of overall space and numoisr cf radar scopes.
The increase in tactical commitments including peripnerel reconnaissance flignts precluded the reieaae of all the GC.T radar equipment for Air fctrense.
Consequently, equipment was net adequate ts mast all operational requirements.
Tne addition of an Air Force mobile radar and GCI site provided a msan3 fur tactical control cf Air Force aircraft in.
Weatarn Cuba and thus enacifcd tne normal Key West radar to. conduc r operations; -in tha regular spaces allocated, ""cergency funding was approved for Che construction of a new Ground Control Intercept facility at NAS Key West.
In the area of force levels for the CINCLANT 312/316 OPLANS it became apparent that the tactical fighter and troop carrier aircraft listed ii» the 312/316 plans were not adequate for the tasks assigned.
Because of the build-up of Cuban military potential an increase in Air Fcrce forces was required.
Military Emergency Zone Because of the large amount of air operations which would occur in the southern Florida area upon the execution of the 312/134/316 OPLATIS, it was necessary to provide a method end means for the control of tcD&essential air traffic.
This nonessential air traffic included local civilian and nontactical military air operations.
The emergency security control of air traffic program would be implemented within the Military Emergency Zone immediately upon establishment of ':hi zone.
Furrier, upon establishment of the MEZ, all civilian and noneau-.ical military traffic scheduled to terminate, depart or overfly the MEZ would be diverted, cancelled; or terminated.
MIlirABY GOVERNMENT Plans, proclamations, ordinances, a command strut .""rare, personnel requirements, and a detailed military government directive ('developed at D/A in soirdiviarion with OINCLANI and sent by DOD to Sta.*:a Department for coord In"" ar.ien) ere prepared.
However, the need for best estimates of casualties that might occur was required.
It './as further pointed out that estimace of casualties based on the assumption that the enemy may employ tactical nuclear weapons was not meaningful because operations could cause severe losses.
On the other hand, a hit on minor troop concentrations mieht not be sienificant.
In the meantime, however, the Commanding General, USCONARC and CINCSTRIKE reached an agreement on a major change in the task organization for STRAC OPLAN 316.
Effective 19 October Combat Command , 2nd Armored Division was deleted from Task Force Charlie and a comparable force from the 1st Armored Division designated as its substitute.
The Commanding General, XVIII Airborne Corps was directed to inform Headquarters, USCONARC concerning the detailed composition of the substitute 1st Armored Division force as soon as it could be determined.
It was also agreed that no major unit changes would be made in the task organization for the present.
During the month of October 1962 the responsibilities of the Commanding General, USCONARC, both in that capacity and in the capacity and in the capacity of CINCARSTRIKE led to the assignment of CONARC troops to operational missions and extensive training exercises which had a relative bearing upon his capability for quick reaction under OPLAN 316.
The two major troop dislocation which thus affected the USCONARC 's capability for reaction were the use of CONARC troops in Operation ""RAPID ROAD"" at Oxford, Mississippi and the major CINCSTRIKE training exercise ""THREE PAIRS"" held at Fort Reed, Texas.
General Howse was relieved of the command responsibility at Oxford on October 1962.
Units involved included five Battle Groups from the and Airborne Division, as well as some Military Police Battalions.
By October, however, the major units had been deployed to their home stations.
As it eventually evolved, this exercise was planned to involve both the 1st and Armored Divisions in a series of three PTX phases of three days duration each.
The PTX phases were to be followed by two live-fire phases of hour duration each.
During each of the PTX phases a Brigade of the 1st Armored Division was to maneuver against a Combat Command of the 2nd Armored Division.
Two Brigades and two Combat Commands were scheduled to take part in the live-fire phases.
K-'/\\ Some of these, however, were included on the troop lists as supporting units.
LF RES/SUPP AVNGRU COMPHIBRON * From embarkation to completion amphibious operations.
Armored Divisio--, as wail ad roi:r Trai-ooV-atiox Coroe iiMi izrzsk ciapaciae and Ma 317M Military Poii :* ;;ar.talioi.
TRANSCRIBED PAGES FOLLOW SECRET Recommended to the Department of the Army that units be mobilized on SnDay to meet three separate requirements: forces required by the troop list to OPLAN 316; forces for the defense of / and forces for the defense of the Florida Keys, defense, prevention of sabotage and subversion and for rendering assistance to civil authorities.
The first category included Army reserve units consisting of two Civil Affairs Headquarters, Type B, two Civil Affairs Groups, five Civil Affairs Companies and two Consolidated Psychological Warfare Companies.
The third category was drawn mainly from the Florida Army National Guard, including elements of two divisions, the 51st Infantry Division and the 46th Armored Division, as well as four Transportation Corps light truck companies and the 317th Military Police Battalion.
CINCSTRIKE passed this information to CINCARLANT and CINCLANT formally directed CINCARLANT to assume temporary operational control of the designated CINCSTRIKE forces.
Despite the fact that CINCSTRIKE had already been relieved of operational control over forces participating in the contingency plans, he the Commanding General, USCONARC as CINCARSTRIKE to place his entire command on DEFCON 3 status effective hours, 12 October.
As an exception to the directive, however, CINCSTRIKE decided to continue both Exercise ""THREE PAIRS"" and Exercise ""SHORT LINE"" until 27 October at a level of activity which could be achieved with the forces remaining available to him.
This action was taken with the permission of the Joint Chiefs of Staff subject to his own discretion.
CINCSTRIKE felt that such continuance would provide proper cover for the contingency plans.
Preparations for the first major troop movements were made on 22 October when the Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the loading for movement of Task Force CHARLIE, 1st Armored Division.
The movement was to be made by rail to Fort Stewart, or to a port of embarkation.
This determination of an interim destination was to be made at a later time.
CINCARLANT was informed that group support equipment, maintenance spares and personnel such as cooks and bakers would have to be provided to support Army elements/ Due to limited billeting facilities, the Army would have to provide tents and bedding for some of its units and personnel.
The 3rd Missile Command Provisional was directed to move as soon as practicable after 1300Z hours to Homestead Air Force Base, Florida to provide logistical and administrative support for the proposed CINCARLANT forward Headquarters.
Action was next taken directing Third Army to , assemble and prepare for movement to selected staging airf ields-and Army Staging Area Command Headquarters for each responsive staging base.
Third Army was also directed to complete activation of teh Third Army's Headquarters, Army Staging Area Command and to move in to its designated destination as soon as possible.
Third Army was next directed to issue the necessary instructions and orders to expedite the movement to their destinations of all units assigned on the ASA troop list.
The Commanding General, 2nd Logistical Command was directed to prepare a detachment of thirty-five officers and ninetyfive men for movement to Opa-looka Air Base to establish a proposed field headquarters.
Finally, the Transportation Group, , was alerted for movement to the Florida area where headquarters would operate under the direct control of the proposed Peninsula Base Command.
The group's major mission teams at all staging bases in Florida and at all surface ports of embarcation being used in OPLAN 316.
In addition to the support units, action was taken on October to move the first of the Combat units requiring relocation for implementation of OPLAN 316.
The first unit move so directed was that of the 2nd Battalion, , 69th Armor, 2nd Infantry Division from Fort Banning to Fort Stewart, Georgia, where it was to be held for eventual movement through the port of Savannah, Georgia.
At the same time, Fourth Army was directed to move the first, second, fifth, and sixth increments of Task Force CHARLIE to Fort Stewart, Georgia.
The prepositioned units of Task Force CHARLIE were scheduled for eventual movement through the port of Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
Page, and three tugs., ^ ^ -, A nuaber' of ""problems arose to -plague ""uSCCNARC/SINCARLANT in the • early phases of ©repositioning troops' to attain a readiness posture j ...-_•> for possible implementation of OPLAN 316. the United States Army Transportation.
Carolin would be used to outload xhe 1st Armored Division from its pre-^r s -> ; positioned location at Fort Stewart, Georgia.
The office *fj^-r*\^ of the Chief of Transportation directed US30NARC to request the required^ r;*f ^ rail equipment from the Defense Transportation Management Service j ^;.| for immediate positioning at designated home stations.
Oin.^fcr is*, respokee to a qtiery from STN2LASI, CrNGARLASX; .v'.5>s Slr.d Airborae^ Division.
The Commanding General, USCONARC felt that some attempt should be made to retrieve at least a portion of these Spanish speaking personnel for use in the Cuban operations.
A recommendation was consequently made to CINCLANT that he, in turn, query CINCARIE as to the availability of four Special Forces Operational Detachments, Type A, all Spanish language qualified, ^ support OPLAN 316.
The teams, if made available, would be attached to the Special Forces at Fort Bragg, North Carolina.
Air Echelon 8th Airborne Division 101st Airborne Division Brigade of the 1st Infantry Division Battle Group Task Force 1st Infantry Division Co.
Florida with the*--; ; •; exception of two batteries of the 8th Missile Battalion.
DOD Interchange fleet capabilities ;, Exception, however, was made for the car* aaalgned to the STRAC pool at Fort i 1 Lewis.
Stewart con; aisted of four reinforced battalions wfcth atcapproxiaate strength of 3,5**0^, i ; i;, officers and men.
It was planned to unload all wheeled vehicles upon^ .;::-$*•; arrival at Fort Stewart for eventual: overland convoy movement to the.outicad; »_;. lag port.
CINCLANT also pointed out that the Naval Air Station at Key West — which had been suggested bv^ClNCARLANT as an. alternate'.-«,»rSxi^'.. facility --was fully committed to^the support of high performance aircraft / and would not be available for use by Army aircraft.
Thus the entire Task Force would be constituted in one location and could move as an integral force to the same part for outloading.
Steps were taken on 27 October to provide aviation support for the forward echelon of CINCARLANT headquarters.
The 100th Aviation Company, , was organized on that date with an authorized strength of 18 Officers, 13 warrant officers, and 91 enlisted men.
A problem had arisen by this time in connection with the use of the Roll-on, Roll-off vessel, the USNS TAURUS, as a carrier vessel for the initial assault phase of the troop landings.
This type of vessel contained no provisions for off-shore or stream discharge of cargo from the rain and mezzanine decks when participating in an amphibious operation.
To overcome this difficulty, The Commanding General, XVIII Airborne Corps, recommended the provision of a properly positioned and secured 40-ton crawler crane on board the vessel.
This type of crane could be made available from one of the Transportation Corps STRAC terminal service companies located at Fort Story, Virginia.
These requirements were to be completed prior to moving to Port Everglades, Florida, for the initial loading.
CINCARLANT was able to report by 18 October that both the First Increment of Task Force CHARLIE and the Headquarters, 1st Armored Division — was ready to move on a hour notice.
The Fourth Increment — consisting of the 3rd Battalion, 6th Artillery — was located on flat cars at Fort Chaffee, Arkansas, and was prepared for immediate movement.
The Floating Reserve, which had been alerted so as to arrive at Fort Stewart, Georgia, after Task Force CHARLIE, planned to move on 28 October.
The On-Call Force was alerted for loading, which was to commence approximately November.
XVIII Airborne Corps merely stipulated that they be positioned at the southern most point in Florida at which they could be properly supported, while the Transportation specifically requested positioning at Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
This prepositioning action would insure that the landing craft and auxiliary craft were available for rendezvous with the Navy Task Force at both the time and date required in OPLAN 316.
The Transportation Center. -planned to Initiate the movement on 30 October if approval was forthcoming, with the complete positioning. of. the craft in the desired location by 2.
A lack of proper rtorage space for loaded equipment cars at Fort Stewart, Georgia, created a major problem for the elements of the 1st Armored Division arriving at that station.
Certain cars — particularly those with tracked vehicles — were to be kept with loads intact in order to facilitate movement of Task Force CHARLIE to the port area.
In an attempt to solve this problem and to prevent any undue delay, CINCARLANT initiated action to procure additional rail siding capacity In the vicinity of Fort Stewart and particularly requested appropriate rail storage at neighboring Hunter Air Force *ase.
This latter request was apparently denied by the Commanding General, Eighth Air Force.
CINCARLANT thereupon requested the Department of the Army to secure the proper approval for use of Hunter Air Force Base facilities at the Department level.
Late that same after• noon the Strategic Air Command, , Instructed the Commanding General, Eighth; Air -Force; to give maximum support 'to. the Commanding General, Fort Stewart, Georgia, by providing on-base rail sidings at Hunter Air Force Base.
The Strategic Air Command, however, desired to be kept informed as to whether the meeting of this requirement caused a serious interruption of the SAC mission.
CTNCARLANT. was then in the process of transferring this responsibility to the proposed Peninsula Base Command which was to be established in Florida for just such purposes.
Such designated units were to be placed under the operational control of the Commanding General, Peninsula Base Command.
Third Army was also directed to furnish the new command with copies of all support plans which had previously been developed for this mission.
Third Army however, was to continue to be responsible for the operation of a personnel replacement center and for administrative and logistical support of the Peninsula Base Command and all of its assigned and attached Army units.
The new directive, moreover,, did not in any way affect Third Army's assigned mission under .35PFLAK nor any other assigned missions lh support of OPLAN 316.
These directives, -owever, were to be effective as orders only upon receipt Of -nstruscoi.* fr.ra higher headquarters to Implement OPLAN 316.
These units, moreover, would require replacements for currently authorised craft which might become unserviceable or mla>t -acuire extensive maintenance as a result of the assault operations, -t was determined by CINCARLANT that a total of 31 Landing Craft Utility, 'LCU> were In storage at the Charleston Transportation Depot.
Tne remaining 27 craft would have to be processed by contract In commercial facilities, a process which would require a minimum of five to six weeks for completion.
At the same time, CINCARLANT was able to announce -^at the Chief of Staff, United States Army, had approved the preloading of^t-e two Roll-on, Roll-off ships and the four available LST's.
While the two Roll-on, Roll-off ships had previously been scheduled to out load tcv* Fo-t Lauderdale, Florida, CINCARLANT was now preparing plans to load f-ea cut of Savannah, Georgia, in view of the fact that the troops wars located in nearbv Fort Stewart.
CINCARLANT intended to proceed wit.f-a loading of the vessels and, if time permitted, to rehearse tas unloading as well.
Since neither of the two Roil-on, Roll-off vessels were or tie combat category, CTNCARLANT was of the opinion extraordinary measures ^ would be reauired in order to Insure propej unloading of prioritj aupp*.^* ard equipment at the objective area.
Area Commands at the intermediate staging airfields gave Heaocuarters, yrc—z Airborne Corps, a chance to evaluate their support capabilities ana *o c-srsider the development of problems, circumstances which could pr~-•'da valuable information for future operations of this type.
The 6th Battalion, 65th Artillery, , ""was located in the general Key West area, with A Battery at the western tip of Key' West, B Battery on the beach nearest to Cuba in Key West, and C and D Batteries at the Boca Chica Naval Air Station.
The 6th Battalion, 15th Artillery ,, was located in the vicinity of Homestead Air Force 2ase, Florida, with A and C Batteries located at that airfield itself.
All four batteries of the 2nd Missile Battalion,, 52nd Artillery, , were located in the vicinity of Homestead Air Force Base.
Information had already reached CINCARLANT concami^z ""-he number of operational HONEST JOHN and LONG JOHN units but no ' information had been developed concerning the DA7Y CROCKETT Wespore Teams.
CINCARLANT therefore requested information from Third, Fourth and Fifth Armies as to the number of DAVY CROCKETT Weapons Teams — both:XM2S and XM29 — which were to remain at their home stations with crews and equipment and which could be maintained in an on-call status to be brought fcrward if required.
Once again on this date, CINCARLANT pointed out to the Department of the Army that it was considered imperative that immediate authority be granted for Army use of the Key West Ir.tsrnatior.al Airport.
CINCARLANT emphasized to tl-.a Department of the Army that either Key West International Airport or equivalent space at tie Key Wes; Air Station was essential to the success of Army Air Operations in tha objective area.
Ths Advance Ta;tisal Air Command, , command post, which controlled troop carrier •' d flight aircraft, was physically located in the same building.
A :vnplete staff with all liaison and computer service was also available there.
Additionally, CINCARLANT had directed the establishment of the Peninsula aa»s""3ommand comprising the State of Florida, the headquarters of which wtre so be located at Opa-locka Air Sate, The.nd -logistical Command was selected as its command and control headquarters.
Liaison detachments from the Army Material Command, port, medical control, ar.d from pertinent Department of Defense agencies were either already located at Opa-locka Air Ease or were moving into position.
This entire organization, immediatedly responsive to the Commanding General, US.:3NaR-, as CINCARLANT, afforded maximum flexibility, control, ar.d .^ordination.
The command was also intended to supervise and coordinate the movement of replacements and medical evacuees.
The forces and activities of the Peninsula Base Command were restricted to the geographical limits of the State of Florida.
At this point, the Commanding General, USCONARC, transmitted to the Department of the Army the feelings of CINCLANT, with regard to the operational control of the Antilles Command, United States Army.
This wo-ld allow for time co clear up command arrangements, bring the AntiLls* Command up to date on the situation, and enable that command to prepare plans for the staging of Latin American units which might be oommirtsd to the objective area.
These two decks, therefore, had to be used for one-quarter ton Jeeps or for soae o ther such cargo which could utilize this low headroom.
Both the COMET and the PAGE, however, had a normal speed of approximately eight knots, thus requiring about three and one half days for the journey from Savannah, Georgia, to Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
It was considered that if these two vessels were to carry the First Increment of Task Force CHARLIE, they would have to move forward or they would never arrive in the objective area as scheduled.
The TAURUS presented still another problem in that although it was a faster ship — approximately 14 knots — it had no ramps between decks and so had to discharge directly from each deck.
A permanent ramp had been constructed at her normal berth in Hew York City but such facilities would not be available in the objective area.
This meant that the Relics, Roll-off capabilities of the vessel could not be used to their fullest intent and capacity.
CINCARLANT decided that the BARC, , units of the Transportation Corps would fill the gap resulting from this lack of available landing craft.
The BARC a would be available for immediate use upon arrival in the objective area.
They, morevoer, possessed both an amphibious and a land capability which made them adaptable for the movement of emergency requirements from shipboard to inland distribution points.
CIRCARLAST, therefore, directed XVIII Alrborr.e Corps to place the 554th Transportation Platoon, BARC Operation and Maintenance, in the surface echelon of OPLAN 316.
Planning details provided that the BARC's be deck loaded on cargo vessels and that they be made ready for drop discharge at the destination.
Second Army was directed to alert the 554th Transportation Platoon, (EARC Operation and Maintenance), at Fort Story, Virginia;, with three BARC's for actual movement.
Sixth Army was directed to maintain the 14th Transportation Platcor., , with three BARC's in a 3tate cf readiness for future movement if directed.
The Rodl-or. y Roll-off vessels were now scheduled for preloading at Savannah.
Georgia, but the four LST's earmarked for Task Fcrss OHARLIE remained as previously scheduled for out loading through Fort Lauderdale, Florida.
CINCARLANT announced on 31 Oc.fobertb.At the Department of the Army had confirmed his authority to move the. first increment of Task Force CEAXLIE to Fort Lauderdale to excute invasion rehearsals and the preloading of the four LST's.
Action to Initiate the move, however, was held in abeyance by the Deputy Chief of Staff fo„* Logistics pending a final coordination on the location of the LST's.
New lagistical problems were encountered at this time in* connect ion with the four LST's which vere earmarked to transport the various increments of Task Force CHAr.LIE to the objective area.
Therefore, four LST's were considered sufficient, since the total wetznt requirements for the First Increment of Task.
The four LST's which were allocated to CIN> ARLANT for transporting Task Force CHARLIE however, were of the ->ld type which had a maximum capability of 1,000 weight-tons, but only 5G0 weighttons capacity for a normal over-the-beach landing.
World War II experience proved that chose vessels could be loaded up to €00 weight'J.-.-.* tor over-the-beach operations without encountering too much difficulty.
LST, thus giving Task Force CHARLIE a carrying capacity of approximately 3,000 weight-tons for an anticipated over-the-ieach landing.
This msant that even with the fifth vessel, Task Force CHARLIE' a equipment would have to be reduced if that force intended to land over-tne-hserh.
A3 far as CINCARLANT was, concerned, it was ccoc a matter pf apace; btt ratner cr.e of weight and t-e manner in which the tonnage wa» tc r« landed.
This problem consequently led directly to ar.or.ner, that of providing wa^erproofing kits for the vehicles to be landed form amphibious vessels.
Chief of Staff for Logistics, CG USCCNARC, announced on 31 Orr.ober 156.'.har. only one such kit was available to the Cxtamand.
One such vessel under civilian ownership, the CAL-AGRO, was berthed at Ocean City Terminal, Savannah* Georgia.
A preliminary inspection of the vessel by CINCARLANT representatives indicated that it was in good shape and that approximately three day3 would be required to bring it close to its original configuration.
On 31 October CINCARLANT requested the Commander in Chief, United States Atlantic Fleet, , to make the necessary official inspection of the vessel and to determine the practicability of chartering and operating it in view of CINCARLANT' s deficiency in this type vessel.
Further actions were taken on 31 October to move units into a positioned location at Fort Stewart, Georgia.
Those units which moved on this date consisted mainly of the Signal and Medical units which were required to accompany Task Force CHARLIE into the objective area.
These included a Field and an Evacuation Hospital, a Medical Group Headquarters, two specialized Medical Detachments, a Signal Group Headquarters, and a Signal Platoon.
The Medical Group and the two hospitals were directed to move their currently assigned personnel and with full ICE equipment.
Additional professional personnel were to be provided by USARLANT when required.
Because of the scarcity of the type of professional personnel required for the two specialized detachments, they were directed to move without them.
USARLANT would also furnish these professional personnel if and when they were required.
The reasoning of the Department of the Army for this delay was that such a move appeared to be mere compatible with the current operational requirements of both CINCLWT and CINCARI3 and that it also was in agreement with the planning accomplished up to this point and with the authority accorded to CINCLANT in ma<or emergencies.
If CINCLANT and CINCARLANT still felt strongly about"" immediate transfer, the Department suggested that CIN.1LANT, after appropriate coordination wi:'r> CINCARI3, submit such a reto-nmenda-ior. dir*2t'_y to tr.e s"":ir.t Z^itfi cf Staff.
Task Force CHARLIE completed its reic^a-.lo-. id Fort Sn^wart, Caorgia, by 1 November 1962.
Its of ..r.i.s comprising Paga 76 of l^i Paej. t v e Task Force remained loaded on rail flat cars which were stored in holding areas ir. the immediate vicinity of Fort Stewart.
While all wheeled vehicles had been offloaded for future convoy movements, they were retained in a combat loaded condition.
November Task Force person?.* 1 conducted firing pra::e of £rewserved weapons and conducted service practice with artillery pieces on loan from the National Guard.
The entire Task Force was placed on a tnree hour alert status for movement to the ports of embarkation.
The Division Floating Reserve was scheduled to commence a training porgram on 5 November which was designated to increase the individual combat proficiency of all personnel.
Full-tracked vehicles of the Floating Reserve — like thoae ef Task Force CHARLIE — were to remain loaded on rail flat cars.
These cars, however, were to be stoced at holding areas in the vicinity of the port of Savannah, Georgia.
Wheeled vehiciles were to be offloaded but to remain under combat load.
The Floating Reserve was to be held on a six hour alert for eventual movement to the ports of embarkation.
As of 1 November the JSS On-Call Forr.e was still located at Fort Hood, Texas, but was shceduled to begin its move to Fort Stewart, Georgia, about 4 November.
At Fork Stewart this force would accomplish the same training program as the Division Floating Reserve.
CINCARLANT considered a ten day 'alert status adequate of this latter force.
Because ef the widespread interest which would be aroused by the proce-aed military actions in Cuba, an additional specialized -jr«it wa3 organized on 1 November 1962 to meet these specific needs within sr.a obje ::'.ve area.
The 1st Press Camp, , was organized at Fort fc-icis, Virginia, with an authorized strength of thirteen officers t one warrant officer, and eighty-one enlisted personnel and assigned tie miaeioi. of providing information services, fasilities, and administrative ewppcrt frr accredited news media representatives who would operate with the United States Forr-SB in the objective area.
The division planned to send four M+tf tanks, four Mil tcrks. and one M5S to Fort Lauderdale, Florida, where driver training would' be conducted for all tank r^mmanders and drivers of -he First Increment as well as for certain supervisory personnel.
A t-tal of cO personnel were involved in the first of suet training courses fsr Task Forjs JHARLIE. *hs division planned -o ship the personnel to Fort Lauderdale ':-' .■•a^i^?. < -al :us whilr. the equipment would be snipped by rail. ge 77 of 17^ Pages In Addition to the driver training program proposed by the 1st Armordd Division at Fort Lauderdale, Florida, CINCARLANT had proposed the practice loading of the various increments of Task Force CHARLIE on the four allocated LST's.
A oort call for the first increment of the Task Force vas issued by the United States Arm/ Trar.so^rtation Terminal Command, Atlantic, on 3 November, with the personnel and equipment scheduled to arrive at Port Everglades, Florida, on the following day.
At the same time XVIII Airborne Corps recommended that the entire first increment be loaded on four allocated LST's as provided in the orginal planning.
In order to give additional assurance, one of tht four LST's would carry a complete causeway pier of fcur sections.
Ihia would enable the LST's to carry the maximum planned weights since they would not be required to beach.
The XVIIE Airborne Corps recommended that these procedures be carried out in a practice landing as a prel?.mir.arr to actual operations in the Assault Phase of OPLAN 316.
It was printsd out that the Division Floating Reserve was scheduled to arrive in the objective area on cargo 6hips on D+10 and could unload at any of four possible locations.
The availability of the Floating Reserve closed ashore waa estimated at D*12.
Planning factor estimates for the. number of tanks in the objective area on D-i-12 were approximately 300.
Not all of these tanks would be in the immediate area of operations and many already would have suffered combat losses.
USC3NARC/USARLANT planners concluded that operations at that point would favor an infantry-heavy rather than a tankheavy force.
They therefore pointed out that a substitution for tactical reasons could be accomplished by swithhing the 2nd Battalion, 8lst Armor, form the On-Cali Force to the Division Floating Reserve, displacing the 2nd Battalion, 52nd Infantry.
The XVIII Airborne Corps was given until the isllnwing day to make a firm recommendation in this regard.
In preparation for actual assault phase movements, the beat and floating craft units of the Transportation Corps had bear, moved forward to tha St.
Tna units ware --ndsr tns cemmand and/cr control of the 159th Transportation Battalion, 'Eoat) , from Fort Eustia, Virginia, An additional boat company and a ICu-con crane from the United States Army Transportation Terminal ^emmand, G-if, were also added to the amphibious element of the surface ecr.elon.
Petersburg, Florida, the 123th Transportati on Sattalioa for operational control for the duration of the Cuban emergency.
Upon termination of the operation, thai ifcit and the ecuipmi&t world revert to the control of the Co-nnwtnding General, , Fourth Army.
Feriiasior. for tha.Arrtf to ««« Kay Weat Istaraiitionel Airport as a staging field for Army aircraft earoute to the objective area vas obtained on 3 November.
On that date the Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the Chief of Staff, United States Army to initiate action with local authorities for use of the airpert.
All equipment was combat loaded and tracked vehicles remained loaded on flat cars in holding areas in the vicinity of Fore Stewart.
Personnel of the entire Ta*k Force were psychologically ready for immediate combat and were on a thrae-hsur alsrt for movement to a designated port of embarkation.
Ail Task Force personnel, moreover, were restricted to the Fs-rt Stewart reservation a-d had with them only thac clothing prescribed by OPLaN 3 It.
Personnel of the livisicn Floating Reserve were acheduled to close at Fort atswart an the following day, but all equipment had already arrived.
All wheeled vehicles wire already offloaded and the tracked vehicles were scheduled for offloading commencing on 11 November. ,Like Tasit Force CHARLIE, the personnel of the division Floating Reserve were in alert status and were rsstriitsed tr tie Fort Sttwart reservation.
This grouo, noweser, did have military winter clothing in addition to that prescribed i3P1AN 3Hi.
All v«iici.s* or this fir.:?, including tranced vehicles w-sre to be unleaded \pvc arrival.
Petersburg, Florida, the 108th Transportation Battalion for operational control for the duration of the Cuban emergency.
Upon termination of the operation, the unit and the equipment would revert to the control of the Commanding General, Fourth Army.
Permission for the Army to use Key West International Airport as a staging field for Army aircraft enroute to the objective area was obtained on 3 November.
On that date the Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the Chief of Staff, United States Army to initiate action with local authorities for use of the airport.
Once the pertinent negotiations were completed, CINCLANT, was authorized to begin, at his discretion, to preposition supplies, equipment, and personnel.
The Joint Chiefs of Staff limited the immediate use of the airfield to the prepositioning of only logistical support and required operational facilities.
On 4 November, the 1st Armored Division was queried by higher headquarters as to its capability to maintain its current operational readiness posture and its current deployment configuration without significant reduction of combat readiness.
In reply, the 1st Armored Division pointed out that Task Force CHARLIE was at full TOE strength in both personnel and equipment and was in the highest possible state of readiness.
All equipment was combat loaded and tracked vehicles remained loaded on flat cars in holding areas in the vicinity of Fort Stewart.
Personnel of the entire Task Force were psychologically ready for immediate combat and were on a three-hour alert for movement to a designated port of embarkation.
All Task Force personnel, moreover, were restricted to the Fort Stewart reservation and had with them only that clothing prescribed by OPLAN 316.
The 1st Armored Division estimated that this alert posture could be maintained for an additional two weeks time — or until about 28 November — without significantly affecting the Task Force's combat readiness.
Personnel of the Division Floating Reserve were scheduled to close at Fort Stewart on the following day, but all equipment had already arrived.
All wheeled vehicles were already offloaded and the tracked vehicles were scheduled for off-loading commencing on 11 November.
Like Task Force CHARLIE, the personnel of the Division Floating Reserve were in alert status and were restricted to the Fort Stewart reservation.
This group, however, did have military winter clothing in addition to that prescribed in OPLAN 316.
Although the unites were still short a few key personnel and a few items of equipment, they were placed on a twelve-hour alert status.
The 1st Armored Division felt that this posture could also be maintained for approximately two weeks without significantly affecting readiness.
The 2nd Brigade and the 3rd Battalion, 2nd Artillery, had already commenced their move but were not scheduled to close at Fort Stewart until about 12 November.
All vehicles of this force, including tracked vehicles were to be unloaded upon arrival.
Personnel of till force were equipped with some garrisont7pe clothing in -addition to the prescribed military winter clothing.
Although not required, the' 1st Araored Division planned to place this force under the suss uniform and off-post restrictions as the Tapk Force and the Floating Reserve.
The 1st Armored Division concluded that a somewhat leaser state of readiness approximately a 24 hour alert atatus — could be maintained for an additional 30 days, or until about 30 December, provided that certain of the reatrictipns placed on Taak Force CHARLIE and the Diviaion Floating • Reserve were relaxed.
Measures proposed by the 1st Armored Division included a controlled relaxation of paas and uniform policies for all concerned and controlled offloading, and reloading of full-track equipment for Task Force CHARLIE in order to permit firing practice and maintenance operations.
In addition to the above situation, queries had also been made aa to the possibility of a ""Stand-Down"" for these forces.
The 1st Armored Divieion assumed that this phrase meant a DEFCON 4 status or perhaps an even lower readinesa condition.
If this assuapt ion were correct, •Task Force CHARLIE would require/ a maximumof 48 hours to regain its current operational readiness poature, while the Division Floating Reserve would require approximately 72 hours.
The On-Call Force' could meet any required readlneas posture commensurate with the time required to move and deploy Taak Force CHASLIE and the Division Floating Reserve.
The division requested authority from ClNrARLANT to dis. patch an additional 80 peraenxel to Fort Lauderdale for such training as soon as the first group completed its training phase.
The division also requested authority to leave the pertinent equipment at Fort Lauderdale until all this training waa completed.
V *\ slat tie vessel was urgently required by CINCARLANT for training purposes.
The second' ; '-"". ptcblsm was the. lack of adsptaess of the CDMET's crew in handling her , • ^ "" > ' i ~own lifting gear.
Skilled a-anaereial stevedores assisted and ""instructed the *v£ msmitrs of the crew in this operation during che £-efc*.aseal.
The solution %r ; f J '] recommended by the Atlantic Terminal Cos-rand 1 s representatives was that•""""-■•;•/; <■ eight skilled heavy ""coom operators from Fort Eustls, Virginia, be assigned , to the ship's ccmpiensnt.
The Joint Chief s cf Staff approved tie request for the charter of one additional LST on 5 November and grantftd authority to the Commander, Military Sea Transport Service, to charter the LST CAL-ASBO at Savannah, Georgia.
Is. . . ■ justifying this reccmmeaiation, Third Arm pointed out that maintenance, training, and morale would be affected aignif icantly if these units were held in their current readiness posture beyond 9 November.
The estimated arrival of the On-Call Force was now moved forward to 11 November.
In the interim, the 1st Armored Division had accomplished certain changes to the forces for OPLAN 316.
The 2nd Battalion, 81st Armor, had been substituted for the 2nd Battalion, 52nd Infantry, in the Division Floating Reserve and the latter unit was now &z the On-Call Force.
In addition, the 3rd Battalion, 2nd Artillery, had ""seen added to the On-Call Force.
In response to an Inquiry from CINCARLANT, the Commanding General, XVIII Airborne Corps — also designated as Commander, Joint Task Force Cuba — submitted a number of comments and recommendations -on the composition and use of the forces allocated to OPLAN 316.
This resulted from recurring Increases in both the force requirements and fcrce availability as new intelligence Information on Cuba was made ■available.
This seemed to him to be the next logical step in the development of. s' stronger 'plan.
If this conclusion proved to be acceptable, a new concept could then be developed for the use of the various elements of the Task Organization.
First of all, on D-Day the E2ad asd 101st Airborne Divisions would conduct their planned prashuaeassault end the Marines, in sufficient force, would secure the beachhead at Tarara.
The 2nd Infantry Division would land over-the-beach at Tarata immediately Page 83 of I7 ^ Pages behind the Marines.
The 1st Amoved Division would land through the port at Mariel, using the maximum available assault shipping, while the 1st Ir.f entry 'Division — Xeas zbs planned airlanded elements — would immediately follow the 1st Armored Division through the port of Mariel or possibly through Havana, if that port had already been opened.
This would enable the use ef the 5th Infantry, the 2nd Armored, or the 4th Infantry Divisions, —the three as a Floating.
The availability of assault shipping, hc*/ever, waB the primary factor which limited the ability to introduce additional fcrces into the initial phase of the operations.
Current planning factors called for a maximum use of. the port facilities at Mariel and, unless sufficient quantities of assault shipping were made available, it was extremely doubtful if any more fcrces « in addition to those already being used in the OPLAN — could be placed ashore within the first eight to ten days.
During the period 19 November to 21 Decenber, series of joint airborne exercises called ""SUM SHADE"" were conducted for eacb battle group of tie 82nd and 10 let Airborne Divisions.
The experience gained during the Cuban emergency has resulted in the Amy attaining a high state of readiness and the Arpy was ready ir. all respects to execute military operations in Cuba in support of United States natior-sl policy.
Naval forces involved in the Cuban operations included Attack Carriers, with embarked Air Groups.
Anti-Submarine Forces, Amphibious Forces, Fleet Marine Forces, Service Forces, Mine Forces, Submarine Forces, and Naval Air Forces.
All of these naval units contributed significantly to the readiness to execute CINCLANT OPIANS 312/316 if directed.
They conducted the surface quarantine operation, and they contributed a major effort in photo reconnaissance and ASW operations.
Direct the Commander Naval Task Force to conduct and control operations in support of CCMANTDEFCOM fcr the Defense of Guantanamo Naval Base and for the selective air strikes provided for in the plan, Direct the CCMNAVTASKFCR to conrrci and coordinate all air operations in support of the defense cf Guantanamo Naval Base.
Advise CINCAFIANT of any Navy/Marine air forces which can be made available for air strikes and reconnaissance operations in Cuba which are not committed to the defense cf Guar.car.amc Naval Ease and provide these forces to him for CPCON when directed.
Provide or arrange for the logistic and administrative support of naval farces.
Provide the Commander, Naval Task Force, and the Naval forces listed in Annex A, Task Organization and Forces.
Provide, or arrange for provision of logistics and administrative suFP°rt of Naval, forces.
Assume responsibility for logistic support of PAC3M II iy.nl forces vhen the forces enter CINCLANT's area of responsibility.
Conduct ASW* AEff» Anti-raider, Mine Countermeasures, and other operations in the Atlantic Command area outside the Cuban area of operations, (Joint Zone Cuba), in order to defend the continental U.S., essential bases agd areas, shipping at sea, and United States forces deploying to or participating In the operations . set forth.
Conduct ASW operations as necessary within the Cuban area of operations, , txL.support of or in coordination with Commander Naval Task Force.
This phase vould be executed by CINCLANT when ths JZS direct an increased state of readiness for military operations in:-&a Phase I provides fcr orderly activation of necessary command and control agencies, the establishment of an advanced state of readiness to reinforce the Naval 3ase at Guantanamo Bay, and possible repositioning of certain naval forces.
Assemble joint task force staff augmentation and place on 4 hour movement notice.
Direct Carib PHIBRON uith embarked Marines to deploy to an area -.•ithin 4 hours steaming 6f Guantanamo Bay.
Take all necessary actions to prepare other designated forces for Cuban operations short of actual deployment or interruption of scheduled operations.
When directed by the J2Sj CINCLANT would order this phase into execution to provide for the most advanced state of. readiness attainable short of. actual hostilities; it requires major deployments and re-positioning of forces.
Reserve forces, MATS aircraft, and MSTS shipping will be made available for this phase.
Chop Carib PHIBRON to COMANTDEFCOM; when Marines disembarked, sail PHIBRON to CONUS port for reload.
Task Force, to form and deploy Naval Task Force to vicinity of objective area.
Direct CG FMFLANT to provide air-lifted reinforcement to Guantanamo Bay as required.
Direct COMNAVAIRLANT to asfcist CG FMFLANT in air-lift of designated Marine forces.
This phase would be ordered into execution by CINCLANT only after the outbreak of hostilities or a United States decision to conduct military operations in Cuba.
Upon announcement of D-Day, P-Hour, movements and deployments in progress will be adjusted to meet the established times.
Continue provision and deployment of naval forces as necessary and P""ge 83 of 1""7& Pages dire.:!-.id; chop forces to Commander Naval Task Force upon departure OtNI'S ports.
In addition to the';$asks outlined above for 312/316 OFLAHS, CINCLANTrir specified that the Commander SECOND Fleet who was Vice Admiral Alfred GWard, USN would serve as Commander in Chief United States Atlantic Fleet if directed.
Also COMSECONDFLT was directed to be. prepared to provide flag facilities for a CINCIANT command echelon in the objective area if required.
Although not specified as Navy tasks in the extant 312/316 OPLANS the Navy provided four TACAN equipped ships in the Florida Straits as navigational aids for CINCAFLANT strike aircraft and to assist in recovery of ditched pilots.
In the area of personnel rescue the Navy was also to provide small craft in the water area adjacent to the air drop zone near llariel to recover parachutists who inadvertently might land in the water.
The foregoing tasks were modified to conform to changes in the command structure and to meet additional requirements as they developed.
The mission of the base is to maintain and operate medium base facilities.
It provides fleet units with the minumum support necessary to the accomplishment of training missions.
Naval Station, Naval Air Station, Marine Barracks, Hospital, Dental Clinic, Supply Depot, and Public Works.
In addition there are two fleet commands, the Fleet Training Group and Utility Squadron 10.
The Guantanamo Bay area was seired from Spanish forces by United States Marines in June 1898 during the Spanish-American War.
Although hostilities ceased in 1S9S, it vas not until 1C03 that a formalized lease agreement becveen the new Republic of Cuba and the United States was consummated.
In 1234, a treaty between the Governments of the United States and Cuba confirmed the previous lease agreement and gave the United States a continuing lease on the 5 by 9 mile base.
This lease could only be voided by the United States abandoning the area or by mutual. .agreement.
As a result, policies of military significance concerning Guantanamo have been highlighted since that date.
Two policies of major importance were that the United States would hold the Naval Base, Guantanams and that overt action against Guantanamo could result in the Joint Chiefs of Staff directing military operations by CIKCLANT in Cuba.
Commander, Antilles Dofenne Command is assigned responsibility by CIKCLAIJT for the overall coordination of the defense of Guantanamo Naval Pa Se 90 , of }1L Pages feBase.
The major combat unit assigned vas a Marine Battalion to be air lifted to Guantanamo on order.
On 12 October COMCARIBSEAFRON recomnewirjd that at tiaa first sign that hostilities were imminent, a Regimental Headquarters and two Marine Battalion Landing Team*, should be placed at-Guantanamo and dependents evacuated.
Prior to the receipt of COIIC.-.llIDr.E.'iFCQN's recommendations, on 11 October CINCLANTFLT directed C0MNAVA1RLANT to assign VA-35 to COMNAVBASE GTMO to arrive at McCalJa by 18 October for primary close air support missions.
Four days later on 15 October, COMPHIBIANT recommended the immediate reinforcement of Guantanamo.
Shortly after that CG FMFLANT indicated his intention of prepositioning supplies and ammunition at Guantanamo.
VA*35 which had been assigned to COMNAVBASE GTKO was in place at McCalla by 16 October.
At this point the build up to improve the defensive readiness at Guantanamo was being rapidly implemented.
The decision had been made that the adequate defense of Guantanamo required the presence of substantial numbers of attack aircraft, naval gunfire support ships and marine ground forces.
The risk of losing aircraft as well as the air strips in case of pre-emptive attack by Cuban forces was accepted.
From this time forward the entire combat capability of the Atlantic Command was to be brought to be;ar on the Government of Cuba.
Specific tasks assigned were the evacuation of dependents, the reinforcement of defense forces, the holding of Guantanamo for seventy-two hours without outside assistance and the seizure of selected critical terrain.
Brigadier General Collins, USMC, Commanded the ground forces; (b> Three marine rifle companies were in position on the main line cf resistance ; an observation plane was airborne seeking unusual activity in Cuban territory; the ESSEX was underxwy-to provide AAW and surveillance to the west of Guantanamo; one and a half rifle companies from the air-lifted battalion from Camp Pendleton \jere in place.
October; (f> Naval gunfire ships were occupying three fire support areas; two FSU aircraft ;*ere providing airborne CAP and two on strip alert daring daylight; PHI2R0N C was within four hours of the base, but out of the sight of land.
Recognizing the shortcomings of his anti-aircraft warfare capability, en 6 October C2MNAV3ASE GTMG stated that the only AAW capability was being provided by PSU type aircraft of Utility Squadron 10 and ships undergoing refresher, training.
C0M3ARI3SEAFR0N oonci-rring with this recommendation further recommended to CEJCLANCI-T that the HAWK or REDEtZ be pro>*ided for defense against no earning low level air strikes.
Hjt^'r.i.v^ambazone is always a a source of great concern to commanders at all levels.
Some were to leave by the aircraft which were bringing in the Marine combat units.
Most were to be evacuated by the surface ships that had been designated.
COMCARIBSEAFR0N was to provide air and surface escort to protect ships and aircraft evacuating non-combatants.
To provide a means of emergency water re supply in the event the Base water source was eliminated, plans were made to have two TAO/AOG readied to haul water when required.
Base defense plans were to include attack to the Northeast to capture the Yteras water plant.
On 21 October CINCLANFET recommended that two ""-surgical teams be deployed to Guantanamo carrying, with them fifty pints of whole blood.
With the foregoing description of the situation at the Naval Base, Guantanamo -and the actions being taken .provide background for the' developments during the period 21 October ■17 November.
On -23 October the radio instructed local militiamen and soldiers, to report to the military school at San Jus to.
Medical teams were directed to report to the hospital and the civilian community was told to extinguish lights, store water and remain inside.
To add to the mounting tension, several Cuban vehicles including three tanks were observed to the east of the base.
Despite this activity it was worthy Of note that there was still an absence of announcements to the Cuban people about the build up of United States Forces at Guantanamo.
There was no noticeable change in the Cuban forces outside the fence line.
In order to acquire as much local and tactical intelligence as possible several requests for aerial photographic coverage were submitted.
Incomiag ir.telligence summaries in mid-November reported that ext&nsivs construction was continuing at the Holguin Airfl&ld in Orients Prcviree. la addition the.
Soviets -ere believed to have in Cuba, four task battalicna with i2'*» A-54 tankfc; the SNAPPER anti-tank missile; and, of great tazZteal significance, a Free Rocket Over Ground battalion with 6 lanrahers and 24 rockets.
Because of the fact that the FROG could carry a zuclear warded., 33MNA""3ASE GTMO recommended that any movement of FROG missiles into poaitissa which threatened the Base he placed In the category of an cif^tsivi act unacceptable to the United States.
However, by 21 October the planned size of the grrvnd fr.r^s had been greatly increased.
The success of this air m-r-v^ment would havs bees greatly impaired if the airfield had been exoosed to any kind of harraasi-g artillery or morsar fire.
J Page 95 of \ltx Pages In order to clearly delineate Adair a 1 O'Donxiel's position as COMNAVBASE (HMO, the Secretary of Defense, on 23 October, gave the Admiral clear authority to respond instantly to any attack on Guantanamo.
By this time the massive reinforcement of the Naval Base was far advanced.
Fleet training had been discontinued and members of the Fleet Training Group were assigned base defense. billets.
Reporting the Base Defense situation, COMNAVBASE GTMO reiterated to COMCARIBSEAFRON that, adequate defense against air attack was still the greatest weakness.
VU-10 was providing some air defense capability, but this was not sufficient.
Station a 4 plane detachment of WF aircraft at McCalla Air Field to enhance the early warning capability.
As a continuation of the air build up, the CO of MAG-32 arrived on the afternoon of 23 October.
TO improve the air defense, 6 aircraft were direcced to fly a one hour dawn patrol.
COMNAVBASE GTMO, receiving CAP and on station CAS from the ENTERPRISE and INDEPENDENCE, requested that 2 VFN be on station from sunset to sunrise and 4 VFN be on station at data and dusk.
The air defense was further improved by the arrival of the HAWK battery on 25 October.
In addition, the DAHLGREN DLG-12 was directed to load ammunition and proceed to Guantanamo for duty.
Once on station the DAHLGREN was. to be designated Anti-Air Warfare Command Post for the Guantanamo Defense Area should base power be destroyed.
Page 96 of -\iu Pages Windward Sector: Two battalions were deployed abreast en the MaiLine of Resistance.
In reserve were two more battalions comprised of two companies from the Marine Barracks, two companies of CB's and fcur cempar-i^.s «"".£ blue jackets.
It was at this point that 2Z FM*~ LANT made some observations to CINCLANT regarding the vulnerability of aircraft at Guantanamo.
The following recommendations were made rsg&rding protection in case of an attack* 3ase at Guantanamo the minimum number of aircraft ts as*t ypvratio-:al requirements.
Maintain aircraft in highest state of readiness to executes emergsrey flyaway.
Further improvement in the situation was evidenced when, on 7 Novmeber the Russian government agreed to have United States ships close aboard for the photographing of missiles on the deck of certain ships departing Cuba.
So these were days of continuing what had become a dally routine Sonar contacts were kept in constant surveillance.
A/rareful check was kept of all surface operations involving merchant ships, particularly those carrying cargo to or from Cuba.
The Cuban government press and radio continued to place considerable emphasis on the demand for the withdrawal of United States Forces from Guantanamo.
ADMINISTRATIVE HIGHLIGHTS The evacuation of dependents was carried out very efficiently.
Despite the personal hardship of leaving their husbands, fathers, pets and belongings there was a minimum of complaining and confusion.
CNO sent the dependents a message delivering his congratulations and respects on the manner in uhich they were carrying out the evacuation.
Except for two Instances, where further hospitalization at Guantanamo was necessary, all non-combatants were evacuated by 1630 on 22 October.
Except for two or three occasions the normal number of Cuban workers reported for duty during the entire crisis.
The few interruptions were Page 9q of \7L Pages as a result of harassing tactics on the part of the Cuban military.
Such tactics as disrupting the transportation and lengthy Interrogation and search were used.
At no time did COMNAVBASE Indicate the slightest doubt about the loyalty «r motives of his Cuban labor force, nor was there any overt act on their part that should ha\*2 created such a doubt.
As a matter of fact, certain on-board Cubans volunteered for extra duties.
For example, 40 Cubans were standing watches with the Base Police as the second man in a police patrol.
A significant development was the bringing forward of evidence of 2 employees cooperating with Cuban authorities in the harassment of Base employees.
The Voice of America continued to broadcast and on 22 October the highlighted program was President Kennedy's speech on the Cuban situation.
An Air Force C-135 carrying ammunition crashed on 23 October killing the entire crew.
By 24 October a circuit from Guantanamo to the White House was ready for operation.
On 31 October COMNAVBASE reported to CNO that a source reported the recovery of an American pilot whose aircraft was reportedly shot down by Russian forces on 29 October somewhere between Banes and Gibara.
CNO replied that the UN was arranging for the delivery of the shot down pilct, Major Anderson, to the Naval Base.
Except for one occasion on 31 October when the 12 inch water line between t'jie Tataras River and pump house #5 sustained a leak, water service was normal.
As emergency measures hotjever, 2 tankers and a water barge were available for fresh water resupply.
The water problem just like the Cuban labor for?.* never became critical.
On 3 November 2 Marines were critically injured when they inaavstt.Trir-.lv entered a mine field.
Four other Marines and a Navy corpsman were wounded when they attempted to remove the injured Marines.
On 6 November 2 Marine sentries ar.uidenr.allv ran a Ford pick-up truck through the fence line.
No Cuban officials appeared at this mssticg and the matter was considered closed.
Another casua&ty resulting incident occurred at 2330 on 8 November, A Marine sentry shot and wounded 2 ether Marines when they did not respond to his challenge.
Planning and preparations for both offensive and defensive actlcns continued.
As the sailors and marines became more accustomed to their surroundings and situation, the problems inherent in field living under combat conditions became the issue of the moment.
Eating, sleeping, working and recreation existing until combat began or until the situation returned to normal.
A schedule was established for relieving the units on the Main Lice of Resistance so that the troops could enjoy hot meals.
Watches were organized eo that the men could have adequate sleep under more comfortable conditions.
The CB's with more appropriate equipment added immeasurably to the digging of trenches, clearing of fields of fire, construction of bunkers and eonmancd posts* More complete communications were installed.
Briefings on the various plans of action, live firing exercises, repair of equipment time was now available for all of thig without detracting from the readiness posture.
There were no critical personnel shortages and the troops were well motivated and offensively minded.
And, if such a state is possible under the conditions as they existed, the situation had become normal.
Thought was given toward sending liberty parties to other Caiibbean islands for rest and recreation.
Credibility of this rumor mounted on 21 November when the quarantine of Cuba was lifted.
By 28 November 1962, the situation had so improved that most of the reinforcing Marine units had been ordered returned to their home stations and plans were being made to have dependents batk to Guantanamo by Christmas.
Nevertheless, defense of the base still was considered of the utmost importance.
Four VMA aircraft were in place at Leeward Point together with a detachment of VU-10.
Foregoing defense forces maintained equivalent of DEFCON THREE at all times.
Maintained in rsadiness to provide for arrival first company 12 hours and remainder of battalion within 24 hours.
It should be borne in mind that other Cuban plans are predicated upon accomplishment of at least the foregoing reinforcement and the evacuation of dependents and non-combatants.
The same day, 23 October, the Joint Chiefs of Staff directed the establishment of a blockade of Cuba.
In their message, the JCS gave the reasons and instructions for the blockade.
Then, on 24 October as directed by JCS and CINCLANT, CINCLANTFLT executed his blockade order.
The organization was divided into three task groups that remained in effect throughout the quarantine.
However, some of the units were relieved in kind as the operation progressed.
COMCRUBESFLOT SIX with 2-Cruisers; 2-DLG; 1-DDG; 9-DD; 2-DDR; 1-DDG; and 1-EDD assigned CTG 136.
CTG 136. took station to the west of the general center of this arc and CTG 136. operated as necessary to replenish the ships on station.
Later, it was determined by United States aerial reconnaissence that the Cuban Air Force and the Cuban airfields were in a poor state of readiness to launch attacks against ships on the ""WALNUT"" stations.
Consequently xuth the approval of CINCIANT and JCS the quarantine arc was readjusted closer to Cuba but seaward of the Bahamas Chain.
Hogle, USN reported as Director and was ultimately assigned a staff of 30 officers and men.
The search effort in an operation such as this one was a monumental task.
Naval Air Patxol Squadrons and the Anti-Submarine Warfare Forces Atlantic Fleet provided aircraft to search the ocean approaches to Cuba.
At the outset of the Quarantine the United States Air Force provided six RB-47 aircraft and four RB-50 aircraft ^o augment Navy search efforts.
To search this approximately 4,500,000 square miles of ocean, the Navy flew aircraft from such widely separated points as Roosevelt Roads, Guantanamo Bay, Bermuda, the Azores, Argentia, Jacksonville, Key West, Norfolk and Patuxent River.
These patrol aircraft did an outstanding job of locating ships in the Cuban trade.
The majority of ships Intercepted were first sighted by aircraft and (hen the quarantine ships were vectored for the interception.
The Remington Rand Univac Sea Surveillance Computer System was the primary method of tracking the merchant shipping to and from Cuba.
The best information on point of departure, course and speed for each ship was entered in the computer.
A read-out every two hours listed the latitude and iongtltude of each ship of (interest.
The initial frequency of the STTSUMS was six per uay which was reduced to three per day commencing 31 October 1962.
Others with nonsuspicious cargo -slowed or even stopped, seemingly awaiting guidance from the Kremlin* Gradually these latter ships proceeded to their ports of destination la Caba. b* SECOND PHASE* From 5 to 11 November.
It was during. this phase that CINCLANTFLT promulgated the code name SCOTCH TAPE followed by a numeral to designate a suspect ship which might warrant special attention.
This code name facilitated unclassified reference to a particular merchant ship.
During this phase, eleven SCOTCH TAPE ships were observed outbound from Cuba.
Based upon information furnished In the UN by the Soviets to our delegation, these ships were intercepted and inspected for missiles without actually being stopped or -boarded.
However, no offensive weapons were detected oo any of these ships intercepted or photographed during this phase* During the first phase, Quarantine Operations were held in abeyance on 30 and 31 October 1962 during the visit of Secretary General U Thant of the United Nations to Cuba.
Mr U Thant was working directly with Premier Castro attempting to explore ways and means to end the Cuban crisis.
In connection with the second phase, great difficulty was encountered in contacting the Russian ships carrying the missiles out of Cuba.
The Soviet delegation to the United Nations had provided the United States with the names of nine Soviet ships, the number of missiles that each ship would carry and the date of departure from Cuban ports.
In turn, the United States, through the Secretary of State provided the Soviet delegation with three <3) locations at sea where the USN ships could rendezvous with the Russian merchant ships in question for the inspection agreed upon.
The name, call signs and hull numbers of all USN combatant ships were indicated in the State Department message.
As a result, It was necessary to initiate an extensive special air and serf ace search to intercept the nine Soviet ships.
This air and surface search caused a great expenditure of time and effort which would not have been required had the Soviets lived up to the agreement for a rendezvous between the various ships.
When intercepted, they appeared well aware of the Instructions of their government and cooperated in varying degrees from good to poor.
BRATSK had been inspected once by CTG 136. by means of surface observations to determine if nuclear material was being transported from Cuba to Russia.
Ship Soviet Missile Count CTNCIANTFLT iMigsile Count 6 As is evident from the discrepancies between the Soviet count and the CISCIANTFLT count, the exchange of information between the Soviet and United States representatives was not entirely accurate.
During Phase Ihree, CTF 81 continued routine and special air searches as -necessary to locate and identify merchant ships enroute to or outbound from Cuba.
Only one ship vas stopped and boarded during the. entire Quarantine Operation.
She was boarded on 28 October by a party from the JOSEPH P KENNEDY, Jr., DD-850.
The cargo was found in order and MARCUIA vas permitted to proceed on to Cuba.
On Tuesday, 20 November 1962, the President of the United States held a press conference.
JCS directed CINCLANT to lift the Quarantine immediately and to ret:irn tha Atlantic Fleet ships to their respective hornsports and normal operating areas.
While the operations with respect to Cuba were partially relaxed, it is to he noted that CZNCIANTTLT on 21 November directed COMASWFORIANT to he prepared to locate and photograph Russian ships leeving Cuban ports with IL-28 aircraft aboard.
This Quarantine Operation was unique in naval annals and it could well herald a pattern of future naval operations.
In the first place, it apprcacned but did not reach, the status of a naval blockade in the accepted sense wf the word.
In the second place, this operation was directed in great part from the seat of government in Washington.
In this connection, there was a steady flow of instructions from Washington to CINCIANTFLT which required rapid dissemination to the operating forces.
Also, there was a pressing requirement for a prompt, accurate and complete flow of the current status and results of the operations.
Although the CW communications were generally fast and good, the requirement for expediting matters required extensive use of the single sideband, voice radio.
One problem noted early during quarantine operations was the lack of uniformity in the method of hailing ships.
These procedures proved to be very effective and information received by CINCLANTFLT from the Force Commander and his intercepting ships was complete in scope and adequate to the needs of the operational and intelligence analyses.
The two considerations listed in the preceeding paragraph were fulfilled by CINCLANT readily and with no undue difficulty.
First, the ,' quarantine effort which approached but was short of a naval blpckadij, provided the United States a"" position of power from which to conduit diplomatic negotiations.
At the same time, if the diplomatic negotiations broke down, the military forces were positioned and poised to commence military operations expeditiously and effectively.
Secondly, the operations were closely directed from Washington, presumably to insure that the diplomatic and military endeavors complemented each other and would not at any time be working at cross purposes.
Er*n sz t im damage incurred did not render either ship incapable of c«7P.~inuing its assigned mission, on the CHESTNUT line.
In closing out this special Quarantine Plot, it is believed that .the procedures and practices established during the operation vere sound and will provide a point of departure for future operations.
This deployment was directed by COMSECONDFLT in response to a CINCLANTFLT directive that in order to reduce reaction time it was desired, until further notice that a CVA be located in Mayport or operate in or soutjx of the Mayport area to the maximum extent practicable.
What started as a routine deployment was to become 43 days of steady steaming for INDEPENDENCE before she returned to her home port.
On 18 October crNCLANTFLT directed COMNAVAIRLANT to chop ENTERPRISE to ;COMSECONBFLT^' The latter was directed to sail ENTERPRISE when ready for sea about 19 October with COMCARDIV TWO and Air Group SIX embarked to proceed south and operate under the same instructions which had been given INDEPENDENCE, COMSECONDFLT was further authorized to alter the schedule «f INDEPENDENCE at his discretion.
It appears that this relief and schedule change came about as a result of a commitment for INDEPENDENCE to take part in a demonstration in the Virginia Capes Area which would have left a gap to the South between 27 October and 6 November.
ENTERPRISE had returned to CONUS after a European deployment on 11 October.
However, the continued presence in Norfolk of other ships led to some public speculation that her sailing was connected with impending Cuban operations.
This OFORD provided the basis for naval actions in support of CIKCLANT OPLAN 312.
Commander Naval Ta6k Force with shore and carrier based aircraft was, commencing at H-Hour, to strike assigned targets In Cuba and provide air defense and close air support to Guantanamo.
COMCARUIV SIX was iatially designated Commander Naval Force and CCMCARDI7 TWO was to be directed to assume command when appropriate.
CG FMFLANT upon execution was to deploy one MAG to Key West and CHOP it to CINCAFIANT, and, if not previously directed, reinforce Guantanamo with one air lifted battalion and the required sea lifted echelon.
If not previously directed, COMPHIBIANT was to terminate his Caribbean exercise, land a BLT from the ready PHTflRON and CHOP it to COM GTMO Sector, CARIBSEAFROT and retain' one PHTBRON with embarked Landing Force in the Caribbean* Later on the 20th OINCLANT directed COMCARDIVs TWO and SIX to move to position as soon as possible for execution of CINCLANT OPLAN 312* and advise ETAo In response to this, COMCARDIV TWO estimated arrival at launch pcir^ of ENTERPRISE with RUSH and HAWKINS as 2110002.
He further stat«d he would gat t3 a more advantageous position, Lat 25N, Long 75W at 2114002.
Commander Antilles Defense Command on the 20th made certair. recommendations with respect to control of forces.
These matters and ethers were clarified by CINCIANT Advance Changs to OFLAN 312.
By message to COMSECONDFLT, CG FMFLANT and COMNAVAIRLANT, CIHCLANTFLT on the 20th directed COMNAVAIRLANT to hold the ENTERPRISE A3 J aircraft ashore.
OOHSECGNDFLT was told to direst ENTERPRISE to take aboard a 20 plane Marine A4D squadron.
CG FMFIANT was told to provide the squadron and fly planes, personnel and equipment aboard as soon as possible and not later than 21 October.
This change in air. group composition increased the close air support capability.
COMCARDIV SIX requested C0MCARDI7 TOO to inform him of readiness to attack assigned targets in first strike and stated his desire for early reconnaissance -and destruction -of KOMARs.
In a follow-up message, C0MCARDI7 SIX further defined approach/retirement areas and stated his -intentions to remain north of Cuba until after first day of operations.
On receipt of COMCARDI"" SZi message 13H3ARDT7 TOO cancelled his earlier message.
J-isr. afisr this, CIIICLANTFLT directed COMNAVBASE GTMO to evacuate depena*.-.i& and non-essential personnel.
While not a part of this force, it is noted that ESSEX with COMCARDIV EIGHTEEN embarked was at Guantanamo.
He stated his ability to strike all assigned targets and intended to . restrike as might be indicated by post-strike briefing and reconnaissance.
He planned to keep 4 CAP and 8 CAS aircraft over Guantanamo during daylight, augmenting as the situation might require.
During this period there was a large volume of traffic relating to target assignments end weapons selection.
ENTERPRISE with FISKE, RUSH and HAWKINS commenced movement via Mayaguana and Windward Passages.
INDEPENDENCE with ENGLISH, HANK, CORRY and O'HARE followed through Windward Passage.
Such frequent refueiings were not required by the current operations then in progress but were considered a necessity if the force Was to be ready for possible execution of a contingency plan.
Alternate day refueiings continued until the departure of COMCARBTV TWO from . the area on 5 December.
Had any plan been executed, all units would have been topped off or nearly so at any time and could have operated for. extended periods without refueling.
Fue lings were scheduled to occur at 0630R each day to permit the beginning of limited flight operations on completion.
The uncertainties of any readiness for contingency plans required all units to be kept at a high logistics level, thus a considerable effort was made to maintain this level.
COKCABDIV TWO also initiated action at this time to shift the GOD basa from Grand Turk to Guantanamo to increase the efficiency of personnel airlifts.
Action was initiated by COMSERVLANT on 25 October to provide an AR and AD in the San Juan/ Area by 3 November.
USS VULCAN and USS GRAND CANYCN were directed to sail with COMCRUDESFLOT 12 embarked on GRAND CANYON to act as COMCRUDESLANT REP at San Juan.
It is not considered operationally feastb lotto restrict ammo availability of strike group CVA'a in such an operation by assigning AE's carrying CLOUD loade to the support of CVA'a.
Pago 1I5 of J21 Pages The afternoon of 26 October ENTERPRISE obtained an ECM ccntact characteristic of SNOOP PIATE radar.
Operating areas were shifted on 27 October tc operate south of 18N because of increasing submarine activity, with TG 135. and TG 135. vest and east of Jamaica Channel respectively.
TG 135. continued to the west the evening of 26 October to operate off the southwest coast of Jamaica.
This move was ideal for submarine protection and an effort was made to operate in the vicinity of shoals present in the area.
CTG 135. was directed to send ENGLISH and HANK to 135. when the first two destroyers reported.
Additional precautions were taken throughout the entire period including all night steaming at darken ship, employing evasive steering, nig zagging and avoiding merchant shipping to the maximum extent feasible.
TG 135. to vicinity 18N 80W ; TEf 135. to 16N 78W ; and TG 135. logistics support group to the area between.
Because of the increased distance and transit time involved the Windward Passage air patrol was secured on 29 October.
All TF movements and areas were predicated on remaining within striking distance of all targets thoughout the operation.
This requirement dictated positioning of ENTERPRISE northwest of Jamaica and north of 19N for optimum tracking of flights from a general position south of Cuba.
This factor subsequently prevented any great alteration of force position for ' the remainder of the deployment.
Due to the number offerees positioned south of Cuba a proposal was initiated to position a tender at Kingston, Jamaica for TAV purposes.
This move plus the availability of the Guantanamo repair facility was considered the optimum positioning of repair services.
Replenishment responsibility wasassumed for TG 44. vhich transited the Panama Canal and arrived in the Caribbean Area on 9 November.
TG 135. was able to absorb this additional requirement, continue alternate refuelings of TG 135.1, TG 135. and consolidate when required from MSTS tankers in the area.
The problem of non-squawking aircraft became increasingly evident in early November.
This problem continued to plague the task force throughout the deployment.
Stroh, COMCARDIV SIX, departed INDEPENDENCE on 9 November for LEXINGTON at Mayport.
By this means the tempo of air operations training was increased by providing one fully ready CVA and one CVA with slightly reduced readiness.
This method of alternating the ready duty was continued until the departure of INDEPENDENCE and. greatlyincreased the flight operations conducted by both C7A's.
O'HARE and W, M WOOD were at tender availability Kingston and DUPONT at Guantanamo for repairs to shaft bearing.
TG 135. ENTERPRISE, J KING, LAWRENCE, RUSH, gWglMS, at sea , FISKE at TAV and C P, CECIL enroute TG 135.
VA-75 was transferred from INDEPENDENCE to Guantanamo as relief for VA-35.
The AIE INDEPENDENCE tow plane* was transferred to ENTERPRISE .to continue AA service fpr TG 135. and TG 135.3.
On 25 November a fatal aircraft accident occurred during the catapult launch of an F-8E aircraft on number 4 catapult, to identify a non-squawking bogey.
In order to accomplish subsequent repairs and inspection to the catapult, the group retired to the area south and southwest of Jamaica.
The final tender availability alongside YOSEMITE at Kingston terminated on 1 December.
A turnover briefing and conference was conducted on board ENTERPRISE 4 December.
ENTERPRISE returned to Norfolk on 6 December having been continuously at sea for 49 days.
OS^S2 was X a;.--rt3i to the strong possibility of Soviet submarine activity *-» the ,; it-'swra Atlantic.
The contact was cbser^dy;. ■ r iLite surface for fir tsen minute's and then. submerged .y.
Upon revisit by ASW aircraft, the TEKEK was found to be dead in the water with an unidentified object alongside.
By the 22nd of October it was evident that some kind of action against Cuba would be forthcoming and additional ASW forces would be required in the southern Florida area.
Both contacts were dead in the water and complete photo and LOFAR coverage were obtained by the aircraft.
This actioii required ASWFORIANT to increase ASW surveillance and to prepare for other more active military measures including activation of the Greenland-United Kingdom ASW barrier.
Minimize of communications was also placed in effect world t:ide on this date.
MILLS reported the TEREK as being dead in the water with running lights secured.
Aircraft operating from NAF Lajes continued to perform daily surveillance in the vicinity of the TEREK to ensure continuous contact and possible Soviet submarines attempting to rendezvous with the ship.
Because of the movement of amphibious forces, COMASWFORIANT VP forces were directed to provide VP ASW surveillance of Amphibious Group FOUR in the Caribbean area.
Several ASW aircraft were directed to intercept certain Soviet shipping enroute to Cuba.
On 24 October 17 VP aircraft and 10 submarines were directed to deploy to the Naval Station Argentia to provide forces for an Argentia Sub-Air Barrier.
Task Group 83.2, , which is a HUK unit, was directed to proceed and rendezvous with the USS INDEPENDENCE group and to provide ASW protection.
As of 24 October, CINCIANTFLT advised thai at least three known Soviet submarines were operating in'the Nor tl* Atlantis.
These three, and perhaps more, could reach the quarantine line within a few days and could best substantial threat to this force.
This action the Fleet Commander advised, could be a deliberate counter action by the Soviets against quarantine forces.
The Chief of Staff, United States Air Force offer ""of USAF aircraft for aerial surveillance of shipping utilizing B-52 aircraft was accepted and areas for patrol were assigned.
This sighting was oi considerable assistance in keeping GROZNY under surveillance by Navy patrol aircraft.
On the 26th of October CINCLANTFLT reported his concern over the shortage of ASW torpedoes and strongly urged an Increase in delivery of these weapons.
This was particularly important in view of Increased ASW activity. In Argentia, COMBARARGENTIA reported that he was not able to load all aircraft assigned to the Argentia Sub-Air barrier due to the lack of HK-43 torpedoes.
On 27 October there was an increase in requirements for open ocean surveillance, and for ASW in support of the quarantine line.
Because of these increased requirements, COMASWFORLANT requested CANCOMARLANT to take the Quonset ASW area under surveillance.
The submarine situation in the Atlantic basin indicated that Soviet subs were making their transit in areas east of the Argentia Barrier.
COMASWFORIANT recommended that the ASW barrier be transferred to the G-I-UR area.
The recommended action was not taken at this time nor at any time duriag the crisis.
On 28 October Task Group AIFA identified a Soviet submarine found on the surface as a FOXTROT Class submarine.
Identifying numbers were painted out and photographs of the sub were obtained.
On 30 October the quarantine was suspended commensurate with the visit of United Nations Secretary General U Thant to Cuba.
ASW surveillance flights, however, continued and submarine contacts were prosecuted.
ASW air patrols conducted surveillance operations in the Davis Strait, Iceland, Azores area on 30 October and reported no significant contacts.
In additira, A3WFORLANT forces participated in surveillance operations for Soviet shipping which were to remove offensive weapons from Cuba.
The code word ""S22T3H TAPE"" was designated for use when merchant ships uere kept under actual surveillance by either air or surface or, irs.
Details of ""SCOTCH TAPE"" operations are noted in the section, on Quarantine Operations.
On 1 November the TEREK was observed continuing on her scuth ws3t2rly •icursa.
The CALCATERRA who was shadowing the TEREK observed what appeared to be signals from the TEREK's search light.
There was no confirmation, however, that TEREK was actually signalling a submarine.
No new s-jbaaria* contacts were made on 1 November and the Argentia sub-air barrier remained cold.
Investigation of contacts and surrsilZ"" anr.s flights continued throughout the period.
Task G'riu? .and Task Group Commanders were advised to continue photo ct^-srage cf ships leaving Cuba and to expedite delivery of photos to Washington.
The Soviet submarine number 945, designated contact G-18, remained »-n the surface on 6 November.
A P3A aircraft was launched to search the general area to the north of the Azores.
One new submarine contact designated TJ-35 was reported southeast of Bermuda.
Surveillance would continue until TEREK was in the vicinity of 55N and was observed on its homeward course.
One new submarine contact was reported by a MATS flight southeast -of 'Charleston, NSC., however, . it wa* of low validity^ The"" srea' was kept trader surveillance.
A S2F tracker squadron, , was deployed to the Marine Corps Air Station at Cherry Point, E.C. for a period of 4 days to provide ASW covsr for amphibious operations.
The ""read out"" problem was of urgent operational concern. flight hours were spent on one contact erroneously classified due to the unknown phenomena.
Active shadowing of the Soviet oiler TEREK, the Soviet submarine number 945, the tug PAMIR and the trawler SHK7AL were terminated on 18 Novsmber.
No new contacts were reported and no significant information en old contacts were made.
It was apparent that Soviet submarine activity in the Westsrn Atlantic was declining.
From the 19th through the 20th of Norxmber ASW forces were primarily employed in ""SCOTCH TAPE"" operations with no significant unidantif isd s""b~ marine. activity reported.
On the 25th of November ""minimize"" was cansailed and operations were reverting to normal conditions.
No significant activity occurred from the 28th through the 1st of December.
More than 620,000 pounds of valuable cargo, and more than 1,000 passengers were transported more than 122,000 miles.
They included, Russian trawlers and fishing factories, Russian merchant ships, a Russian electronic ship, and an ""unfriendly"" submarine.
The foregoing report only spotlights the more significant activities --;f the ASW forces and cannot adequately depict the many hours of tedious search and tracking by ships, aircraft, and their personnel.
RADM Tyree's headquarters is located at the Naval Station Trinidad when the Admiral and his staff are not embarked in a flagship.
During the Cuban crisis COMSOLANT was designated as Commander Task Force 137, (Commander Combined Latin American-United States Quarantine Task Force)* This force of combined United States and Latin American Naval Forces took an active part in the quarantine of Cuba.
United States Atlantic Fleet, was in his flagship, USS MULLINKIX , ste«B±Bg-*£f tJa northern coast of Chile, engaged in conducting the AfiW exercises of.
There had bees little warning in toe Force that a crisis was building up over Cuba.
T» halt this offensive buildup, a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated.
On Hedsssdar morning, the 24th of October, QOMSOLANT was directed to return to Trinidad with key members of his staff as soon as possible.
On request, the senior Chilean and Peruvian officers transferred to MULLMNIX to be briefed on the situation.
They returned to their ships, command was .passed to the senior officer, Captain Maza, Peruvian Navy, and the MULLINNIX left the UNTTAS III Task Force for Callao, Peru.
Upon arrival the morning of the 25th, COMSOLANT and most of the members of his staff boarded the UNITAS United States A£r detachment aircraft and flew to Trinidad, arriving the morning of 2$ October.
The Organization of American States backed the President's stand unanimously CINCLANTFLT ordered the establishment of a quarantine force which would be placed in position to intercept shipping going to and from Cuba to the northeast.
However, this force permitted free access to the Caribbean area through the Lesser Antilles passages.
The OAS Indicated that nations providing forces to the Quarantine Force desired to operate as a combined force under the OAS, rather than under United States command, although they did not' object to being placed under a United States commander.
Accordingly, CINCIANTFLT cancelled his directive and ordered COMSOLANT to report to CINCLANT for operational control.
After a brief stop in Panama, the MULLINHTX sailed for Trinidad, arriving on Saturday morning, the 3rd of IJdvember.
Having only recently returned from an extensive period at sea, most of their crews had been on leave and the ships were 'j^cergoing repair when the quarantine was established.
Nevertheless, within the space of five days the crews were re-assembled and the ships headed for Trinidad, 4500 miles to the north, at high speed.
They stopped only brief iy. at Rio.de Janeiro and Recife to fuel and arrived at the United States Naval Station, Trinidad on the morning of Thursday, the 8th of November.
As an indication of Argentine Navy pride, the ships ordered and paid for the first load of fuel, on arrival, so that they would be turned over to the United States operational control as fully ready as possible.
By the time the Argentine ships arrived, the COMSOLANT staff had begun to expand in order to be able to properly plan and command the southern phase of the quarantine operation.
Many were especially chosen to form Communication-Liaison Teams to be placed aboard the Latin American ships.
These off icers and men had experience in cryptography and in radio communication and could also speak Spanish or, in a few <Jaseo, Portuguese.
It is fairly obvious that not many officers and men had the special skills called for and that the few who did have would be widely scattered.
One chief radioman came from Point Mugu, California, while officers arrived from as far away as Bremerton, Washington and Rota, Spain.
COMSOLANT and staff normally consisted of the Admiral, 8 officers and 20 enlisted men.
After the augmentation, the staff had expanded to 25 officers and 51 men, £f which 10 Officers and 20 men were earmarked for the express purpose of assignment to Communications-Liaison Teams.
This was translated into Spanish with the able assistance of the Argentine officers who, together with their yeoman and aided by COMSOIANT yeoman, translated, mimeographed and distributed the Spanish version in less then two days.
The combined quarantine potential grew as new ships were added to the Task Force* j On 9 October the Venezuelan destroyers ART ZULIA and ARV NUBVA ESPARTA, commanded by Commander SECOND Destroyer Division and CO ZULIA, Captain M Benatuil, arrived at the United States Naval Station, Trinidad.
A third Venezuelan shtfo, the submarine ARV CARTTE remained on call in Venezuela awaiting orders to take part in the operation.
There was no need for her services at the time, but it was planned to use her in combined anti-submarine exercises later.
On hand to greet the Argentine ships when they arrived in Trinidad was RADM Grunwaldt, the Argentine Naval Attache in Washington.
Alonso, head of the ordnance branch of the Argentine Navy's purchasing commission in Washington, to become the first foreign .... officer attached to COMSOIANT staff.
Shortly,after, ICDR Jose AH Erlceno, >*». is < normally chief of the Venezuelan Navy's communications department, reported in an Assistant Chief of Staff for Venezuelan Operations.
These two offices proved to be extremely valuable to logistics and supply matters, as well as in operations.
Meanwhile, the physical plant of the Naval Station, Trinidad and COMSOLANT's headquarters were feeling the impact of the quarantine operations.
It became apparent Immediately after the combined operation was ordered. that Naval Station, Trinidad, which -provides all communication support for COMSOIANT headquarters when ashore, would be jcsable to provide either the number of circuits needed to conduct the operation nor t» guarantee tie necessary reliability.
These limitations were due to lack of equipment, age and obsolescence of the equipment installed and limitations in number of communication personnel.
It was apparent that all participants were aware of their roles in the historic event* After steaming out In special formation for serial photographs, the ships separated, each to go to her assigned patrol stations.
The ZULIA and the NUEVA ESPARTA occupied patrol stations covering the passage between the island of Grenada and the mainland of Venezuela.
Further north the ROSAIES patrolled the passage between the islands of Dominica and Guadeloupe* The ESPORA patrolled two stations, one in the Guadeloupe Passage and the other off the inland of Monserrat.
As the ships reached their assigned patrol stations, their reports of merchant ship contacts began to reach the C0MS0IANT OPCON Center, where they were recorded and plotted.
The Information, developed by the searches was passed immediately to the ships on patrol and proved to be very useful.
They were in ax* treaely poor condition, particularly with regard to their engineering plantar, and had to be gives an immediate tinder availability in order to make thea ready of operations.
A certain amount of press censorship, by ssdzz cf the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs,, shielded operatises c£ the Quarantine Forces.
Even so, the contribution of the Latin American navies to the quarantine operations was noted by the world press and was viewed as clear evidence of the solidarity of the free nations of the hemisphere.
The Chief of Naval Operations hailed the Latin American participation in the quarantine as an historic milestcne in hemisphere relations and personally chanked his counterparts in Argentisi. ,. tbs Dominican Republic and Venezuela for their contributions to the comrorn effort.
As type commander for a-abmsrises, TS^M Grenfell had 7 eubmarins squadrons, a submarine division, 5 eubsnarii-s .tsad&rs, , and 6 submarine rescus ships,, , under his cimmaod.
Aa of 18 October 1962 no unit* of the aranrlsa force of the Atlantic Fleet were employed specifically to support Csbaa operatista.
S33N, <2fclaria equipped submarines), vera on station in assigned patrol areas In samel coaxigaratien.
Jh«.i-iijt5R' andNorfolk, with USS MARLIN and U'SS SEA CAT rstuiizr-^sl^ i_ia.r.i.
Grenfell, USN, with headquarters at the United States Naval Base Norfolk, Virginia.
C0MSU3LANT immediately promulgated .an ALSU31ANT to the submarine force setting DEFCON 3 to insure that all submarine units were advised.
DEFCON 3 was attained throughout the Force including Forces at Holy Loch at 0346Z on 23 October.
The unit commander, best situated for Cuban cisntingency operations was designated along with 3 SS and 1 APS3.
Units at sea earmarked for deployment ware directed t2 ret-jrn to port and load cut with wartime torpedo lead and tco off fcr pcaaible extended operations.
When DEFCON 3 was set on 22 October the 'JSS A2RAHAM LZN3C;IX, tie only SSBN in upkeep at Holy Loch, was in the 13th day of a normal 28 day upkssp.
At 1400Z, 23 October, 15 hours after setting of I-E'yC3j} 3, A3EAHaM LINCOIN deployed to her Polaris patrol area.
USS PROTEUS got underway after LIN30LS deployed-.d pracssdsd ts £?-£ Irish Sea.
The schedule of USS THOMAS EDISON undergoing post ahaied-ran availability was expedited by 19 days to permit dspiovms-t to the Valeria petrel area by 7 November.
USS PATRICK HENRY arrived in Holy Loch on 20 November 1962 after a 61 day patrol.
On 24 October CINCIANTFLT directed the disestablishment of the Argentia 5ub-Air ASW barrier with all forces reverting to normal operational commanders.
No unfriendly submarines were detected by barrier forces during the period the barrier was in effect.
On 15 November C0MSU3LANT directed TORSK and CUTLASS, who were returning to Norfolk from the barrier, to divert and proceed at best speed to the position of the sinking Greek merchantman CAPTAIN GEORGE to render assistance and attempt recovery of survivors.
TORSK and CUTIASS continued on this operation until 17 November when they were re. leased from the SAR mission and proceed to Norfolk, Their search had bean fruitless.
In the Cuban crisis the all out effort of the Service Force contributed much to the success of Navy operations.
On IS October 1962, Commander Service Squadron FOUR and a detachment of helicopters from Utility Squadron FOUR embarked in USS TRUCKEE (A0147) to provide mobile logistic support for PH3BRIG1EX 62 exercise.
The force sailed for the vicinity of Vieques Island, Puerto Rico for the scheduled exercise* On 22 October 1962 the USS ENTERPRISE and her destroyer screen joined the exercise Task Force and SERVRON FOUR provided the logistic support for these ships.
Also on this date COMSERVLANT activated the SERVLANT war room on a 24 hour basis consistent with the President's announcement concerning the Quarantine of Cuba.
Ships of the Service Force undergo periodic refresher training in the Guantanaxoo area.
When the evacuation of dependents from GTKO was ordered, HYADES was included as part of the evacuation element.
SERVRON EIGHT were deployed and were post tilled for operations in ports covering the southern United States from New Orleans to Norfolk.
As the scope of Naval operations braadenad it became obvious that additional tankers would be required to support the fleet.
By 25 October replenishment utilizing ELOKOMIN and CKIKASKIA in the southern most sector, NEOSHO and KANKAKEE in the middle sector and KASKASK1A in the northern sector was operating satisfactorily.
Underway replenishment for the force was directed to conform to this line.
As -operations /-progressed, overall, logistic, support -..task required -a . de'-. ■ tailed support task organization.
This order provided for logistic Support, salvage, towing, repair, harbor clearance and such other logistics services as required.
Quantities of NFSO were adequate for the majcr portion of the operations.
The Service For;e use cf TAOi's was sens id* red satisfactory aftsr initial difficulties in ""hock ups"" ware resolved.
Ko3t s&ips dspl^yed on short notice which resulted in 3ome personnel who were or. leave or liberty being left behind.
Accordingly, C0MSERVDI7 21 and a small staff was assembled and scheduled to sail on 19 November.
From 31 October through 19 November, with the arrival of all ships on their assigned quarantine stations, daily underway refueling; schedules were utilized to maintain -station ships with at least 70% burnable fuel on board.
During this period oilers sought out and delivered their products to the customers and provided general purpose services to the fleet.
On 17 November 1962, forces under Commander Service Squadron FOUR commenced logiBtic support of TG 128.4, the Pacific Amphibious Group.
On 21 November, President Kennedy announced that the quarantine had besn suspended and that many of the ships in the quarantine force would be returning soon.
Many of the active duty personnel. who were extended were to be released.
Even after President Kennedy's speech lifting the quarantine / operations, however, SERVRON EIGHT'S ships continued to support ships in the quarantine force.
In one 24 hour period, TRUCKEE fueled end consolidated a total of 23 hours.
In spite of the past commissioning frustrations and material difficulties experienced by USS KANKAKEE, a newly activated AO, she steamed continuously from 24 October to 5 December and met all. commitments expeditiously.
Her abilities to accomplish this in the face of the difficulties encountered is a most favorable reflection on the Ingenuity and willingness of a hard working crew.
After joining COMSERVRON FOUR on 15 October, USS MAZAMA steamed continuously until 3 December meeting all commitments without incident.
In addition to the routine replenishment operations, MAZAMA -mads one trip to Roosevelt Roads to pick up ordnance items to fill up her CLOUD stocks which were urgently required for Marine Corps back up.
During these few house in Roosevelt Roads, MAZAMA personnel accomplished a task that normally would have required two days.
There was no liberty or respite from her heavy work schedule and this short period is not considered of sufficient duration -to break her continuous steaming record.
Service Force Units transferred 1024 personnel by Helicopter or Highline.
The pattern of operations was fairly routine for the middle of the fiscal year's second quarter.
Fifteen amphibious ships vere deployed either to the Mediterranean or Panama, or else enroute to Norfolk from deployment.
An additional twelve ships were deployed to the Caribbean or were enroute as relief.
These latter ships plus six others were to constitute the naval forces assigned to Amphibious Brigade Landing Exercise 1962 (PHIBRIGLEX-62) which was just commencing.
Four more ships were assigned to a LOGEX at Onflow Beach, North Carolina.
The employment of the remaining ships, covered a wide variety of operations such as POM, RFS, AOTU, upkeep and/or tender availability.
A serious problem confronting COMFHIBLANT, Vice Admiral River o, at the time was the shortage of AGC type command ships.
The POCONG was in the Mediterranean as flagship for CINCUSNAVEUR and the third AGC assigned to PHIBIANT, the MT McKINLEY was the only one available for operations.
COMFHIBGRU FOUR, Rear Admiral Pittard, who was to be Commander Amphibious Task Force 146, sailed on 15 October utilizing the FRANCIS MARION <APA-249) as his flagship.
Because of the unavailability of a flagship COMPHIBRON TOO, Rear Admiral Craighill, was ashore at Little Creek, Virginia.
The LOGEX at Onslow Beach was terminated and COMPHIBRON 10, with forces assigned, departed for Little Creek in order to avoid damage* Because of the weather, COMPHIBRON 6, with ships returning from the Mediterranean, was unable to offload at Morehead City so he was directed to proceed to Norfolk.
On 19 October, although he departed formation, COMPHIBIANT remained in the vicinity of the movement unit rather than proceeding to San Juan as scheduled.
His continued presence generated some speculation as to the course of future events.
Page t&i of \7L 1 II r t la the meantime, COMFHIBRON 6 had arrived in Norfolk and was taking on J fuel and provisions.
He was directed to maintain readiness for sea and retain ' all troops on board.
Amphibious Force either operationally engaged, ready for sea in 24 hours, or committed to regular overhaul . j Cn the 20th, even though ELLA had abated sufficiently to ccntinue with the PHI3R1GLEX drills and cperations, an abrupt change in plans tock place.
COMPHIBLANT assumed direct operational control of PHI3R0N 8 and he ordered this Caribbean Ready FHXSRON to proceed at bast speed to the Guantanamo operating area.
An AKA and 1ST that had been offloading aviation equipment and personnel at Roosevelt Roads were directed to complete o fflo ading and return as quickly as possible to Morehaad City.
TfO LST that were at Panama, under CINCARTB cperationai control, were ordered to return to Little Creek.
While enroute these LSI were diverted to Port Everglades, Florida, for assigment with United States Army armored units.
Two 1ST which were supposed to. .relieve the Panama unit were directed to remain at Little Creek.
This entire movement unit then proceeded through the Mona Passage to a point south of the mid^part of the Dominican Republic.
Ths.se two ships embarked .an RLT Headquarters, a Marine Air Group Headquarters and tie seatail of a battalion which had already been airlifted to Guantanamo.
At this point, C0MPE31ANT was sailing wast, scuta of the Dominican Republic.
Page l^ 2 cf 17* Pages Events were transpiring so quickly that connrurications had seriously back logged* Even high precedence messages required excessive time for delivery.
These Marines then joined the battalion that had just been flown in from Camp Pendleton, California.
One of PHIBRON 8's ships, the DESOTO COUNTY , embarked 92 dependents for return to Norfolk.
Back at Norfolk, COMPHIBRON 10, with an LPH, two AKA, an LSD and two LST assigned, had been directed to outload Marines from Norfolk and Morehead city, North Carolina and sail for the Caribbean.
To summarize PHIBIANT's activities on 22 October COMPHIBLANT was in position in the Caribbean.
The SANDOVAL Unit, serving as PHIBRON 2 and providing shipping for still another BLT, was made up and ready to sail when loading ports were clear.
COMPHIBGRU FOUR with Movement Unit ALFA and COMPHIBRON 12 were in position in the Caribbean.
Within another 48 hours vitually all PHIBLANT ships would be combat loaded ox enroute to loading ports.
By the morning of 23 October C0MPHI3GRU FOUR and Movement Unit ALFA, following COMPBTBIAHT, had retransited north through the Mona Passage.
Here they would meet with COMPHIBRON 6 who was enreute from the United States From this rendezvous point, the major portion of the Amphibious Task Force in the Caribbean would be at a point nearly equi-distast to either the Havana area or Guantanamo Bay.
COMPHIBLANT designated COMPHIBTRAIAKT, Rear Admiral Dempsey, as COMPHIBLANT REP Norfolk.
Admiral Dempsey was made respon3ibile for Amphibious FoTce ships in loading out ports as well as for repairs and reloading in the event a combat situation ensued.
C0MFHI3LANT and COllPHISGRU FOUR conferred, and it was decided that CC3MFHI3IAN2 would return to Norfolk, disembark trom the Mt.
McKINIEJ, shift his flag to Little Creek and assign the AGC to CGMPHIBGRr FOUR as his flagship.
Later COMPHIBGRU FOUR effected a rendezvous with COMPHIBRON 8 near San Salvador.
On 24 October the staffs of C0MPHI3GRU TWO and CG, XVIII i rbcrae Corps conferred regarding the armored d iris ion lift from Fort Lauder ale by four older LSI* COMSTS also had representatives present.
J had directed CINCPAC to embark the 5th Marine Expeditionary Brigade from Camp Pendleton, California and sail as soon as ready.
This step appeared to be another Incremental execution of actions outlined in the Contingency Plan without execution of the plan itself.
COMPHIBRON 6 and COMPHIBRON 12 reported to CCMPHIBGRU FCoR cn 24 October.
In turn CCMPHI3R0N 6 was directed to take his squadron to a point northward of Northeast Providence Channel.
COMPHIBRON 12 was to proceed to the Coastal waters south of Mayport, Florida.
COMPHIBRON 10, cn the BOXER, joined the rsmaindsr cf his grrqp off Onslow Beach on 25 October.
On 27 October the squadron commander was ordered to rendezvous his group off Charleston when loading was completed.
During the next few days, the Task Groups either continued loading or else were steaming to, or already located in their assigned holding areas.
Since no contingency plan had been executed, the prospect of a lengthy holding period became increasingly evident.
In the meantime, not all of the Amphibious Force ships were playing their role as members -of the.
This versatile 1156 class LST remained uncommitted to the Task Force 44 organ* Izatlon until 6 November.
She loaded in five porta, offloaded in three ports and steamed a total distance of nearly 5,000 miles.
Upon his expected arrival on 1 November, COMPHIBRON 6 was authorized to institute a leave and liberty program consistent with the safety of his ships and a 48 hour sailing notice.
Only those forces assigned to COM* PHIBLANT, CTF 44 operational control were to be activated under TF 128.
COMPHIBGRU THREE, with the 5th MEB embarked was now enroute to the Panama Canal.
COMPHTBGRU THREE was further instructed to proceed within 24 hours steaming of Guantanamo and, upon arrival, maintain one half of his forces in readiness at sea.
The ships of the remaining half could be either at San Juan or Roosevelt Roads for upkeep with the Page _i&5_ of -;7& Pages Marines exercising ashore at Vieques, or, In Jamaican Eominicar.
This general plan for the holding period was acme what modified later but essential features remained.
S. coastal waters, one 3LT, in the vicinity of San Salvador, one EL"" at anchor and one 3LT in port for liberty, logistic support and upkeep not t~> exceed one week.
Groups would be rotated at weekly intervals. When loading out was completed on 31 October, C0MPHI3LANT disestablished COMPHEJlAriT REP at Norfolk but established a REP at Maypcrt.
This measure proved so successful that a PH3IANT REP was later established at Roosevelt Roads for the benefit cf PHZ3GRU THREE ships.
At this point a question arose relative to the control of MSTS shipping Involved in the operation.
The ba3ic operational pattern cf the holding operation was new firmly established.
Groups maintained northsouth locations in the same order of sequence as for movement to the 'objective area* While in the holding area ships conducted exercises to maintain cptimam combat readiness.
Each group was required to maintain geographical position, material and personnel readiness to arrive at the objective area well within the required reaction time.
Ships were sailed to Charleston and Maypcrt for replenishment, upkeep and liberty on a rotsticnal basis and as required.
This plan midsized AStf, upkeep and replenishment problems, permitted contact between operational commanders, and afforded the uske&p and liberty necessary for material readiness and hi£h msrals.
The majcr remaining requirement was for a landing area to conduct rer.sarsals and provide the embarked tawwrps with exercise ashore.
Some units had new besa embarked two wa&ks and this problem was dally beccming more urgsEt.
This was the first amphibious operation ever conducted with this number of LPH available.
As a consequence of this decision all RED beach surface units were placed under command of COMPHIBRON 8 and all BLUE beach surface units were placed under the command of COMPHIBRON 12.
November, all elements of TF 44 except for two LPH were located In the vicinity of the east coast from Virginia to Florida.
The ., two LPH, OKINAWA and THETIS BAY, were on station between San Salvador and Northeast Providence Channel.
FHIBGRU THREE with nearly 11,000 Marines and Navy personnel of the Sth MEB embarked, commenced transit of the Panama Canal on 5 November.
COMFHXBLANT, on 8 November requested that COMSECONDFLT and CCMCRUDESLANT afford naval gunfire ships that had not fired within six months, the opportu; :. • to qualify at Culebra.
This shortage of gunfire support ships, coupled with the numbers that were not qualified, constituted a serious problem.
Forces assigned but which had not been chopped were listed with suitable notation to that effect.
Reed, USN ALFA ONE C0MPHI3R0N EIGHT mt Mckinley 1 AGC CHILTON '""• ROCKBRIDGE 2 APA CAFRKORNUS ALGOL 2 AKA LINDENHALD I LSD DESOTO COUNTY TRAVERSE COUNTY 2 LVT LIDDLE 1 A7J CTE 128.3.1.
Marks, USN BRAVO ONE COMPHIBRON TEN BOXER 2 THETIS BAY OKINAWA 3 LPH UVALDE RANKIN 2 AKA FT SNELLING SHADWELL 2 LSD LORAIN COUNTY 1 LST CTE 128.3.1.
USN BRAVO TWO COMPHIBRON SIX CAMBRIA 1 APA OGLETHORPE 1 AKA CASA GRANDE 1 LSD WALWORTH COUNTY YORK COUNTY CTE 128.3.1.
Crawford, ' COMPHIBRON ONE 2 APA 1 AKA Page i&q of 17A Pages COLONIAL THOMASTON CTE 128.4.8.
PACARIB Movement Element ALFA TWO NOBLE OKANOGAN PT DEFIANCE GUNSTON HALL COOK CTU 128.4.
Meyei, USN COMPHIBRON SEVEN RENVILLE 2 APA WASHBURN 1 AKA BELLE GROVE CARTER HALL 2 LSD CTE 128.4.9.
Harmon, USN BRAVO TWO CC, IWO JIMA IWO JIMA 1 LPH MERRICK MATTHEWS 2 AKA WHETSTONE CABILDO 2 LSD CINCLANTFLT bad already advised COMLANTRESFLT that the possibility existed that some, or all of the Reserve Fleet LST might be activated.
The ready availability of cargo and certain amphibious type shipping was most critical.
In addition, CNO was advised of the possibility that all eleven LST of the Atlantic Reserve Fleet might be needed.
Developments concerning these LST were followed with great interest at PHIBIANT headquarters.
Additional LST would have molTad .one of the most difficult problems of the Cuban operatione. the prcrlsica. cf adequate, timely amphibious lift for the Army Armored Division.
As a natter of fact, late in November CINCLANTFLT further recommended to CNO that .as many LST As feasible be transferred to class ""A"" selected Reserre status In the Atlantic Reserve Fleet if it were decided not to activate the elersn LST for the Atlantic Fleet.
Page 15 ° of 17* Pages CINCLANT notified CINCARLANT, COMPHIBLANT and CG FMFLANT of a planning conference scheduled for 12 November to reaolve Che problem of over the beach transport of Army forces in the contingency plan.
The fundamental problem, however, was not satisfactorily solved be* cause the Army requirements far exceeded the Navy capability* Upon the arrival of POC0N0 at Norfolk on 12 November, COMFHIBLANT shifted his flag aboard.
The deployment of the Amphibious Force, remained generally aa previously. .. . described.
However, the two LPH, OKINAWA and THETIS BAT, had returned to Mayport from the vicinity of San Salvador.
COMFHIBLANT authorised COMPHIBGRU FOUR to donduct full scale landing exercise at Onslow on 16 November.
The risk of exceeding reaction time requirements was reduced by careful observation of weather and restrictions on the quantity of equipment landed in order to ensure rapid back loading.
It was planned that following the landing* one third of PHTBGRU FOUR would proceed to Norfolk with, troops remaining ashore at Camp Lejeune from seven to ten days.
At 0700, 16 November 1962, the high point of the Amphibi ous Force participation in the Cuban -operation was reached.
COMFHTBflRU FOUR, Rear Admiral Flttard, signalled ""Land the Landing Force"" commencing the largest amphibious landing exercise conducted by the Atlantic Fleet in nearly two decades.
Six Marine BLTs were landed in the assault, four by surface and two by helicopter.
All boat waves landed within one minute of schedule and no boats were broached.
The successful execution and remarkable timing, achieved without a prior rehearsal, attested to the professional skill and combat readiness of the Atlantic Fleet Navy-Marine Corps Amphibious Team.
On conclusion of the landing at Onslow on 17 November, the Marine units designated to remain ashore continued the exercise while the remainder backloaded preparatory to return, as previously planned, either to Norfolk, Mayport-^harleston or the holding area.
Before the Cuban operation ended all embarked Marines and five increments of the Army's Task Force CHARLIE would be landed in training exercises.
Page \ fl of _MU Pages Indicative of the easing -In tension was CINCIANTFLT's authorisation to institute modest leave and liberty programs and to Implement such measures as were necessary to improve training and maintenance.
Although this arejpired a modification to DEFCON THREE, the ability to meet specified resetios times was maintained.
With the lifting of the quarantine operations on 21 November the tempo of operations began to draw rapidly to a conclusion.
In addition COMPHIBGRU TWO was directed to inspect four chartered commercial LST that had been contracted for.
He was to determine the specific material, personnel and training requirements necessary to make their use feasible.
COMSERVLANT was notified that at least two tender/. repair ships «re required in the Jamaica-Puerto Rico area to maintain the ' readiness -of FHIBGRU THREE 'ships.
Arrangements were made through COMCR'JZSiLANT that the YOSEMITE would remain at Kingston, Jamaica to provide tender repairs for FHIBGRU THREE ships.
By 28 November there were stronger Indications of an imminent standdown.
DEFCON FIVE was set in the Atlantic Fleet and Dispersal Ccndition FOUR was ordered in CONUS ports.
Shortl y befo re midnight, the uncertainty concerning the stand-down was ended.
C0MPH1BLANT was ordered to load on FHIBGRU THREE ships the maximum number of personnel and equipment cf the Marine battalion that had flown from Camp Pendleton, California to Guantaname.
Immediately thereafter a message was received for CGMPHIBIANT to return the II MEF to home station.
On 6 December, TF 128, the greatest assemblage of amphibious power in the Atlantic Fleet in a generation, was dissolved and all ships were reverted to normal operational control.
Reconnaissance flights over Cuban territory, and Preparation for the defense of GTMO; limited aerial attacks on specif led military targets *a Cuba; and an amphibious assault by the II MEF In joint operations to seize Cuba.
Aviation units were deployed to HAS Key West, NAS Roosevelt Roads and NAS Guantanamo, in preparation for the execution -of OPLAN 312.
Ground units also were sent to Guantanamo to support the execution of the same plan.
The 2nd Marine Division, together with aviation conanand elements and helicopters were embarking in preparation for the execution of OPLAN 314/316.
Some FMFPAC units augmented FMFLANT units at Guantanamo while'others were enroute from the Pacific to the Caribbean area in preparation to execute the contingency plans.
The subsequent period until 23 November was primarily spent In refining existing plans and conducting exercises of deployed units to maintain proficiency of the troops and maintenance of equipment.
To provide some conception of the magnitude of Flest Marine Force participation in the Cuban crisis, there were over 40,000 personnel involved.
Prepositioning of ordnance and aviation support equipment was authorized.
CG FMFIANT was additiar.ally directed to provide to C0MNAV3ASE GTMO one TP3-15 radar together with technicians to remain until permanent installation of the SPSr40 was completed and operational, this was estimated as net earlier than 1 December 1962.
C3KSiVAT5LaNT and ZZ 7M7LSKT lesre scheduled to rotate the assignment on a monthly basis.
In view of the lack of currently available airfields to support operations in Eastern Cuba, CG FMFIANT recommended that VMA squadrons be based aboard CVA upon execution of the contingency plans.
Report one MAG to CKCAFLAKT for planning and to deploy this MAG to Key West and chop to CDICAF1ANT en exesution of this order.
Late on the evening of 20 October, CG FMFLANT issued a FRAG OSD containing implementing instructions to his forces.
The next morning BLT 2/1 from the 5th MEB began to arrive at Guantanamo.
In the meantime, the Caribbean ready PHT3R0N 8, with BLT 2/2 embarked, was proceeding to the vicinity of GTMO at best speed.
This request was approved and on 27 October tuo YMA squadrons were assigned.
On 21 October a detachment of VMCJ-2 chopped to COMFAIRJAX t» participate in BLUE MOON reconnaissance flights over Cuba.
The first elements were directed to arrive the night of 21 Cetcber, C0MPHI3IANT, previously instructed to maintain PHT3R0N 8 and 3LT 2/2 within 4 hours sailing time of GTMO, was directed to land BIS 2/2 on the evening of 22 October.
C0MNAV3ASE GTMO, was directed to evacuate dependents and coxessential personnel.
MAG-14 was ordered to report to CINCAFLANT at Key West and MAG-32 Headquarters was directed to deploy to Roosevelt Roads to assume 0PC3N cf Marine air in that area.
After setting .2JEFC0N tweer on 23 October, C3 FMFIA3T was directed to embark the remainder of the 2nd Marine Division a3 shipping became available.
PHIBRON 8, upon completion of unloading was directed to return to CONUS to embark additional XI tod units.
A battery from the 3d IAAM Battalion was ordered to Guantanamo by air to report to the Commanding Officer, MAG-32.
COMFHIBIANT proposed on 25 October that provisions be"" made for exercising troops ashore in order to maintain efficiency and readiness posture.
Mayport, Jacksonville, Savannah and Charleston were recommended by CF FMFLANT and these ports were subsequently used for this purpose.
Pla nning for embarkation of the II MSF, until 27 October, provided for COMPHTBLANT/CATF and CG, II MEF to embark in the Mt.
COMPHIBGRU FOUR and CG, 4th MEB were embarked in the FRANCIS MARION and CG, 24 MarDlv was scheduled to embark in the FRANCIS MARION for command of Landing Group West.
On recommendation of COMPHIBGRU FOUR and CG, 4th MEB, the FRANCIS MARION was deemed inadequate as a cotnnand and control ship for the magnitude of operations planned.
C3 FH7ZAST recommenced against deploying the entire squadron to prevent an excessivs number of unrevetted and unprotected aircraft in a vulnerable area.
The Commanding General &I30 requested and later received OPCON of the 41st Civil Affairs Company to implement the Task Organization of OPLAN 316.
The authorization applied only to forces currently under command of the amphibious force.
Tthe requirement for complete air superiority, additional naval gunfire support, was also emphasized.
Embarkation and deployment of major FMFIANT/II MEF units were completed with the shift of the command post of CG, 2d MARDI7 on 30 October.
Actions during the following period were directed toward maintaining readiness cf deployed forces for a prolonged period, the modification and refinement of the designated plans, and occasional deployment of smaller units.
After consideration of the posture of II MEF units, and recommendations of task group commanders, CG FMFIANT established 20 December 1962, as the terminal date of the period in which satisfactory readiness could be maintained.
Individual ships liberty was authorized within the limit cf the prescribed reactirn time.
The other increment was authorized to cenduct ess-cises on ""iaqujs while maintaining a 36 hour reaction time to ccmplets rsembarkaticri.
These two increments were scheduled for rotation at 10 day iittrvais. of 17 ' ■ Pages Landing Group, West was authorized to conduct a full scale exercise at Camp Lejeune, followed by separation into three increments.
The schedule provided fox one increment to conduct maintenance and training la Camp Lejeune, one * increment on liberty in Florida and Carolina ports, and one increment remaining at sea and conducting landing exercises In the Mayport area.
These three increments were scheduled for rotation at seven day intervals.
It was further recommended that a VMF be deployed from FMFPAC to provide a similar VMF rotation capability.
Both requests were disapproved but retained for consideration at a later time.
CTNCLANTFLT further directed the II MEP lea* BLT 2/2 and BLT 1/8 to return to hose atationi.
On 30 November the Commandant of the Marine Corps requested and ' COMPHTBLANT subsequently directed that BLT 1/7 be returned to the West Coast Independently ahead of the 5th MEB to prepare for onward move* ment to the Western Pacific.
MAG14, T7MA-121, and the Det VMF-235 commenced returning to home bases on 1 December.
VMF-122 .assumed the 6 plane commitment -at NAS Key West under COMKHESTFOR previously provided by Det VMF7235.
On 6 December CINCLANTFLT set DEFCON 5 for all Atlantic Fleet Forces at NAVBASE GTMO and in Task Force 135.
CINCLANTFLT further directed that a FHXBR0N be sailed to GTMO and Roosevelt Roads to embark BLT '2/2 and MAG-32 less T7MF-115 and return them to home stations by IS December.
CG, FMFLANT was directed to return by airlift BLT 1/8, the personnel of C Battery, 3d LAAM.Bn, and Hq RLT 6.
On 15 December all FMFLANT/II MEF contingency deployments were terminated and routine readiness measures reestablished except for MAG-14 and MAG-32 which have been placed on 48 hour reaction for portions of OPLAN 312.
General Lemay approved the plan in principle, and directed General Walter 3.
Sweeney, Jr., COMIAC, to Inform Admiral Robert L Dennison , CINLANT, that, if he should approve the plan, it would receive the full support of the Air Force.
The plan was approved, and was adopted by C7NC1ANT as She air es*«uit portion of existing Cuba Contingency Plans.
CINCAFLANT was to have operational control of all TAG aircraft and those shore-based Navy and Marine aircraft committed to the Cuba Contingency which were not directly related to the defense of Guantanamo.
With the approval of the air assault plan, it was necessary to brief all major commanders who had a specific Interest In the plan so that they would know its impact on their mission and forces.
Marine Forces, Atlantic, General Sweeney briefed the Commander, Antilles Defense Command.
The next day they flew to Guantanamo, and during the briefing there, they were recalled to Washington to meet with the JCS and Secretary Rsbert S McNamara.
The Cuban situation had reached its most critical stage — A direct confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The newly discovered ballistic missile sites had altered the purpose of the plan from the original objective of defeating Cuban air to oneof defeating Cuban air and preventing deStraeSftgs missile attacks on the United States.
Accordingly, all AFLANT forces were placed on full alert status and mend into their employment bases in Florida.
The missile sites were immediately targeted as first priority and target materials were rushed by special air courier to the combat units.
Conferences were held with Army, Navy and Marine planning groups to iaaurs maYlrosa integration -of effort and the fullest exploitation possible of the air assault plan in the event the Invasion *plan should be implemented.
As a result of the deployment, TA3 aircraft at the Fiwrica employment bases increased vary rapidly.
Continental Air Defense Command Forces were also made available to the direct support of the Cuban operations.
October ZOtlh was established as the target dace when ail essential elements to support the air assault plan were to be in place.
Combat forces were ready and crews were thoroughly briefed on their missions and targets.
War readiness material such as munitions, fuel and vehicles were in place* more were enroute, and backup depot stocks <oere available.
To exemplify the magnitude of the supply operation, 144,000 rockets and over 3,700 napalm boobs were positioned in support of the Cuba plans.
The fuel required to support the operation was calculated at over one million barrels, and this amount and mare was readily available.
The total tonnage of supplies and equipment, not including fuel that was moved Into the employment bases, was over 18,000 tons.
AFB, New Mexico to Key West. short, AFLANT forces were ready to execute the air assault plan on 20 October, to sustain operations, and to move into invasion operations, if required.
The target date could not have been met without the full cooperation and willing assistance of all concerned.
Teampotk and singleness of purpose prevailed between the military services, and full support was received from, the JCS and the Governmental agencies in Washington.
Within the Air Force, support of the operation was also unstintlngly provided.
Also, the personnel at the SAC bases* McCoy and Homeatead, rendered every assistance in an outstanding team effort that overcame ail obstacles.
The remainder of the force was on IStninutc ground alert, and the strategic missile forces wore placed on maximum readiness., SAC bombers assisted greatly in the quarantine operations.
Air Defense Command and Continental Air Defense Forces immediately moved Into southern Florida bases to protect the area from air attack and to assise in controlling reconnaissance and combat air patrol flights.
Air Force air defense intercepters in Florida flew more than 2,000 individual fighter patrols and maintained a 24-hour orbit of several strategic points off Florida.
All North American Air Defense Command Forces. were on 5 to 15 minute alert.
MATS provided airlift support, air-sea rescue forces., and weather service, all essential to the full success of the plan.
Also, within 48 hours of notification, MATS airlifted a force of Marines from California to Guantanamo, Cuba.
MATS aircraft assisted greatly in the airlift of Che thousands pf personnel and tons of cargo into the southeast United Staces.
It was largely because of the outstanding efforts of the Air Force Logls-. tica Command and the Air Force Comaunicatlcn Service that the 20 October target date was met.
In Short, it was full team effort, with air staff providing the guidance and overcoming those obstacles which were beyond the capabilities of the air commands involved.
However, reserve pai-t^cipation in the Cuba crisis did not begin or sud with this active duty per led.
Hone, over 700,000 pounds of equipment into the Florida employment bases, in addition, during the crisis period, these reserve fleets airlifted almost two and one-half million pounds more and over 120O passengers into Florida.
Also, during the redeployment phase, the again Inactive reserve fleets assisted by redeploying almost 1500 passengers and over one and one-half million pounds of equipment back to the home bases of the regular units.
Besides this invaluable assistance In helping position military forces, and the significant part recalled reserve units would have played had invasion plans been implemented, the reserve aircraft recovery and base support units which were not recalled, were of great help to the regular units cf SAC, TAC, and ADC In deployment and dispersal operations.
Air National Guard Forces were not. ^committed and constituted an immediately ready reserve of seven fighter squadrons.
Additional Air Guard fighter squadrons were available if the President determined the situation to be serious enough to mobilize those units previously called up for the Berlin crisis.
In the event that a threat developed in some other area, these squadrons were readily available to replace TAC squadrons facing Cuba, or to deploy to the newly threatened area.
Plans had been developed and distributed to accomplish the rapid mcoilization of both Air Guard and Air Reserve Forces.
As a result, when reserve units were notified of the recall order late on Saturday night of 27 October, 937. of assigned personnel reported by 0900 hours the next morning, the appointed recall hour.
These reserve personnel handled their mobilization tasks tn a smooth and prefessional manner, and with high morale.
They deserve great credit for their ability and willingness to respond.
Included among the Air Force personnel were 7 Air Liaison Officers, 32 Forward Air Controllers, and 6 combat control teams, all to be airdropped alcr-g with.
The remaining Air Force personnel were to be airlanded to operate the airfields and handle the airlanding aircraft.
Of the more than 17,000 Army personnel to be introduced on D-Day, 14,500 were paratroopers, which is comparable tc the United States Airborne Forces dropped during the Normandy Invasion.
In summary, the United States Air Force was ready for the Cuban crisis ar.d the soundness of its internal organization was proven.
The validity cf Unified Command action was demonstrated; all services were able to join together in a well integrated team effort to gain maximum military effectiveness.
