It also tells how that secret was shared, sanctioned, and, at times, willfully ignored by the top political and military officials of the United States since the Eisenhower years.
In it, you will find many senior American officials being quoted — most of them for the first time — about what they knew and when they knew it.
These officials spoke to me not because of animosity toward the Israeli government, but because they realized the hypocrisy of the American policy of publicly pretending that Israel's nuclear arsenal does not exist.
Furthermore, Israel subjects all journalists, domestic and foreign, to censorship.
Under Israeli rules, all material produced by journalists in Israel must be submitted to military censors, who have the right to make changes and deletions if they perceive a threat to Israeli national security.
Those in the past who have broken the rules have been refused reentry to Israel.
Those Israelis who talked were not critics of Israel's nuclear capability, nor would they feel secure without the bomb.
They spoke because they believe that a full and open discussion of the Israeli nuclear arsenal — and of the consequences of its deployment — is essential in a democratic society.
The first KH-11 had been launched on December 19, 1976, after Jimmy Carter's defeat of President Gerald R Ford in the November elections.
The intensive security system was given a jolt in March 1979, when President Carter decided to provide Israel with KH-11 photographs.
The agreement gave Israel access to any satellite intelligence dealing with troop movements or other potentially threatening activities as deep as one hundred miles inside the borders of neighboring Lebanon, Syria, Egypt, and Jordan.
Jimmy Carter's decision to provide that high-tech imagery was suspected by some American intelligence officials as being a reward for Prime Minister Menachem Begin's successful Camp David summit with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat the year before.
The KH-11 was the most important advance of its time, explained a former official of the National Security Agency , the unit responsible for all communications intelligence, and every military and civilian intelligence agency in the government seemed to have an urgent requirement for it.
The goal of the KH-ll's managers was to carefully plan and ""prioritize"" the satellite's schedule to get it to the right place at the right time, while avoiding any abrupt shifts in its flight path or any sudden maneuver that would burn excess fuel.
With good management, the multimillion-dollar satellite, with its limited fuel supply, would be able to stay longer in orbit, provide more intelligence, and be more costefficient.
Carter's decision to give Israel direct access to the KH-11 completely disrupted the careful scheduling for the satellite's future use; it also meant that some American intelligence agencies were going to have less access to the satellite.
The key element of the sixty-four-foot-long satellite was a downward-looking mirror in front of the camera that rotated from side to side, like a periscope, enabling the satellite to track a single location as it moved across the atmosphere.
The result was a stereoscopic image of unusually high quality that could be even further enhanced by computer.
A SECRET AGREEMENT 5 could jeopardize their own access to such information and thus reduce their status as insiders.
The Israelis, not surprisingly, viewed the KH-11 agreement as a reaffirmation of respect and support from the Carter administration, whose director of central intelligence, retired Admiral Stansfield Turner, had abruptly cut back intelligence liaison with Israel and other friendly nations as part of a restructuring of the Central Intelligence Agency.
The Israelis, accustomed to far warmer treatment by Presidents Richard M Nixon and Gerald R Ford, saw the men running the Carter administration as naive and anti-Semitic; as men who perhaps did not fully understand how entwined Israel's primary foreign intelligence service, Mossad, had become with the CIA during the Cold War.
The 1979 agreement on the KH-11 was no less than the twenty-eighth in a series of formal IsraeliAmerican cooperative ventures in strategic intelligence since the 1950s.
Nothing has ever been officially disclosed about these arrangements, many of which were financed off-the-books — that is, from a special contingency fund personally maintained by the director of central intelligence.
Through the 1960s, for example, one of the most sensitive operations in the Agency was code-named kk mountain (kk being the CIA's internal digraph, or designation, for messages and documents dealing with Israel) and provided for untold millions in annual cash payments to Mossad.
In return, Mossad authorized its agents to act, in essence, as American surrogates throughout North Africa and in such countries as Kenya, Tanzania, and the Congo.
Other intelligence agreements with Mossad revolved around the most sensitive of Israeli activities in the Middle East, where American dollars were being used to finance operations in Syria, and inside the Soviet Union, where the CIA's men and women found it difficult to spy.
Some of the Soviet activities apparently were financed by regular Agency disbursements — and thus cleared through the appropriate CIA congressional oversight committees — but the complex amalgamation of American financing and Israeli operations remains one of the great secrets of the Cold War.
The Israelis had responded to Admiral Turner's 1977 cutback 6 THE SAMSON OPTION in liaison — in essence, his refusal to pay for the continuing operations in Africa and elsewhere — by sharply reducing their flow of intelligence back to Washington.
In the Israeli view, the KH-11 agreement in March 1979 was made inevitable not by the success of Camp David but by the CIA's failure to anticipate the steadily increasing Soviet pressure on Afghanistan in 1978 and the continuing upheavals in Iran.
There were large Jewish communities in both nations — many shopkeepers in Kabul, Afghanistan's capital, were Jewish — and Mossad's information was far superior to the CIA's.
Most galling to the President and his top aides was the CIA's embarrassingly inept reporting on Iran, where Shah Mohammed Reza Pahlavi, a United States ally of long standing, had been overthrown in February 1979 in a popular uprising — despite a year-long series of upbeat CIA predictions that he would manage to cling to power.
The CIA had failed the President and forced the American leadership to turn once again to Israeli help in trying to anticipate world events.
It was no accident that Lubrani was attached to the Israeli delegation that negotiated the March 1979 KH-1 1 agreement in Washington.
The KH-11 imagery provided Israel — depicting any military activity inside the border of Israel's four neighbors — is known as I&W, for intelligence and warning, and carries the highest classification marking in the American intelligence community.
The photographs, once processed, were to be picked up by Israeli military attaches at a special Pentagon office controlled by the Defense Intelligence Agency , the military's joint intelligence service.
Israelis were not to be given any intelligence that could help them plan preemptive strikes on their neighbors.
The official added, however, that he and his colleagues anticipated from the outset that the Israelis would do everything possible to get around the restrictions of the agreement.
One of the immediate Israeli arguments was that the limitations should not apply to the joint enemy of the United States and Israel — the Soviet Union.
In the months ahead, there would be constant Israeli pressure for access to satellite intelligence on the Soviet supply lines to Syria and the Soviet involvement in the training of Iraqi combat divisions in western Iraq.
Nonetheless, Israel was once again an essential ally, and even if it could not get unfettered access to KH-11 imagery, the 1979 agreement did include language permitting Israel to make specific requests for satellite intelligence.
The package was too much for British intelligence officials, involved Americans recalled, who were described as ""mad as hell"" about Israel's being provided with the chance to obtain intelligence that they — World War II allies and fellow members of NATO — could not get.
American intelligence officials had learned by the end of the Carter administration that the existence and capability of the KH-11 system were known to the Soviets, and there were suspicions that someone in a senior position in British intelligence was funneling vast amounts of technical information to Moscow.
In the fall of 1982, a former high-level GCHQ^employee named Geoffrey A Prime, of Cheltenham, was arrested on sex charges, and he subsequently confessed to spying for the Soviets.
There were British newspaper reports that senior British officials had known of Prime's betrayal for two years before the arrest but had not told their American counterparts.
The incident led to inevitable tension between the intelligence services of the two allies.
The stern American position was more than a little offset by the fact that a junior CIA clerk named William T Kampiles had been sentenced to forty years in jail in 1978 after his conviction for the sale of a top-secret KH-1 1 technical manual to the Soviets.
Kampiles received $3,000 for the manual, which included no KH-11 photographs — and thus presumably did not reveal just how good the satellite's optics could be.
The trial of Kampiles raised a 8 THE SAMSON OPTION Israel, as the British may have suspected, did have a secret agenda in its constant maneuvering for KH-11 access, but that agenda only became clear to a few top Reagan administration policymakers in the fall of 1981.
It was a Sunday afternoon in early June 1981, and Richard V Allen, President Ronald Reagan's national security adviser, was taking it easy, sipping iced tea on the sundeck of his suburban Virginia home and shuffling through a week's worth of unread cables, many of them highly classified.
An aide in the White House situation room, which is staffed around the clock, telephoned to report that the Israelis had informed Washington that they had successfully bombed the Iraqi nuclear reactor at Osirak, twelve miles southeast of Baghdad.
Allen immediately telephoned Reagan, who was spending the weekend at the presidential retreat at Camp David, in the nearby Catoctin Mountains of Maryland.
The President, he was told, had just boarded his helicopter for the trip back to the White House.
The President took the telephone call amid the background thumping of the helicopter blades.
Boys will be boys.""* number of embarrassing questions about security at CIA headquarters, where Kampiles worked; at least sixteen other KH-11 technical manuals were missing, and there was testimony to the effect that Kampiles — and others, if they wished — were able to leave the premises without any security check.
Others at the meeting, including Vice President George Bush and Chief of Staff James A Baker III, agreed that some sanctions against Israel were essential.
The President's private acceptance of the raid was not reflected in the administration's public actions.
Nonetheless, recalled Allen, ""Reagan was delighted . . . very satisfied"" by the attack on the reactor at Osirak.
The Israeli bombing triggered worldwide protest, and a few days later the White House announced the suspension of a scheduled delivery of four more F-i6s, a continuation of the 1975 sale.
There was controversy inside Israel, too, over the bombing, which had been debated at the highest levels of the Israeli government since late 1979.
Yitzhak Hofi, the director of Mossad, and Major General Yehoshua Saguy, chief of military intelligence, both opposed the attack, primarily because there was no evidence that Iraq was as yet capable of building a bomb.
After the Israeli strike, the American 10 THE SAMSON OPTION were joined in futile dissent by Yigael Yadin, the deputy prime minister.
At a late-1980 planning session, Saguy continued to inveigh against the mission, arguing that the adverse reaction in Washington would be a more serious national security threat to Israel than was the Iraqi reactor.
Saguy suffered for his dissent; the chief of military intelligence was not told of the mission until June 4, three days before it was scheduled to take place.
Saguy responded by renouncing any responsibility for the raid and threatening — briefly — to withhold intelligence.
The attack had been carried out, as planned, in two minutes, and the likelihood of any detection was slight.
But Menachem Begin, buoyed by the success, stunned his colleagues on June 8 by unilaterally announcing the Israeli coup.
On the next day, as Israel was besieged with protests, the prime minister defended the operation and vowed that Israel was ready to strike again, if necessary, to prevent an enemy from developing the atomic bomb.
The appalled Israeli officials knew that Begin's remarks were descripexperts concluded that Israel had bombed only one of two major targets at the site; it had destroyed the reactor as planned but left the nearby reprocessing plant untouched.
It was in the reprocessing facility that plutonium could be chemically recovered from spent reactor fuel rods.
A SECRET AGREEMENT I I tive not of the nonexistent underground weapons facility at Osirak, but of one that did exist in Israel.
Begin also told newsmen at the reception that the Iraqi government had hidden the facility from the International Atomic Energy Agency , which had inspected the reactor at Osirak in January 1981, under provisions of the 1968 Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, to which Iraq was a party.
Israeli government spokesmen attempted to recoup the next day by telling newsmen that Begin had misspoken; the underground facility was only four meters, not forty, below the surface.
Begin had visited the underground facility at Dimona at least once since becoming prime minister in 1977 an d> Israeli officials told me, had been provided in the days before the raid at Osirak with a detailed memorandum about it.
The officials suggested that Begin, in his public remarks, had simply transferred what he had seen and read about Dimona to Osirak.
There was no doubt in the Israeli intelligence community about which politician Hofi was criticizing.
Israeli officials acknowledged that their intelligence services saw evidence in the days after the June 7 raid that Iraq, obviously seeking revenge, had begun moving some of its Soviet-supplied Scud missiles closer to the Iraq-Jordan border.
If the Scuds were to be moved farther west into Jordan, Dimona would be in range of a retaliatory strike by the Iraqis.
Unlike the reactor at Osirak, which had not yet begun full-scale operation, Dimona had operated around the clock for eight months a year to produce and reprocess weapons-grade plutonium for nuclear weapons.
An Iraqi strike could scatter deadly radioactive contamination for dozens of miles.
Well before the bombing at Osirak, however, Israeli officials had ordered the dome-shaped reactor and underground reprocessing plant at Dimona to cease all operations; both were kept out of service through the end of the year.
The Israeli Air Force was also instructed to keep intelligence aircraft in the sky on a twenty-four-hour alert.
There is no evidence that Washington saw or understood any of the Israeli defensive actions.
A few British intelligence officials immediately suspected that Israel had used the high-resolution KH-11 photography to target Osirak, and they complained to their American counterparts about it.
There was evidence that William J Casey, Ronald Reagan's director of central intelligence, had inadvertently played a key role.
Casey was an enthusiastic supporter of the imagery-sharing program from the moment he took office, and early in his tenure he ordered that the Israeli liaison officers be provided with a private office near CIA headquarters.
The goal, apparently, was to give the Israelis direct access to the American intelliA SECRET AGREEMENT 13 gence officers who processed the KH-11 imagery to make sure that all essential intelligence was turned over.
Only Israelis, so the reasoning went, would know what was important to Israel.
The CIA director, suddenly confronted after Osirak with serious questions about Israel's abuse of the KH-11 intelligencesharing agreement, authorized a small, ad hoc committee of experts to review the matter.
In little more than two years, the Israelis had expanded what had been a limited agreement to the point where they were able to extract virtually any photograph they wished from the system.
Most surprisingly, the Israelis had requested and received extensive KH-11 coverage of western Russia, including Moscow.
These included renewed espionage activities inside the Soviet Union, aid for the anti-Communist Solidarity movement in Poland, and economic and military support — in violation of a congressional ban — for Jonas Savimbi's UNITA resistance movement in Angola.
Casey also insisted upon and apparently received Israeli promises of support for what emerged in the early 1980s as one of his near-obsessions — covert aid to the anti-Communist Renamo insurgency in Mozambique.
Despite the successful visit, Casey was embarrassed and rankled by the fact that his newfound colleagues in Israel had not seen fit to inform him in advance of the planned attack on Osirak.
His CIA thus had failed to anticipate the first serious foreign policy crisis in the Reagan administration.
The freeze led to enormous complications throughout 14 THE SAMSON OPTION der secretary of defense for policy, recalled his frustration at knowing that the Israelis were ""edging deeper into the overhead"" and not knowing how to stop it.
A former high-ranking NSA official recalled his anger upon subsequently learning early in the Reagan administration that Israeli military officers were permitted to attend Pentagon meetings at which future missions and orbital flight paths for the KH-11 were discussed.
This officer depicted the direct access provided to Israel as ""a compromise.
The Israeli officer assigned to the Pentagon, the intelligence officer said, was only relaying Israel's intelligence needs to the men in charge of the KH-11 program.
The Israeli, in return, was allowed to ""stand by"" as the KH-11 funneled its real-time imagery back to Washington.
A State Department official who was involved said he and Secretary Haig viewed the arguments about Israeli access as ""an intelligence community theological debate.
A SECRET AGREEMENT 15 in the Pentagon who informally had provided the expanded access.
It was finally agreed in the White House after the ad hoc review that the photographs could continue to flow to Israel, but with the initial 1979 restrictions emphatically back in force.
Allen personally relayed that message in the fall of 1981 to Ariel Sharon, the controversial and hard-line Israeli general and war hero who had been named defense minister in August by the newly reelected Begin government.
To meet that need, the Israelis sought Reagan's approval for the pre-positioning of American military forces, joint use of airfields, joint planning for military and political contingencies in the Middle East and Persian Gulf, and the United States financing of a receiving station, or downlink, for the KH-11 satellite imagery, to be located in Tel Aviv.
The Israeli proposals were understandably viewed as excessive and were much watered down during negotiations over the next few months, to Sharon's dismay.
Sharon pushed especially hard on the downlink issue, also insisting that the receiving station be ""dedicated"" — meaning that the encoded signals to and from the satellite to the downlink could be read only by Israel.
The United States thus would be in the untenable position of not being able to know what intelligence the Israelis were obtaining from its own satellite system.
The bombing at Osirak led to no significant changes in the U.S -Israeli relationship, nor were any serious questions raised about Israel's need for so many KH-11 photographs from so many places — a need that risked a breach in Israel's relations with the United States.
Despite the brief flap over Israeli access, there were no lessons learned and KH-11 photographs continued to flow to Israel.
The French, who had also been the chief suppliers of nuclear materials and expertise to Iraq in return for oil, were embarrassed as well as outraged by the Israeli attack.
Ariel Sharon concluded after the cabinet room meeting that the United States was not a reliable strategic ally.
He turned to a clandestine Israeli intelligence agency controlled by his defense ministry, whose operations at the time were not fully understood by Washington, and stood by as it intercepted intelligence on the Middle East and Soviet Union from the most sensitive agencies in America — the kind of intelligence that Israel had been told it would no longer be able to get.
An American Jew working in the United States intelligence community had volunteered his services to the agency several years earlier; he would soon be put to work spying on his country for Israel.
It's almost certain that no one in Ronald Reagan's White House considered Sharon's request for a KH-11 downlink in Tel Aviv in terms of Israel's nuclear ambitions.
Israel was itself a nuclear power that was targeting the Soviet Union with its warheads and missiles.
The international scientific community came to know Bergmann after Israel's successful War of Independence in 1948 — the first Arab-Israeli War — as a brilliant organic chemist and director of the chemistry division at the Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel's preeminent research facility.
He was chairman of Israel's Atomic Energy Commission, set up in 1952, and, on those few occasions when he appeared in public, an outspoken advocate of nuclear research for peaceful purposes.
Cigarette constantly in hand, Bergmann was a picture of charm and wit at international conferences on nuclear science.
By 1947, Bergmann was telling friends that the large phosphate fields in the Negev desert contained meager, but recoverable, traces of natural uranium.
Within two years, a department of isotope research was established at the Weizmann Institute and young Israeli scientists were being sent abroad to study the new fields of nuclear energy and nuclear chemistry.
A joint research program also was begun with the nascent French Atomic Energy Commission.
He announced — two years after the fact — that an Israeli Atomic Energy Commission had been established.
The next year Israel signed an agreement with the United States, under the Eisenhower administration's Atoms for Peace program, for cooperation in the civilian uses of atomic energy.
Washington helped finance and fuel a small nuclear reactor for research, located at Nahal Soreq, south of Tel Aviv.
The agreement called for the United States to have inspection rights to the small reactor under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, which provided for an Israeli guarantee, to be verified by inspections, that the nuclear materials would not be diverted to weapons research.
These were years in which David Ben-Gurion — Israel's white-maned ""Old Man,"" who served, with one brief interlude, as prime minister and defense minister from 1948 to 1963 — repeatedly bragged to visitors that Israel would build its own atomic reactor, utilizing its own natural uranium and locally manufactured heavy water.
Nuclear energy, Ben-Gurion promised, would soon be producing the electricity and creating the desalinated water needed to make the Negev desert bloom.
Bergmann's dream of nuclear power plants was sincere, but it also amounted to a totally effective cover for his drive to develop the bomb.
Ben-Gurion was the man in charge of all of this, with the aid of his brilliant young protege Shimon Peres, who was thirty years old when Ben-Gurion appointed him director general of the ministry of defense in late 1953.
Bergmann's Israeli Atomic Energy Commission, as the public was not told in the radio address, was under the direct jurisdiction of Peres and the defense ministry.
Nuclear power was not Ben-Gurion's first priority; the desert would glow before it bloomed.
These three men would find an international ally to help create the bomb and, equally important, would accept from the beginning that the bomb would have to be privately financed by wealthy American and European Jews who shared their dream of an ultimate deterrent for Israel.
THE SCIENTIST 21 Israel's nuclear bomb ambitions in the early 1950s were not foreseen in Cold War Washington.
Egypt's corrupt King Farouk was overthrown in a coup in 1952, and a radical new leader, Gamal Abdel Nasser, emerged in 1954 as premier.
British troops, after a stay of more than seventy years in Egypt, were on their way out of North Africa.
By 1955 the French government was facing insurrection from three former colonies, Morocco, Tunisia, and Algeria.
Morocco and Tunisia would gain their independence by 1956, but Algeria, whose opposition National Liberation Front was strongly supported by Nasser, became the main event.
The bloody war, with its 250,000 dead, came close to destroying France over the next five years and provided inspiration to Arab revolutionaries throughout the Middle East.
Nasser, with his talk of Pan-Arabism, also rattled the Israelis, who instinctively turned to the United States.
Ben-Gurion had tried for years to join in a regional security pact with Washington — to somehow be included under the American nuclear umbrella — with no success.
Ben-Gurion offered to send Israeli troops to fight alongside the United Nations' forces in South Korea.
The United States, England, and France had agreed in their 1950 Tripartite Agreement that all three nations would maintain the status quo in the Middle East by not providing any significant quantity of military equipment to Arabs * Israel's position on the Korean War enraged Moscow and led to a rupture in diplomatic relations.
The Eisenhower administration came into office in 1953 with no intention of changing the policy.
Israel tried, nonetheless, to establish some kind of a special relationship with President Eisenhower, with no luck.
In the mid-1950s, a year-long series of renewed talks on a mutual security treaty with Washington went nowhere.
At one point, as Ben-Gurion told his biographer, Michael Bar-Zohar, he considered offering Eisenhower American bases in Israel in return for a security commitment.
There were equally unsuccessful strategems to purchase fighter planes and other weapons, but Eisenhower essentially maintained the 1950 embargo on arms sales to Israel throughout the eight years of his presidency.
The effect was to limit America's influence in the Middle East and deny Washington a chance to have an impact on Israeli foreign policy.
The policy suited the men around Eisenhower, many of them Wall Street lawyers who thought that America's oil supply would be jeopardized by arms trafficking with Israel.
Ben-Gurion's private nightmare in these years — as his close aides knew — was of a second Holocaust, this time at the hands of the Arabs.
Israel's only security, Ben-Gurion repeatedly warned, would come through self-defense and self-reliance.
Ben-Gurion believed that he understood Arab character and was persuaded that as long as Arabs thought they could destroy the Jewish state, there would be no peace and no recognition of Israel.
Many Israelis, survivors of the Holocaust, came to believe in ein brera, or ""no alternative,"" the doctrine that Israel was surrounded by implacable enemies and therefore had no choice but to strike out.
For these Israelis, a nuclear arsenal was essential to the survival of the state.
In public speeches throughout the 1950s, BenGurion repeatedly linked Israel's security to its progress in science.
Ben-Gurion, Shimon Peres, and Ernst Bergmann believed that Israel's independent arsenal finally could provide what President Eisenhower would not — the nuclear umbrella.
The Israelis in charge of those posts knew Bergmann to be the most uncompromising and effective advocate for nuclear weapons, the man most directly responsible — along with the French — for Israel's status by the end of the 1960s as a nuclear-weapons state.
Bergmann and the French not only got it done in the Negev desert, but they kept it secret, just as J Robert Oppenheimer and his colleagues had kept the Manhattan Project undiscovered in the desert at Los Alamos.
He was on the fringe of a circle of eminent scientists, including Ernest Rutherford in England and Marie Curie of France, who were the cutting edge of what would become an international race in the prewar years to unravel the mystery of nuclear fission.
As a nuclear physicist, Hans Mark had 24 THE SAMSON OPTION his career published twenty books and more than five hundred papers on polymer science.
While in Berlin, Bergmann and Mark worked together and published joint papers on the chemical structure of rubber, paint, and adhesives.
Bergmann's father was one of the most eminent rabbis in Berlin and a close friend of Chaim Weizmann, the RussianJewish biochemist and Zionist then living in England.
Little is known of Bergmann's defense work for the British before the war; it is in those years that he first became involved with the defense of Palestine.
One of the Weizmann biographies reports that the Hagannah, the military arm of the Zionist movement in Palestine, asked Weizmann in 1936 for a chemist to help produce an effective high explosive for use in the underground war against the Arabs and the British.
Dynamite was far too dangerous to handle in the climate of the Middle East.
Weizmann assigned the mission to Bergmann, who got it done and then signed on as a member of the Hagannah's technical committee.
In 1939, the biography adds, Bergmann traveled to Paris on behalf of the Hagannah and shared his findings with the French, whose army was then operating in North Africa.
Bergmann left England shortly after Germany invaded Poland in the fall of 1939.
Weizmann had intervened once again and found him a job with old friends who owned a chemistry worked for twelve years beginning in 1955 for the Lawrence Livermore Laboratory in California, one of America's main nuclear weapons facilities.
For four of those years he served as a division leader in experimental physics.
Mark had been driven out of Europe in 1938 and ended up doing research for a Canadian paper company in Ontario.
By 1940 he was running a laboratory at the Polytechnic Institute of Brooklyn; two years later he became dean of faculty and turned the institute into a haven for Jewish refugees, including Chaim Weizmann.
Oppenheimer and his colleagues in the Manhattan Project, including John von Neumann, the mathematician and early computer theoretician, were being wooed — unsuccessfully — by Weizmann as early as 1947, and were repeatedly asked to spend time doing research in Israel.
He also took a military flight with Bergmann and Shimon Peres to visit the port city of Elat at the southern reach of the Negev, according to newspaper reports at the time.
Israeli officials who worked in 1958 at Dimona, then in the early stages of construction, recall no visit then or in later years by Oppenheimer.
Weizmann had been instrumental in the 1930s in setting up Palestine's first research facility, the Daniel Sieff Institute.
According to Shimon Peres, Weizmann approached Albert Einstein, then teaching at Princeton, and asked him to recommend one of his students to run the institute.
Einstein instead suggested Bergmann, who didn't get the job for reasons not known.
Inorganic chemistry was directed by Aharon Katchalsky, later Katzir, who was a specialist in the electrolytic properties of chain molecules and a pioneer researcher in the related field of musclepowered robotics.
There was one final move for Bergmann, at Ben-Gurion's request, after Israel's Independence in 1948 — to the ministry of defense, where, under Shimon Peres, Bergmann established the nation's first institute for defense research.
More than forty years later, Peres would tell an Israeli newspaper reporter that Bergmann, even in 1948, was constantly speaking about a missile capability for Israel.
Mark became a constant commuter between Brooklyn and Israel after World War II, serving on planning boards and as a scientific adviser to the fledgling Weizmann Institute.
That interview, nine years before his death, was as close as Bergmann ever came to publicly discussing the bomb.
There was at least one early occasion, however, when Bergmann couldn't resist sharing what he knew.
He would operate at the highest levels between Washington and Jerusalem for the next two decades.
Israel's needs in the late 1940s and early 1950s coincided perfectly with France's.
Both nations were far from having any technical capacity to build a bomb, nor was there any internal consensus that a bomb was desirable.
Ben-Gurion, Peres, and Bergmann would spend much of their careers engaged in a bitter fight inside the Israeli government over their dreams of a nuclear weapons program.
In 1950, he was the first to sign the Stockholm Appeal, a Soviet-backed petition calling for a ban on 28 THE SAMSON OPTION all nuclear weapons.
French scientists, despite extensive involvement in prewar nuclear fission research, had been excluded from a major role in the American and British bomb programs of World War II, and Joliot-Curie's politics kept France isolated.
Joliot-Curie was dismissed after signing the Stockholm Appeal, and he was eventually replaced by Pierre Guillaumat, who had served during the war with the French secret intelligence service, and Francis Perrin, a Joliot associate who in 1939 had been the first to publish a formula for calculating the critical mass of uranium — the amount needed to sustain a chain reaction.
The French plowed ahead with no help from the United States, which viewed France's Atomic Energy Commission as being riddled with Soviet agents.
A socialist who fled to England in 1940 at the fall of France, he became friendly with Bergmann — how the two met is not known — and traveled to Tel Aviv in 1949.
It was after that visit that some Israeli scientists were permitted to attend Saclay, the newly set up French national atomic research center near Versailles, and participate in the construction of Saclay's small experimental reactor.
It was a learning experience for the nuclear scientists of both countries.
Then we would decide exactly what sort of collaboration to seek and what kind of contribution could be made in a joint endeavor, considering Israel's capacities and resources.
A critical decision for France, and thus Israel, came in 1951 when, over the objections of Perrin, Guillaumat authorized the construction of a natural uranium-fueled reactor capable of producing, after chemical reprocessing, about twenty-two pounds of weapons-grade plutonium a year.
The chain reaction would be moderated by graphite, a technique used by the United States and the Soviet Union in their huge plutoniumTHE SCIENTIST 29 producing reactors.
Surveyors had found large deposits of natural uranium a few years earlier near Limoges, in central France, and that discovery made it easy for Guillaumat and Perrin to discard an alternative method for powering the reactor — using uranium that had been artificially enriched.
Enriched fuel, if available at all, would have to be imported, since French technicians did not yet know how to enrich natural uranium.
But relying on foreign suppliers — and inevitable international controls — would rob France of any chance to achieve its basic goal of atomic independence.
The decision to produce weapons-grade plutonium would irrevocably propel France down the road to a nuclear bomb, as Guillaumat, Perrin, and the Israelis had to know — but the French public and its military leaders did not.
Construction began the next year at Marcoule, in the southern Rhone Valley.
Saint-Gobain Techniques Nouvelles , a large chemical company, subsequently was granted a contract to build a chemical reprocessing plant on the grounds at Marcoule.
The natural uranium, once burned, or irradiated, in the reactor, breaks down into uranium, plutonium, and highly toxic wastes.
The irradiated fuel needs to be transported, cooled, and then treated before the plutonium can be separated and purified.
These steps can be accomplished only by remote control and in a specially built separate facility — the reprocessing plant — containing elaborate and very expensive physical protection for the work force.
There was renewed controversy inside Israel over the constantly expanding Israeli presence in France, but Ben-Gurion held firm.
There were people who went to Ben-Gurion and told him, 'Don't listen to Shimon; he and Bergmann are spinning tales.
Israeli scientists were the only foreigners allowed access throughout the secret French nuclear complex at Marcoule.
One obvious reason for the carte blanche was the sheer brilliance of the Israeli scientists and their expertise, even then, in computer technology.
The French would remain dependent for the next decade — the first French nuclear test took place in i960 — on Israeli computer skills.
And many of France's leading nuclear scientists were Jewish and strong supporters of the new Jewish state, which was emerging — to the delight of these men — as France's closest ally in the Middle East.
No Frenchman had stronger emotional ties to Israel than Bertrand Goldschmidt, a nuclear chemist who had served during World War II with the handful of French scientists who were permitted — despite being foreigners — to work directly with the Americans doing nuclear research.
He had become an expert in the chemistry of plutonium and plutonium extraction.
He also had helped build an experimental reactor fueled with natural uranium and moderated by heavy water.
As a first-rate chemist, he had been offered a chance to stay in the American bomb program after the war, but instead chose to return to France and join its Atomic Energy Commission.
After intense negotiations, American security officials permitted him to do so, but refused to release him from his wartime pledge of secrecy.
That was a reasonable compromise"" — and one that was quickly disregarded.
Goldschmidt was a Jew whose family had suffered, as had most Jewish families in Europe, during the war.
His ties to THE SCIENTIST 31 Israel were heightened by marriage; his wife was a member of the eminent Rothschild banking family, whose contributions to Israel and Jewish causes were measured in the tens of millions of dollars.
Goldschmidt and his wife had made the pilgrimage to Israel in the early 1950s and been taken by Ernst Bergmann for a memorable meeting with Ben-Gurion at his frame home in the Negev.
He also was among the few outsiders permitted to visit the completed reactor at Dimona in the 1960s — then a classic example of illicit proliferation.
The important fact to understand, he added, with some discomfort, is that ""in the fifties and sixties having a nuclear weapon was considered a good thing — something to be congratulated for.
By 1953, *he scientific team at the Weizmann Institute had developed the improved ion exchange mechanism for producing heavy water and a more efficient method for mining uranium.
Goldschmidt recalled that Bergmann himself came to France to negotiate the mining sale with Pierre Guillaumat.
The procedure did produce heavy water far more easily and much more cheaply than other methods, as advertised, but also much more slowly.
Israel would remain on a cash-and-carry basis with the French in its nuclear dealings.
He believed he could revive that spirit and set an example by resettling in the desert with his wife.
Ben-Gurion would be replaced by not one but two people, for he decreed that his jointly held positions of prime minister and defense minister be separated.
No two men could have differed more in their approach to the Arab question.
Sharett, who had lived in an Arab village as a child and who, unlike Ben-Gurion, spoke Arabic, believed that peace with the Arab world was possible, but only through military restraint and with the possible intervention of the United Nations.
As prime minister, he would begin secret peace negotiations with Nasser.
Before leaving office, Ben-Gurion also designated Pinhas Lavon, more hard-line than Sharett on the Arab question, as the new defense minister.
His goal, obviously, was to ensure that Sharett's views would not go unchallenged.
Ben-Gurion also arranged for another hard-liner, Moshe Dayan, to become the new army chief of staff.
Ben-Gurion's concerns about Sharett did not extend to the nuclear question.
Sharett, as his voluminous personal diaries — as yet unpublished in full in English — make clear, shared the 34 THE SAMSON OPTION Old Man's ambition for the ""Enterprise,"" without sharing BenGurion's confidence in Bergmann.
In one typical entry, Sharett wrote off Bergmann ""as a chemist sunk in research and teaching with no ability to oversee the 'problem' "" — one of many synonyms for the bomb.
How to handle the Arab question was the dominant issue, however, and over the next year there was inevitable tension as Dayan and Peres, in almost constant contact with Ben-Gurion at his kibbutz, sought to stifle Sharett's dovish policies and his secret talks with the Egyptians.
Scandal broke in mid-1954 when Egyptian authorities announced the arrest of an Israeli spy ring that had bombed and sabotaged American, British, and Egyptian targets earlier in the year in what became known as the Lavon Affair.
The goal of the bombings had been to derail pending British and American negotiations — and possible rapprochement — with the Nasser government; Egypt was to remain isolated from the Western powers.
An internal Israeli investigation was unable to determine who had given the order for the sabotage activities, and Sharett, who had not known of the operation, accepted Lavon's resignation in January 1955.
Ben-Gurion was recalled a few days later from retirement to replace Lavon as defense minister.
The Old Man's immediate public mission was to restore the army's morale and the citizens' confidence in the government.
He entered office, however, more convinced than ever that a policy of military reprisal was essential; any interference with defense planning, he warned Sharett in writing, would force him once again to resign and call for new elections.
Sharett, in his diaries, made it clear that he was convinced that Dayan was involved in both the original unauthorized operations inside Egypt and the subsequent attempt to shift the blame to Lavon.
Any involvement of Dayan, of course, inevitably raises the possibility that Ben-Gurion had personal knowledge of the operation and, in fact, had approved it.
THE FRENCH CONNECTION 35 after taking office, on February 28, 1955, Ben-Gurion responded to a cross-border attack by Palestinian guerrillas, or fedayeen, by authorizing a large-scale retaliation against an Egyptian military camp at Gaza.
The Israeli attack, which killed thirty-six Egyptians and Palestinians, was led by Lieutenant Colonel Ariel Sharon, whose reputation for skill and brutality already was well established.
The Gaza attack escalated what had been a series of skirmishes into something close to guerrilla war; Arab casualties were four times greater than Sharett had been told to expect.
The raid ended the secret contacts between Sharett and Nasser and resulted in an Egyptian decision to step up its fedayeen attacks from Gaza.
Nasser responded to the increased tension by turning to the Communist world for military aid.
He traveled in April 1955 to the Bandung Conference of African and Asian nations and received a promise from Chou En-lai, the Chinese premier, for as many arms as Egypt could afford.
In late 1954, the coalition government led by Pierre MendesFrance, one of fourteen coalitions that held office during the chaotic Fourth Republic, had granted authority for a nuclear * The first temple and Jewish state, as every Israeli schoolchild knows, was destroyed in 537c. by the Babylonians.
The second temple was destroyed by the Romans ind., although Jews continued to live in the area through the centuries.
Modern Zionist resettlement of Palestine began in the 1880s, and Jews had become a political force in Palestine by 1917, when Britain, in the Balfour Declaration, pledged to establish in Palestine ""a national home for the Jewish people,"" with safeguards for the other,e., Arab, inhabitants.
Senior officials of the ministry of defense thus were brought into nuclear planning for the first time.
Many French military men had been skeptical of an independent nuclear deterrent, but that attitude was changed by France's disastrous defeat at the hands of Ho Chi Minh at Dienbienphu, North Vietnam, in 1954, and the subsequent collapse of French colonialism in the wars of liberation in North Africa.
It was clear to many Frenchmen that France could not depend on its NATO allies to protect purely French interests.
This was especially true in Algeria, where the bloody revolution and French repression were turning the casbahs and deserts into a killing field.
In January 1955, t ' ie French government fell again and a new socialist government headed by Guy Mollet assumed power.
Mollet took a much harder line on the war in Algeria and those Arab leaders, such as Nasser, who supported the revolutionaries.
Israel, which had been intensively waging guerrilla war against Egypt, was now widely seen as one of France's most dependable allies.
Mollet agreed later in the year to begin secretly selling high-performance French bombers to Israel; the sales, arranged by Shimon Peres, were from one defense ministry to another, with no diplomatic niceties and no involvement of the French or Israeli foreign ministries.
Arms continued to flow from France to Israel for the next twelve years.
In return, Israel agreed to begin sharing intelligence on the Middle East, the United States, and Europe with the French.
The Israeli intelligence networks in North Africa were particularly good, former Israeli officials recalled, because the Jews there tended to live and work as merchants and businessmen in the Arab quarters.
Of special significance were the more than 100,000 Jews in Algeria, many of them trapped by the violence and irrationality of both sides.
Those Jews were encouraged by the Israeli government to provide intelligence on the leadership of the National Liberation Front and in other ways to cooperate with the French.
The Israelis understood that no plutonium weapon could be made without a reprocessing plant, and they also understood that the construction of the plant would be impossible without a French commitment.
The French Atomic Energy Commission was scheduled to begin construction in mid-1955 on its own chemical reprocessing plant at Marcoule, and Israeli scientists had been involved at every step along the way.
Having the French say yes could, ironically, trigger a crisis inside the top ranks of the Israeli government.
A French commitment would force Peres and Bergmann to inform the cabinet that Israel was going to build a secret nuclear complex.
Levi Eshkol, the finance minister, shared Ben-Gurion's belief in ein brera, but also was convinced that a nuclear-armed Israel would be financial madness.
Eshkol would hold on to that view after becoming prime minister in 1963.
The Canadian government announced that it had agreed to build a heavy-water research reactor for the Indian government.
The Canadian offer included no provision for international inspections, since no international agreement on nuclear safeguards had yet been promulgated.
In late 1955, a new Israeli government was formed with BenGurion once again serving as both defense minister and prime minister.
National elections that summer had eroded the Mapai plurality in the Knesset and provided more evidence that the Israeli public was dissatisfied with the dovish policies 38 THE SAMSON OPTION sot Moshe Sharett.
A few months later, the long-standing direct talks between Jerusalem and Washington also collapsed; there would be no American security agreement with Israel.
On June 10, Ben-Gurion authorized General Moshe Dayan to open secret negotiations with Paris on a joint war against Egypt.
In July, Nasser, as expected, nationalized the Suez Canal, bringing the outraged British government into the secret planning for war.
Shimon Peres was now shuttling between Paris and Tel Aviv on behalf of BenGurion; the line between public policy and personal diplomacy was eroding daily, to the muffled protests of many inside each government.
Within the labor movement there were three main parties, the dominant one Mapai, the most centrist and pragmatic faction of Israel's socialist-Zionist movement.
Achdut Avodah, the Unity of Labor, was domestically more socialistic than Mapai, and more hawkish and nationalistic in foreign policy.
The General Zionists, conservative on economic matters and moderate on defense and military issues, lost seats.
The most hawkish political factions in the mid-1950s, in terms of military policy toward the Arabs, were the group led by Moshe Dayan and Shimon Peres, Mapai; Achdut Avodah, led by Yisrael Galili and former 1948 War of Independence hero Yigal Allon; and Herut.
Ben-Gurion, Dayan, Peres, and Galili were hawks of Realpolitik considerations — a belief in force as a necessary ingredient of international relations.
THE FRENCH CONNECTION 39 That summer Moshe Sharett quietly resigned as foreign minister.
The Israeli public would not learn of the deep divisions at the top of its government until the publication of Sharett's personal diaries in 1980.
Sharett's replacement was Golda Meir, the minister of labor, whose main qualification, Ben-Gurion would later acknowledge, was her ignorance of international affairs.
Meir endorsed Ben-Gurion's argument for preventive war; nonetheless, her ministry would be repeatedly bypassed by Ben-Gurion, Peres, Dayan, and Ernst David Bergmann as Israel broadened its involvement with France.
In mid-September, with the Suez War against Egypt six weeks away and with no international protest over the Canadian reactor sale, Ben-Gurion decided it was time to formally seek French help for the Israeli bomb.
Israeli nuclear scientists working at Saclay had been involved since 1949 in planning and constructing the French experimental reactor, known as EL 2, which was powered by natural uranium and moderated by heavy water.
Uranium was indigenous to Israel, and there was some heavy water available locally in Israel; more heavy water, if needed, as seemed likely, could be supplied by the French or illicitly purchased from Norway or the United States, then the world's largest producers.
Ben-Gurion already had picked out a location for the Israeli reactor — in the basement of an old deserted winery at Rishon LeZion, a few miles from the Weizmann Institute.
They said that when the Americans will realize we have a nuclear capacity, they will give us the guarantee of survival.
Four days later, on September 17, Bergmann and Peres had dinner with Francis Perrin and Pierre Guillaumat at the home 40 THE SAMSON OPTION of Jacob Tzur, the Israeli ambassador to France.
There is no written record of the meetings, and it is impossible to determine what happened when.
What is clear, nonetheless, is that Israel sought French help for the bomb — and got it — at least six weeks before the shooting started in the Suez War.
Many Israelis viewed the conduct of their partners in the Suez War as a betrayal.
Israel's immediate tactical goal in the war was to destroy the Egyptian Army and its ability to support and train the growing Palestinian fedayeen movement.
Keeping the Arab world in disarray has always been a focal point of Israeli strategy, and Nasser, with his calls for Pan-Arabism — Egyptian hegemony, in Israeli eyes — was a serious national security threat.
The Israelis further believed that a humiliating Egyptian defeat in the Suez War inevitably would lead to Nasser's overthrow.
The battle plan called for Israel to initiate the attack on October 29, sending paratroopers into the Sinai and destroying the ability of Egypt to operate from Gaza.
France and Britain would then demand that both sides halt hostilities and withdraw ten miles from the Suez Canal, creating a buffer zone.
When the Egyptians, who owned the canal, refused to do so — a refusal that was inevitable — France and England would launch bombing and airborne assaults on November 6 to neutralize and occupy the canal.
Israel stormed through the Egyptian Army and had captured all of the Sinai by November 4.
There was nothing, other than a United Nations call for a cease-fire, to stop the Israeli Army from crossing the Suez and taking Cairo.
Guy Mollet began THE FRENCH CONNECTION 41 urging Anthony Eden, Britain's prime minister, to move up the date of their combined assault, but Eden, made anxious by the fast pace of the Israeli Army and the United Nations ceasefire call, refused.
The British and French finally landed, as prearranged, on the morning of November 6 at Port Said, only to stop again when the Soviet Union, then involved in the bloody suppression of the Hungarian revolution, issued what was perceived in Israel to be a nuclear ultimatum in separate notes to Ben-Gurion, Mollet, and Eden.
The Soviet telegram to Ben-Gurion accused Israel of ""criminally and irresponsibly playing with the fate of peace, with the fate of its own people.
There also was a threat to send troops as ""volunteers"" into the Middle East.
Israel, deserted by its two allies, was forced a few days later to agree to a cease-fire and the eventual deployment of the United Nations' peacekeeping force in the Sinai.
The Israelis were disappointed by the French and enraged by Eisenhower, who, so Ben-Gurion had believed, would never turn away from supporting Israel in the weeks before the presidential elections.
There was a widespread belief in Israel and in France that the United States, considered to be Israel's superpower friend, had backed down in the face of the Soviet nuclear threat.
The Suez War was viewed by Washington not as an anti-Soviet or anti-Communist move, but as a last-ditch attempt by two powers — 42 THE SAMSON OPTION ""You Americans screwed us,"" one former Israeli government official said, recalling his feelings at the time.
On November 6, after learning of the French and British cease-fire, Ben-Gurion sent Peres, accompanied by Golda Meir, to Paris.
Mollet had fought against the cease-fire but, when faced with Britain's insistence on withdrawal, felt he had no choice but to go along.
Even worse, Mollet was now going to have to persuade Ben-Gurion to accept a United Nations peacekeeping role in the Sinai.
Israel would have to withdraw from the land for which its paratroopers had fought and died.
There was no connection between one sentence and England and France — to stanch their continuing international decline.
Eisenhower and his senior aides believed that Nasser and other Third World leaders much preferred alliances with the United States rather than with the Soviets, and thus were more likely to become pro-American if the administration disassociated itself from the Middle East colonialism of England and France.
The President was distressed at the two American allies for continuing to practice what he viewed as their colonialistic policies; he also resented the obvious Israeli belief that he would pander to the American Jewish vote by endorsing the Suez War.
Eisenhower's realization from the secret U-2 overflights — the first U-2 spy mission had taken place a few months earlier — that Israel had purchased sixty Mystere attack aircraft from the French, and not the twentyfour they had publicly announced.
No public mention was made of the larger-thanreported Israeli purchase — the new aircraft were seen on runways — since the existence of U-2 overflights was then the government's biggest national security secret.
Israel's unhappiness with Eisenhower was matched by Guy Mollet's sense of guilt and shame at France's failure to carry out commitments made to his fellow socialists in Israel.
Ben-Gurion agreed to withdraw his troops from the Sinai and accept a United Nations peacekeeping role in return for France's help in building a nuclear reactor and chemical reprocessing plant.
Israel was no longer interested in an experimental reactor, such as at Saclay, but in the real thing — a reactor patterned after Marcoule.
The deal was struck, although it would be nearly a year before Peres would conclude the final negotiations.
Mollet also formally cleared the way later in 1956 for the French nuclear weapons program by establishing a committee on the military use of atomic energy, to be led by the army chief of staff.
Israeli scientists were on hand as observers when the first French nuclear test took place in i960.
Over the next few years, as weapons-grade plutonium began rolling out of Marcoule, the French strategic goal would incor* A major complication for Peres in working out the official government-to-government agreement was the continuing collapse of the French governments.
Guy Mollet's government fell in mid-1957 anc ^ was replaced by one led by Maurice Bourges-Maunoury.
There were last-minute qualms about the Israeli reactor expressed by Christian Pineau, the new foreign minister.
Pineau's meeting with Peres and his signed authorization for the reactor came in late September 1957, precisely at the time that the Bourges-Maunoury administration — that is, Pineau's government — was being voted out of office by the French National Assembly.
In essence, the formal authorization for Dimona was signed by an official who was already out of office.
The nuclear tests in the South Pacific, although marred by misfires, enabled France to develop its nuclear deterrent, the force defrappe, by the mid-1960s, with ambitions — not reached until the 1980s — of independently targeting the Soviet Union with intercontinental missiles.
Charles de Gaulle would stun Washington and its allies by pulling France out of NATO in 1966.
The Soviets would conclude, so Gallois's reasoning went, that there was no military target in Paris or anywhere in France that was worth the risk of having one nuclear bomb falling on Moscow.
A nuclear-armed France would no longer need to wonder, as did all of Europe, whether the United States would come to its defense — and risk a Soviet retaliation — in a nuclear crisis.
Gallois was taken very seriously by the Israelis, and France's force defrappe became the role model for Israel's strategic planning — and its ultimate decision not to count on the American nuclear umbrella.
Israel would complement its new reactor with a major research effort to design and manufacture longrange missiles capable of targeting the Middle East and, eventually, the Soviet Union.
The reactor at Dimona was just the beginning for Ernst Bergmann; he would now have to begin putting together a nuclear arsenal.
Bergmann's role in developing Israel's nuclear arsenal remains a state secret today.
In the years after his death, as the Israeli nuclear arsenal became fixed, he became a virtual nonperson, a victim of stringent Israeli security and the selfTHE FRENCH CONNECTION 45 censorship that such security involves.
For example, in a book he wrote that was published in the United States in 1979, Shimon Peres eulogized Bergmann, with whom he worked closely for thirteen years, as one of the seven founders of the State of Israel.
Peres, of course, did not mention nuclear weapons, but he did report that Chaim Weizmann considered Bergmann to be ""a future candidate for the presidency"" of Israel.
By the spring of 1957 it was clear that the old winery at Richonel-Zion wouldn't do and a new site was needed for the larger reactor, known then only as EL 102.
It wasn't difficult for Peres to convince Ben-Gurion to locate it at Dimona, near the ancient city of Beersheba in his beloved Negev.
Money was transferred directly to Paris from the prime minister's account and Saint-Gobain, the French chemical firm, then two years away from completing the reprocessing plant at Marcoule, was selected to build the Israeli reprocessing facility — underground.
As they began work, Saint-Gobain's engineers were given access to the initial construction plans for the reactor, and were stunned by what they learned.
The French-Israeli agreement called for the plant to be capable at its peak of producing 24 million watts of thermal power, but its cooling ducts, waste facilities, and other specifications suggested that the plant would operate at two to three times that capacity.
It takes three megawatts of thermal power to produce one megawatt of electrical power; Dimona's electrical power output thus would be eight megawatts.
Nuclear scientists have determined that one megawatt-day of production will produce one gram of plutonium.
Dimona's reported output of twenty-four megawatts would produce, if the reactor were operating 80 percent of the time, about seven kilograms of enriched plutonium per year, enough for two low-yield weapons.
Over the next few years, thousands of tons of imported machinery and hundreds of imported technicians, engineers, wives, children, mistresses, and cars turned a quiet corner of the Negev desert into a French boom town.
Eisenhower came into the presidency in 1953 concerned about the lack of aerial intelligence on the Soviet Union and ordered the CIA to do something about it.
Lundahl had analyzed reconnaissance photos for the Navy during the war and stayed in the business afterward.
One of his first moves was to entice Dino A Brugioni, then compiling dossiers on Soviet industry for the CIA, to join his staff.
Brugioni was another World War II veteran who had served as an aerial photographer and radio and radar specialist in lead bombers with the Twelfth Air Force in Italy.
He had been recruited by the CIA in 1948, the year after it was established; like Lundahl, Brugioni was very good at what he was doing.
The two men would remain colleagues and close friends for the next forty years.
Eisenhower's next major step was to authorize a daring reconnaissance program — primarily targeted at the Soviet Union — and assign the development of the revolutionary airplane that would make it work jointly to the CIA and the Air Force.
The aircraft, built under cover by the Lockheed Aircraft Company in Burbank, California, and known as the U-2, would be able to fly and glide for almost eleven hours — covering more than five thousand miles — at heights greater than 65,000 feet, 48 THE SAMSON OPTION while utilizing only one thousand gallons of fuel.
Special lenses, cameras, and thin film were developed, enabling the spy plane to photograph a path from Moscow to Tashkent, southeast of the Ural Sea, in one take.
The U-2 went operational from a secret base in West Germany on July 4, 1956.
Moscow was overflown on the next day, and dramatic photographs — code-named chess — of the Kremlin and the Winter Garden were later shown to the President and his advisers.
A second U-2 base was authorized in Turkey; later there would be more bases in Pakistan and Norway.
Soviet sites were photographed, mapped, and targeted, all within a few days, by American missiles and bombers from the Strategic Air Command.
By August 1949, four years after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Soviets had managed to explode their first atomic bomb, using plutonium.
That first bomb, like its American predecessor, was the most basic in the atomic arsenal — a fission weapon.
Such weapons consist of a small core of fissile material surrounded by high explosives.
The explosives are triggered inward in a precise sequence (measured in nanoseconds), suddenly and intensely compressing, or imploding, the core.
The fissile material goes ""supercritical"" and begins discharging neutrons at a much faster rate than they can escape * American intelligence had been unable to locate all the Soviet nuclear facilities in the early 1950s, before the U-2 went operational, and the Pentagon's nuclear war planners had to emphasize Soviet airbases and missile fields in their primary targeting.
Despite the tonnage, SAC could not guarantee that the Soviets' nuclear retaliatory capacity would be destroyed, leaving American cities open to retaliation.
Well before the end of the war, Edward Teller and other American nuclear weapons designers understood that a far more powerful nuclear device, with fission as merely a first step, was theoretically possible.
The new weapon, developed under the code name of ""Super,"" was the hydrogen bomb, known to today's physicists as a fusion device.
After much trial and error, scientists at Los Alamos developed a two-stage device, with two separate components inside a single warhead case.
Deuterium, a hydrogen isotope twice the weight of hydrogen, or lithium deuteride could be used as the thermonuclear fuel.
Deuterium is the main fuel of the sun, and is burned there at temperatures of 18 to 36 million degrees Fahrenheit.
American physicists conducted experiments and came to understand, with appropriate awe, that a thermonuclear fuel, once ignited by fission inside a hydrogen bomb, would burn at a speed, temperature, and pressure greater than it burned at in the center of the sun.
A key to the hydrogen bomb was the initial triggering of a fission device, for only fission was capable of generating the heat and, as the scientists later came to understand, the radiation needed to burn the thermonuclear fuel.
The Los Alamos team later determined that the fusion of deuterium and tritium, another heavy hydrogen isotope that is a by-product of lithium, could produce a thermonuclear explosion of fifteen megatons — that is, one thousand times greater than the Hiroshima bomb.
The Soviets, at one point known to be at least three years behind the American thermonuclear bomb program, moved 50 THE SAMSON OPTION ahead rapidly in the science of making doomsday weapons.
The first Soviet two-stage hydrogen bomb was successfully tested in 1955, and six years later Soviet scientists detonated the largest known hydrogen bomb, with an explosive force of fiftyeight megatons.
At its height in 1988, the Soviet nuclear stockpile totaled an estimated 33,000 warheads, slightly more than the United States maintained in 1967, its peak year.
In the beginning, everything was secret — even the existence of the CIA as well as its Photographic Intelligence Division.
The first U-2 flights over the Soviet Union had provided dramatic evidence that the Soviets were not nearly as advanced in conventional arms as the Pentagon had assumed.
These revelations were of the utmost importance and were immediately presented to President Eisenhower himself, as well as to other top officials.
Lundahl, as head of the U-2 intelligence unit, soon found himself becoming the American government's most listened-to briefing officer.
Eisenhower and the men around him, including John Foster Dulles, the secretary of state, and his brother Allen, the CIA director, had been infuriated by Israel's attempt to mask the extent of its military buildup prior to the 1956 Suez invasion.
The administration's truth-teller continued to be the U-2, whose pilots, including Gary Francis Powers, later to be shot down, were usually assigned to overfly the Soviet Union.
But there were other standing U-2 targets in sensitive areas and * Lundahl briefed President John F Kennedy in the Oval Office in October 1962, after a U-2 overflight produced evidence of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
FIRST KNOWLEDGE 51 especially in moments of crisis — and that description fit the Middle East in 1958.
Egypt and Syria had merged early in the year to form the United Arab Republic, and the Arab world was immediately thrown into political turmoil.
Muslim opposition, sparked by Egypt and Syria, led to violence in proWestern Lebanon, where American marines waded ashore in July to protect the regime of President Camille Chamoun.
The Iraqi monarchy, also proWestern, was overthrown in a bloody coup d'etat and replaced by a military dictator, Abdel Karim Qassem.
Gary Powers and his colleagues, who had continued intermittently to overfly the Middle East, were now steadily back at work in the area.
The CIA's photo interpreters were suddenly seeing a lot of activity at an Israeli Air Force practice bombing range south of Beersheba, an old Bedouin camel-trading center.
Photo interpretation was still a fledgling science in 1958, a hands-on business.
The developed film from the U-2 missions was rushed to the CIA's Photographic Intelligence Division, printed, analyzed, mounted on boards if necessary, cleared with Allen Dulles, and then immediately taken to the White House.
Eisenhower remained an avid consumer until the last days of his presidency, and access to the photographs and briefings often was limited to the President and his immediate aides.
Secrecy was paramount, although the Soviet Union eventually learned of the U-2 operations and began to complain bitterly, in private, about the American violations of its airspace.
Much more disturbing to Washington was evidence that the Soviets were aware in advance of the take-off time for each mission.
The National Security Agency, responsible for monitoring Soviet signals intelligence, reported — precisely when could not be learned — that the Soviet military and civilian aviation authorities had established a pattern of abruptly grounding all air traffic before a U-2 flight was scheduled to depart.
The elimination of all airplane traffic, of course, made it much easier for the Soviet radar system to plot the U-2 flight paths, and thus provided more time for the intended targets of the U-2 cameras to take countermeasures.
The mystery was solved early in the U-2 program by a group of Air Force communications technicians at Kelly Field in Texas — none of whom had any knowledge of the U-2 operation or any clearance for such knowledge.
The Air Force analysts were able to deduce that a special intelligence operation was in existence as well as predict each flight simply by monitoring the extensive and poorly masked preflight communications between Washington and the U-2 airfields.
The U-2 communications system did not change, and, one of the never-ending ironies of the intelligence world, the high-level American intelligence officer who brought the evidence of Soviet awareness to the attention of the U-2 plan52 THE SAMSON OPTION There also was a continuing and essential need for close coordination between exotic groups such as America's nuclear planners and the men authorizing U-2 operations.
Plutonium and tritium, for example, occur in nature only in minute amounts and thus must be manufactured by irradiating lithium in a nuclear reactor.
Among the inevitable by-products of the manufacturing process are radioactive gases, which are vented into the atmosphere.
The analysts of the early U-2 photography learned to look for huge or distinctive chimneys, or ""smokestacks,"" as the photo interpreters called them, all of which were studied intently to see if they were linked to a nuclear weapons facility.
It was Brugioni who recalled seeing the first signs of what would become the Israeli nuclear reactor.
One clue, not immediately understood, was the fencing off of a large, barren area a dozen or so miles outside the small desert town of Dimona.
Brugioni and the photo interpreters assumed that the Israelis were setting up an ammunition-testing site.
A new road from Beersheba, twenty-five miles to the north, was observed, leading directly to the fenced area.
The site was no longer just another point of reference amid the thousands of feet of U-2 negatives flowing into CIA headquarters.
The subterranean digging began in early 1958; soon afterward, cement began to pour into heavy foundations.
For example, you can draw a circle ners was accused of a security violation.
FIRST KNOWLEDGE 53 twenty-five miles in diameter in most areas of the world and understand how man spends his life by studying that circle.
You see cattle grazing, hog and poultry pens, and conclude that people eat meat.
There was a fear that Nasser would get together [with the Arab world] and they'd take Israel.
Eisenhower secretly authorized the United States Air Force to provide fighter pilot training and courses in aerial reconnaissance and photo interpretation to the Israelis.
There was no way that Lundahl and Brugioni could wink at the imminent construction of a secret nuclear reactor.
They and their colleagues in the U-2 shop believed strongly in Israel's right to exist, but were equally convinced that an Israeli bomb would destabilize the Middle East.
They also knew that they were dealing with political dynamite, and chose to wait; speculation would be deadly.
The pouring of concrete footings for the reactor's circular dome was all the evidence Lundahl needed.
Lundahl rushed the early raw photographs to the White House; it was late 1958 or early 1959.
The special secrecy of the U-2 was heightened by the fact * The lack of any written notes or documents inevitably made it difficult for Brugioni and Lundahl to recall the dates of specific events, such as the date of Lundahl's briefing on Dimona to President Eisenhower.
No declassified documents about such briefings are available to the public in the Eisenhower Library in Abilene, Kansas.
The photo interpreters also were provided with communications intercepts and reports of Soviet and Eastern European refugee interrogations, as compiled by special American and Israeli intelligence teams.
The assumption was that since most of the nuclear weapons installations behind the Iron Curtain were carefully camouflaged, the photo interpreters needed all the help possible.
A refugee's random comment about a secret factory somewhere in the Soviet Union often triggered a major discovery.
The CIA's Photographic Intelligence Division offered three categories of follow-up.
Phase One was the immediate report — presented as soon as possible, as were the early photos of the Israeli reactor.
A Phase Two report, to be presented overnight, would require Lundahl's shop to enlarge the intelligence photos and mount them for display.
A Phase Three report called for extensive analysis based on many more overflights over many weeks.
There would be special assignments for the U-2S, and an extensive series of photographs.
Lundahl anticipated a Phase Two or Three request on the Israeli intelligence.
Instead, he recalled — still amazed, more than thirty years later — there was ""no additional requirement.
In fact, added Lundahl, over the next years, ""nobody came back to me, ever, on Israel.
But no one told him not to do so, and so the U-2 continued to overfly the Negev.
Lundahl also relayed the findings on Dimona to Lewis L Strauss, chairman of the Atomic Energy Commission, and a few AEC aides who were among the handful of officials in the Eisenhower administration cleared for U-2 intelligence.
Lundahl's standing orders called for him to proFIRST KNOWLEDGE 55 vide all nuclear intelligence to the White House and then, unless directed otherwise, to the AEC commissioner.
None of the communications between Eisenhower and BenGurion about the ominous construction in the Negev has been made public, but such letters are known to have been written.
Ben-Gurion had hoped to be invited to visit Washington for direct talks with the President.
There was no subsequent reply from Eisenhower, the former official said.
The White House,"" he confirmed, also mystified, ""never encouraged us to do further briefings.
Brugioni prepared the presidential briefing materials for Lundahl and knew that the intelligence on Israel was getting to * Few of the private messages between Eisenhower and Ben-Gurion on any subject have been made public by the Eisenhower Library.
Retired Army General Andrew J Goodpaster, Eisenhower's military aide in the White House, explained that the diplomatic exchanges between the two were ""very closely held"" and not available at the time to even close subordinates.
LundahPs interpreters had watched, via the steady stream of U-2 imagery, as the construction teams (the Americans did not immediately know, of course, that they were French-led) dug two separate sites in the desert.
There was an early attempt to estimate how large the sites were going to be by measuring the ""spoil"" — the amount of cubic feet of dirt unearthed each day.
It was old hat for the American photo interpreters, who had watched in World War II as the Germans moved their industrial plants and factories underground in futile attempts to avoid the heavy Allied bombing.
At some point after 1958, the Israelis, using covered trucks, could be seen hauling away the dirt and debris from each day's digging.
There was very strong circumstantial evidence by then that the second underground site at Dimona was being readied for the chemical reprocessing plant that was essential in order to make weapons-grade plutonium — and the bomb.
The best evidence of Israel's intent came from an analysis of the striking similarities in layout, as seen from aerial photography, between Dimona and the French nuclear facility at Marcoule.
The French facility was being constantly overflown in the late 1950s by civilian transport planes — equipped with hidden cameras — that belonged to American diplomats and military officers assigned to the American embassy in Paris.
By 1959, the reactor and the chemical reprocessing plant at Marcoule were known to be in full operation.
As the Dimona reactor was completed, there was less to be learned from the U-2 overflights.
The U-2 imagery could only depict what was on the surface, and the intelligence community would spend years trying to find out for certain whether Israel had taken the next step — construction of a chemical reprocessing plant.
American military attaches were assigned to find a reason to travel to the desert — the CIA station even offered to buy the wine for any seemingly casual group that wanted to picnic — and take photographs.
Special automatic cameras with preset lens settings were developed by the CIA for the attaches.
Later, in an attempt to determine whether the chemical reprocessing plant was in operation, the CIA began urging attaches to pick up grass and shrubs for later analysis.
The theory was that traces of plutonium and other fission products, if being produced, would be in the environment.
The Israelis responded by planting large trees to block the line of vision of any would-be candid photographers and increasing their perimeter patrols around Dimona.
One American military attache was nearly shot by Israeli guards after overstepping the ground rules that had been set up by the American embassy in Tel Aviv.
The cat-and-mouse game would continue for the next ten years, with the Israelis shielding the expanding construction at Dimona while the United States remained unable to learn categorically whether the Israelis were operating a chemical reprocessing plant.
One of the most complicated issues involved the question of American Jews who were also intensely committed — as many were — to the security of Israel.
A few American nuclear physicists were known to have emigrated to Israel after World War II; one was a veteran of the Manhattan Project who had worked until 1956 in the most sensitive areas of nuclear reactor design.
Jewish physicists and scientists began returning from visits to Israel by the late 1950s with increasingly specific information about Israeli interest in nuclear weapons.
The CIA had even been tipped off"" about the fact that Israel was raising large sums of money for Dimona from the American Jewish community.
By the end of 1959, Lundahl and Brugioni had no doubt that Israel was going for the bomb.
There also was no doubt that President Eisenhower and his advisers were determined to look the other way.
If you're a senior officer, you learn to read the tea leaves quickly — and keep your mouth shut.
The vast majority of those senior officials who knew what was going on at Dimona thought it folly to waste such prodigious amounts of money on a doomsday weapon that might or might not work when conventional weapons such as tanks, guns, and aircraft were desperately needed.
The concept of underdeveloped and underfinanced Israel as a superpower seemed ludicrous.
By the early 1960s, Dimona, with its huge manpower needs, had hired many of the most skilled Israeli scientists and technicians away from local research and manufacturing companies, resulting in a much-criticized slowdown in the growth of the nation's industrial base.
There also were moral objections from a few members of the scientific and academic community, including two of the original members of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission.
By 1957, as construction began on the reactor, four more members of the commission had resigned, essentially because they had nothing to do.
The only commission member still on the job was its chairman, Ernst David Bergmann.
Bergmann, David Ben-Gurion, and Shimon Peres were waging what amounted to constant war — all in secret — to keep the Israeli bomb project alive.
The most threatening problem came from Israel's partner in secrecy — the French.
General Charles de Gaulle had won a seven-year term as president of France's newly constituted Fifth Republic in December 1958 by promising to find an acceptable compromise for ending the war in Algeria.
The war, which de Gaulle continued to prosecute, had sharply divided the nation, as the Vietnam War would later divide the United States; all other issues, such as the question 60 THE SAMSON OPTION of continued support for Israel, seemed secondary.
De Gaulle was known to be emphatically in favor of an independent nuclear deterrent for France, but it was not known how he might react to the profound French commitment to Dimona.
Contracts had been signed and money paid, and the work was proceeding at Dimona.
Hundreds of French engineers and technicians had begun pouring into the Negev in 1957, and Beersheba bustled with construction as new apartment complexes and residential units were thrown together.
Housing also was made available to the thousands of North African Jews who emigrated from Morocco and Algeria, hired to do the digging and building of the reactor and reprocessing plant.
European Jews were slowly and carefully recruited from government and private businesses throughout Israel to serve as scientists and bureaucratic managers; they, too, were provided with housing in Beersheba.
There was a caste system in the desert, and the French were on top, as they repeatedly made all too clear.
Even those Frenchmen who were Jewish did little to ease the tension; many considered themselves to be of a different class and social standing than their less sophisticated Israeli colleagues.
Ironically, the Algerian and Moroccan Jews also were mistreated by their Israeli employers.
One standing INTERNAL WARS 61 rule was that the Moroccans and Algerians would be hired only for fifty-nine days and then dismissed, a strategem that avoided paying any of the many benefits that came with tenure , which was reached after two months on the job.
After a few days off, the North African Jewish laborers would be rehired for another fifty-nine days.
The North African Jews were ""treated like slaves"" by French and Israelis alike.
The Israeli scientists and technicians had absorbed much of the French technical data by then — many plans were modified extensively on the job — and the reaction was, an Israeli recalled, ""Go.
Abraham Sourassi, one of the senior Israelis at Dimona — he was responsible for building the reprocessing plant — endeared himself to his countrymen by declaring, ""Good riddance,"" upon hearing of de Gaulle's disenchantment with Dimona.
The long hours, hard work, and French smugness did not diminish the excitement of being involved with Israel's most important secret.
Israel had been racked by a series of spy scandals by the late 1950s, and the 62 THE SAMSON OPTION intelligence operatives in the sixty-man Soviet embassy in Tel Aviv were believed to especially target the scientific community.
Providing security for the burgeoning nuclear operation was a high priority and led Shimon Peres to insist on the creation of a new intelligence agency, initially known as the Office of Special Tasks.
Its director, handpicked by Peres, was a tall, quiet former military intelligence officer named Binyamin Blumberg.
The Office of Special Tasks, bureaucratically placed inside the defense ministry, would become one of the most successful intelligence agencies in modern history — and, after Blumberg's resignation more than twenty years later, be responsible for one of Israel's worst mistakes, the recruitment of Jonathan Pollard.
Blumberg's sole mission in the late 1950s was protecting Dimona, and he made it a point to be involved in the details.
One Israeli responsible for recruiting scientists told of having an excellent prospect rejected by Dimona's security office because of distant relatives in Eastern Europe.
The top scientists were provided with double pay and subsidized seven-room apartments in Beersheba, space unheard of in those years in Israel.
Those who stayed long enough eventually were given possession of the apartments, worth at least $50,000, and permitted to sell them at their leisure.
As the pace and intensity of construction grew, Beersheba inevitably became an international city.
The French presence was palpable, as upward of 2,500 French men, women, and children made their life in the Negev.
There were special French schools for the children, and the streets were full of French autos.
All of this was duly reported by foreign diplomats and military attaches assigned to various embassies in Tel Aviv.
There were constantly recurring rumors of the bomb, but the INTERNAL WARS 63 cover stories — usually revolving around seawater desalinization or agricultural research — somehow held.
Ian Smart was a young British diplomat on his first foreign assignment in the late 1950s, as third secretary of his country's small embassy in Tel Aviv.
He would go on to become an international expert in nonproliferation, but in those years he was merely curious — and suspicious.
And from the road you could see the cooling tower base of the dome and the beginning of the rib structure.
The Israeli government, when officially asked about the activities at Dimona, told the British embassy a series of stories.
One early claim, recalls Smart, was that the area was a desert grasslands research institute.
Smart himself heard a second explanation while driving with a group of Israeli Defense Force troops in the Negev.
Throughout the last year of his stay, Smart adds, ""I was reporting the 'suspicion' that this looked like a nuclear reactor.
The Eisenhower administration, as Smart could not know, was in its third year of U-2 overflights of Dimona by i960, and expanding its coverage.
Art Lundahl, Dino Brugioni, and their colleagues in the U-2 shop at the CIA were now requesting systematic overflights of the French nuclear test site near Reggane, Algeria, in the Sahara.
The French had successfully tested their first nuclear bomb in February i960; it had a yield of more than sixty kilotons, three times larger than the first American test at Los Alamos.
And the CIA knew that an Israeli scientific team had been at the test site as observers.
Israeli scientists also had been tracked to a nearby French chemical and biological weapons testing 64 THE SAMSON OPTION area in the Sahara.
All of this was immediately shared with the Eisenhower White House, Brugioni said.
The Israelis and French continued to monitor the U-2 overflights, but they also continued to operate with the most stringent secrecy at Dimona — as if no outsider understood what was going on.
The sophisticated equipment for the reactor and processing plant was assembled by the French Atomic Energy Commission in a clandestine workshop in a Paris suburb and transported by truck, rail, and ship.
The heaviest equipment, such as the reactor tank, was described to French customs officials as components of a seawater desalinization plant bound for Latin America.
Israel also needed an illicit shipment of heavy water — it was impractical to rely on the heavy-water process invented by the Weizmann Institute, which was too slow — and turned, as did most of the world's nuclear powers, to the Norwegians, who before World War II had invented an electrolysis method for producing large quantities of heavy water.
Norway remained among the international leaders in the export of heavy water in the 1950s, and its sales to the French Atomic Energy Commission had only one condition — that the heavy water not be transferred to a third country.
That stipulation was ignored as the French Air Force secretly flew as much as four tons of the water — stored in oversized barrels — to Israel sometime in 1960.
The essential facts in Pean's book were verified by the author of this book in subsequent interviews with French and Israeli officials.
Those officials raised questions, however, about the motives of some of those who had aided Pean.
Many of the French companies, they said, that had been involved in the construction of Dimona in the early 1960s were working under contract for Iraq, with the approval of the French Atomic Energy Commission, at the time of the bombing of Osirak in 1981.
It was the subsequent politiINTERNAL WARS 65 firm, the Research Company for Financing and Enterprise, eventually was set up to handle the extensive contacts and negotiations with the Israeli government and various Israeli subcontractors who would actually build Dimona.
There was no problem of security among the subcontractors; all contracts were funneled through Peres and his colleagues in Mapai.
All of this cost money, and the huge expense of Dimona was a constant source of dissent inside the Israeli government, which was in a struggle to match Egypt in the rapid arms buildup in the Middle East.
Egypt acquired its first Soviet advanced fighter plane, the MiG-21, in i960, and Israel continued to purchase the most advanced warplanes available from the French.
Both countries obtained bombers from their international patrons, and both were continuing research into ballistic missile delivery systems.
By 1961, however, Egypt's military expenditures had reached nearly $340 million, twice as much as Israel was spending.
The perennial critics of Israel's nuclear program, who included Levi Eshkol, the finance minister, and Pinhas Sapir, minister of commerce and industry — the two men dominated the Israeli budget process for more than fifteen years — saw the Egyptian arms buildup as the most compelling argument against investing money at Dimona.
Just how much Israel was spending on the bomb in these years is impossible to estimate accurately, and Israel's 1957 con ~ tract with the French for the construction at Dimona has never been made public.
One rough estimate, published by the Israeli press in December i960, put the cost of the reactor alone at $130 million.
A detailed study of overall nuclear start-up costs was published in 1983 by Thomas W Graham, a nonproliferation cal and economic anger at the Israelis that led a few private and public officials to cooperate fully with Pean and provide him with documentation of the French role at Dimona.
Graham concluded that France had spent between $10 billion and $15 billion to assemble its secure strike capability, including thermonuclear weapons, with as much as half spent on delivery systems.
India similarly would have to invest as much as 10 to 23 percent of its annual defense budget in the nuclear area, Graham wrote, if it were to achieve status as a full-scale nuclear power.
Israel's strategic goal was to achieve nothing less than a secure strike capacity, with themonuclear weapons and missile and aircraft delivery systems capable of reaching targets in the Soviet Union.
The cost of those ambitions was heightened by the fact that so much of the facility at Dimona, including its chemical reprocessing plant, was being built underground.
The difficulties of working below the surface could only skyrocket the already high costs of ventilation, waste disposal, and worker safety.
Other significant cost factors included the obligation to pay workers well in union-dominated Israel, a reliance on foreign nationals such as the French, and the extensive security needed to protect a secret facility.
Israel's ultimate commitment undoubtedly amounted to many billions of dollars.
Ben-Gurion understood that getting Dimona complete would be possible only if it were not being financed out of the Israeli budget.
Israel already was receiving, according to American intelligence estimates, hundreds of millions a year in overall gifts and contributions from American Jews alone.
Sometime in i960, Shimon Peres decided to form a special group of trusted and discreet donors that became known, according to Israeli sources, as the Committee of Thirty.
Years later, Peres would brag to an interviewer that ""not one penny came from the government budget.
The project was financed from contributions I raised from Jewish millionaires who understood the importance of the issue.
Former Israeli government officials confirmed that at least one group of foreign contributors was permitted to visit Dimona in 1968, after its completion.
Israeli officials estimated that by the mid-1960s Israel was spending not scores of millions but hundreds of millions of dollars annually on its nuclear program, with the Peres operation producing a small percentage of the funds and the government underwriting the rest.
Old-fashioned military men such as Yigal Allon, who had led troops during the War of Independence; Yitzhak Rabin, the army chief of operations who was destined to be chief of staff; and Ariel Sharon, the Israeli general and commando leader, believed that Israel's essential advantage over the Arabs was the quality and training of its military personnel.
If Israel possessed nuclear weapons, their analysis continued, it would be impossible to deny them to Egypt or other nations in the Middle East.
Israel was, in essence, facing what amounted to a domestic brain drain.
By the late 1960s, senior * Moshe Dayan, as one of the few military men who supported the bomb in these early years, was an anomaly.
American nonproliferation experts eventually came to understand that there was a correlation between the attitude of military officers toward the bomb and a national commitment to going nuclear.
Many senior military officers in both Israel and India objected bitterly to the nuclear weapons arsenal in its early development.
However, once the bomb joined the military arsenal, as it did in India in the late 1970s and in Israel a few years earlier, dissent ceased.
Government funding for such research had been drastically cut back, and industry was lagging increasingly behind science.
Scientific innovations still took place, but there were few engineering companies capable of turning those ideas into profitable goods that manufacturers could put into production.
Officials who worked at Dimona in those years acknowledged the predatory hiring practices, with the nation's chemical industry being a prime target.
The only facility off-limits was the small research reactor at Nahal Soreq, near the Weizmann Institute.
At its height, the former official said, fifteen hundred Israeli scientists, many with doctorates, worked at Dimona.
The first overt sign of de Gaulle's unease over France's nuclear commitment to Israel came in May i960, when Maurice Couve de Murville, the French foreign minister, informed the Israeli ambassador that France wanted Israel to make a public announcement about the reactor at Dimona and also agree to submit it to international inspection, similar to the inspection of Nahal Soreq.
Without such acts, Couve de Murville said, France would not supply raw uranium to the reactor.
From the very first moment, I felt sympathetic admiration for this courageous fighter and champion.
Bertrand Goldschmidt's personal notes of the meeting, provided to the author, show that de Gaulle, embroiled in Algeria, was worried about the potential for international scandal if France's involvement with Dimona became publicly known.
Ben-Gurion gave his view of the Arab threat, but de Gaulle insisted that the Israeli prime minister was ""exaggerating the danger of destruction that threatens you.
Saint-Gobain's work on the underground reprocessing plant was delayed for more than two years, but in 1962 a new French contractor arrived and finished the job.
Ben-Gurion was pleased with de Gaulle's promises of continued military aid, but he was not willing to trade an Israeli bomb for French warplanes.
Over the next few months, Shimon Peres was able to work out a compromise in talks with Couve de Murville that centered on what amounted to an Israeli lie, one that would dominate Israel's public stance on nuclear arms for decades.
The Israelis assured France that they had no intention of manufacturing an atomic bomb and would not do any reprocessing of plutonium.
French companies would continue to supply the uranium ore and reactor parts that already had been ordered and not demand any foreign inspection.
Israel would make public the ex70 THE SAMSON OPTION istence of its nuclear reactor and continue its construction at Dimona without any official French government help.
With the friendly summit behind him, Ben-Gurion did nothing to change the status quo at Dimona.
The privately owned French construction firms and their employees maintained a vigorous presence at Dimona until 1966 and continued to be well paid under the existing contracts.
Finney, hired away from United Press International by bureau chief James A Reston, was considered a solid addition to the news staff — but he had yet to bust a big one.
The messenger was the Times's redoubtable Arthur Krock, then the patriarch of Washington columnists, who approached Finney's desk late one afternoon.
Krock was known to young bureau reporters such as Finney for his remoteness and for his daily long lunches with senior government officials at the private Metropolitan Club, a few blocks from the White House.
John A McCone, a very wealthy Republican businessman from California, was chairman of the AEC, and Finney had established good rapport with him.
Finney got the story and McCone was able to duck responsibility for giving it to him.
McCone's leak to Finney would be his parting shot as AEC commissioner; a few days later he announced his resignation on Meet the Press, the NBC Sunday television interview show.
Finney was * There is no evidence that the Israeli government ever claimed to Washington that the construction at Dimona was a textile plant.
Those American and European diplomats who inquired invariably were informed that Dimona was a research facility (usually for agriculture) or a chemical plant.
Buchwald told of an Israeli cab driver who six months earlier had driven an American diplomat to Dimona in search of a suit, at wholesale prices, from the textile plant.
Another scientist ""rushed in with a Geiger counter, a slide rule, and two robot arms.
McCone, as he did not indicate to Finney, had been briefed regularly on the Israeli nuclear program after replacing Lewis Strauss as AEC commissioner in July 1958; there is no evidence that Strauss, who also received regular briefings on Dimona from Art Lundahl and Dino Brugioni, personally shared his knowledge with McCone.
McCone, as AEC chairman, was a member of the United States Intelligence Advisory Committee, the top-level group at the time, and was, according to Walter N Elder, a former CIA official who was McCone's long-time aide, ""in on the action from the beginning.
Walt Elder, who wrote the still-classified history of McCone's CIA tenure, described McCone as being committed to the concept of nuclear nonproliferation and also aware of the convenient fact that Eisenhower was a month away from ending his eightyear reign in the White House.
By December i960, work at Dimona had progressed to the point where the reactor dome had become visible from nearby roads in the Negev, and thus was more susceptible to being photographed by military attaches.
Premier Nikita Khrushchev's rage at the incident, which caught the White House in a series of lies, ruined Eisenhower's Paris summit meieting scheduled for a few weeks later and led him to order an end to all reconnaissance flights over Russia.
The Powers fiasco did not diminish the fact that Eisenhower and Khrushchev had made steady progress over the previous year in drafting a comprehensive treaty banning all nuclear tests; such testing was suspended by both nations until September 1961.
That success had led to an overall heightened sensitivity about nuclear proliferation, and also may have played a role in the sudden concern over Dimona.
Whatever the reason, even before McCone's summoning of John Finney, there was a coordinated effort at the top levels of government to make Israel acknowledge what it was doing at Dimona.
Such unanimity of purpose and widespread access to sensitive intelligence about Dimona wouldn't happen again — ever.
By the date of McCone's appearance on Meet the Press, Washington had been awash for at least ten days with new information about Dimona and a new desire to do something about it.
Even Christian A Herter, the usually detached and preoccupied secretary of state, was in on it.
Armin H Meyer, a senior foreign service officer soon to be posted as ambassador to Lebanon, recalled his surprise in early December at finding Herter seemingly upset upon being given a photograph of the reactor, as taken from a highway.
Herter, the under secretary who had been given the top job after the death of John Foster Dulles in May 1959, had gone so far as to call in Avraham Harman, the Israeli ambassador, for an explanation.
Something must GOING PUBLIC 75 have happened in the nuclear field that gave him the safety to raise the issue.
Shortly after receiving the intelligence, he asked an aide to approach the French and find out whether they indeed were helping the Israelis.
Farley quietly raised the issue with a deputy to the French ambassador and came away convinced, as he reported to Herter, that the fears about a French connection were warranted.
Farley was enough of an expert to know that the reactor at Dimona was obviously too large for pure research, and, after a discussion in the National Security Council, Herter was instructed by the White House to give a formal diplomatic protest to the French.
As luck would have it, Couve de Murville, the French foreign minister, was in Washington for a meeting.
He was approached, Farley recalled, but assured the State Department that the Israeli reactor was benign and that any plutonium generated in its operation would be returned to France for safekeeping.
At the time, of course, Farley added, he and his colleagues in the bureaucracy did not begin to realize the extent of Couve de Murville's dissembling; they had no idea that it was France that had made the Israeli bomb possible.
The statement, while undoubtedly correct, played into the hands of de Gaulle's ambitions for the force de frappe.
House and Senate members of the Joint Committee on Atomic Energy were summoned urgently from Christmas recess to a secret briefing on Dimona by CIA and State Department officials.
CIA Director Allen Dulles also arranged for President-elect John F Kennedy be be briefed.
It seems clear that none of this — the demarche to the French, the briefing of the joint committee, and the briefing of the President-elect — could have taken place without the explicit approval of Dwight Eisenhower.
Washington also was sharing its concern with its allies, and it was that communication that moved the diplomatic concern about Dimona onto the front pages.
The dispatch was written by Chapman Pincher, known for his close ties to the British intelligence and nuclear communities.
Pincher had indeed gotten a tip from a senior figure in British atomic weapons research, whose concern was that an Israeli bomb would necessarily be ""dirty"" — that is, generate a lot of radioactive fallout.
Pincher, in a telephone interview, said that his next step was to call an old contact in Mossad and verify the story.
McCone's leak to John Finney, his strong statements on Meet the Press, and his later actions in the Kennedy administration — he replaced Allen Dulles as CIA director in the fall of 1961 — would get him labeled by some as anti-Semitic.
McCone, as he would demonstrate anew as CIA director, was dead set against any nuclear proliferation and repeatedly railed against the GOING PUBLIC 77 French as well as the Israelis.
He also was offended by the Israeli and French lying about their collaboration in the Negev, and he viewed Washington's acquiescence in those lies with contempt.
Myron B Kratzer, the AEC's director of international affairs in December i960, recalled being telephoned a few hours before McCone's farewell appearance on Meet the Press by a State Department colleague and told to urge McCone to downplay the Israeli issue.
In Israel, Deputy Minister of Defense Shimon Peres, forewarned by Ambassador Harman and perhaps by Mossad, began working up the cover story.
There was a widespread suspicion in the prime minister's office that the truth about Dimona had been leaked to the British press by some of the men around de Gaulle; the French had continued to urge the Israelis to make public the existence of the reactor since the June summit meeting between de Gaulle and Ben-Gurion.
Betrayal by an ally was, for the Israelis, always the expected; Peres's immediate goal was to keep his and Ben-Gurion's dream on track.
Norway had been given a pledge of peaceful use and the right to inspect the heavy water, which it would do only once in the next thirty-two years.
The twenty-ton purchase of heavy water was obviously much more than required to fuel a twenty-four-megawatt reactor; a Nor* McCone, perhaps anticipating a return to public life, did play the game nonetheless, saying on television that there was only ""informal and unofficial information"" about Dimona.
He also said he did not know whether any of the nuclear powers had aided Israel.
It was the first time members of Israel's parliament had been officially told about the reactor construction.
He and his colleagues simply did not believe that the talkative Knesset had a prominent role to play when it came to security issues.
They were not contemptuous of the Knesset, whose deliberations on * Ben-Gurion and his immediate associates were prepared to say whatever was necessary for what they believed to be the good of the state.
In his biography of BenGurion, Michael Bar-Zohar tells of the prime minister's determination to shield his and the Israeli Army's responsibility for the brutal 1953 slaying of seventy Jordanians in the border village of Kibiya.
A statement was issued in Ben-Gurion's name blaming the atrocity on the inhabitants of nearby Jewish border settlements.
The nun committed no sin in lying, Ben-Gurion argued, ""because her lie was designed to save human life.
GOING PUBLIC 79 other issues were accepted with respect, but saw themselves as pragmatists who — unlike the Knesset — believed in acting first, and then talking.
Knesset members, for their part, accepted Ben-Gurion's view that it would be inappropriate to assert their legislative rights in a debate over Dimona.
The Knesset was only too eager to accept any government statement denying the intent to produce nuclear weapons.
Even Ernst David Bergmann's categorical denial of any plan to make the bomb was accepted without challenge, although Bergmann's total involvement with the bomb was widely known.
Bergmann was in the embarrassing position of still serving as chairman and sole member of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission, although there had been no commissioners for him to chair for years.
The commission members moved en masse to the physics department at the Weizmann Institute, according to Israeli sources, because senior government officials hostile to nuclear development, including Levi Eshkol and Pinhas Lavon, then the defense minister, refused to allocate research funds for them.
Two of the former commissioners would emerge in the 1960s as critics of the nuclear programs; others, such as Amos Deshalit, Israel's most eminent nuclear physicist, ended up being closely involved with Dimona.
The Israeli statements were not challenged in subsequent days and weeks by the Eisenhower administration, which, having triggered the first public discussion of the Israeli bomb, immediately retreated in the face of Israeli's shameless denials.
Effort has been to create more excitement than facts as revealed by Israelis warrant.
The notion of ""stilling atmosphere"" would define America's enduring policy toward the Israeli bomb.
Dimona came up, and Herter was discussing the ""disturbing"" new element in the Middle East when Senator Bourke B Hickenlooper, the conservative Republican from Iowa, interrupted testily.
The powerful senator also knew that he was just blowing off steam in a secret hearing.
No one in the lame-duck Eisenhower administration was going to do anything more to take on Israel.
Strauss certainly knew as much about Dimona as anybody in the intelligence community by the time he left the AEC in 1958.
There is no evidence, however, that he raised questions about the Israeli weapons program while in government; nor was he known to have ever discussed Dimona after leaving office.
He most certainly did not tell McCone, a devout Roman Catholic, about it.
Strauss chose not to talk about the Israeli nuclear program because, as a Jew with deep feelings about the Holocaust, he approved of it.
A conservative investment banker from Virginia who rose to admiral in the Navy Reserves during World War II, Strauss viewed America's nuclear arsenal as essential to survival against the Soviet Union; those who disagreed with him were not merely wrong, they were Communist dupes.
He had left his Wall Street firm after the war to serve until 1950 as one of the original members of the Atomic Energy Commission, an independent federal agency set up to be custodian of America's nuclear materials, just as the Army's Manhattan Engineering District had been administratively in charge of Oppenheimer's secret work in Los Alamos.
Strauss and his five fellow commissioners now found themselves the proprietors of all fissionable materials; they also were responsible for operating the nation's 84 THE SAMSON OPTION nuclear reactors and developing atomic bombs.
Civilian control of the nuclear arsenal was so total that the commission initially did not tell the military either the number or the yield of the bombs being manufactured, creating havoc with the Joint Chiefs of Staff's early nuclear war planning.
Strauss quickly emerged as the strongman of the commission, and he became even more powerful in 1953 when Eisenhower asked him to return to the AEC as its chairman.
Strauss supported loyalty oaths for citizens with access to nuclear information.
He was insistent on continued nuclear testing and publicly took issue with those who claimed that fallout from the tests was dangerous to human health.
He also fought against attempts by the Eisenhower administration to negotiate a nuclear test ban treaty or any other nuclear arms agreement with the Soviet Union.
Strauss sided with those in the government and Congress who sought to prevent the passing of weapons information to the European allies in fear that the Soviet bloc would gain access to it.
At the same time, he championed Atoms for Peace, the Eisenhower administration program that called for America's allies to be provided with American nuclear technology and nuclear fuel — under international safeguards — to promote the peaceful use of atomic energy.
The assumption, which turned out to be dreadfully wrong, was that smaller nations, once supplied with the enriched uranium or plutonium needed to drive a nuclear power plant, would have no incentive or desire to develop nuclear weapons.
Strauss was, not surprisingly, a proponent of private enterprise and worked hard to ensure that industry — and not the government — would be permitted to build and operate nuclear power plants.
The AEC commissioner became best known to most Americans, however, for his dislike of J Robert Oppenheimer, who had sparked a furor in the early 1950s by calling on the United States to abate the arms race by forgoing the hydrogen bomb.
In 1954, Strauss led a bitter and successful fight to strip Oppenheimer of his security clearance; the hearings, which eventually centered on Oppenheimer's loyalty and integrity, captivated the nation.
Strauss's activities against Oppenheimer DUAL LOYALTY 85 were not always in the open; evidence subsequently was revealed showing that Strauss had directed the FBI to monitor Oppenheimer's movements and tap his telephone, including calls to his attorney, in an effort to make sure that the clearance would be denied.
Strauss's tactics and his prickly public demeanor ensured that he would never be well liked, despite his playing a major role in American nuclear policy until his death in 1974, at age seventy-seven.
Even close associates viewed him as aloof, arrogant, and calculating; many others viewed his demand that he be called ""Straws"" as a sign that he was defensive about being Jewish.
None of this seemed to matter to Dwight Eisenhower, who trusted his judgment and would later describe him as among the ""towering governmental figures"" of Western civilization.
Eisenhower offered him a series of top jobs after Strauss decided in 1958 to leave the AEC — as secretary of state and White House chief of staff, both of which Strauss refused — and finally got him to agree to become secretary of commerce.
The 1959 confirmation hearings were a disaster — Strauss was caught being less than candid with the Senate Commerce Committee — and led to a humiliating rejection.
He was the only cabinet nominee not to be confirmed during Eisenhower's two terms, and only the eighth such rejection in American history.
He also continued to advocate the use of atomic energy, and in 1964 made a visit to Israel — apparently his first — to consult with the government on a proposed nuclear-powered water desalinization plant.
At some point in his AEC career, Strauss, who attended most of the international conferences on the peaceful uses of the atom, met and befriended his Israeli counterpart, Ernst David Bergmann.
It was a relationship shared with few; neither Strauss's biographer nor his son, Lewis, who has had access to all of his father's personal papers, knew that the two had met.
The friendship with Bergmann provides the strongest evidence of Strauss's sympathy for the Israeli nuclear weapons 86 THE SAMSON OPTION program.
In the fall of 1966, Strauss used his influence to get Bergmann a two-month appointment as a visiting fellow at the prestigious Institute for Advanced Studies in Princeton.
Strauss, who never graduated from college, had joined the institute's board of trustees during World War II, and he continued to be one of its major contributors and fund-raisers.
The institute rarely dealt with chemists — its fellows are physicists and mathematicians — but the rules were bent for Strauss.
Bergmann was a bitter man at that point; he had been forced to resign his posts at the defense ministry and as head of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission after his continued objections to Prime Minister Levi Eshkol's decision — in part because of pressure from President Lyndon B Johnson — to delay full-scale nuclear weapons production.
It was only after Bergmann arrived, Kaysen added, that he learned who he was and what he did.
It became clear that he and Strauss were close, and also clear that he was working on [the Israeli nuclear] weapons program.
It was also obvious that Bergmann was telling Kaysen all that he had told Strauss.
Kaysen, a distinguished political economist who had been deputy assistant to the President for national security affairs, wasn't surprised to learn that Israel was interested in nuclear bombs, but it was a jolt to realize that Strauss — seemingly so ambivalent about his Jewishness and so opposed to any spread of nuclear weapons technology — privately was in favor of a nuclear-armed Israel.
Perhaps because Strauss's political life was so mired in turbulence, the public and the press never had a chance to get more than a glimpse of his private feelings about being Jewish and his guilt about not doing more in the 1930s to save Jews caught up in the Holocaust.
In DUAL LOYALTY 87 1957, Eisenhower had briefly toyed with the idea of naming him secretary of defense, but decided that his Jewishness would cause too many problems with the Arab nations in the Middle East.
Yet Strauss's activities on behalf of a Jewish homeland apparently were not known, not even to his close associates in the Atomic Energy Commission.
In 1933, Strauss had been asked by the American Jewish Committee to attend an international conference in London on the Jewish plight.
Chaim Weizmann and listened as the conferees agreed that an ""astronomical sum"" of money from the United States must be raised to help resettle what could be millions of Jews.
Strauss, then fervently opposed to a Jewish state in Palestine, was the only delegate to raise his voice in dissent during the conference, a position he came to regret.
Six years later, Strauss would spend much time and effort in an unsuccessful attempt to convince the British government to donate a large chunk of colonial Africa for resettlement by European refugees, Jews and non-Jews alike.
Strauss and his American colleagues, who included Bernard Baruch, the financier, were agreed that as much as $300 million could be raised.
Strauss carried a letter to London from Baruch in the late summer of 1939 noting that the land to be ceded in Africa could be ""cleaned up with modern equipment.
Missing from the Baruch-Strauss proposal is any thought or concern about the Africans who lived in the areas to be ceded.
Any such resettlement would have inevitably resulted in internal conflict similar to that raging then — and now — between the Israelis and those Palestinians who were ousted from their homelands by the Zionist movement.
More than fifteen hundred delegates from seventy nations, including Israel, whose delegation was led by Ernst Bergmann, took part.
Moshe Sharett, then foreign minister, received a full report — as he noted in a diary entry for September 18, 1955 — from a deputy, who characteristically thought it important to tell Sharett that at least three hundred of the delegates were Jewish.
In 1978, Brugioni and Robert Poirier, a CIA colleague, noticed that the camps were in direct alignment with the reconnaissance path for the Farben complex.
Brugioni knew from his own experiences that reconnaissance cameras were always turned on well before the target was reached.
The photographs were invaluable as a historical record — the Nazis had forbidden any photography while the camps were in operation — and President Jimmy Carter personally presented a monograph based on them to the President's Commission on the Holocaust.
Allied warplanes also were attempting to break the back of the Luftwaffe in late 1944 by heavy raids on all of the synthetic fuel plants in Germany, Brugioni said, creating yet another demand for photo interpretation and bomb damage assessment.
DUAL LOYALTY 89 Strauss, nonetheless, worked hard while in Washington at reining in his intense feelings about being Jewish and about the Holocaust, although many of his former subordinates from the AEC remarked in interviews about his unrelenting hostility to Germans and his reluctance to deal with Germans on any issue.
Yet the longtime AEC official Myron Kratzer, who is also Jewish, did not find out until Strauss had left the AEC that the former chairman followed the tradition of fasting during Yom Kippur, the holiest Jewish holiday.
Strauss had been asked by Eisenhower after his retirement to head the American delegation to an international meeting in Vienna, and on Yom Kippur, Kratzer recalled, ""Strauss did not show up.
Strauss's background and his strong feelings about the Holocaust cannot be disregarded in analyzing why he did not tell anyone — especially John McCone — about Dimona.
Fair or not, the issue of ""dual loyalty"" — exemplified by Strauss's actions — has been a very real concern to the American intelligence community since the creation of Israel in 1948.
American Jews, for example, were routinely barred for many years from dealing with Israeli issues inside CIA headquarters; none of the early station chiefs or agents assigned to Israel was Jewish.
The official wasn't quite right, but even those few Jews who did get to the top, such as Edward W Proctor, who served as deputy director for intelligence in the mid-1970s, were not given access to all of the sensitive files in connection with Israel.
Jews also were excluded from Hebrew language training (at one time called ""special Arabic"") in the National Security Agency; such training, of course, is a prerequisite for being assigned to NSA field stations that intercept Israeli communications.
There was a flat ban in the Navy communications intelligence agency (known as the Naval Security Group) on the assignment of a Jew to a Middle East issue.
There was — and still is — a widespread belief among American foreign service officers that any diplomatic reporting criti90 THE SAMSON OPTION cal of Israel would somehow be delivered within days to the Israeli embassy in Washington.
In 1963 the Kennedy administration informally agreed with Israel that neither country would spy on or conduct espionage activities against the other.
The agreement was sought by American officials, a former Kennedy aide recalled, in an attempt to limit the extent of Israeli penetration of America.
The truth is that Jews and non-Jews alike looked the other way when it came to Israel's nuclear capability.
The notion of dual loyalty solely as a Jewish problem is far too narrow; the Jewish survivors who became Israelis, with their incredible travails and sufferings during World War II, had and still have enormous appeal to Americans of all backgrounds.
The primary effect of ""dual loyalty"" has been a form of self-censorship that has kept the United States government from dealing rationally and coherently with the strategic and political issues raised by a nuclear-armed Israel.
The issue is not whether rules or laws have been broken, but that very few officials who supported Israel, Jewish or not, have used their position to try to obtain a complete and accurate picture of the Israeli nuclear program.
Those few government bureaucrats in the nonproliferation field who even tried to learn all there was to learn about Dimona were often accused of being ""zealots"" — and thus not fully trustworthy.
Yet, being Jewish inevitably raised questions, even among the most fair-minded of men.
He knew there was evidence inside the CIA suggesting that American and European Jews had been directly involved in the financing and construction of Dimona from the start.
In interviews for this book with senior officials of the American nuclear weapons program — men similar to Lewis Strauss, DUAL LOYALTY 91 who spent part or all of their life making bombs — none expressed any doubt about Israel's nuclear ambitions.
Most told of close personal friendships with Israeli physicists who were working on the Israeli weapons program.
No one with the sophistication and expertise of Lewis Strauss could have had any question about the significance of a secret reactor in the Negev.
His widow, Alice, still spry in 1991 at the age of eighty-eight, acknowledged that her husband, who was very closemouthed about his work, ""would have approved of Israel trying to defend itself.
Strauss's failure to discuss Dimona with John McCone may have been done in the belief that he had an obligation to ensure that what happened to the Jews of Europe under Hitler could not happen again.
Similar choices were made over the next thirty years by Jews and non-Jews in the American government, who looked the other way when it came to Dimona.
Many American Jews, perhaps understandably, believe the question of ""dual loyalty"" is an issue that should never be raised in public.
They fear that any discussion of Jewish support for Israel at the expense of the United States would feed anti-Semitism; the fear seems to be that non-Jews are convinced that any Jewish support for Israel precludes primary loyalty to the United States.
A second issue, in terms of American Jewish 92 THE SAMSON OPTION support for Israel, is that any public accounting of Israel's nuclear capacity would trigger renewed fears among Arab nations of a worldwide Jewish conspiracy and a redoubling of Arab efforts to get the bomb.
Many senior nonproliferation officials in the American government were convinced by the early 1990s that the Middle East remained the one place where nuclear weapons might be used.
Some of Strauss's former subordinates in the AEC find it difficult to believe that his Jewishness would have been the reason that Strauss would or would not tell John McCone about Dimona.
In Wells's view, whether Strauss did or did not tell McCone wasn't that important.
Wells had been in Israel in 1958, he recalled, and learned then — as had any government official who chose to do so — that Israel was building a nuclear reactor.
Feinberg also had been a ""player"" — to use his word — who shared the early dreams of his good friend Ernst David Bergmann of a nuclear-armed Israel.
He served publicly as president of the Israel Bond Organization, while privately helping to raise some of the many millions of dollars needed to build the controversial reactor and reprocessing plant at Dimona.
Feinberg accepted the fact that the expanding and expensive operations at Dimona had to be financed outside of the normal Israeli budget process; there were too many critics of the nuclear program inside and outside Israel to raise money any other way.
The unwanted publicity at the end of the Eisenhower administration had only added to Ben-Gurion's and Shimon Peres's determination to protect the secret.
Feinberg was more than just a fund-raiser in all this; he became an inside advocate for Ben-Gurion and Peres as President Kennedy, who brought in John McCone as director of central intelligence in September 1961, established himself as firmly opposed to the Israeli bomb.
Feinberg remains proud of his support for Israel and its secret weapons program.
His most pitched battle on behalf of Israel came in the early days of the Kennedy administration when he successfully helped fight off the initial Kennedy insistence that an American inspection team be permitted full and unfettered access to Dimona.
Feinberg, as a member of a Democratic campaign finance committee, was invited to a White House meeting with the President, who had won the worldwide admiration of Jews for his decision to recognize the State of Israel earlier in the year.
Feinberg told Truman's aides that he would be able to guarantee the money by the end of the day, and subsequently he arranged for Truman's whistle-stop train campaign to be met by local Jewish leaders at each stop ""to be refueled"" — that is, provided with additional contributions as needed.
Among Feinberg's prize possessions is a seven-page handwritten letter of thanks and praise from Truman.
Feinberg estimates that he and his Jewish colleagues raised ""in the neighborhood of $400,000"" during the 1948 whistle-stop campaign.
Truman understood the rules and at some later point discussed naming Feinberg ambassador to Israel.
Feinberg's account of his bankrolling of Harry Truman is A PRESIDENTIAL STRUGGLE 95 found in none of the contemporary histories of that period,* and — like some of his later special fund-raising activities for Dimona — cannot be fully verified.
Strong evidence is available, however, that Feinberg's role was as pivotal as he suggests.
For example, Clark Clifford, the eminent Washington attorney who was a Truman aide and poker-playing crony, has a vivid recollection of a crucial Feinberg intervention during the whistlestop campaign.
Keeping the campaign alive, he recalled, was ""as difficult a task as anybody ever had.
Disaster loomed in Oklahoma City when one of the radio networks — this was the pre-television era — informed the campaign that it would not nationally broadcast a much-touted Truman foreign policy speech unless ""it was paid for in advance.
I always gave credit to Abe for saving that particular program and saving us that embarrassment.
Feinberg was also active in fund-raising for Adlai E Stevenson, the losing Democratic candidate in 1952 and 1956, and was a strong backer of Senator Stuart Symington, Democrat of Missouri, for the Democratic presidential nomination.
A few weeks after Kennedy's * Campaign historians were not the only ones who missed the Feinberg story; none of the contemporary daily press or television journalists covering events in 1948 wrote about the financial ties between Feinberg and the Truman campaign.
I told Kennedy I was going to get in touch with Abe Feinberg, who I thought was a key Jew.
Fortunately for Kennedy, that message was enough for the men at Feinberg's apartment.
Kennedy had gone upstairs to a separate room with Ribicoff to await their judgment, Feinberg recalled.
The group agreed on an initial contribution of $500,000 to the presidential campaign, with more to come.
Kennedy was anything but grateful the next morning in describing the session to Charles L Bartlett, a newspaper columnist and close friend.
He had driven to Bartlett's home in northwest Washington and dragged his friend on a walk, where he recounted a much different version of the meeting the night * Kennedy's social friends and colleagues agreed that Kennedy, like many wealthy Irish Catholics of his time, had gone through prep school at Choate and Harvard College with few close Jewish friends.
One especially close schoolboy friend, according to Arthur M Schlesinger, Jr., the presidential biographer, was Alan J Lerner, with whom Kennedy traveled widely as a youth.
Bartlett further recalled Kennedy promising to himself that ""if he ever did get to be President, he was going to do something about it"" — a candidate's perennial need for money and resulting vulnerability to the demands of those who contributed.
Presidential elections, Kennedy declared, were ""the supreme test of the democratic process"" in the United States.
But the fact remains that despite Kennedy's tough words to Bartlett, Abe Feinberg's influence inside the White House was established by the end of Kennedy's first year in office, and the young President did little to diminish it over the next two years.
The goal was to broaden the base of a candidate's financial support and reduce dependence on specialinterest groups and the wealthy.
In 1962, Kennedy submitted five draft bills to reform presidential campaign financing to Congress; none survived.
Kennedy tried again in 1963, submitting two more draft bills to Congress; again neither survived.
The political expediencies that forced him to be ambivalent about Dimona had to be frustrating.
Kennedy eventually agreed to a series of facesaving American inspections of the Israeli nuclear facilities, although the label ""inspection"" hardly does justice to what the Israelis would permit.
Kennedy's complicated feelings about Jewish political power and the Israeli issue were summarized in his appointment of former campaign aide Myer Feldman as the presidential point man for Jewish and Israeli affairs.
The President viewed Feldman, whose strong support for Israel was widely known, as a necessary evil whose highly visible White House position was a political debt that had to be paid.
In 1966, President Lyndon Johnson, anxious to do something for his good friend Abe Feinberg, promoted Wilfred to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
Robert Kennedy pushed for the nomination of Edward Weinfeld, widely considered to be the most distinguished jurist on the lower federal court, but Kennedy understood that he could never match Abe Feinberg's influence with Johnson.
Wilfred Feinberg served with distinction and went on to become chief judge of the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in 1980.
The President's most senior advisers, most acutely McGeorge Bundy, the national security adviser, desperately sought to cut Feldman out of the flow of Middle East paperwork; the result often was bureaucratic chaos.
He sent nothing to Feldman, because Feldman was getting involved in issues in which he had no business.
The White House staff aides might well have been taking their cues on treating Feldman from their young President.
Kennedy, having provided special access for Feldman, couldn't resist making wisecracks behind his back.
An equally cynical view of Feldman was publicly expressed by Robert Kennedy in an interview published in 1988 by the John F Kennedy Library.
Wiesner, who played a major role on disarmament issues for the Kennedy administration, had served as a board member of the Weizmann Institute and repeatedly ran into Ben-Gurion on visits to Israel.
That answer, Wiesner thought, marked him as a liberal in Ben-Gurion's eyes and limited his access.
He had been allowed to visit Dimona in 1962 and knew firsthand, as those around the President only suspected, that Israel was intent on building the bomb.
Israel's bomb, and what to do about it, became a White House fixation, part of the secret presidential agenda that would remain hidden for the next thirty years.
None of the prominent John F Kennedy presidential biographies, including those written by insiders Arthur Schlesinger and Theodore C Sorensen, who was the President's special counsel and chief speechwriter, say anything about a nuclear-armed Israel or even mention Abe Feinberg.
The U-2 intelligence collected by the CIA's Arthur Lundahl and Dino Brugioni continued to be treated as higher than top-secret, leaving a huge gap in knowledge between the bureaucracy and the men at the top.
Shortly after Kennedy's inauguration, the State Department appointed William R Crawford, a young foreign service officer, as director of Israeli affairs.
Early on, Crawford recalled, the Air Force attache in Israel managed to snap yet another long-range photograph of the reactor dome at Dimona.
The idea was to reassure the Egyptian president that Dimona was not a weapons plant and to prevent Egypt from beginning its own nuclear research.
The inspection of Dimona was to be carried out by an independent team of experts from the International Atomic Energy Agency , the nuclear safeguarding agency based in Vienna; Israel had agreed in principle to permit the IAEA to replace the United States in the twice-a-year monitoring of its small research reactor at Nahal Soreq.
The letter was forwarded to the office of George Ball, then the under secretary of state, rewritten,* and dispatched.
Ben-Gurion's letter to Kennedy has not been made public, either by the United States or by Israel, but Crawford, nearly thirty years later, had no trouble recalling its tone.
In that first exchange, Crawford said, Ben-Gurion did not agree to the IAEA inspection of Dimona.
Israel's bomb program, and the continuing exchange of letters about it, would complicate, and eventually poison, Kennedy's relationship with David Ben-Gurion.
The Israeli prime minister had been rebuffed in seeking a state visit to Washington but, with the aid of Abe Feinberg, contrived a May 1961 visit to the United States.
Feinberg refused, * Ball's office held on to the letter for days, Crawford said, eventually provoking a complaint from the White House.
Ben-Gurion similarly was anxious about the session, in fear that the continued American pressure over Israel's nuclear weapons project would lead to an unwanted flare-up.
Dimona already was on politically shaky ground among the various factions inside Israel, and a flap between Ben-Gurion and Kennedy on the issue could be devastating to the concept of a nuclear-armed Israel.
No public record of the Kennedy-Ben-Gurion meeting has been released, and it is not reliably known what transpired on the nuclear issue.
Ben-Gurion later recalled that he once again asserted that Dimona was being constructed solely for research purposes.
Kennedy brought up the RabiWigner visit to Dimona and expressed satisfaction with their conviction that the reactor was designed for peaceful purposes.
Kennedy was * Wigner, who won the Nobel Prize for physics in 1963, was visiting Israel when he was asked — seemingly spontaneously — by the Israelis to visit Dimona.
He ""vaguely"" recalled, he said in telephone interviews in 1989 and 1991, being accompanied by Rabi, a 1944 Nobel laureate.
Wigner, who had joined with Albert Einstein in urging the United States to begin building the atom bomb before World War II, cautioned the author that his memory had faded with age.
The most memorable moment for Ben-Gurion came when he was leaving the hotel room.
Ben-Gurion, known to his associates as B.G., made similar complaints to Abe Feinberg.
Ben-Gurion's complaints about Kennedy and the continuing pressure about Dimona unquestionably were also linked to an all-important agenda that was remaining on track.
In April, a Norwegian official named Jens C Hauge had spent two weeks conducting Norway's first — and only — inspection of the heavy water that had been sold to Israel.
The inspection, closely monitored by Ernst Bergmann, couldn't have gone better.
Dimona was not yet in operation, and the water, still in its original shipping barrels, was safely stored near the small and totally innocent Nahal Soreq research reactor at Rehovot.
Hauge's report to the Norwegian foreign ministry was astonishing in its uncritical acceptance of all of Bergmann's assertions.
Professor Bergmann at an earlier point had given in104 THE SAMSON OPTION formation to his colleagues in the United States about the reactor, but Israel had not kept America officially informed about the reactor.
At another point, Hauge quoted Bergmann as explaining that Norway's heavy water would be used to power a twenty-four-megawatt ""research reactor"" that would be a model for a planned much larger power reactor.
The multistage, solid-propellant Shavit II, which soared fifty miles into the upper atmosphere, was said to be designed to measure upper atmospheric winds as part of a series of experiments for the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission.
Kennedy, despite his remarks to Ben-Gurion, was far from persuaded by the inspections by Rabi and Wigner that Dimona was anything but a nuclear weapons production facility.
A nu* There was no Shavit I, Shimon Peres told a political rally on the night of the launch, because of the possibility that the name would be corrupted to Shavit Aleph, since aleph is the first letter of the Hebrew alphabet.
And there was no indication that Ben-Gurion, who was admitting nothing, would back off.
The Israeli prime minister, in subsequent private communications to the White House, began to refer to the President as ""young man""; Kennedy made clear to associates that he found the letters to be offensive.
The President's apprehension about the Israeli bomb undoubtedly was a factor in his surprising appointment of John McCone to replace Allen Dulles as CIA director in the wake of the Bay of Pigs debacle.
McCone not only was a prominent Republican but had spoken out against the White House's much-desired test ban treaty with the Soviet Union.
There is no public record of what the two men discussed, although Ben-Gurion's latest annoying letter had arrived only days before and the Soviet Union had announced the resumption of nuclear testing, ending the informal U.S.-USSR moratorium.
In any case, McCone subsequently told Walt Elder, his executive assistant in the CIA, that Kennedy had complained to him about the fact that he was ""getting all sorts of conflicting advice on the whole range of nuclear issues,"" including the Israeli bomb.
Kennedy asked McCone to prepare a written analysis of the issue and report back within a few weeks.
McCone did so and, upon his return, as he told Elder, the President tossed the report aside — ""Give it to the staff"" — and offered him the CIA job.
McCone would join the administration with enormous credibility with the press, with the Congress, and especially with Dwight Eisenhower, who was quietly going about life in retirement in Gettysburg, Pennsylvania.
In one of their first meetings after McCone took the job, Kennedy complained about the most recent of Ben-Gurion's letters, which continued to shrug off the issue of international inspection of Dimona, the White House's key demand that had been initially articulated by Bill Crawford.
Kennedy talked to McCone about it and McCone said, 'Write him a stiff note.
Mention the United States' international obligations, and our suspicions of the French.
He would call the White House and say, 'I'm on my way to see the President/ "" After such meetings, McCone would immediately dictate a detailed memorandum to the file, which was eventually made available to Elder for further action and safekeeping.
McCone, recognizing that the Israelis were keeping close watch over the American intelligence officers inside their country, told his men, ""We can't do our job without leaving traces.
It also could end the debate about what Israel was, or was not, doing at Dimona.
The CIA's on-the-ground agents, obviously recruited from a foreign country, were unable to get inside.
The U-2 once again proved that photographs — even sensational ones — weren't enough.
By December 1961, CIA officials had set up a new agency, the National Photo Interpretation Center , with Arthur Lundahl in charge, and assigned it the mission of providing more sophisticated photo intelligence.
NPIC came through early with a huge photographic mosaic of Israel, capturing not only Dimona but all other possible nuclear facilities.
Increased economic aid and a series of private letters had led to a warming of relations by mid-1962, and senior Egyptian officials were reassuring the White House that they also desired improved relations, within the context of nonalignment.
The question of Dimona was repeatedly raised at Arab League conferences on defense and foreign ministry issues during 1961, with no resolution — except for a shared Arab determination to build up conventional arms.
The Kennedy administration reassured the Egyptians that it would continue to press until it obtained IAEA inspection rights to Dimona, and would provide a summary — with Israel's agreement — of the findings to Nasser.
Ben-Gurion had no intention of permitting a legitimate inspection — for obvious reasons.
He had been tipped off about the inspection demands by Myer Feldman and relayed his political complaints through him; he said he never discussed the matter directly with the President.
He said he'd been instructed to tell me to change my mind and release the planes.
In the end, however, Feinberg and Ben-Gurion could not overcome the continued presidential pressure for inspection of Dimona.
In late 1961 a group of prominent Israeli scholars and scientists — including two former members of Bergmann's Atomic Energy Commission — had privately banded together to form the Committee for the Denuclearization of the Middle East.
The most important factor, clearly, in Ben-Gurion's decision to permit the inspections was the Kennedy administration's decision in mid-1962 to authorize the sale of Hawk surface-to-air missiles to Israel.
The administration had spent months secretly reviewing and analyzing the Hawk sale and carefully laying the political groundwork in an attempt to avoid a political explosion in the Middle East.
The ambassadors chose the Hawk sale as ""least damaging"" to American interests, and it was agreed that Egypt and other Arab nations would be informed in advance.
What Kennedy did not tell his ambassadors was that inspection rights to Dimona were at stake.
That message was personally relayed to Ben-Gurion by Myer Feldman, who was dispatched in August to inform the Israeli government of the sale and what Jack Kennedy wanted in return.
Feldman, asked about his mission, said that it would be ""too strong"" to suggest that the inspection of Dimona was a ""quid pro quo"" in return for the Hawks.
Dimona did not have to be inspected by the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Ben-Gurion had insisted in his private exchanges with Kennedy that such inspections would violate Israel's sovereignty.
The White House eventually agreed to send a specially assembled American inspection team into Dimona.
There were extensive practice sessions in the fake control room, as Israeli technicians sought to avoid any slips when the Americans arrived.
The goal was to convince the inspectors that no chemical reprocessing plant existed or was possible.
One big fear was that the Americans would seek to inspect the reactor core physically, and presumably discover that Dimona was utilizing large amounts of heavy water — much of it illicitly obtained from France and Norway — and obviously operating the reactor at far greater output than the acknowledged twenty-four megawatts.
The American team, following a pattern that would be repeated until the inspections came to an end in 1969, spent days at Dimona, climbing through the various excavations — many facilities had yet to be constructed — but finding nothing.
They did not question the fact that the reactor core was off-limits and gave no sign that they were in any way suspicious of the control room.
The Israelis even stationed a few engineers in a concealed area in the control room to monitor the machinery and make sure that nothing untoward took place.
Another aspect of the cover-up was made much easier by the fact that none of the Americans spoke or understood Hebrew.
The Americans were led by Floyd L Culler, Jr., a leading expert in the science of nuclear reprocessing who was then deputy director of the Chemical Technology Division at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory in Tennessee, where the first uranium for American nuclear weapons had been enriched.
At the time, Culler said, he reported to the White House that the reactor he and his colleagues inspected was nothing more than a ""standard reactor.
Culler, who retired in 1989 as president of the Electrical Power Research Institute in Palo Alto, California, seemed surprised but not shocked upon being informed that his team had been duped by a false control room.
Culler was far more disturbed to learn that by i960 the CIA's photo interpretation team had concluded that a site was being excavated at Dimona for a chemical reprocessing plant and had even attempted to measure the amount of dirt being scooped.
Such intelligence had not been provided to him, he said, and should have been.
Culler shrugged off the Israeli cheating as inevitable, but not necessary.
He viewed his inspection as ""part of the game of wearing away, of finding ways to not reach the point of taking action"" against Israel's nuclear weapons program.
He is not at all convinced today, he said, that Israel was wrong to develop its own independent deterrent.
Culler wrote his secret report on the inspection during stopovers in Athens and Rome, and dutifully included an account of the Israeli concern.
The CIA u got to me as soon as I got off the plane"" in Washington, he added, and he was rushed into a debriefing.
The constant bargaining over Dimona was a factor in aborting an ambitious Kennedy administration initiative to resolve the Palestinian refugee issue.
Like all American Presidents since 1948, Kennedy came into office with a belief that he could find a way to bring long-term peace to the Middle East.
As a House and Senate member, Kennedy had always been a public supporter of Israel, but he had repeatedly expressed understanding of the aspirations of Arab nationalism and sympathy for the plight of the Palestinian refugees.
For example, in a February 1958 speech before a Jewish group, he declared that the refugee question ""must be resolved through negotiations, resettlement, and outside international assistance.
Kennedy asked for innovative ideas, and the department suggested that another try be made to resolve the Palestinian refugee problem in the West Bank and Gaza Strip stemming from Israel's victory in the 1948-49 Arab-Israeli War.
The State Department came up with a new twist, in which individual refugees would be asked in a confidential questionnaire if they wanted to return to a former home in Israel.
Those who ruled out a return would be compensated by Israel for the seizure of their property and be given a chance to emigrate to another Arab country or anywhere else in the world.
There had been bitter protests by Arabs during the Eisenhower years over the failure to implement the United Nations resolution.
State Department studies on the resettlement issue showed that no more than 70,000 to 100,000 Palestinians would opt to return to their seized Israeli homesteads over ten years, a number that was deemed to be manageable.
The Israelis also would be given veto power over every returning Palestinian, in an attempt to minimize the security risk.
A few weeks later, President Kennedy authorized a major — and highly secret — State Department effort to implement the new variant of Resolution 194; over the next eighteen months, said Armin Meyer, a workable compromise was accepted by the Arab states and endorsed by the White House.
Meyer, who served as ambassador to Jordan, Iran, and Japan before retiring from the Foreign Service in 1972, is convinced today that BenGurion's decision not to torpedo the resettlement project was based on his belief that the Arabs would never accept direct negotiations on any issue with Israel; any discussion of repatriation, in their eyes, would be tantamount to formal recognition.
When the expected last-minute Arab rejections did not come, Meyer said, ""Israel panicked,"" and provoked a wave of intense political pressure from American Jews upon the White House.
In the end, President Kennedy — already in a war with Ben-Gurion over Dimona — backed down, bitterly disappointing his State Department supporters by doing so.
One solution was to help get Ben-Gurion, then embattled in the most serious crisis of his political career, out of office.
A few days after Christmas 1962, Kennedy made what amounted to a direct move against the prime minister's leadership.
Meir made no secret of the fact that she resented BenGurion for permitting his acolytes, Shimon Peres and Moshe Dayan, to operate behind the back of the foreign ministry; she and other party members who had been born in Eastern Europe, such as Levi Eshkol, the treasury minister, were convinced that Ben-Gurion chose to rely on young men such as Peres and Dayan only because they would be more reluctant to stand up to him.
The declassified memorandum on the Kennedy-Meir meeting contains no specific mention of nuclear weapons (some paragraphs were deleted for national security reasons), but there is little doubt that Kennedy pointedly raised the issue.
The memorandum further shows that Kennedy made an extraordinary private commitment to Israel's defense.
Our position in these matters may seem to be asking Israel to neglect its interests.
The reason we do it is not that we are unfriendly to Israel; but in order to help more effectively.
I think it is quite clear that in case of an invasion the United States would come to the support of Israel.
Moments later, according to the memorandum, Kennedy — anticipating the chronic crisis that would be created by the refugees of the West Bank and Gaza Strip — expressed his regret that the Arab resettlement plan had failed and said his administration would not give up trying to find some solution to the refugee situation.
What we want from Israel arises because our relationship is a two-way street.
Kennedy's commitment to Golda Meir, along with his decision to sell the Hawk missiles, amounted to a turning point in American foreign policy toward Israel — one little noted even today.
The Kennedy offer might have been enough, if Israel's goal had been to forge a military partnership with the United States.
John McCone remained agitated about the Israeli bomb and the failure of his agency to determine whether a chemical reprocessing plant was buried underground at Dimona.
He also was more outspoken than any other Kennedy insider on the issue; at a 1962 Washington dinner party he publicly reprimanded Charles Lucet, a senior French foreign ministry official, for France's role in the Israeli bomb.
McCone then turned his back on Lucet and did not speak to him for the rest of the evening; it was, given France's high standing with the President and his wife, who were both Francophiles, a pointed rebuff.
In early April 1963, Shimon Peres flew to the capital to meet at the White House on the still-pending Hawk sale, and was directly asked by the President about Israeli intentions.
An Israeli nuclear bomb, Kennedy said, ""would create a very perilous situation.
That's why we have been diligent about keeping an eye on your effort in the atomic field.
The administration's lack of specific information about Israeli intentions was complicated by the fact, as the President had to know, that many senior members of Congress supported the concept of a nuclear-armed Israel.
The reactor went critical — that is, began a sustained chain reaction — sometime in 1962 with no significant problems, and was capable of being operated at more than seventy megawatts, far greater than the twenty-four megawatts * Lucet was offended by McCone's action and, upon his return to Paris, relayed the incident to Bertrand Goldschmidt.
Running the plant hotter would create more plutonium by-product to be reprocessed, and a larger nuclear weapons stockpile than any outsider could anticipate.
Later that year, the private French construction companies at Dimona, always eager for business, began once again to work on the vital chemical reprocessing plant underground at Dimona — despite de Gaulle's insistence that France would have nothing more to do with the Israeli bomb.
The French would build at a furious pace for the next three years, at high pay, finishing the reprocessing plant and the elaborate waste treatment and safety facilities that were essential.
Israeli and French scientists continued to cooperate at the French nuclear test site in the Sahara, as the experiments became more weapons-oriented.
By late 1961, the French had begun a series of underground tests and were perfecting a series of miniaturized warheads for use in aircraft and, eventually, missiles.
There were further tests in the early 1960s of a more advanced Shavit rocket system, with no more public announcements; CIA analysts assumed that the long-range rocket was meant for military use.
And in 1963 Israel paid $100 million to the privately owned Dassault Company of France, then one of the world's most successful missile and aircraft firms, for the joint development and manufacture of twenty-five mediumrange Israeli missiles.
It was anticipated that the missile, to be known to the American intelligence community as the Jericho I, would be able to deliver a miniaturized nuclear warhead to targets three hundred miles away.
By spring of 1963, Kennedy's relationship with Ben-Gurion remained at an impasse over Dimona, and the correspondence between the two became increasingly sour.
None of those letters has been made public* Ben-Gurion's responses were being * The Kennedy exchanges with Ben-Gurion also have not been released to United States government officials with full clearances who have attempted to write classified histories of the period.
The President made sure that the Israeli prime minister paid for his defiance.
In late April, Egypt, Syria, and Iraq united to form the short-lived Arab Federation; such unity was Ben-Gurion's recurring nightmare.
He instinctively turned to Washington, and proposed in a letter to the President that the United States and Soviet Union join forces to publicly declare the territorial integrity and security of every Middle Eastern state.
Kennedy rejected Ben-Gurion's offer of a state visit and expressed ""real reservations,"" according to Ben-Gurion's biography, about any joint statement on the issue with the Soviets.
He requested that the United States sign a security treaty with Israel.
A few weeks later, on June 16, 1963, Ben-Gurion abruptly resigned as prime minister and defense minister, ending his fifteen-year reign as Israel's most influential public official.
The many accounts of Ben-Gurion's resignation have accurately described the resurgence of scandal, public distrust, and polarization that marked his last years.
Ben-Gurion refused, and Lavon took his case to the Knesset's foreign affairs and defense committee.
Once at the Knesset, he charged that Ben-Gurion, Peres, and Dayan had undermined civilian authority over the military; then he made sure that his allegations were leaked to the press.
The next step was a cabinet-level committee, set up at Levi Eshkol's instigation, that was to recommend procedures for investigating the Lavon allegations.
But the committee, instead of dealing with the procedural issue, cleared Lavon of authorizing the failed operation in Egypt.
Ben-Gurion accused the committee of overstepping its mandate, resigned once again, and called for a new government in an unsuccessful effort to annul the decision.
Many of those who opposed Ben-Gurion, especially Levi Eshkol and Pinhas Sapir, also opposed Lavon's violation of political norms and successfully moved for his dismissal from the Histadrut job.
Ben-Gurion, arguing that someone had lied, continued to insist, however, that a judicial inquiry be convened.
The public came to see him as a stubborn old man who was trying to keep the issue alive; the affair tarnished his reputation and made what seemed to be his dictatorial methods of running the government more vulnerable than ever.
Dayan never became prime minister, and Peres waited twenty years for the job.
A second public scandal surfaced in 1962 and 1963 when it was reported that Egypt had developed — with support from some West German scientists — what were alleged to be advanced missiles capable of hitting Israel.
Golda Meir and her supporters took a hard line on the Egyptian-West German activities, warning that the coalition posed a danger to Israel's national security.
Ben-Gurion was far more skeptical of the threat posed by Egypt's dalliance with West German scientists and, in his public statements, emphasized the contribution that West Germany had made to Israeli security.
What the public did not know was that Ben-Gurion had just completed a successful, and secret, negotiation with West German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer for modern weaponry, including small arms, helicopters, and spare parts.
For Ben-Gurion, there now was ""another Germany,"" profoundly different from the Germany of Hitler's time and far more willing than France and America to keep Israel armed.
Ben-Gurion's point of view was ignored in the wake of press hysteria over the German aid to Egypt, with newspaper talk of German ""death rays"" and renewed ""final solutions"" — all of which turned out to be exaggerated.
There had been street riots in front of the Knesset in 1952 to protest the initial Israeli-West German talks over compensation for the loss of Jewish lives and property in the Holocaust.
Cash-starved Israel eventually accepted more than $800 million in reparations.
In June 1959, a furor over the sale of Israeli munitions to West Germany resulted in another brief resignation by Ben-Gurion and yet another call for new elections.
Tired and distracted after years of leadership, the Old Man was looking forward to writing his memoirs and telling his version of the history of Israel and Zionism.
Levi Eshkol, the new prime minister, was, like Ben-Gurion, a product of Eastern Europe w h° turned to Palestine and Zionism at an early age.
Eshkol moved quickly to lighten government control of the press and also set up an independent broadcasting authority to ease the government's monitoring and censorship of the state-run television network — reforms that Ben-Gurion had bitterly resisted.
Most significantly, Eshkol had spent the last eleven years as finance minister, much of it in a struggle against funding for Dimona, and was far less committed emotionally than Ben-Gurion to the concept that hundreds of millions of dollars should be spent each year on nuclear activity to the detriment of what he and his supporters saw as Israel's most immediate need — better weapons and training for the army and air force.
Kennedy, confronted with intelligence reports showing that Israel, far from slowing down its nuclear program during his presidency, had been expanding it, wasted little time in urging nuclear restraint on the new Israeli government; private presidential messages reiterating the need for international inspection of Dimona began arriving shortly after Eshkol took office.
Israel's Jericho I missile was another factor in the continued White House pressure on Eshkol.
American experts considered the Jericho's guidance system to be highly unstable and inaccurate, suggesting — so the analysts concluded — that only one type of warhead made sense.
Kennedy's persistent pressure on Israel stemmed from his belief that Israel had not yet developed any nuclear weapons; that it was not yet a proliferator.
There is evidence that once Israel actually began manufacturing bombs — as the French had done — the President was prepared to be as pragmatic as he needed to be.
While Kennedy remained resolutely opposed to a nuclear Israel to the end, he did change his mind about de Gaulle's bombs.
At the time, the French had refused to sign the Limited Test Ban Treaty, and de Gaulle had announced that France would continue to test its bombs in the atmosphere.
The President casually praised Senator Mike J Mansfield, the majority leader from Montana, for his support for the treaty.
Heartened, he set forth his hope of lessening the 4 chance of a military collision between those two great nuclear powers which together have the power to kill three hundred million people in the short space of a day.
In 1958, President Eisenhower recommended, and Congress approved, an amendment to the 1946 act that permitted the United States to exchange nuclear design information and fissionable materials with the British; France, of course, was enraged by the exclusion.
Kennedy's successor, Lyndon Johnson, like many Vice Presidents, had been left in the dark on sensitive national security issues by the President and his top aides.
Two of his closest advisers, lawyers Abe Fortas and Edwin L Weisl, Sr., while not particularly religious, felt deeply about the security of Israel.
The Kennedy administration continued to antagonize the French on nuclear issues.
Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, distressed at France's nuclear independence and its continued testing in the Sahara, went on a public campaign in 1962 against the force defrappe.
Instead, he insisted, the nations of Europe should buy American arms and rockets to build up their conventional forces and let the United States handle the issue of nuclear deterrence.
He had delivered essentially the same message a few weeks earlier in Athens, enraging not only de Gaulle, but America's NATO allies.
Continued United States opposition to the force de frappe was one reason for de Gaulle's 1966 decision to remove France from NATO's military organization and evict NATO headquarters and all allied military facilities from French territory.
McCone assured the Vice President that the Senate was indeed backing the President, and the placated Vice President reversed course.
His wife, Lady Bird, told a Texas historian years after Johnson's death that he had returned ""just shaken, bursting with overpowering revulsion and incredulous horror at what he had seen.
There are no photographs of the visit, but Johnson's congressional archives contain a full set of United States Army photos taken two days after the liberation of the death camp on April 30, 1945.
Johnson's sensitivity to the plight of European Jews had begun even before World War II when, as a young congressman from Texas, he was urged by Jewish supporters in his home district to cut through Washington's red tape and get asylum in America for German refugees running for their lives.
Once the refugees got into the country, Johnson had worked hard to keep them in, and his congressional files show that Erich Leinsdorf, the eminent conductor, was among those whose deportation Johnson had prevented.
Deportation to Austria after the Nazi Anschluss in Vienna meant slow death in a concentration camp.
Johnson won the respect and the financial backing of the Jewish community in Texas by taking on the Leinsdorf case, and others, and finding a way to circumvent the rules.
Five weeks after assuming office, he dedicated a newly constructed Austin synagogue, Agudas Achim, as a favor to James Novy, a longtime Texas political ally and Zionist leader who was chairman of the building committee.
He was the first American President to do so, yet only a few newspapers took note of the event.
In his introduction, Novy, once the Southwest regional chair* Jews in Europe found it extremely difficult in the 1930s to get visas for the United States, although American immigration quotas went unfilled.
Between 1933 and 1938, for example, only 27,000 German Jews were granted entry visas to the United States, far less than the 129,875 permissible under the quotas.
Lyndon Johnson was quickly consumed by the Vietnam War, and what he saw as the struggle of a small democratic nation against the forces of Communism.
But Israel likewise was perceived as a besieged democracy standing up to the Soviet Union and its clients in the Arab world.
Johnson's strong emotional ties to Israel and his belief that Soviet arms were altering the balance of power in the Middle East drove him to become the first American President to supply Israel with offensive weapons and the first publicly to commit America to its defense.
The American Jewish community eventually would be torn apart by Johnson's continued prosecution of the Vietnam War, with many Jewish leaders insisting that Johnson's steadfast support of Israel entitled him to loyalty on Vietnam, while others continued to oppose the war on principle.
In the early years of his presidency, however, Johnson echoed Kennedy's policy by urging Israel to submit Dimona to International Atomic Energy Agency inspection.
His support for nonproliferation and his desire to end the Cold War were motivated by his belief that only by a relaxing of international tensions could he achieve his ultimate goal — the extension of the New Deal to all Americans.
The prime minister's dilemma was not whether to go nuclear, but when and at what cost, in terms of the competing need to equip and train the conventional units of the army, navy, and air force.
The debate over the nuclear option had surfaced in the nation's newspapers, in deliberately innocuous language, long before Eshkol took office.
In April 1963, Dayan wrote an article for Maariv, the afternoon newspaper, urging the Israeli arms industry to keep pace with Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser's effort to build nuclear weapons.
Nuclear energy cannot be ruled out, the ex-prime minister was quoted as saying, ""because Nasser won't give up.
That means atomic weapons — and he has a large desert in which to test.
The Eshkol government, under pressure first from President Kennedy and then from Johnson, worked at keeping the lid on, and had no qualms about stretching the truth to do so.
In December 1963, Shimon Yiftach, director of scientific programs for the defense ministry, publicly told a group of Israeli science writers that, as they had assumed, the advanced reactor at Dimona would produce plutonium as a by-product.
However, Yiftach insisted that the Israeli government had no plans to build a separate plant for chemically reprocessing plutonium.
Yiftach, who had been trained at the Argonne National Laboratory in Illinois, was then one of Israel's leading experts in the chemistry of plutonium and knew that French construction companies had started up once again on the underground reprocessing plant at Dimona.
Eshkol's apprehension about committing Israel to the mass production of nuclear weapons did not impede the steady progress at Dimona.
By mid-1964, the reactor had been in operation for almost two years and the reprocessing plant, with its remote-controlled laboratories and computer-driven machinery, was essentially completed and ready to begin producing weapons-grade plutonium from the reactor's spent uranium fuel rods.
Israel's nuclear facilities eventually would include a weapons assembly plant in Haifa, to the north, and a wellfortified nuclear storage igloo at the Tel Nof fighter base near Rehovot.
Extreme security is a way of life inside the nuclear complex, and especially at Dimona, which is under the constant watch of Israeli troops, electronic detection systems, and radar screens linked to a missile battery.
Such detonations, known in the weapons community as ""zero yield,"" produce a fission yield that is low, but discernible, and are considered to be a perfectly reliable measurement of the overall weapons assembly system.
In early 1965, completion of the underground reprocessing plant removed the last barrier to Israel's nuclear ambitions; it also heightened the ongoing debate inside the government over the issue.
Completion of the reprocessing plant also made it even more essential that Floyd Culler's annual visits to Dimona continue to produce nothing, and the Israeli cover-up was constantly being improved and embellished by Binyamin Blumberg and his colleagues in the Office of Special Tasks.
In the mid-1960s, Dimona's managers came up with a new method of hiding its underground world.
Members of the Israeli Defense Force's 269th General Staff Reconnaissance Unit, the most elite undercover group in the nation, were ordered to the nuclear facility a few weeks before the arrival of a Culler inspection and told to bring with them, one former 269th member recalled, ""eight semitrailers loaded with grass.
It was sod — all for camouflage,"" * During the 1967 Six-Day War, an Israeli Mirage III was shot down when its pilot, either confused or dealing with equipment problems, ventured into Dimona's airspace.
Israel claimed, without evidence, that the plane was headed for Dimona.
Taylor, in a 1988 paper presented to an arms control seminar in London, noted that low-yield tests are reliable enough to be useful to countries with considerable weapons testing experience.
The scene remains vivid in his memory, the former officer said, because he'd never before seen sod.
It was as if the White House believed there really were two atoms, one of which was peaceful.
American teams had conducted the inspection two times a year until then, without incident, under the original 1955 agreement that had set up the small research reactor — which, unlike Dimona, was constantly being used for medical and scientific research by the staff of the Weizmann Institute.
The American request was consistent with the Johnson administration's policy of strengthening IAEA safeguards by insisting that all countries participating in the Atoms for Peace program submit to international, and not American, inspection.
Another factor in the switch to international safeguards, a former nonproliferation official explained, was the widespread belief that the bilateral American inspections were weak.
In return for the Israeli acquiescence, the United States agreed to provide forty more kilograms of enriched uranium, under safeguards, for Nahal Soreq's research program.
Both nations could make missiles, Bundy told the President on May 18, two weeks before the Eshkol visit, but ""the difference was that the Israelis could make nuclear warheads to put on their missiles, while the UAR couldn't.
It's inconceivable that Bundy and his colleagues did not know what Israel was doing with a secret nuclear reactor in the Negev.
Eshkol wanted to buy American M-48 tanks, and was delighted when Johnson agreed before their summit meeting to use the prestige of his office to persuade West Germany to sell Israel the M-48 out of its NATO stockpiles.
Such a purchase, even if circuitous, would be a first for offensive weapons, and would open the American arms pipeline.
Eshkol's mission in coming to America was to get what he could — in the way of United States arms and commitments — without making any real concessions on Dimona, which, of course, he could not.
He had told the White House prior to his arrival that he would continue to accept the Culler inspections of Dimona, but he wanted nothing to do with the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Israel offered the public argument, as did other putatively nonnuclear nations, that it should not be forced to place its national laboratories under IAEA aegis until all of the world's nuclear powers did so.
The White House staff had to anticipate hard bargaining on the Arab and IAEA issues; Eshkol's delegation included Peres, who was violently opposed to international inspection and to the sharing of anything about Dimona with the Arab world.
Nonetheless, NSC aide Robert Komer, in his pre-summit memorandum to Johnson, suggested that the President try to change Eshkol's mind on both issues.
This could have the gravest repercussions on U.S.-Israeli relations, and the earlier we try to halt it the better chance we have.
Turning to the relaying of information about Dimona to the Arabs, Komer wrote, ""We're firmly convinced that Israel's apparent desire to keep the Arabs guessing is highly dangerous.
To appear to be going nuclear without really doing so is to invite trouble.
Komer, who served for years with the CIA before joining Bundy's National Security Council staff, had few illusions at the time about what was going on underground at Dimona.
His recommendations to the President, as he had to know, had no chance of being accepted by the Israelis, nor could they even serve as a negotiating device.
Raising a ""to-do"" to put Israel ""firmly on notice"" was not going to stop the bomb.
Johnson was emphatic in telling Eshkol that international inspection of Dimona would calm the Arabs and slow the Middle East missile race.
The President also reminded Eshkol that the Soviet Union was becoming more of a factor in the Middle East, and an Israeli reassurance on Dimona could go a long way toward keeping the Russians out.
This is our whole point too — if Nasser thinks Israel is getting better missiles than he has, and is not reassured on Dimona, he'll be forced to pay Soviet price to get missiles.
Therefore, you urge Eshkol to agree both to Dimona reassurances, and to IAEA controls.
Komer added, ""All in all, we understand why Israel, being under the gun, is more fearful of its future than Washington.
Israel, of course, was willing to play along in any way to get more American arms.
It was this proposal, not found in any of the declassified documents in the Johnson Library, that drove the June i summit meeting.
Eshkol obviously was far from a pacifist; he had, for example, no ambivalence about continuing Israel's ongoing chemical and biological weapons programs.
Dimona was costing upward of $500 million a year, more than 10 percent of the Israeli military budget.
The meetings were attended by senior officials of the leading Israeli political parties, as well as many defense experts.
Dimona's supporters had convinced most of the leadership that only nuclear weapons could provide the absolute and final deterrent to the Arab threat, and only nuclear weapons could convince the Arabs — who were bolstered by rapidly growing Soviet economic and military aid — that they must renounce all plans for military conquest of Israel and agree to a peace settlement.
In its place, argued the nuclear advocates, would be the Samson Option.
Samson, according to the Bible, had been captured by the Philistines after a bloody fight and put on display, with his eyes torn out, for public entertainment in Dagon's Temple in Gaza.
With that, he pushed apart the temple pillars, bringing down the roof and killing himself and his enemies.
There was, for example, no private computer industry in Israel by the late 1960s, although American intelligence officials had rated Israel for years as an international leader — with Japan and the United States — in the ability to design and program computer software.
Podhoretz, asked years later about his essay, said that his conclusions about the Samson Option were just that — his conclusions, and not based on any specific information from Israelis or anyone else about Israel's nuclear capability.
A major complication in the debate, seemingly, was the Arab and Israeli press, which routinely published exaggerated accounts of each side's weapons of mass destruction.
In Israel, there were alarmist accounts of Soviet and Chinese support for an Egyptian nuclear bomb.
Egypt, in turn, publicly suggested that it had received a Soviet commitment to come to its aid in case of an Israeli nuclear attack, and President Gamal Nasser warned in an interview that ""preventive war"" was the ""only answer"" to a nuclear-armed Israel.
The officials at the top in Israel understood the difference between public perceptions and private realities.
Before the Midrasha conference, for example, Binyamin Blumberg prepared an analysis estimating that the Arab world would not be able to develop sophisticated nuclear weapons for twenty-five years — until 1990.
Israel as yet had no long-range aircraft or missiles in place that were capable of accurately delivering a bomb to targets inside the Soviet Union, which was always Israel's primary nuclear target; no Arab nation would dare wage war against Israel, so the Israeli leadership thought, without Soviet backing.
It was more than good enough for Johnson, who was losing interest with each passing year in waging political war with Israel over the bomb.
The President rewarded Eshkol's pledge of a delay by authorizing the sale to Israel in 1966 of forty-eight advanced A-4E Skyhawk tactical fighters, capable of carrying a payload of eight thousand pounds.
For Johnson, this meant that the Cold War was moving to the Arab world, with Israel serving as a surrogate for America.
He was joined by a reluctant but loyal Peres, who became Rafi's power broker, and the restless Dayan, who had recently resigned as agricultural minister.
Rafi would now become an opposition party, and play the role that had traditionally belonged to right-wing groups.
The issue emerged as a dominant one in the 1965 elections, although it was played out in code language.
Israeli newspapers were full of criticism from Peres and Ben-Gurion over what was referred to in Hebrew as ha y anoseh ha'adin, ""the sensitive topic,"" or b'chia ledorot, ""a lament for generations""; the Rafi leaders also constantly criticized what they euphemistically called EshkoPs ""big mistake,"" language understood by many inside Israel as referring to Eshkol's hesitations about opening a nuclear weapons assembly line at Dimona.
It was an ugly election, with insults and accusations from all parties.
Many Israelis understood, in a way that no outsider could, that the debate was not only about defense policy or the bomb, but about Ben-Gurion's profound belief that Israel could survive only by relying on the state — and not on the traditional volunteerism of the Zionist movement.
Many aspects of this debate coalesced — at least for his critics — in Ben-Gurion's unwavering support of the nuclear arsenal.
Some of his opponents in the 1965 election viewed Dimona as nothing more than a collection of competent scientists and bureaucrats, with unclear ideological affiliations, who had created a powerful weapon away from public scrutiny and approval.
For many, the election was perhaps a last-ditch struggle between an Israel that continued to utilize the willing spirit of dedicated volunteers and an Israel that relied on the use of science, objective knowledge, and the state.
The election amounted to a brutal referendum on his dream of returning to power, and the end of his role in the public policy of Israel.
The country seemingly had rejected the efficient ""can do"" approach of Ben-Gurion, Dayan, and Peres in favor of the social-democratic and volunteerist goals of the Meir-Eshkol wing of Mapai.
Many in the Eshkol cabinet viewed his departure as long overdue, and it showed; Bergmann was angered and hurt when a ministry of defense official came to his apartment within an hour of his resignation * Ben-Gurion was an inveterate diarist and spent many hours in his later years — he died in early 1974 — assembling his papers and helping his biographer, Michael BarZohar.
Myer Feldman recalls being accompanied on one of his last scheduled meetings with Ben-Gurion by Teddy Kollek, the mayor of Jerusalem and longtime associate of the Old Man.
The two men stood waiting as Ben-Gurion scribbled away in his notebook.
Decisions about the future of nuclear weapons in Israel would now be made by the highest political authority.
Nonetheless, the nuclear weapons issue, even if depicted as ""long-term scientific planning,"" had moved into the open inside Israel.
In the United States, where all foreign policy was rapidly becoming consumed by the Vietnam War, Israel's nuclear option continued to be an issue solely for government insiders, who weren't talking.
President Johnson and his advisers would pretend that the American inspections amounted to proof that Israel was not building the bomb, leaving unblemished America's newly reaffirmed support for nuclear nonproliferation.
The men and women analyzing intelligence data and writing reports for their higher-ups understood, as Arthur Lundahl and Dino Brugioni had learned earlier, that there was little to be gained by relaying information that those at the top did not want to know.
There was much known, for example, about the Israeli Jericho missiles, rapidly being assembled by Dassault.
I even designed three warheads for it — nuclear, chemical, and HE — as a game.
What Israel could do, the former CIA official said, was successfully target and fire a nuclear warhead.
The official said he decided to bootleg a copy of the intelligence report — risking his job by doing so — to senior officials in the Pentagon and State Department.
Even James Jesus Angleton, the CIA's director of counterintelligence, who also was responsible for liaison with Israel, had his problems when it came to the Israeli bomb.
The moody Angleton was legendary — and feared — for his insistence on secrecy and his paranoia about Soviet penetration of the Agency.
He was a master of backchannel and ""eyes only"" reports, and his increasing inability to deal with the real world eventually led to his firing in late 1974, but his glaring faults in counterintelligence apparently did not spill over to Israel* Former Agency officials, who, in prior interviews with me, had been unsparing in their criticism of Angleton's bizarre methods in counterintelligence, acknowledged that he had performed correctly and proficiently in his handling of Israel.
Angleton had worked closely with members of the Jewish resistance in Italy while serving with the Office of Strategic Services at the end of World War II; it was a dramatic period when thousands of Jewish refugees and concentration camp survivors were being illicitly funneled from Europe into Palestine, then under British control.
One of Angleton's closest colleagues was Meir Deshalit, a resistance leader and Israeli intelligence official who had been posted to Washington in 1948.
Deshalit was the older brother of Amos Deshalit, the physicist who had done much to develop Israel's nuclear arsenal before dying of cancer in 1969.
The story linked Angleton and his office to Operation chaos, the massive and illegal spying by the CIA on antiwar dissidents in America.
Angleton, in a telephone conversation with me before the story was published, suggested that he could provide better stories, dealing with Communist penetration of the antiwar movement and CIA operatives in the Soviet Union, if the domestic spying story was not published.
On the day of its publication, a Sunday, as I later wrote in the Times, Angleton telephoned me very early at home and complained that Cecily, his wife of thirty-one years, had learned only by reading my story that her husband was not a postal employee, as Angleton claimed he had told her.
I mumbled something about a newsman's responsibility to the truth, hung up, and telephoned an old friend who had served in the CIA with Angleton.
He laughingly told me that Cecily of course had known from the beginning what her husband did for a living, and had left him three years earlier to move to Arizona, only to return.
His was one of the most important assignments in the 1950s and early 1960s, the height of the Cold War, because of the continuing flow of Soviet and Eastern European refugees into Israel.
Angleton and his Israeli counterparts ran the ""rat lines,"" as the Jewish refugee link became known.
It was the Jewish refugee operations, as many in the CIA understood, that provided the West in the early postwar years with its most important insights into the Soviet bloc.
Some of the programs were financed off the shelf by CIA contingency funds, as part of kk mountain.
Angleton's love for Israel and his shared views on the Arab and Soviet question, however, did not keep him from investigating, as a counterintelligence officer, any Israeli or American Jew he suspected of trafficking in classified information.
The CIA knew from its analysis of the fallout of the ongoing French nuclear tests in the Sahara that the increasingly modernized and miniaturized French warheads were based on United States design.
A former American nuclear intelligence official recalled that he and his colleagues ""were driven crazy"" by the suspicion that Israel's quid pro quo for the French help at Dimona included access to design information purloined from the government's nuclear laboratories at Los Alamos and Livermore, California.
No evidence of such a link was found, but intelligence community investigators were surprised to discover at the end of the chaos inquiry a cache of Angleton's personal files, secured with black tape, that revealed what obviously had been a longrunning — and highly questionable — study of American Jews in the government.
The files showed that Angleton had constructed what amounted to a matrix of the position and Jewishness of senior officials in the CIA and elsewhere who had access to classified information of use to Israel.
Someone in a sensitive position who was very active in Jewish affairs in his personal life, or perhaps had family members who were Zionists, scored high on what amounted to a Jewishness index.
The Angleton matrix suggested that at some point a suspect who measured high enough on the Jewishness scale was subjected to a full-bore field investigation.
Samuel Halpern, a Jew who served for years as executive assistant to the director of the CIA's clandestine services, was under constant investigation by Angleton.
His father, Hanoch, was a Pole who had become active in Zionism before World War II and, after emigrating to Palestine, had worked closely with Ben-Gurion and Moshe Sharett, among others, after the State of Israel was formed in 1948.
He also was a sponsor, through the chaos program, of a highly secret CIA operation involving the Agency's purchase of a Washington trash collection company.
The firm, known in the CIA as a proprietary, had contracts to pick up garbage at various Third World embassies, including the Israeli embassy.
Another of its stops was the downtown Washington offices of B'nai B'rith, the powerful Jewish social and volunteer organization with worldwide activities.
The trash would be systematically sorted and analyzed for any possible intelligence.
One senior official recalled that Angleton's first intelligence report on Israel's plans to build the bomb was filed routinely in the late 1950s, and not by backchannel, and thus could be made available to those who needed to know inside the CIA's Directorate of Operations, the unit responsible for clandestine action.
Over the next few years Angleton continued to produce intelligence on Dimona, also based on information supplied by his personal contacts, but never learned — or, at least, never reported — the extent to which Israel was deceiving Washington about its nuclear weapons progress.
Angleton, of course, had been given periodic briefings in the late 1950s and early 1960s by Lundahl or Brugioni on the intelligence collected by the U-2 overflights of the Negev, but never evinced much interest.
His forte was human intelligence, or humint, as the intelligence community calls it, and not technical intelligence, such as the U-2 imagery. u He was a real funny guy,"" Brugioni recalled.
For all of his mystique and freedom to operate, Angleton, too, was stymied by the Israeli bomb.
His reports on Dimona, buttressed by the U-2 data, did not even result in an official CIA estimate that Israel was going nuclear.
They didn't have any understanding of Israel; didn't know what made them think.
It is not known how many CIA analyses on the Israeli bomb were produced in the early 1960s by the Office of National Estimates, but the one memorandum that does exist was astonishingly inept about Israeli attitudes.
The paper, entitled ""Consequences of Israeli Acquisition of Nuclear Capability,"" was dated March 6, 1963, and was made available nearly twenty years later at the John F Kennedy Library without any deletions.
Israel had no intention of going public with the bomb in fear of American and worldwide Jewish disapproval that would result in international reprobation and diminished financial support from the Diaspora.
Such flawed intelligence analyses went a long way toward keeping the men at the top officially ignorant of what no one wanted to know.
In public, the Johnson administration, as were its predecessors, was firmly opposed to the spread of nuclear weapons anywhere in the world; official acknowledgment of an Israeli bomb would have presented Washington with an unwanted dilemma — either sanction Israel or be accused of a nuclear double standard.
Israel was not considered a nuclear weapons state on October 18, 1964, when China exploded its long-awaited first nuclear bomb.
Whatever their differences, all four are sober and serious states, with long experience as major powers in the modern world.
Communist China has no such experience. . . . expensive and demanding effort tempts other states to equal folly,"" the President said.
Six weeks later, McGeorge Bundy, Robert McNamara, and Secretary of State Dean Rusk discussed what they considered the administration's real policy options at a secret meeting on nonproliferation.
Rusk mentioned the possibility of having an Asian group of nuclear weapons countries, pointing out that the real issue was among Asian countries and not between northern countries and the Asians.
Nevertheless, he # Johnson also reassured the nation that his administration had not been surprised by the Chinese test.
The President perhaps did not know it at the time of his talk, but the American intelligence community was aghast to learn from air sampling that the Chinese bomb had been fueled by enriched uranium, and not, as predicted by the CIA, by far-easier-to-produce plutonium.
The American guess had been that China would chemically reprocess plutonium from the spent uranium rods in a reactor, as at Dimona.
Confronted with evidence to the contrary, some in the CIA believed that China might have stolen or otherwise misappropriated the enriched uranium for its bomb.
He pointed out that adoption of a nonproliferation policy by the United States might require us to guarantee the security of nations that renounced nuclear weapons.
Any intimation to the contrary would be very disturbing throughout the world.
McNamara added that we had to the stop the leaks that come out of meetings like this.
McCone sorely felt the loss of John Kennedy; his relationship with Lyndon Johnson was much less intimate and his advice not always welcome.
McCone's solution to the Chinese bomb (and to the problems with North Vietnam) was to send in the Air Force.
It should be noted that there was no mention of this extraordinary debate in McGeorge Bundy's seemingly comprehensive history of the atom bomb, Danger and Survival, published in 1988.
Bundy could have added that there were a few Americans in high Washington positions in 1964 who had no doubt then that India's desire for the bomb was quite truly Indian.
One thought was to use unmarked bombers to strike at the Chinese, thus avoiding identification.
McCone resigned as CIA director in 1965, despite his support for Johnson's continuing escalations in Vietnam.
McCone knew that Floyd Culler's inspections were accomplishing little; he also understood what Israel's continuing refusal to permit full-fledged international inspections meant.
But, said Elder, the CIA director found that Johnson ""didn't understand the implications"" of the inspection issue and didn't want to hear about it.
Johnson's understanding that good nonproliferation policies made for bad politics.
The President needed no one to remind him that any serious move to squeeze the Israelis on their nuclear weapons program would lead to a firestorm of protest from American Jews, many of whose leaders had consistently supported his presidency and the Vietnam War.
He got another reminder of the political danger of nonproliferation from a special panel on that subject he convened a few weeks after the Chinese test.
The distinguished panel, headed by Roswell L Gilpatric, who had served John Kennedy as deputy secretary of defense, returned on January 21, 1965 — the day after Johnson's inauguration — with a report that amounted to an indictment of past and present policy.
The report * Panel members included the retired Allen Dulles, the former secretary of state Dean Acheson, the former defense secretary Robert A Lovett, the former White House science adviser George B Kistiakowsky, and IBM chairman Arthur K Watson.
Most significantly, it suggested that the President should reconsider — in terms of nonproliferation — a controversial American plan to create a multilateral force that would give NATO members, including the West Germans, a joint finger on the nuclear trigger.
The raising of any question about the MLF issue was especially sensitive, for the Soviet Union was insisting that any proposed nonproliferation treaty prohibit a separate European nuclear force, which it viewed as nothing more than a vehicle for providing the West Germans with the bomb.
Its premature release, Rusk added, ""could start the ball rolling in an undesirable manner"" — in terms of the MLF and future negotiations on a nonproliferation treaty.
The report went nowhere, despite the President's promise of further consultations with Gilpatric.
Political disaster, from the White House's point of view, struck in June, when newly elected Senator Robert Kennedy based his maiden Senate floor speech on many of the until then unknown and ignored recommendations of Gilpatric's panel.
Over the next months, Glenn Seaborg recalled, there was nothing more heard about the Gilpatric report from the White House, and nonproliferation continued to be treated as a topic fit only for the arms controllers in the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency , whose advice — no matter how prudent — rarely carried weight with the White House.
President Johnson held out for two years before agreeing in secret talks with the Soviets to drop the MLF, clearing the way for the 1968 Nonproliferation Treaty and giving the government's arms controllers an important victory.
In the mid-1960s, the Soviet Union had begun to step up its military and economic aid programs in the Middle East, and Israel was increasingly seen by the Johnson White House as a regional American bulwark.
It was inevitable that high-level interest in the perennial and profitless issue of international inspection for Dimona began to wane in 1967 — as the A-4E Skyhawks began arriving in Israel, as the routine Floyd Culler inspections proceeded, and as America got more and more enmeshed in the Southeast Asian war.
The senator's remarks caused a sensation in Israel, but were little noted elsewhere.
In mid-1966, the Israeli government delayed in accepting nearly $60 million in possible American aid for the construction of a much-needed nuclear desalinization and power plant because the aid was contingent on an Israeli commitment to permit IAEA inspection of Dimona.
Continued American insistence on IAEA inspections made the Israelis walk away, without any explicit explanation, from the project.
The proposed desalinization plant was studied for the next decade, but the American conditions were never accepted, and the plant was never built.
The same argument — Warsaw Pact tank and troop superiority — had been used a few years earlier by the United States and its allies to justify the deployment of nuclear missiles in Europe.
The growing danger of proliferation became starkly clear during the Kennedy administration, when a group of scientists awaiting clearance before beginning work at Los Alamos successfully designed a nuclear bomb from the open literature.
The laboratories' primary targets continued to be the reactors and research centers in the Soviet Union and China, but the intelligence units eventually began monitoring the transfer of nuclear technology and those countries that were viewed as ""nth"" nations, as near-nuclear countries came to be known.
We were even able to do mock-ups of their weapons system — go from the warhead back through the plant.
Israel was always at the top of his list, the official recalled, followed by South Africa.
His Knesset statement was initially reported in Israel and Nuclear Weapons, by Fuad Jabber, published in 1971 by the International Institute for Strategic Studies in London.
Jabber wrote that the conference, known as the International Assembly on Nuclear Weapons and sponsored in part by the IISS, had, in fact, issued a call for ""a serious effort"" to negotiate a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East.
Such ore, known as yellowcake, served as the raw fuel for the heavy-water reactor at Dimona; by the mid1960s, its sale was a highly competitive and profitable business whose transfer in lots under ten tons was not monitored by the IAEA in Vienna.
The first known shipment of ore from South Africa to Israel had arrived in 1963 and, since it totaled ten tons, was duly reported.
In subsequent years, however, clandestine shipments of South African yellowcake began to arrive at Dimona, often escorted by a special operations unit of the Israeli Defense Force.
Israel's goal was to prevent outsiders from learning that the reactor was operating at two to three times greater capacity than publicly acknowledged, utilizing that much more uranium ore — and therefore capable of reprocessing greater amounts of plutonium.
At least some of those later clandestine shipments from South Africa became known in the late 1960s to the intelligence officers in Los Alamos and Sandia, who were carefully watching — by satellites and other means — most of the major uranium mines in the world.
But after Israel's overwhelming victory in the 1967 Six-Day War, the intelligence about Dimona and its nuclear potential became highly compartmentalized, as the White House decided to side more openly with Israel in the Middle East, and thus much harder to access.
Far more intelligence was being collected by America's corona and gambit satellite systems, which, after much trial and error, had by the mid-1960s begun consistently to produce high-resolution photography from their orbital perches in outer space.
Any interesting intelligence on Israel was now being routed to Livermore and Los Alamos through the CIA's Office of Science and Technology, headed by Carl E Duckett, to which Lundahl's National Photo Interpretation Center was now reporting.
As a civilian Army expert on Soviet missile systems, he had been regularly consulted in prior years by Lundahl and Brugioni on U-2 photo intelligence, but had been told nothing about the findings on Dimona.
That process reversed once Duckett joined the CIA, where he got his own special access to the Israeli intelligence.
In the beginning, Brugioni recalled, there were long meetings in the late afternoon, usually over a few drinks, at which Duckett and his colleagues would openly discuss the day's findings.
Lundahl and Brugioni soon came to understand that Duckett was no longer sharing all of his information about the Israeli bomb — the U-2's spy flights were no longer as important, and there was no longer any need for them to know.
It was the first of many disconnects that would come to dominate the processing of United States intelligence on Dimona.
He constantly sprayed his throat with a vaporizer, wore yellowing white suits with brown-and-white shoes, and walked with a shambling gait, an outsized Sydney Greenstreet.
Barbour spoke no Hebrew and by the end of his stay in Israel still had little to do with the people of the country, rarely attending educational, cultural, or social events.
And yet he was beloved by Israel's leadership, and had been since his appointment in 1961 by John F Kennedy; he remained on the job for the next twelve years.
Barbour's long assignment as ambassador was not a testament to his intelligence and competence, which were exceptional, but to his understanding of when and when not to accept every Israeli assertion at face value and his willingness to operate the American embassy as a subsidiary, if necessary, of the Israeli foreign ministry.
The ambassador often reminded his questioning subordinates that he was not a servant of the Department of State or its secretary, but a President's man # The State Department's historical office lists George P Marsh, minister to Italy from 1861 to 1882; Edwin V Morgan, ambassador to Brazil from 1912 to 1933; and Claude G Bowers, ambassador to Chile from 1939 to 1953.
A graduate of Exeter and Harvard, Barbour was unfailingly courteous and correct to his subordinates, and in his first six years as ambassador, when some of the most accurate reporting on Dimona was forwarded to Washington, rarely interfered with the job of those working in his embassy.
But the field reports had no impact; they simply disappeared into the bureaucratic maze.
Barbour did nothing to keep them alive, and after the 1967 Six-Day War ordered his staff — over the objection of one key aide — to stop reporting on nuclear weapons in Israel.
Barbour's assignment at that moment was to insulate Lyndon Johnson and his men from those facts that would compel action, and he did his President's bidding.
Barbour's important role in the history of U.S.-Israeli relations — and his knowledge of Israel's nuclear capability — was hidden by his insistence on a low profile.
He was a virtual nonperson to the American correspondents assigned to Israel; he rarely met with them, unlike most ambassadors, and he never spoke on the record.
His reclusiveness was legendary in his embassy, a five-story building located near the beach at Tel Aviv.
There were afternoon rounds of golf, weather permitting, dips in his pool, and an occasional evening of bridge.
Everything I do is designed to keep Jews off the President's back,"" Barbour added.
Barbour also was phobic about using a newly installed State Department telephone scrambler system, designed to protect conversations from being intercepted.
He repeatedly urged Bill Dale to send embassy reports by mail, especially if the intelligence was adverse to Israeli interests, because ""Israel has friends all over the State Department"" and would intercept the information.
Most junior members of the embassy staff had no contact with the ambassador and could go for months or longer without even seeing him; Barbour's weekly staff meetings were only for senior subordinates.
One personal aide recalled being asked by Barbour in 1967, six years after he became ambassador, whether it was possible to cash a check in the embassy.
He didn't bother with * His sister, Ellen, served as embassy hostess during her extended annual visits to Israel.
Barbour's closest associates were not his fellow Americans, but senior officials of the Israeli government, including Golda Meir, who became prime minister in 1969, and Major General Aharon Yariv, director of military intelligence from 1964 to 1972.
Of course, no senior Israeli official would talk to an outsider about nuclear weapons, and Barbour, in the end, shared that taboo.
Yet it was Barbour's men who reported before the June 1967 war that Israel had completed its basic weapons design and was capable of manufacturing warheads for deployment on missiles.
Israel also may have had a crudely manufactured bomb or two ready to go, but — as the embassy could not know — no decision had been made by Prime Minister Eshkol to begin mass production.
Spying on Dimona was not the responsibility of the Central Intelligence Agency, as in most foreign countries, but left to the United States Army, Air Force, and Navy attaches assigned to the embassy; the Agency's espionage functions included the monitoring of Soviet activities and the providing of special cameras, film, and free bottles of wine to any officer who wanted to picnic on the weekend with his family in the Negev.
The 1963 restrictions on the CIA's operations inside Israel, American officials acknowledged, were a sop aimed at avoiding any undue embarrassment for the Israeli government, whose extensive penetration of the United States government needed to be curbed.
The few espionage attempts organized by the CIA before 1963 had gone nowhere, in part because of the nature of Israel's closeknit society but also because of Israel's ability to monitor the activities of the Americans assigned to Israel.
All of the United States embassy contacts with Israeli citizens and government officials were — and continue to be — funneled through a special liaison office of the Israeli foreign ministry.
It was understood that American intelligence and military officials who tried to evade the liaison system would be carefully watched.
Israel, with its steady stream of Soviet and Eastern European Jewish refugees, remained the most important country for collecting intelligence on the Soviet Union, but those operations were left to James Angleton and his men in Washington.
It was sometimes hard for a newcomer, like John McCone, to keep things straight.
Peter C Jessup, the CIA station chief in the early 1960s, recalled being peremptorily ordered to fly to Rome early in McCone's tenure, where the director — then on a grand tour of CIA facilities in Europe — was scheduled to see the pope.
McCone wanted the questions about Israel put to rest, and urged the station chief to put ""his staff"" to work.
At the time, the bemused Jessup added, his ""staff"" at the CIA station consisted of two aides.
Despite the difficulties, the men in the United States embassy — wanting, like most people, to do their job as well as possible — kept on trying to find out what they could about Dimona.
Getting close was fun and a little dangerous — one American officer was chastised by Barbour after being caught by the Israelis with a butterfly net outside Dimona's barbed-wire fence — but occasionally added something useful to the intelligence.
Colonel Carmelo V Alba was the United States Army's military attache to Israel in the mid-1960s and, like the other attaches from Western embassies, spent many weekends cruising in the Negev with his long-range telescopic camera.
He did so at least once a month, shipping the film off to Washington, with no reaction — until one of his photographs showed ""evidence of activity at Dimona.
John Hadden, who began his tour as CIA station chief in 1963, sent Alba one weekend to Beersheba to do a census of French names on the mailboxes of the city's apartment complexes.
Barbour did not interfere with the hunt; William Dale, as the second-highest-ranking American diplomat, was given wide latitude in the day-to-day management of the embassy, and he encouraged his staff to find out what it could.
The embassy's scientific attache was a physicist named Robert T Webber, who shared Dale's interest in Dimona.
It was a hunt, and the men in the embassy got a break sometime in 1966 from an unlikely source — an American Jew living in Israel.
Dale and the rest of the embassy staff stayed on good terms — as American diplomats do all over the world — with the many American citizens who chose to live abroad.
Americans in Israel were routinely invited to embassy parties and picnics, * Alba got Hadden in trouble with the Israeli foreign office by inadvertently putting Hadden's American license plates on a jeep before taking one of his weekend jaunts to the Negev.
All diplomatic cars in Israel were required to have special license plates, and the embassy mechanics routinely removed the American license plates from the private cars of newly arrived diplomatic personnel and placed them on the walls for decoration.
It arrived with no plates, and the colonel, in a hurry, ordered the mechanic to grab a set at random from the walls and throw them on.
Hadden, who retired from the Agency a few years after returning from Israel, acknowledged with a laugh that he ""never paid any attention to organizational charts and titles.
Max Ben, a Princetontrained pharmacologist who was helping the Israelis set up a pharmacology institute under United Nations auspices.
He had become a close friend and confidant of Ernst Bergmann's while in Israel, and it was that friendship, he claimed, that led to the invitation to take a firsthand look at the reactor.
He talked to Dale and then agreed to discuss what he knew on a more sophisticated level with Bob Webber.
Ben explained years later that his purpose in taking up the issue with Dale and Webber had not been to inform on Israel's nuclear progress, as Dale obviously assumed, but to try to pass word of the accomplishments at Dimona to Washington.
He brought Webber and others into the embassy's most secure room — a lead-sealed facility known as the ""bubble"" — and the group drafted a highly classified dispatch to Washington summarizing their intelligence.
The paper had to be approved by the ambassador, who was approached with trepidation.
It was, Dale thought, the embassy's most definitive report by far on Dimona.
Webber eventually was replaced as science attache by someone much less interested in Dimona, and Colonel Alba was reassigned as an aide to the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Adding to the frustration, Dale said, was the fact that more revealing information about Israeli intentions was provided early the next year by another American Jew.
The embassy was entertaining a group of American government officials who were en route from India after attending a regional meeting of American economic and commercial attaches.
On the next day, Eugene M Braderman, then a deputy assistant secretary of state for commercial affairs, approached Dale, ""looking ashen.
Israel decided in early June 1967 to preempt the increasing Arab buildup in the Sinai and go to war.
A year of steady tension had culminated two weeks before in an Egyptian blockade of the Israeli port city of Elat.
An increasingly confident Nasser had sent his troops to occupy Sharm el Sheikh on the southern tip of the Sinai Peninsula, blocking the access of Israeli shipping to the Strait of Tiran, which leads from the Red Sea to the Gulf of Aqaba and then to Elat.
Israel considered the Egyptian move to be an act of war, but — under pressure from the Johnson administration not to attack — the Eshkol government wavered.
The prime minister, confronted by a public that wanted to initiate war with the Arabs, was viciously criticized for his indecisiveness and lack of military experience.
To maintain political control — intelli* Braderman, now retired and living in Washington, recalled the 1967 visit to Israel and said it was ""possible that I'd said something like that"" to Bill Dale.
He added that Dale's recollection certainly reflected his general view of the issue of Jewish loyalty.
For Begin, now a minister without portfolio, the appointment meant that he was serving in the Israeli government for the first time in his political career.
Dayan's nomination as defense minister had to be much more difficult for Eshkol; it amounted, in essence, to an acknowledgment that he was unable to lead the nation in wartime.
Dayan, with his romantic image, was as admired among the population as the hesitating Eshkol was not.
Israel struck first on June 5 and achieved its stunning victory in six days, humiliating the Soviet-supplied Arabs and seizing Egypt's Sinai Peninsula, the Gaza Strip, Jordan's West Bank, and Syria's Golan Heights, and, most stirring of all, fulfilling a two-thousand-year-old dream by bringing the Old City of Jerusalem under Jewish control.
But Israel suddenly found itself in control of one million more Palestinians.
Wally Barbour spent much of the war in the Israeli war room, and he shared the jubilation throughout the nation — and in much of America — over the stunning Israeli victory.
There was no pretense of objectivity in his reporting to Washington; his views and those of the Israeli leadership were identical.
For example, Barbour urged that Washington downplay the Israeli Air Force's rocket and strafing attack on the USS Liberty, a naval intelligence ship, on the third day of the war.
The incident triggered resentment throughout the United States government.
Dale was to inform the embassy's military attaches, Barbour said, that they were no longer to report on Dimona and no longer to undercut the Israelis by conducting operations with their British or Canadian counterparts.
It was ""inconceivable,"" Clifford added, according to the NSC notes, that Israel destroyed the Liberty by error, as it claimed.
A former senior intelligence officer recalled that ""a big change took place"" inside the Agency after the Six-Day War.
This became especially true in the Nixon administration; Nixon and Henry A Kissinger, his national security adviser, became renowned inside the CIA for preferring Mossad's intelligence assessments on the Middle East to those supplied by the Agency.
In his next post, with the State Department's Policy Planning Council, he again tried to raise questions about Dimona, with similar results.
One of his early assignments on the council, the State Department's in-house think tank, was to do a paper on nonproliferation.
He wanted to include a chapter on Dimona, but was refused permission to discuss that issue with members of Congress or members of the Atomic Energy Commission.
When he protested, said Dale, a senior State Department official, declaring that the Israeli bomb ""was the most sensitive foreign policy issue in the United States,"" threatened to discuss his conduct with the secretary of state.
With Barbour staying on and on, the Israeli bomb disappeared after 1967 as a significant issue in the American embassy.
Sometime that year the Israelis invited Arnold Kramish, an American expert on nuclear fuel cycles, to visit the reactor.
But, Zurhellen added, the embassy's view was that much of the international concern about Dimona had been deliberately fostered by Israel.
U A strong element of their policy is to convince others they have the bomb.
Zurhellen was referring to the steadily escalating air and artillery battles in the late 1960s and early 1970s between Israel and Egypt, whose army and air force had been dramatically reinforced by the Soviet Union after the Six-Day War.
After the inauguration of President Richard M Nixon in January 1969, Barbour was even less than uninterested in Dimona — he exorcised the issue.
A senior American intelligence officer recalled summoning a group of staff aides to provide Barbour, then in Washington, with a special briefing on the Israeli nuclear weapons program.
Barbour had many good reasons for not wanting to tell President Nixon bad news.
He was increasingly phobic about death, Zurhellen said, and kept an oxygen tent near his bed.
The ambassador also continued his easygoing work habits; Zurhellen recalled only two occasions in their five years together when Barbour stayed at the embassy after his usual noon departure time.
The appointment, as were all such assignments, was contingent upon medical approval, but, said Zurhellen, Barbour hadn't had a State Department physical in years, and knew he'd never pass one.
In 1970, Barbour made one of his rare public appearances, sharing a podium with Prime Minister Golda Meir at the opening of an American school in Tel Aviv.
When it came to Dimona, Barbour did what Israel wanted — without asking.
His support for Israel was profound and heartfelt; nonetheless, many of his former colleagues in the Foreign Service were confounded and distressed when on April 3, 1974, a year after retirement, he agreed to become a board member of the American branch of Bank Leumi, the Israeli state bank.
There was nothing illegal in doing so, but many State Department officials consider such appointments to pose an obvious conflict of interest.
Barbour, characteristically, couldn't have cared less about what his peers thought, and he remained on the board until his death.
He and a group of aides had been invited to inspect the early work on Israel's first nuclear missile field, under construction at an obscure site known on the map as Hirbat Zachariah, in the foothills of the Judean Mountains west of Jerusalem.
The expertly concealed shelters, not identified for years by the American intelligence community, were to be burrowed into the ground at the end of an unmarked road lined with closed-circuit cameras.
They were being built by Tahal, the governmentowned water planning corporation, which was then negotiating with the shah of Iran to build a forty-two-inch oil pipeline to relay Iranian crude to the Israeli port cities of Elat and Ashdod.
The smooth barrels through which the missiles would be launched had been imported into the country marked as lengths of pipeline.
Nonetheless, those first shelters represented, as Allon clearly understood, a new kind of military security for the nation.
Missile tubing also may have been shipped to Israel described as water mains.
We're a people,"" added the observer, ""who have come back from the dead.
A few days later, he stunned his cabinet colleagues by warning Egypt in a public speech at Haifa that Israel would reply in kind to any Egyptian attack on a population center using advanced weapons.
As a member of the prime minister's select committee on national security issues, Allon had great credibility.
But no Israeli official had ever publicly acknowledged the existence of a nuclear missile system, and Allon's cryptic assertions were privately attacked by other government officials as a breach of security and publicly criticized in the press for creating a panic.
Israel's missile program, code-named Project 700, had been envisioned years earlier by Ernst David Bergmann as the final, costly step toward the Samson Option.
One former Israeli government official recalled seeing figures indicating that the overall long-range price of Project 700, if fully authorized by the prime minister's national security committee, would be $850 million — more than was budgeted for all Israeli defense expenditures in 1967.
The staggering price of the missiles was more than matched by other elements of the nuclear system, and the overall cost of the nuclear program continued to be the major barrier to the bomb and the biggest hurdle for the official who emerged in the late 1960s with responsibility for Israel's nuclear future, Defense Minister Moshe Dayan.
Dayan was among the first in the Eshkol cabinet to predict that the Soviets, searching for any foothold they could get in their ideological struggle with the United States, would fill the power vacuum in the Middle East and become the major threat to Israel.
Dayan was articulating the sense of isolation that had worked its way into the top levels of the Israeli leadership, in a way not felt since the 1956 Suez Crisis.
Charles de Gaulle had responded to the war by accusing Israel of being the aggressor and canceling all of France's arms sales to Israel, abrogating twelve years of close French support for Israel.
De Gaulle also delayed the pending shipment of fifty previously purchased Mirage III jet fighters.
President Nikolai V Podgorny made a triumphant state visit to Cairo in late June and was greeted by hundreds of thousands of cheering Egyptians.
Planeloads of Soviet arms began arriving shortly thereafter, initiating an extensive and rapid buildup of the depleted Egyptian war stores, all of which would be renewed within a year.
Moscow eventually sent Soviet advisers and high-performance MiG fighters to Egypt; in return, the Russians were granted preferential treatment at four Mediterranean harbors as well as virtual control of seven Egyptian air bases.
The Soviets were similarly generous in their support for Syria and Iraq, the other losers in the Six-Day War.
The Soviet fleet was suddenly being deployed in greater force in the Mediterranean, with two or three ships — obviously attempting to intercept Israeli communications-parked off the Israeli coast.
There was no response to these provocations, as seen by the Israelis, from the world's other great superpower, the United States.
In late August 1967, the Arab nations, buoyed by the Soviet support and guided by Soviet advice, gathered for the first postwar summit at Khartoum and agreed on what became known as the ""three no's"" — no peace, no negotiations, and no recognition.
Dayan's drive for the bomb was heightened by his conviction that Israel could not depend on America to deter a Soviet attack.
In a crisis, Israel either would or would not — as in Suez — be supported by Washington, depending on the White House's assessment of its international and regional interests.
Dayan believed Moscow similarly would be willing to come to the aid of the Arabs not because of a deep concern for the Middle East, but to protect its prestige and international interests.
Whatever their motives, Dayan was convinced that the superpowers would dictate events in the Middle East unless Israel took steps to arm itself fully.
Israel's survival, in Dayan's view, was now dependent on its ability to mass-produce nuclear weapons and target them at the Soviet Union — just as the French goal was to target its force defrappe at Moscow.
Dayan's mission in late 1967 and early 1968 was to convince his fellow cabinet members that if the Soviets could be persuaded that the Israeli threat was credible, they might decide that there was no Middle East war worth fighting.
A credible Israeli bomb also would deter the Soviets from taking any steps in the Middle East that would jeopardize Israel's survival — such as agreeing to supply an Arab nation with a nuclear weapon.
And when Israel developed its first bomb in a suitcase, Moscow also would be told — and reminded that there was no way to stop Mossad from smuggling a nuclear weapon across the border by automobile or into a Soviet port by boat.
As for the rest of the world, including the United States, there would still be studied ambiguity on the question of whether Israel had the bomb.
Dayan got a boost in his lobbying sometime in the last few months of 1967 when the Israelis learned from American intelligence that the Soviet Union had added four major Israeli cities — Tel Aviv, Haifa, Beersheba, and Ashdod — to its nuclear targeting list.
Kissinger met privately in February 1968 with a group of Israeli scholars at the Jerusalem home of Major General Elad Peled, director of Israel's Defense College, where Kissinger had taught the year before.
Second, that no American President would risk World War III because of territories occupied by Israel.
By early 1968, it was obvious that the overwhelming victory * American intelligence officials subsequently told me that the United States did not obtain a physical copy of the Soviet nuclear targeting list until the early 1970s.
Some human intelligence about Soviet targets did exist, however, and it was that information, known only to a few in the CIA and elsewhere, that conceivably could have been passed along to the Israelis.
Yitzhak Rabin, the army chief of staff, flew to Washington in mid-December 1967 and said as much in a meeting with General Earle G Wheeler, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
America's Jewish community responded to the dramatic June victory with showers of money and increased visits; tourism was booming in late 1967, and so was the Israeli economy.
Israel's success, as Ambassador Walworth Barbour told his doubting staff in the American embassy in Tel Aviv, had cemented its relationship to Washington.
Yet for Dayan and many of his supporters at Dimona and elsewhere, America had proved its basic unreliability as an ally a month before the SixDay War when it failed to respond to Nasser's closing of the Strait of Tiran and blockade of Elat.
Israeli foreign ministry documents showed that Dwight Eisenhower had promised in writing after the Suez debacle in 1956 that the United States would use force, if necessary, to keep the strait open.
Israel called on Johnson to keep that commitment after Nasser's blockade and felt betrayed upon learning that the State Department considered Eisenhower's commitment to have expired when Eisenhower left office in early 1961.
Only a treaty ratified by the United States Senate was binding on subsequent administrations, the Israelis were told.
Washington, without knowing it, was playing into the hands of Moshe Dayan and his nuclear ambitions.
One Israeli official recalled seeing estimates indicating that by the early 1970s a full-scale nuclear weapons program, including warheads and missiles, would be chewing up more than 10 percent of Israel's overall budget — nearly $1 billion.
In his view, an Israeli bomb would only lead to conflicts with the United States and a lessened flow of American contributions.
Dayan, one Israeli official recalled, made a critical decision early in 1968.
He telephoned Sapir and asked him to spend a day with him, just as he had done with Allon.
The two men went to Dimona. u He showed him the whole thing, from A to Z,"" the Israeli said.
There is no evidence that the Israeli cabinet ever made a formal decision about Dimona.
Nonetheless, production of the first assembly line bomb, whether officially sanctioned or not, was quickly known to the top layer of national security officials and widely applauded.
An Israeli recalled that champagne was broken out at * In 1965, Mapai and Achdut Avodah had agreed to join forces to run as a bloc for seats in the Knesset.
The Israeli who used that phrase in an interview was fluent in idiomatic English and, in his translation, was trying to describe the essence and import of Sapir's comment to Allon.
One former Israeli government official explained the bureaucratic procedure behind the decision to open Dimona's assembly line by saying, with a shrug and a smile, that Moshe Dayan had unilaterally decided that he had received the support of the key money men and had all the authority he needed — as defense minister — to turn Israel into a nuclear power.
Even if such a sale could be arranged, no one in Israel was willing to let the world know that Dimona, ostensibly a twenty-four-megawatt reactor capable of consuming no more than twenty-four tons of ore in a year, was purchasing an eight-year supply of uranium.
Mossad's solution was to approach one of its agents in West Ger* In April 1976, Time magazine reported that shortly after the Six-Day War, Dayan ""had secretly ordered the start of construction"" on a reprocessing plant.
The article, despite its confusion about the reprocessing plant, which was already finished by 1967, provided the world with its first hard information about the Israeli weapons program.
The story carried no byline, apparently because it was reported by David Halevy, who, as an Israeli citizen, was subject to government censorship.
Halevy, a former intelligence and army officer, was known for good contacts inside the Israeli government and intelligence community; it was widely believed inside the Israeli government, which officially denied the story, that his basic source was Moshe Dayan.
The sale was approved by Euratom in October, and the uranium was shipped out of Antwerp aboard a vessel renamed the Scheersberg A The Scheersberg A had been purchased, with Mossad funds, by another Israeli agent-in-place in Turkey.
Once at sea, according to published accounts that were confirmed by Israeli officials, the uranium ore was transferred to an Israeli freighter guarded by gunboats and taken to Israel.
The disappearance of the huge shipment of uranium ore was known, of course, within months to Euratom; it wasn't much longer before United States and European intelligence agencies were reporting internally that the Israelis were involved.
It took nine years, nonetheless, before word of the uranium hijacking reached the press, and the affair eventually became the subject of a 1978 book, The Plumbat Affair.
Israel's response to the book and to the earlier newspaper accounts was to continue to deny that it had a nuclear capability.
No one, except for a few public-interest advocates and a few reporters, seemed to care.
America did so, bitter Israelis noted, while the Soviets continued to resupply their allies.
Johnson also publicly eschewed any firm commitment to defend Israel in a crisis.
Nonetheless, Prime Minister Eshkol was eager to make a second state visit to Washington in January 1968 to plead for the sale of F-4 jet fighters to balance the Soviet introduction of MiGs into Egypt.
The F-4 was the most advanced fighter in the American arsenal, and the Pentagon and State Department argued that Israel did not need such aircraft to maintain a military advantage against the Egyptians, whose MiG-2is had a much more limited range and bombing capacity.
Introducing the top-of-the-line F-4S into the Middle East would be an unwarranted and unnecessary escalation; Israel would remain superior with the previously supplied A-4 Skyhawk bombers.
Rostow's suggestion that it would be possible to link the Phantom sale to the NPT was farcical, given Israel's commitment to Dimona and the ample United States intelligence — much of it supplied by Wally Barbour's embassy in Tel Aviv — about that commitment.
The issues would stay the same for at least the next twenty-three years.
Rostow had to know that the Israeli military had gone on a virtual rampage at the end of the Six-Day War in the newly occupied areas of Jerusalem, the West Bank and Golan Heights, ransacking and destroying Arab homes in an obvious attempt to drive Palestinians and other Arabs off their land and into Jordan and Syria.
More than one hundred Arab homes were demolished in the Old City of Jersualem on the first night after the war by Israeli troops, operating under floodlights with bulldozers.
Moshe Dayan later accused the Israeli soldiers of taking ""punitive"" action in the village and ordered cement and other goods to be provided to the villagers for rebuilding.
There was a brief period after the war in which many senior Israelis, among them Dayan and David Ben-Gurion, openly questioned the wisdom of holding on to the occupied lands.
The goal, said Critchfield, was to reach a quick accord on trading land for peace before the Israelis began settling the occupied territories.
Dayan and Zamir were convinced that such a step would be ""a disastrous development,"" said Critchfield.
A White House meeting was arranged with Bundy and Nicholas D Katzenbach, then the under secretary of state.
Angleton argued that if we do not act now with Dayan's and Zamir's support, there will be settlements in the West Bank.
As we walked out, Mac said to me, Td forgotten how passionable Angleton could be.
The Revisionists' position emerged as the government's policy over the years.
The Israeli intransigence over return of the territories, coupled with the rearmed Arabs' desire for revenge, doomed United Nations Resolution 242, which called for Israeli withdrawal from the occupied territories in return for Arab commitments of territorial integrity and peace.
It had been unanimously approved by the United Nations Security Council in late November 1967.
Things couldn't have gone worse, from the Israeli point of view, at the Johnson-Eshkol summit meeting in early 1968 at the President's ranch in Texas.
Eshkol and his advisers, including Ephraim Evron, the Israeli ambassador to Washington, who was a Johnson favorite, had sat through a day of briefings at which a series of Senate and Defense Department officials argued against selling F-4S to Israel.
Within weeks of the summit meeting with Eshkol, Johnson was presented with a CIA estimate concluding— for the first time — that Israel had manufactured at least four nuclear warheads.
He ordered CIA Director Richard M Helms to bury the report, and Helms obeyed the order, as he always did.
Duckett had briefed Teller in the past and, as he acknowledged, stood in awe of him.
Teller explained that he had just returned from Israel — he had a sister living in Tel Aviv and was a frequent visitor there — where he had many contacts in the Israeli scientific and defense community.
Teller was careful to say that he had no specific information about Israeli nuclear weapons.
But it was his understanding, Teller told Duckett, that the Agency was waiting for an Israeli test before making any final assessment about Israeli nuclear capability.
The Office of Science and Technology had just distributed a top-secret estimate on nonproliferation, and Duckett decided that an update, known inside the intelligence community as a ""Memo to Holders,"" would be dispatched.
The company's owner, Zalman Mordecai Shapiro, a devout Jew with close ties to Israel, insisted that the uranium loss — first reported by Shapiro in 1965 — was routine, an inevitable by-product of the difficult task of enrichment.
Duckett and many others in the intelligence community thought otherwise.
Duckett acknowledged that he had no evidence that Shapiro's uranium had been diverted to Israel, but ""made an assumption"" that it had while preparing the updated Israeli estimate.
Without the Teller report and the suspicions about Shapiro, Duckett acknowledged, the CIA didn't have much to go on.
The Agency had been unable to determine whether Israel had built, as suspected, an underground chemical reprocessing plant at Dimona.
The Agency also had not been able to penetrate any of the military commands or intelligence services of Israel.
And no Israeli had defected to the United States with nuclear information.
The National Security Agency and its electronic eavesdropping also had not been much help, Duckett said, although it had provided early evidence suggesting that some Israeli Air Force pilots had practiced bomb runs in a manner that made sense only if nuclear weapons were to be dropped.
Thin as its evidence was, Duckett was now willing to state in a top-secret written report that Israel was a nuclear power.
The revised estimate was more than a little bit sensitive, Duckett knew, and he cleared it first with Dick Helms.
The CIA director told Duckett not to publish the estimate in any form and also declared that he himself would be the messenger with bad tidings.
By 1968, the President had no intention of doing anything to stop the Israeli bomb, as Helms, Duckett, Walworth Barbour, William Dale, and a very few others in the United States government came to understand.
Moshe Dayan's unilateral action to push Dimona into full-scale production carried what should have been a huge risk — a nuclear-armed Israel would find it impossible to sign the Nonproliferation Treaty, and Israel thus would not get its F-4S from the Johnson administration.
The pressure from the Washington bureaucracy on that issue remained intense, especially at the Pentagon, where Clark Clifford, who had replaced Robert McNamara as secretary of defense at the end of January, and his senior aides were adamant.
In October 1968, one month before the presidential election, Johnson formally approved the F-4 sale in principle, but left the bargaining over delivery dates and other details to be negotiated.
Paul C Warnke, the assistant secretary of defense for international security affairs, recalled thinking there still was ""an outside chance"" Israel could be forced to sign the NPT in exchange for immediate delivery.
Warnke called in Yitzhak Rabin, newly named as Israel's am* Helms, despite his public image as a suave spymaster, was more of a bureaucrat than most newsmen and government officials in Washington could imagine.
One of Helms's senior deputies recalled the occasion in the last year of the Johnson administration when an angry President ordered a twenty-four-hour halt to all CIA intelligence collection and reporting on Vietnam.
The President's goal was to prevent a leak, and his assumption seemed to be that if he could stop the voluminous traffic to and from the CIA, he would do just that.
Of course, shutting off the communications link had its obvious perils, and the senior CIA staff were sure that Helms would ignore, or override, the irrational presidential order.
Although he most certainly knew better, Helms followed orders and stopped the traffic.
A Warnke aide, Harry H Schwartz, also was at the meeting and recalled an even tougher Warnke remark.
The ambassador, of course, was enraged by the encounter, which he subsequently claimed had nothing to do with nuclear weapons.
In his memoirs, published in 1979, Rabin depicted the basic issue as Warnke's insistence that the United States, as a condition of the F-4 sale, be permitted to have on-site supervision of every Israeli arms manufacturing plant and every defense installation engaged in research and development.
He left the meeting, he added, and began passing ""broad hints"" to Israel's supporters in Congress and elsewhere to generate support for the F-4 sale.
He and Major General Mordecai Hod, the Israeli Air Force's chief of staff, went to see one of the few Americans who could get the President to change his mind — Abe Feinberg.
Paul Warnke arrived at a later meeting of his staff, all of whom favored tying the F-4 sale to Israeli acceptance of the NPT, and dramatically drew his hand across his neck.
The treaty, he wrote, was ""the most difficult and most important ... of all the agreements reached with Moscow"" during his presidency.
There's also no evidence that Johnson felt he was in debt to the Israeli government for its support of his policies in Vietnam; American Jews, despite that support, were overwhelmingly hostile to the war.
His decision not to stop the F-4 sale had given Israel, as Johnson had to know, a high-performance aircraft capable of carrying a nuclear weapon on a oneway mission to Moscow.
It was, perhaps, nothing more than his farewell gift to the Israeli people and his way of repaying the loyalty of Abe Feinberg.
There is no question that Feinberg enjoyed the greatest presidential access and influence in his twenty years as a Jewish fund-raiser and lobbyist with Lyndon Johnson.
By 1968, the government of Israel had rewarded Feinberg for his services by permitting him to become the major owner of the nation's Coca-Cola franchise.
U A lot of people were afraid publicly to give as much as they could, so * Israel had rewarded other financial supporters with similarly lucrative business deals.
In 1959, for example, Tricontinenal Pipelines, Ltd., an international investment group controlled by Baron Edmund de Rothschild, was given the concession to operate a sixteen-inch oil pipeline between Elat and Haifa, via Ashdod.
The contract, signed by then Finance Minister Levi Eshkol on behalf of Israel, committed the state to ship at least 1. million tons of oil through the pipeline for the next fifteen years.
Edmund de Rothschild was, according to Abe Feinberg, another major contributor to Dimona's start-up costs.
Feinberg's special status became clear to some in the White House after the press revealed on October 14, 1964, that Walter Jenkins had been arrested a week earlier in the bathroom of a Washington YMCA on homosexual solicitation charges.
The arrest took place three weeks before the 1964 presidential election.
Johnson telephoned Feldman and ordered him and Bill Moyers, another trusted aide and sometime speechwriter, to clean out Jenkins's safe.
Feldman also knew that Jenkins was especially trusted on national security issues.
What he and Moyers did not know was that they would find the Feinberg money.
Moyers, asked about the incident in early 1991, said his memory was vague, but acknowledged that ""circumstances did lead me to believe"" that Jenkins had a private cache of money in his safe.
Asked specifically whether the cash was meant for the Democratic campaign, Moyers said, ""I don't know and I don't know what happened to it.
Moyers, now a prominent television personality, recalled the time in the Johnson White House when ""a guy from North Carolina came to see me.
He'd take from friends and adversaries just because he thought that's the way the system worked.
He had been stunned a year earlier when a group of Israeli military attaches had come into his Pentagon office and asked for a Low Altitude Bombing System for nuclear weapons.
The computerized bombing system provided time for an aircraft to drop its weapons and roll away to avoid the blast effects.
Don't ever haul one out, because your little government will disappear.
The huge underground laboratories at Dimona had their precedent in the Jewish struggle after World War II against the British mandatory power in Palestine.
The British authorities had angered David Ben-Gurion and his followers by insisting that they adhere to the strict limits on Jewish immigration to Palestine that were set in 1939, after three years of Arab revolts.
The British ruling had meant then that hundreds of thousands of Eastern European Jews were unable to escape the Holocaust.
And now those who had somehow managed to survive were again being denied a chance to come legally to Palestine.
The heavily outnumbered and outgunned members of the Hagannah, the Jewish underground, began the inevitable guerrilla war against the British troops with little other than their guile and determination.
One of the war's most imaginative operations involved what seemed to be yet another farming kibbutz that was set up in 1946 about fifteen miles outside Tel Aviv, adjacent to a large British military base.
The kibbutz's administrative building was constructed, seemingly at random, within a half mile of the base.
Metal for the bullets had been shipped into Israel disguised as lipstick tubes, and it cleared British customs without challenge.
The underground facility had been ""scooped out,"" said Feinberg, in twenty-seven days.
The men and women who worked underground alternated that work with farming; those who completed a shift in the arms factory were ordered to muddy their shoes and sit under sunlamps so they could appear to the British and others as if they had been innocently tending crops or looking after the kibbutz's cows and sheep.
Over the next two years, British soldiers and officers were constant — and unsuspecting — customers of the kibbutz's bakery and laundry, which cheerfully offered their services to the military.
Feinberg recalled that a few of the British soldiers even made a point of coming to the kibbutz's Friday-night Shabbat dinners.
Today the underground bullet factory is known as the Ayalon Museum, a popular attraction for Israeli schoolchildren.
Located a few hundred feet from the reactor, Dimona's chemical reprocessing plant looked, on the surface, very much like an ordinary administration building — a nondescript two-story windowless facility, eighty by two hundred feet, containing a workers' canteen and shower rooms, a few offices, some warehouse space, and an air filtration plant.
The building had thickly reinforced walls, not an unusual safety feature, given its location.
A bank of elevators on the top floor was routinely bricked over before foreign visitors, such as the American inspection teams headed by Floyd Culler, were permitted to enter the building.
Vanunu began working as a technican at Dimona in August 1977 and spent much of the next eight years assigned to various tasks inside the reprocessing plant, formally known as Machon 2 and informally known as the Tunnel.
A special pass was needed to enter the plant, and all movement inside, even to and from the bathroom, was — in theory — to be closely monitored.
Vanunu, once at work in the Tunnel, found that the stringent security existed in theory only.
Constantly in trouble for his public proArab views, he had been laid off in mid-1985 as part of a government-wide cutback.
Vanunu appealed through his union, powerful as are all unions in Israel, and won back his job.
It was at that point that he smuggled a camera into the reprocessing plant during an overnight shift and wandered around undetected for some forty minutes, taking fifty-seven color photographs.
A few weeks later he was fired after calling for the formation of a Palestinian state during an Arab rally.
Even then, again with help from his union, Vanunu was able to negotiate a settlement from Dimona's management that gave him severance pay and a letter attesting to his good record.
A combination of factors — disenchantment with his life, distress at the treatment of Arabs in Israel, and what he had learned inside Dimona — drove him to exile in Australia and eventually to the London Sunday Times.
The newspaper's editors and reporters were appropriately skeptical of Vanunu's account of the goings-on inside Dimona, but the photographs he had taken proved to be critical in finally establishing his credibility.
However, even as he talked to the Sunday Times, he was being closely monitored by the Israeli government, whose operatives have long-standing ties to the London newspaper world.
Copies of some of Vanunu's sensational photographs had been made available in London — before publication of the Sunday Times story — to an Israeli intelligence agent masquerad198 THE SAMSON OPTION ing as an American newspaper reporter.
The photographs were sent by courier to the office of Prime Minister Shimon Peres, who ordered Mossad to get Vanunu out of London and into Israeli custody.
Instead, the lonely Vanunu was enticed by a Mossad agent named Cindy Hanin Bentov (a pseudonym) to leave for Rome a few days before publication of the story.
Once in Rome, Vanunu has told family members, he was taken by taxi to an apartment, where he was drugged and returned to Israel by ship to stand trial.
He was sentenced in March 1988 to eighteen years in a maximum-security prison.
Vanunu's Times interview and his photographs of many of the production units in the Tunnel, or Machon 2, provided the American intelligence community with the first extensive evidence of Israeli capability to manufacture fusion, or thermonuclear, weapons.
American intelligence also obtained a copy of many of the Sunday Times 's interview notes with Vanunu; those notes, some of which were also made available to the author, provided much more specific detail of the inner workings of Dimona than was published.
Senior American officials, including men and women who have worked in nuclear weapons production and nuclear intelligence, uniformly agreed that the unpublished Vanunu notes are highly credible.
The most exhaustive analysis of the Vanunu statements and photographs was conducted by the Z Division, a special intelligence unit at the Livermore Laboratories whose experts are considered to be the final word on proliferation issues.
It is responsible for analyzing foreign nuclear weapons, with emphasis on Soviet weaponry.
There was no evidence in the Vanunu materials of additional cooling capacity for Dimona's reactor, whose output would have had to have been dramatically increased to produce enough plutonium for two hundred warheads.
Vanunu, however, in a portion of his interview not published and not made available to Z Division, explained that a new cooling unit had been installed at the reactor while he was employed at Dimona.
Of extreme interest to the United States were Vanunu's photographs of what apparently were full-sized models of Israeli nuclear weapons.
They concluded that Israel was capable of manufacturing one of the most sophisticated weapons in the nuclear arsenal — a low-yield neutron bomb.
Such weapons, which first came into the American stockpile in the mid-1970s, utilize enhanced radiation and minimal blast to kill anything living within a limited range * Vanunu described the cooling unit to Frank Barnaby, a nuclear physicist and former employee of Britain's nuclear weapons installation at Aldermaston.
Barnaby spent two days with Vanunu, at the request of the Sunday Times t in a continuing effort to verify his account.
After leaving government service, Barnaby became director of the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute , an arms control study group funded by the Swedish government.
The mock-ups are accurate replicas, in terms of external design and size, of a normal warhead, and American nonproliferation experts assumed that the Israelis' models were carefully prepared.
The weapon actually is a two-stage thermonuclear device that utilizes tritium and deuterium , and not lithium deuteride, to maximize the release of neutrons.
The Vanunu information also helped American intelligence experts date the progress of the Israeli nuclear arsenal.
Vanunu revealed, for example, that Unit 92 in the Tunnel had been painstakingly removing tritium from heavy water since the 1960s, indicating that physicists at Dimona — following Levi EshkoFs 1965 plea for advanced research — had been attempting from the earliest days of Dimona's production to manufacture ""boosted"" fission weapons.
The United States began experimenting in the early 1950s with boosting, which dramatically increases the yield, or destructiveness, of a single-stage fission device.
Boosting is a process in which small quantities (a few grams) of tritium and deuterium are inserted directly into a plutonium warhead and designed to flood the warhead with additional neutrons at the moment of fission — in essence, jumpstarting the weapon at the moment of critical mass — producing a bigger kick, or yield, with smaller amounts of plutonium.
Vanunu also told the Sunday Times of returning from a vacation in 1980 — his first trip abroad since emigrating with his family to Israel in 1963 — and being assigned then to work at a new production plant for lithium 6, another essential element of the hydrogen bomb.
In 1984, he further reported, a new facility for large-scale production of tritium was opened.
Lithium is irradiated in the reactor, then moved to Unit 93, where it is heated to release tritium in a gas form, along with helium and hydrogen.
The gases are then driven under high pressure through an asbestos palladium column and separated.
The helium is stored in powdered uranium and can again be released by heating.
The opening of Unit 93 suggests that fullscale production of neutron weapons began then, for up to twenty grams of tritium are used in each neutron warhead.
As described by Vanunu (and confirmed by the author in later interviews with Israeli officials), Dimona includes the reactor and at least eight other buildings, or Machons, the most important of which is the chemical reprocessing plant.
Machon i is the large silver-domed reactor, sixty feet in diameter, that can be clearly seen from the nearby highway.
The uranium fuel rods remain for three months in the reactor, which is cooled and moderated by heavy water.
The heavy water is itself cooled by ordinary water flowing through a heat exchanger, creating steam, which in a nuclear power plant would drive a turbine and create electricity.
Instead, the steam in Machon i is vented into the atmosphere, creating a radioactive cloud.
Machon 3 converts lithium 6 into a solid for insertion into a nuclear warhead and also processes natural uranium for the reactor.
Machon 4 contains a waste treatment plant for the radioactive residue from the chemical reprocessing plant in Machon 2.
Machon 5 coats the uranium rods with aluminum to be consumed in the reactor.
The rods, once stacked in the core of the reactor, provide the fuel needed to sustain a chain reaction — and capture weapons-grade isotopes of plutonium.
Machon 8 contains a laboratory for testing samples and experimenting on new manufacturing processes; it also is the site of Special Unit 840, where Israeli scientists have developed a gas centrifuge method of enriching uranium for weapons use.
There also is a laser-isotopereprocessing facility for the enrichment of uranium in Machon 9.
The shells, buttressed by the heavy uranium, which is much denser than lead, can easily penetrate thick armor plating and are a staple in modern arsenals.
It was one of those ventings, apparently, that was photographed by Army Colonel Carmelo Alba in 1965, providing the CIA with the first concrete evidence that Dimona was operational.
Some of the American tanks also were equipped with uranium armor plating for added defense against Iraqi attacks.
Dimona's most essential facility, of course, is the reprocessing plant in Machon 2, where Vanunu spent most of his career.
It is here that plutonium, a by-product of the fission process in the reactor, is extracted by chemical means from the spent uranium rods.
The residual uranium is then reprocessed and reconstituted for use in new fuel rods.
There are at least thirty-nine separate units in the six underground levels of the Tunnel, the most important of which is the production hall where the spent uranium rods undergo reprocessing.
Before reprocessing can begin, however, the rods must be cooled for weeks in water-filled tanks, reducing radioactivity by a factor of several thousand.
Even then, the radioactive rods are still lethal and are always handled by remote control and from behind lead shielding.
The Tunnel's production hall dominates levels one through four below ground; work there is monitored by a large control room that includes an observation area known to technicians as ""Golda's Balcony,"" a reference to Golda Meir's frequent visits after she became prime minister in 1969.
The end result of the chemical processing, according to Vanunu, is a weekly average of nine ""buttons"" of pure plutonium whose combined weight is 1. kilograms.
The plutonium is fabricated by machine in a secure area on level five, the only floor in the Tunnel to which Vanunu was denied access.
Other chemicals used in the Israeli nuclear arsenal, including lithium compounds and beryllium, also are machine-fabricated on the fifth level.
Once completed, the weapons parts are moved by convoys of unmarked cars, under armed guard, to another facility to the north — not known to Vanunu — for assembly into warheads.
Israeli officials subsequently told me that the final stage of warhead production takes place at a defense plant north of Haifa operated by Rafael, the top-secret Israeli research and manufacturing agency that is responsible for Israel's most sensitive weaponry.
The Tunnel remained in operation around the clock for thirty-four weeks a year, according to Vanunu, and was shut down from July to November for routine maintenance and repair.
American nuclear experts consulted about Vanunu's story describe the methods used to reprocess the spent uranium at Dimona as essentially routine; the industrial solvents and solutions used by the Israelis are the same as those relied upon at the Savannah River Plant in Aiken, South Carolina, where state-of-the-art heavy-water-production reactors have operated since the mid-1950s.
If Vanunu's information about the rate of plutonium reprocessing is correct — a steady production rate of 1. kilograms weekly — the reactor would be producing enough enriched materials for four to a dozen or more bombs a year, depending on warhead design.
If so, Dimona could be producing sixteen to twenty kilograms of weapons-grade plutonium per year, enough for four or five warheads.
What especially impressed American experts about Dimona's reprocessing plant was its location — underground — and its sophistication.
You need threefoot lead walls, all automated; people in suits; robotics.
That, in turn, drives up the price of ventilation shafts, air intakes, and fan systems, as well as all ordinary construction costs.
Going underground also posed enormous engineering risks that could be met only by superb master planning and expert intelligence.
For example, the construction teams that initially built the United States Atomic Energy Commission's Savannah River Plant in South Carolina decided to put the thick, lead-shielded doors that protected the work force on custom-made coasters with specially engineered automated motors for opening and closing.
The possibility exists, the official said, that the Israelis determined from the outset that they could avoid such problems by finding out what had gone right — and wrong — from the Americans who built the Savannah River Plant.
It is impossible to even roughly determine the amount of plutonium that has been produced at Dimona without knowing the power output and operating history of the reactor.
The general accuracy and scientific validity of Vanunu's statistical data added to his credibility with American intelligence officials.
That kind of intelligence is crucial to not having to reinvent the wheel.
Blumberg's agents were operating all over the world, collecting available technical information and also setting up front companies in Europe and Latin America for the purchase from the United States of high-tech equipment whose export to Israel would not be permitted.
Another area of great sensitivity involved the science of robotics, whose most important early use in the United States came in the hot weapons laboratories where humans could not work.
The precision involved in machining the thin plutonium hemispheres and placing them around the gases needed to create boosted nuclear weapons was achieved only after enormous strides had been made in the use of remote control.
It was not an accident that Aharon Katzir , who became, like Ernst Bergmann, an intellectual force inside the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission, was world-renowned for his research into robotics at the Weizmann Institute.
It reported on Katzir's pioneering work in converting chemical energy into the energy of motion.
Katzir's team at the Weizmann Institute also was concentrating on the development of artificial muscle tissue for use in robots.
His research was heavily funded by the United States Air Force's Office of Scientific Research; the Air Force's primary interest was in utilizing robotics in outer-space research.
The Air Force had no idea that it was also helping to underwrite research for the Israeli nuclear arsenal; nor did it know that Katzir's main work was being done at Dimona, and not at the Weizmann Institute.
Despite such comments, there remains no actual evidence that Israel needed outside help for its nuclear weaponry.
George A Cowan, who spent more than twenty years designing nuclear weapons at Los Alamos, acknowledged that there always was a close association with Israeli physicists from the Weizmann Institute.
Similarly, physicist Hans Bethe, the Nobel laureate who helped design the first American nuclear and thermonuclear weapons, recalled three visits to the Weizmann Institute during which his hosts would ""take me anywhere and discuss anything with me.
They knew I was interested in nuclear power reactors,"" he added, ""and yet they never offered to take me to Dimona.
If there was any solace for the American intelligence community in the wake of the startling Vanunu disclosures, which gave Washington the most specific evidence of an Israeli reprocessing plant, it was in the conviction that the extraordinary degree of master planning that had to take place at Dimona was little appreciated by senior officials in the Israeli chain of command.
Shimon Peres has confided to friends that during the early construction of Dimona he often signed requisition orders and other technical documents on behalf of the Ben-Gurion government without knowing precisely what he had approved.
Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger approached inauguration day on January 20, 1969, convinced that Israel's nuclear ambitions were justified and understandable.
The two American leaders also shared a contempt for the 1968 Nonproliferation Treaty, which had been so ardently endorsed in public by Lyndon Johnson.
Nixon, midway in his campaign against Vice President Hubert H Humphrey, dismayed the arms control community by urging the Senate to delay ratification of the NPT until after the election.
He went further a few days later, telling newsmen in Charlotte, North Carolina, that he specifically was concerned about the NPT's failure to permit the transfer of ""defensive nuclear weapons,"" such as mines or antiballistic missile systems, to non-nuclear powers.
In the secrecy of their offices, however, as only a few in the government knew, Nixon and Kissinger had simultaneously issued a presidential order to the bureaucracy undercutting all that was said in public.
I heard him say that if he were the Israelis, he would get nuclear weapons.
Kissinger also told his staff in the first months of 1969 that Japan, as well as Israel, would be better off with the bomb than without it.
He was convinced, said Halperin, that nuclear weapons were essential to the national security of both nations.
Kissinger's support for Israel's nuclear weapons program, as spelled out during his 1968 meeting at General Elad Peled's home, was widely known to the Israeli leadership.
If an overt sign of the administration's stand was needed, it came quickly, with the decision in 1969 to end the Floyd Culler inspections of Dimona.
The inspections, begun in 1962, had long been considered by the American arms control community to be important in principle but in practice to have marginal utility; they dragged on without change, nonetheless, through the Johnson years.
Israel resented the inspections as an intrusion on its sovereignty; there also was fear that Culler or one of his team might actually stumble onto something useful, especially as Dimona began gearing up in the late 1960s for the full-scale production of warheads.
Culler's inspection in 1969 seemed to some Americans to be PRELUDE TO WAR 21 I especially pointless, in the wake of President Johnson's lastminute decision to allow Israel to purchase its much-desired F-4S without insisting — as the State Department and Pentagon wanted — on Israeli ratification of the NPT in exchange.
But now Washington found it convenient to end the charade, and the inspections ended.
Israel had gone nuclear, and there was nothing that the United States could — or wanted to — do about it.
The Smith story also described Israel's progress in developing its Jericho I missile system and revealed that a manufacturing plant had been set up near Tel Aviv for the production of solid propellants and engines for the missiles.
The Symington peg helped Smith get the story published a few days later; the reporter, experienced in covering diplomatic affairs, awaited the attention he was sure the article would attract from others in the media and the Congress.
Neither did any of the Times's newspaper competitors, who found it impossible to confirm the story.
The reporter did hear from the Israeli embassy in Washington; there was a subsequent meeting with a ""very upset"" Ambassador Yitzhak Rabin. decision not in terms of costs, but as stemming from a concern that the nuclear-powered plant would become too much of a target for Arab terrorism in the wake of the Six-Day War and the renewed War of Attrition with Egypt.
By mid-1971, the White House's permissive attitude toward the Israeli bomb made it possible for even those officials responsible for monitoring the shipment of sensitive materials to look the other way.
Glenn R Cella, a foreign service officer, was assigned that summer to handle political-military affairs on the State Department's Israeli desk; he also was named the department's representative on the Middle East Task Force, an interagency group whose main mission was to monitor American arms transfer policies.
Cella, who had served in Morocco, Algeria, and Egypt, began asking about the Israeli bomb and quickly learned of Duckett's suppressed estimate.
He also learned that if there was going to be any pressure on Israel to stop its nuclear weapons program, it would not come from the task force or the State Department.
Israel was then pushing for the immediate shipment of more F-4S, and the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research had been ordered to make a study of the military balance in the region.
The study, when completed, made no mention of Israeli nuclear capability, to Cella's dismay.
A few months later, Cella was notified that an Israeli request for the sale of krytrons had been routinely approved by his Pentagon counterpart on the task force.
Krytrons, the inquisitive Cella was informed, were sensitive electronic timing devices used to trigger strobe lights.
The high-speed device, whose export usually is closely monitored, is essential for the precise detonation of the chemical explosives that cause implosion in a nuclear weapon — facts that should have been known to the Pentagon official.
A year later the United States budget somehow included funds earmarked for the supply of two supercomputers to the Weizmann Institute.
Richard Helms, the consummate bureaucrat, continued to please his superiors by stifling significant intelligence about the Israeli bomb.
He'd also come to a personal conclusion about Israeli intelligence, repeatedly telling his deputies and aides that he was convinced Israel was funneling American satellite information to the Soviet Union.
Helms was convinced the Israelis were doing it on behalf of the Soviets.
Israel wanted the satellite imagery of the Soviet Union because of its own nuclear targeting needs.
To his credit, Duckett said, Helms asked for help, and a series of educational briefings was arranged, amid great secrecy, in his office.
At the first session, Helms was asked by his instructor, one of the Agency's leading experts in nuclear fission, whether he'd ever studied physics in high school.
Helms eventually spent a day with Duckett and other government officials at the nuclear underground test center in Nevada.
After serving nearly eight years as the head of the CIA, he was appointed ambassador to Iran by Richard Nixon in early 1973.
Long recalled once being asked by a superior to put that response in writing, in a formal diplomatic note to a Middle Eastern nation.
Curtis F Jones similarly spent his career as a Middle East expert in the Foreign Service; his final assignment from 1971 to 1975 was as director of Near East, North African, and South Asian affairs for the Bureau of Intelligence and Research.
The easing of the pressure from Washington removed any constraints on Dimona and the Israeli leadership, which correctly interpreted the end of the Culler inspections as an American carte blanche.
The technicians and scientists at Dimona began operating in the early 1970s exactly as their American and Soviet counterparts had done in the first days of the Cold War — the Israelis made as many bombs as possible.
These ranged from huge thermonuclear city busters to an atomic warhead for a jeep-mounted bazooka.
The missiles had been capable since 1971 of hitting targets in southern Russia, including Tbilisi, near the Soviet oil fields, and Baku, off the coast of the Caspian Sea, as well as Arab capitals.
There also was a squadron of nuclearcapable F-4 fighters on twenty-four-hour alert in underground revetments at the Tel Nof air base near Rehovot.
The specially trained F-4 pilots were the elite of the Israeli Air Force and were forbidden to discuss their mission with any outsider.
The long-range F-4S were capable of flying one-way to Moscow with a nuclear bomb; the daring pilots would have to be resupplied by an airborne tanker to make it home.
By this time, Dimona had solved many of the basic problems of weapons miniaturization; the smaller warheads provided Israeli weapons designers with an array of options that included the development of low-yield tactical weapons for battlefield use.
The United States had done its part by approving the sale of long-range 175mm and 203mm cannons to the Israeli Defense Force in the early 1970s; those weapons, capable of striking targets twenty-five miles away, also became part of the Israeli nuclear option.
American intelligence later learned that Israel had experimented by fusing together two long-range artillery barrels to produce a cannon capable of hurling a shell more than forty-five miles.
Gerald Bull, a controversial Canadian arms designer, for the supply of specially configured artillery shells whose range was extended as much as 25 percent.
At the time of his death, Bull had accomplished for Iraq's artillery what he had done for the Israelis.
There was highlevel Israeli concern over Bull's success in constructing a ""supergun"" for the Iraqis — a weapon, as the Israelis knew only too well, that provided Iraq with the ability to threaten Israel with long-range chemical, biological, or conventional high-explosive shells.
Bull's initial contracts with Israel phased out in the mid-1970s; his firm, the Space Research Corporation , later did business with South Africa and China from an eight-thousand-acre compound straddling the Vermont-Canadian border.
Bull's partners in SRC during much of the 1970s included the Arthur D Little Company, a highly respected management research firm.
Four executives from Arthur D Little were on the SRC board of directors.
This American, who was a senior official at one of the United States Army's weapons testing facilities, had visited Israel in 1973 an d h a d been told of the intended use of the long-range cannons, information he dutifully reported to United States intelligence.
There also were suggestions, added the American, that Israel had targeted Damascus, Syria's capital, with the special cannons during the Yom Kippur War.
A senior State Department intelligence official recalled widespread concern in the early 1970s over the ambitious Israeli artillery program.
As the Israeli weapons program prospered, there was a new element of caution inside the Israeli government and the military commands.
The political struggles and infighting were put aside as the new weapon became standardized for battlefield use.
The Israeli leadership had to work out procedures for the actual use of the bomb; at one early stage it was agreed that no nuclear weapon could be armed and fired without authorization from the prime minister, minister of defense, and army chief of staff.
People realized the moment that the bomb was upon us that we'd become targets, too."" radar van to South Africa without a license — although he insisted until his death that his activities on behalf of South Africa had been sanctioned by the American intelligence community.
Dayan's standing among his peers in the military and the upper echelons of the Israeli government was far lower than among the public; he was considered overrated as a military leader and suspect because of his incessant womanizing and his financial wheeling and dealing — there was categorical evidence, never officially acted upon, of his appropriation of excavated antiquities for personal use, in direct violation of Israeli law.
We wanted the Arabs to know what we had"" — without explicitly saying too much.
Dayan, with his public statements and leaks to the press, blurred that tactic.
He and Peres felt like they were almost parents"" of the nuclear complex.
While Dayan lost no authority, it was eventually made clear to him, the Israeli said, that he was no longer welcome at Dimona; he no longer had a military need to know anything about the Israeli nuclear program, which was being managed out of the prime minister's office.
Tragedy struck the program in May 1972, when Aharon Katzir, the innovative physicist in charge of Dimona, was killed in a Japanese Red Army terrorist attack at Lod Airport near Tel Aviv; there is no evidence that Katzir was specifically targeted.
His replacement, Shalheveth Freier, was a nuclear * Dayan outraged many of his countrymen after the Six-Day War, when the biblical lands of the West Bank and Gaza were once again open to Israeli academics and archaeologists, by commandeering military units to cordon off areas known to be rich in antiquities.
Dayan, with the help of the troops, would then remove artifacts — many of them invaluable — for his personal gain.
He eventually established an antique garden in the rear of his home in Zahala, an exclusive suburb of Tel Aviv.
The minister of defense's activities led to occasional critiques in the Israeli press, but no government investigation.
Americans who served as diplomats and military attaches in Israel have acknowledged the purchase of antiques from Dayan, who invariably insisted on payment in American dollars.
Freier also enjoyed high standing among international scientists and was particularly well known to American nuclear weapons designers, many of whom understood exactly what he did.
In 1973, two Israeli scientists caused a stir in the academic and intelligence world by receiving a West German patent for a laser process that, as they claimed, could cheaply produce as much as seven grams of uranium enriched to 60 percent U-235 in twenty-four hours.
The research paid off six years later, according to Mordecai Vanunu, when Dimona opened a special Machon for the production of laser-enriched uranium.
The burgeoning nuclear bastion at Dimona may have officially remained a secret to the world, but the Israeli intelligence community discovered in the early 1970s that the Soviet KGB had penetrated the top offices of the defense ministry and intelligence establishment and was relaying the essentials of major strategic decisions to Moscow and its allies in the Middle East.
One of the detachment's most senior officers was Reuven Yerdor, an accomplished linguist who had cracked a Soviet code — for which he later received Israel's highest defense medal — that had masked the communications between KGB headquarters in Moscow and its regional base in Cyprus.
The Israelis began poring over the backlog of undeciphered Soviet message traffic and discovered that many of the major secret decisions of the Israeli defense ministry, including those dealing with nuclear weapons, were being reported to Moscow within, in some cases, twelve hours.
The team was headed by Shin Beth, Israel's internal security agency, and included members from Mossad and Prime Minister Meir's office.
Yet it was unable to find out how the KGB, which continued its spying during the secret inquiry, was able to transmit its intelligence out of Israel.
The investigators were able, however, to determine that only a small number of Israeli officials had access to all the material that had been funneled to the KGB — including at least one of Golda Meir's personal aides.
A few of the suspects, including the aide, cleared themselves by passing lie detector tests; others chose not to take the test, and the matter was left unresolved, to the acute frustration of the investigators.
The Soviets understood that no amount of surveillance could prevent Israeli agents from smuggling nuclear bombs across the border in automobiles, aircraft, or commercial ships.
Israel's leadership, especially Moshe Dayan, had nothing but contempt for the Arab combat ability in the early 1970s.
In their view, Israel's main antagonist in the Middle East was and would continue to be the Soviet Union.
Dimona's arsenal, known by the Kremlin to be targeted as much as possible at * One of the most nagging questions of the inquiry had to do with the transmission of the intelligence.
At one point, a knowledgeable Israeli said, the investigators turned to the National Security Agency for help, but the NSA was unable to come up with an answer.
Years later, an Iranian general spying for the KGB in Iran was arrested and found to be carrying an American satellite communication device, which he had used for filing his intelligence reports.
Israel had a steady flow of American arms and American acquiescence in its continued control of the occupied territories, where settlements were systematically being constructed.
The death of Nasser in September 1970 had not altered the basic equation in the Middle East; his successor, Anwar Sadat, was, in the view of Prime Minister Golda Meir and her cabinet, nothing more than yet another unyielding threat to Jews.
The new Egyptian leader had been jailed by the British authorities during much of World War II because of his openly pro-German stance and his public endorsement of Hitler; the fact that his actions were more anti-British than pro-German was of little solace to the Israeli leadership.
Sadat, however, broke new ground by offering the Israelis a peace agreement shortly after taking office — the first Arab leader willing even to discuss such a commitment.
The Sadat offer was rejected out of hand by Golda Meir ; she viewed the compromise as nothing more than a starting point for extended negotiations.
That did not happen, and the bitterly disappointed Egyptian president, in trouble at home and ridiculed by many of his Middle Eastern peers, tried again in mid-1972 to get Washington's respect; he abruptly ordered Soviet troops and advisers out of Egypt to demonstrate, in part, that Egypt was not pro-Communist.
Nixon and Kissinger were astonished, as was the rest of the world, at the Soviet ouster, but they mistakenly viewed it as only reaffirmation of their policy of support for Israel.
Kissinger went further and privately reviled Sadat as a fool who, by acting unilaterally and emotionally, had thrown away an opportunity to use the Soviet explusion as a bargaining tool.
Israel, preoccupied by the Soviet threat, saw the expulsion as diminishing any real chance of war.
On paper, Israel's army and air force were more than a match for even the combined forces of the Arab Middle East.
There would be no peace, perhaps, but there was no immediate threat to continued Israeli control of the captured territories.
In August, Keating and his deputy, Nicholas A Veliotes, paid a courtesy call on Moshe Day an, whom they found to be not just confident, but swaggering.
There had been constant talk that summer of an impending Arab attack, Veliotes recalls, and the embassy had been put on a higher alert.
He described the Arab armies in the desert as 'rusty ships slowly sinking' — as if the desert were a sea.
Israel wasn't ready when Sadat attacked across the Sinai and Syria invaded the Golan Heights on Saturday, October 6, 1973 — Yom Kippur, the Day of Atonement, the holiest day of the year for a Jew.
Israeli soldiers were being killed as never before; some units simply fled in disarray from battle.
Five hundred tanks and forty-nine aircraft, including fourteen F-4 Phantoms, were lost in the first three days.
In the Sinai, Egyptian forces, equipped with missiles and electronic defenses, blasted through the Bar-Lev defense line along the eastern bank of the canal and soon had two large armies on the eastern bank.
Only a few Israeli tanks stood between the Syrians and the heavily populated Hulla Valley.
The extent of Dayan's panic on Monday, October 8, has never been fully reported, but it is widely known among Israelis.
One of Dayan's functions as defense minister was to provide the censored media and their editors-in-chief with a daily briefing on the war — in essence, to control what they wrote.
There was talk in a later meeting of appeals to world Jewry, distribution of antitank weapons to every citizen, and last-ditch resistance in the civilian population centers.
Instead, Israel called its first nuclear alert and began arming its nuclear arsenal.
And it used that alert to blackmail Washington into a major policy change.
Meir's closest aides, the so-called kitchen cabinet, assembled for what turned out to be an all-night session.
Among those in attendance, besides Dayan and Meir, were General David Elazar, the army chief of staff; Yigal Allon, the deputy prime minister; Brigadier General Yisrael Leor, the prime minister's military aide; and Israel Galili, the influential minister without portfolio and longtime confidant of Meir.
The kitchen cabinet agreed that the nuclear missile launchers at Hirbat Zachariah, as many as were ready, would be made operational, along with eight specially marked F-4S that were on twenty-four-hour alert at Tel Nof, the air force base near Rehovot.
The initial target list included the Egyptian and Syrian military headquarters near Cairo and Damascus.
No weapons were targeted on the Soviet Union, but there was little doubt that the Soviets would quickly learn what was going on.
Israeli intelligence was intercepting indecipherable signals from what were presumed to be Soviet operatives inside the country; the encoded messages were beamed throughout the early morning.
All of the key players are now dead, and none left any record of what took place.
There is widespread knowledge among the Israeli defense and political leadership of what took place at the crucial meeting, but in subsequent years those who were there — including stenographers and advisers — have never talked publicly about it.
The only significant objections came from within the nuclear community, some of whose senior officials — but not Freier — were said by an Israeli source to have accused the senior officials, in essence, of panicking.
Their view was that the situation had not yet been reached for weapons of last resort, which were then code-named, appropriately, the ""Temple"" weapons.
One former Israeli government official who was in the prime minister's office that night depicted the chain-smoking Meir, who slept very little during the early stages of the war, as confused and concerned by Dayan's report of imminent collapse.
The basic decision to arm the weapons of last resort was reached easily, he said; there were far more complicated discussions of how many warheads to arm and where they were to be targeted.
There was a separate, preliminary briefing by technical experts from Dimona, led by Shalheveth Freier, who described the weapons and targets that were available for immediate assembly.
One Israeli assumption was that the Soviets, who would learn — as they had learned other secrets inside Israel in recent years — of the nuclear arming, would then be compelled to urge their allies in Egypt and Syria to limit their offensive and not attempt to advance beyond the pre-1967 borders.
And a Soviet warning was given, according to Mohammed Heikal, editor of Al-Abram, the leading Egyptian newspaper, and eminence grise to Nasser and Sadat.
The information was given to General Mohammed Abdel Ghany el-Gamasy, the Egyptian chief of staff, by a Soviet intelligence officer who had worked closely with elGamasy when he served earlier as chief of military intelligence.
The Soviet message also reported, Heikal recalled, that Moshe Dayan had visited the front and returned to Tel Aviv ""with a scary report"" that was presented to Golda Meir's equally alarmed kitchen cabinet.
There was widespread rage inside the Israeli cabinet at the Nixon White House — aimed especially at Henry Kissinger — over what was correctly perceived in Israel as an American strategy of delaying the resupply in an attempt to let the Arabs win some territory, and some self-respect, and thus set up the possibility of serious land-for-peace bargaining.
Kissinger, just sworn in as secretary of state, would direct the negotiations.
The same question was asked again, in a second telephone call, at 3:00m.
Kissinger, accompanied by Peter W Rodman, his longtime assistant, and Dinitz, accompanied by General Mordecai Gur, the Israeli military attache, met at 8:20m. in the Map Room of the White House, where Kissinger was told of the desperate situation of the Israeli military and the need for more tanks and aircraft.
At one point during the Map Room meeting, Kissinger wrote, Dinitz insisted that he and Kissinger needed to be alone.
Rodman and Gur, who both could be trusted with the most sensitive information, were dismissed.
It was a request that Kissinger could, and did, as he wrote, reject ""out of hand and without checking with Nixon.
A more complete account of the Dinitz message would undoubtedly show that it was closer to blackmail, as Kissinger knew, and it worked.
Word of the Israeli nuclear arming also came from the Soviets, according to a former IsraSeli intelligence official.
The official said that Detachment 8200, the Israeli communications intelligence agency that had picked up the Soviet warning to Cairo — as acknowledged by Heikal — also intercepted on the morning of October 9 a Soviet warning to Washington about the Israeli arming of nuclear weapons.
Kissinger has never talked publicly about the Israeli nuclear arming, and his closest advisers at the time, including Rodman and William G Hyland, then handling Soviet affairs for the National Security Council, said they knew of no such information.
The best source for what happened, nonetheless, is Kissinger himself, who privately acknowledged that there had been an Israeli nuclear threat both to Anwar Sadat and to Hermann F Eilts, the American ambassador to Egypt who worked closely with Kissinger during the intense Middle East shuttle diplomacy of the mid-1970s.
Eilts had been handpicked in October 1973 by Kissinger for the assignment to Cairo, and he arrived there at the end of the Yom Kippur War.
His first detailed conversation with Kissinger about his new assignment couldn't have been more dramatic.
It took took place, at Kissinger's request, at a hastily arranged breakfast in early November in Islamabad, Pakistan, where Kissinger had stopped overnight en route to a muchdelayed visit to China.
Kissinger was far less casual at the time he learned of Israel's intention.
He told none of his colleagues in the cabinet about the nuclear threat, of course, but changed his mind overnight about the need to get military arms — in huge quantities — to Israel.
He got a little hysterical"" in urging an immediate and massive resupply.
Kissinger's actions led some senior officials to conclude that Israeli use of a nuclear weapon was not out of the question.
Kissinger referred to the Israeli nuclear threat in his first extended private meeting in Cairo on November 7, 1973, with Egyptian President Anwar Sadat; it was a precursor of Kissinger's famed Middle East shuttle diplomacy that would begin the next year.
Israel had at least three warheads and was preparing to use them, Sadat told Heikal.
Sometime in this period, the American intelligence community got what apparently was its first look, via the KH-11, at the completed and operational missile launchers hidden in the side of a hill at Hirbat Zachariah.
The launchers were left in the open, perhaps deliberately, making it much easier for American photo interpreters to spot them.
One United States official also recalled seeing hollowedout nuclear storage bunkers and huge blast doors, with railroad tracks leading to a nearby mobile launching site.
By mid-October, the Israeli military had successfully counterattacked in the Golan Heights and the Sinai, ending any immediate threat — and the necessity for the nuclear alert.
With Egypt suddenly on the defensive, Soviet Premier Alexei N Kosygin flew to Cairo on October 16 and persuaded Sadat to call for a cease-fire.
Kissinger flew to Moscow on October 20 and to Tel Aviv two days later, where he received Israeli acquiesence for a cease-fire in place.
In the meantime, the Egyptian Third Army was in danger of being surrounded and left essentially to the mercy of the Israeli Defense Force.
The Israelis continued their offensive in Egyptian territory, moving north and west to a point within sixty miles of Cairo.
The implication seemed to be that Brezhnev would send some of his troops as a blocking force behind the front lines in Egypt to prevent the Israelis from going on to Cairo.
The President earlier had been rocked by the indictment on corruption charges and subsequent resignation of Vice President Spiro T Agnew.
Another complication was the publicly announced Arab boycott of oil sales to the United States and the Arab decision to increase crude oil prices dramatically.
There is no evidence that the Soviets did, in fact, contemplate any significant deployment of their airborne troops, despite their high alert status.
Most scholars now agree that Brezhnev's warning to the White House was aimed at forcing Washington to urge the Israelis to adhere to the cease-fire.
The aircraft carrier John R Kennedy also was dispatched to the Mediterranean, and at least fifty B-52S were redeployed from Guam to the United States.
The nation, still reeling from the continuing Watergate revelations, was stunned — and distressed — by the White House's unilateral action; there was widespread belief that the alert had been ordered primarily for domestic political purposes and not because the Soviets were ready to move into the Middle East.
This time, the crisis resolved itself quickly, as Golda Meir ordered her army to stop all offensive action against Egypt, permitting a United Nations peacekeeping force to impose the cease-fire.
At this point, however, a small undercover United States Navy intelligence unit, known as Task Force 157, operating in the waters of the Bosporus off Turkey, relayed data to Washington suggesting that one of the Soviet ships leaving the Black Sea en route to the Mediterranean was carrying radioactive material.
The report from the Navy swept through the American intelligence community and the White House.
Over the next few days, as the Soviets and many in Congress and the American media accused Nixon and Kissinger of overreacting, * Many of Kissinger's senior aides and others in the government, including William Colby, defended the alert.
Colby recalled that there had been a steady stream of intelligence reports suggesting that the Soviet Union was preparing some of its most highly trained paratroop units and its transport fleet for deployment to the Middle East.
On the night of the alert, he said, the American intelligence community ""lost the transport fleet.
The NSC aide added that neither he nor Kissinger anticipated that word of the heightened alert would become known so quickly.
Another equally senior American official, who had access to all of the available intelligence, viewed the actions of both Washington and Moscow simply as ""posturing.
It was presumed, the authors wrote, that several Soviet nuclear warheads had been provided to Egypt for deployment in Scud missiles.
The only flaw in the Kissinger account, as told to the Kalbs, is that it was not true.
One high-ranking American officer, who was in charge of a major intelligence agency at the time, said that reconnaissance had established that the Soviets had loaded nuclear warheads on a cargo ship in a Black Sea port — but never shipped them.
Kissinger also made no mention of the alleged Soviet warhead shipment in the second volume of his memoirs, nor has he — or any American official — revealed that Israel issued two nuclear alerts during the crisis.
He did emerge, however, from the October crisis with renewed official concern about Dimona.
Some weeks afterward, Kissinger asked the CIA for a formal National Intelligence Estimate on the Israeli nuclear program; the paper, which concluded that Israel had at least ten nuclear warheads, took Carl Duckett's Office of Science and Technology months to prepare and then was submitted only to the White House.
The unit, he explained, was manned by specially recruited Turkish citizens who were not competent to make on-the-spot assessments, but instead relayed their tapes and other data by commercial aircraft to Washington for analysis.
Mohammed Heikal, for example, insisted that the Soviet reports about the Israeli nuclear arming — while taken very seriously — had no impact on the overall Egyptian military operation.
Egypt's military goals, he said, had been sharply limited from the outset.
There is clear evidence that Syria also set very limited goals for its military, for its army came to a literal stop — with no opposition in front of it — more than a day before Golda Meir's kitchen cabinet met in Tel Aviv to authorize the nuclear arming.
The best guess at this point is that Syrian and Egyptian planners certainly were aware that any deep penetration inside the pre-1967 borders would have occasioned a massive, and perhaps nuclear, counterattack — but the fact that no such advance was planned or sought had much more to do with the myth of Israeli military invincibility than with a specific concern about the weapons at Dimona.
The results of the Mossad inquiry could not be learned, but Golda Meir's concern about America's ability to penetrate Israel seemed to diminish as Kissinger's shuttle diplomacy got under way.
There was one tantalizing public reference, however, published with little fanfare seven years later, suggesting that the United States had known independently of the nuclear alert as it took place.
The secret documents claim that Israel came within hours of running out of essential arms.
American authorities feared the Israelis might resort to nuclear weapons to assure their survival.
Talbott understood the significance of the information and quickly filed a top-secret one-page memorandum for General Creighton W Abrams, the Army chief of staff.
Carl Duckett, who at the time had direct responsibility for the CIA's intelligence on the Israeli nuclear arsenal, first learned of the Talbott message from the author; he also said he had never been informed of any intelligence suggesting that Israel had gone on two nuclear alerts during the Yom Kippur War.
The CIA official was an expert in communications intelligence and spent three years in Israel in the early 1970s as an undercover liaison officer with Detachment 8200; one of his assignments was to help the Israelis monitor the sophisticated Soviet radar and communications gear that had been supplied to the Egyptians during the War of Attrition.
Israel also was operating, with the aid of equipment leased from the National Security Agency, at least three supersecret listening posts capable of * Talbott was accompanied during the meeting with Elazar by Colonel Bruce Williams, the United States Army attache in Israel.
After the war, the official prepared a highly classified report on some of the Israeli deception techniques that had been successfully used for, among other things, relaying bogus orders to Egyptian and Syrian forces.
I did not mention that the conversations [with his Israeli counterparts] got to nuclear threats.
I knew that the weapons available were something to be reckoned with, and they told me that this had been communicated to the Egyptians.
Angleton had seen his report on Israeli deception techniques and wanted a special debriefing.
It was clear that the room was wired so that Angleton could monitor the conversation.
The aide would occasionally leave the room to check a fact or line of query with Angleton, who never made an appearance, and whose presence was limited to an occasional scraping of his chair.
Within fifteen minutes, according to former Israeli intelligence officers, Soviet helicopters had arrived and began dismantling the equipment.
In June 1974, however, Anwar Sadat announced that his country had obtained intelligence indicating that Israel had developed tactical nuclear weapons.
The squabble between the two countries was treated perfunctorily by the press and provoked no concern from President Gerald R Ford or his senior aides.
A National Security Council official did broach the issue, very gently, with an Israeli diplomat over lunch more than a year later.
On March 11, 1976, Duckett was one of a group of CIA officials who participated in an informal seminar before a group of local members of the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics.
Such sessions, held at an auditorium near the CIA's main headquarters building at McLean, Virginia, were standard Washington fare; any remarks were understood to be limited to unclassified materials.
Within days, an account of his remarks was published in the Washington Post, forcing George Bush, the newly installed CIA director, to issue a public statement assuming ""full responsibility"" for the disclosure of the secret information.
The real issue, however, he insisted, was not his drinking but Bush's unwillingness to promote him to deputy CIA director.
Duckett's 1974 estimate giving Israel ten to twenty nuclear weapons would remain the official American intelligence estimate until the early 1980s — years in which Israel was exponentially increasing its nuclear warhead stockpile.
Duckett acknowledged that there was no specific intelligence behind the estimate.
The alleged smuggled uranium also was a major factor in Duckett's second estimate, in 1974, that credited Israel with at least ten bombs; it was based on the amount of uranium he believed Shapiro had diverted plus a guess that the technicians at Dimona could have chemically separated enough plutonium from the reactor to have produced six weapons or more since 1970.
Just how Israel would accomplish that feat without a chemical reprocessing plant — the CIA still had no proof that such a plant existed in Israel — was not clear, but what was clear was Shapiro's culpability.
To Duckett and his colleagues, especially Richard Helms, the case against Shapiro was unassailable.
In the CIA's view, Shapiro was more than just a Jew who supported Israel; he was a Jew in the nuclear-fuel-processing business who traveled regularly to Israel and was a partner with the Israeli government in some business ventures.
As his career progressed, Shapiro — who underwent rigorous national security checks while at Westinghouse — made no secret of his strong commitment to Israel; some of his family had been victims of the Nazis, and he believed in the need for an independent Jewish state.
He became an active member of the Zionist Organization of America and also generously supported the American Technion Society, which raises funds and provides equipment to the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa, Israel's most advanced school of science and engineering.
In 1957, he organized a publicly owned nuclear fuel processing firm, with at least twenty-five stockholders, in an abandoned World War II steel plant in Apollo, Pennsylvania, twenty-five miles northeast of Pittsburgh.
Shapiro was aggressive in the pursuit of work for his young company, and by the early 1960s NUMEC was providing nuclear services for at least nine foreign countries.
There was a steady stream of foreign visitors to the factory, many at the instigation of the Department of Commerce and the State Department, which were eager to show off the government's Atoms for Peace effort.
There were at least three foreign employees at NUMEC, including an Israeli metallurgist assigned to unclassified breeder reactor fuel research.
There also was constant back-and-forth in those years between AEC security officials and NUMEC over the handling of classified materials, and the company was required to improve its procedures.
Shapiro would be hounded by those suspicions for the next twenty-five years — although the most significant evidence against him seemed to be his Jewishness and the fact that one of the major investors in NUMEC shared his support for Israel.
A number of experienced investigators from the government and the Congress, as well as dozens of journalists, assumed that Shapiro's emotional tie to Israel was enough of a motive for him to commit nuclear espionage, a crime punishable by death under the Atomic Energy Act.
Despite more than ten years of intensive investigation involving active FBI surveillance, however, no significant evidence proving that Shapiro had diverted any uranium from his plant was ever found.
Nonetheless, he remained guilty in the minds of many in the government and the press; reporters invariably included an account of Shapiro's ties to Israel and the alleged NUMEC diversion in any story about the development of nuclear arms in Israel.
Some of the newspaper and book accounts did note that the charges against Shapiro were never proved; many others simply declared that it was the Shapiro uranium that gave Israel the nuclear bomb.
There is little solace, too, for the American intelligence community in Shapiro's noninvolvement with nuclear diversion, for it failed to learn of Shapiro's close ties to Ernst David Bergmann and Binyamin Blumberg and the sensitive — and legitimate — mission he did conduct for his beloved Israel.
The scrap was chemically treated — sometimes two or three times — in an attempt to isolate the salvageable uranium.
It was the kind of work NUMEC's larger and more solidly financed competitors did not want.
Other NUMEC contracts involved cleaner work, such the conversion of highly enriched uranium from gaseous uranium hexafluoride — the form in which it was shipped from the government's huge uranium diffusion plants — into uranium oxide powder capable of being fabricated into nuclear fuel for Navy reactors.
That process, too, created waste — as much as 10 to 15 percent of the uranium eventually ended up as scrap and needed to be recovered.
Since working with weapons-grade material was exceedingly dangerous, NUMEC had to divide the uranium being processed into small lots — creating more opportunity for waste — to guard against the horrible possibility of setting off a chain reaction.
Under the stringent AEC rules governing the reprocessing of weapons-grade uranium and plutonium, Shapiro's firm was responsible and had to pay enormous penalties for any enriched materials that could not be accounted for — as much as $10 a gram; each missing pound thus meant a loss of more than $4,500.
The term MUF, for ""material unaccounted for,"" became a common one in the nuclear processing industry.
Making the contractors pay for missing materials also was the backbone of the AEC's safeguards program; the assumption was that no reprocessing firm would divert or steal uranium if it resulted in a stiff fine.
The AEC eventually worked out complicated rules for accounting for MUF that enabled private firms such as NUMEC to estimate in their regular reports how much missing but accountable uranium was believed to be in a plant's air filtration system or buried in its waste pits.
NUMEC would routinely report seemingly huge losses of enriched materials on any given contract — thirty or forty pounds was not unusual — and then estimate that 80 percent or more of the lost materials would be recovered upon cleanup.
The AEC accepted such estimates as realistic, and deferred the assessments of any penalties.
The enriched materials handled by the workers at NUMEC were not ""hot,"" as commonly understood, for they had not yet been irradiated in a reactor and thus did not emit penetrating and lethal radiation.
The danger facing the NUMEC employees came from breathing in or otherwise ingesting uranium, which, like all heavy metals, accumulates in bones, where it eventually impacts on bone marrow, causing leukemia.
Enriched uranium, if breathed into the lungs, also could trigger lung cancer, and the NUMEC employees were constantly urged to wear face masks, although many refused to do so in the summer.
Zalman Shapiro's career-destroying problems began in 1962, when he was the low bidder for two complicated Westinghouse contracts, involving the processing of more than 2,500 pounds of enriched uranium.
NUMEC was assured by Westinghouse that 60 percent or more of each hundred kilograms of uranium could successfully be processed — meaning that as much as 40 percent of the uranium would be scrap, to be separately recovered.
In fact, NUMEC found that the process was far more difficult than Westinghouse had claimed for one of the contracts, and resulted in only a 35 percent yield of acceptable product.
Nearly two thirds of the Westinghouse-supplied uranium ended up as scrap, much of it — so Shapiro and his associates thought — eventually buried in barrels, along with contaminated rags and other cleaning equipment, in two huge waste pits on the NUMEC grounds.
The pits included contaminated waste not only from the Westinghouse contract but from other processing jobs for private companies; Shapiro had not isolated the scrap from each of his contracts, as the AEC demanded.
AEC investigators subsequently became convinced that Shapiro had deliberately commingled the scrap from different contracts as a money-saving bookkeeping measure.
The AEC tried to resolve the complicated mess in a series of extensive negotiations in 1964 and 1965, with Shapiro constantly citing NUMEC's precarious financial condition to justify his actions.
Portions of the 1963 waste pit eventually were dug up, and AEC inspectors found that the amount of enriched uranium buried there was not nearly enough to match the huge losses.
The inspectors concluded that there was a MUF of 93. kilograms of enriched uranium; they also told headquarters that because of NUMEC's ""inadequate and incomplete accounting records,"" a diversion could not be ruled out, although there was ""no evidence"" that a diversion had taken place.
The issue was aired at a special meeting in February 1966 of the AEC commissioners and senior staff, and, according to a declassified transcript of that meeting, the commissioners agreed that NUMEC's employees be interviewed to find out what had happened.
It was further agreed that a trip would have to be taken to Capitol Hill to inform the Joint Atomic Energy Committee of the loss.
The American nuclear community already had been rocked in October 1964 upon learning that China's first nuclear bomb had been triggered by uranium, and not plutonium, as the CIA and other intelligence agencies had widely anticipated.
A special study into AEC safeguards was commissioned, and it questioned the commission's heavy reliance on financial penalties as a sufficient bar against nuclear diversion.
The CIA, nonetheless, found Shapiro's long-standing ties to Israel to be of continuing interest.
Shapiro also was a partner with the Israeli government in a business involving the pasteurization of food and the sterilization of medical supplies by irradiation; packages to and from NUMEC were being shipped out of and into Israel.
By late 1966, although reports of Israel's progress in nuclear weaponry began to flow from the American embassy in Tel Aviv, John Hadden, the CIA station chief, was still unable to find proof that Israel had a chemical reprocessing plant at Dimona.
And without such a plant, Israel would have needed an independent source of enriched uranium or plutonium to manufacture the bombs that, so Hadden's informants told him, existed.
Duckett and Helms shared Hadden's view that Shapiro had to have been the source for the Israeli progress in nuclear weaponry; the two men would spend the next few years pushing their suspicions on anybody — including Presidents Johnson and Nixon — who would listen.
They were mesmerized by Shapiro's links to Israel and the fact that one of the initial stockholders in NUMEC, David Lowenthal, had helped bring illegal immigrants into Israel before 1948.
Duckett even came to believe, as he later told congressional investigators, that NUMEC had been set up in 1957 by Shapiro as part of a longrange Israeli intelligence scheme to divert uranium.
Murphy also was appalled by what he considered to be a lack of security at NUMEC and told a congressional investigator of seeing uranium pellets scattered ""all over the benches"" during a visit to the Apollo plant.
The possibility of a diversion to Israel seemed solid, and Shapiro was put under FBI surveillance in the late 1960s.
One of Lovett's first acts was to insist that the concrete floor of the old plant be protected with stainless steel; concrete, Lovett knew, absorbed far more uranium than suspected.
Shapiro and other company officials ""were deluding themselves,"" Lovett recalled.
But most of the uranium was not in the plant's waste pits; it was embedded in the concrete floor, clinging to ventilation ducts, flushed out with other plant wastes into the local waterways, and scattered in the air.
The continuing controversy over the alleged diversion became widely known inside the tight-knit nuclear community, and Shapiro suffered.
In 1967, Shapiro and his partners were forced to merge their interest in NUMEC into the Atlantic Richfield Company ; Shapiro, with his special Qjrlearance (for atomic energy matters) still intact, continued to run the plant.
Bergmann was especially interested in a nuclear-powered water desalinization plant, Shapiro said.
The system, then Israel's largest development project, linked local and regional water conduits to form an integrated network that sought to capture all of the nation's rainfall and channel it into reservoirs.
The National Water Carrier was not completed, however, without a series of disputes with Syria, especially over Israel's goal of bringing water south from Lake Kinneret in Galilee.
There were huge stretches in northern Israel where water being moved to the south was in the open, protected only by fencing; the waterway was an obvious target for terrorists.
El Fatah, the Arab guerrilla group (and later an important member of the Palestine Liberation Organization), boasted that it would poison the water.
At one point, Israeli security officials suspected that El Fatah had attempted to cut the fence protecting the water works in what was feared to be an effort to plant a bomb.
It was at this point that Zalman Shapiro was asked by Israel to devise a rapid and accurate method of determining whether water had been contaminated with toxic materials.
Shapiro acknowledged, reluctantly, that he also advised on that issue, eventually recommending that a radioactive tracer be added to the water in Lake Kinneret to monitor the flow.
In the late 1960s, Shapiro convened a series of meetings — some in his home — of American scientists and Israelis to dis250 THE SAMSON OPTION cuss, he said, the issue of how to protect the National Water Carrier from potential terrorists.
At the time, NUMEC was under contract to provide to Israel specialized small power sources, whose function Shapiro refused to spell out, other than to acknowledge that they were linked to the security of the waterways.
All of the items shipped were approved by the Commerce Department for export, he said.
Shapiro would not say whether he knew — as did many American scientists — of the work being done at Dimona.
But he denied revealing any American secrets or diverting any materials.
Duckett and Helms remained convinced that Shapiro was guilty of espionage.
Duckett's conversation with Edward Teller and his early-1968 estimate of Israeli nuclear capacity led Helms to urge the FBI to renew its investigation into Shapiro's dealings with Israel.
The FBI's J Edgar Hoover was then in the midst of a bitter dispute with James Angleton's counterintelligence shop over the CIA's handling of defectors, as well as the continuing — and illegal — CIA spying inside the United States under a presidential mandate to determine whether the anti-Vietnam War movement was being directed by Moscow.
Hoover chose to spar with Helms over the Shapiro issue for the next year, according to a former congressional investigator who has reviewed the Senate and House intelligence committees' files on Shapiro.
It seemed as if the future of nuclear power now depended on public acceptance of fast breeder reactors capable of generating more plutonium fuel than they consumed.
The advocates of nuclear power, who included many in the NRC, shuddered at the prospect of more adverse publicity about nuclear reactor safety and possible widespread contamination.
Antinuclear groups were being organized around the world and had begun large, and sometimes violent, demonstrations in an effort to halt nuclear power.
A high-level briefing by Carl Duckett was arranged to discuss the possibility of a diversion.
He didn't say anything that would convince you that was the case — but the issue from our point, our little world, is that he said what he did.
Gilinsky's contention was that the NRC had no obligation to determine whether Duckett' s assertions were correct, but it agreed on the basis of what Duckett said to tighten up procedures for dealing with nuclear materials.
Most of those at the Duckett briefing ""were not involved in foreign affairs,"" Gilinsky noted.
Duckett's briefing to the NRC and his subsequent informal talk at the CIA before the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics Association, while ruinous to his career, did provoke another brief flurry of concern over NUMEC at the Ford White House — yet another investigation of Shapiro was initiated.
There was independent evidence, moreover, demonstrating that Shapiro's problems in operating NUMEC were not as exceptional as the AEC had publicly indicated in the mid-1960s.
Further study showed that more than no pounds could be accounted for by what the NRC study called previously ""unidentified and undocumented loss mechanisms"" — such as the contamination of workers' clothing, losses from scrubber systems, material embedded in the flooring, and residual deposits in the processing equipment.
By the end of the year the NUMEC case was being actively pursued by the House Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, one of the most competent and aggressive investigative units in the Congress, as well as the House Subcommittee on Energy and the Environment.
Carl Duckett and John Hadden, both retired from the CIA, cooperated fully with the subcommittees; at one point, Duckett telephoned an investigator in the middle of the night and insisted that he go to a pay telephone at a gas station to return the call.
Hadden, meanwhile, was repeatedly suggesting that the Israeli government had to have a u mole"" — a clandestine operative — inside the Atomic Energy Commission who had protected Shapiro in the early investigations of a possible diversion.
The subcommittee investigators seemed to take every one of Duckett' s and Kadden's claims at face value.
But it is through those claims that outsiders can begin to understand how the CIA and the two congressional subcommittees weighed evidence and what kind of internal checks and balances were imposed on their investigations.
In 1990, largely on the strength of her protests, she was elected local councilwoman.
Virostek, then thirty-five years old, lives with her husband and two sons five hundred feet from the Babcock & Wilcox plant.
She became involved after company officials announced in the early 1980s that they were beginning decontamination operations.
She then began a relentless campaign, through Freedom of Information inquiries, to force information out into the open.
Virostek said, that her community was the only one in the immediate area to have a statistically significant excess in the number of cancer deaths.
I believe that all of my senior analysts who worked on the problem agreed with me fully,"" Duckett said.
The subcommittee investigators had no way of knowing, of course, how little Duckett and his ""senior analysts"" had been able to learn about the Israeli nuclear arsenal.
The subcommittees also did not know that Duckett's initial estimate of Israeli nuclear capability was primarily based on an assertion to that effect by Edward Teller, and not on any specific intelligence about the capacity of the Israeli reactor or the established existence of a chemical reprocessing plant at Dimona.
There also was no specific evidence linking Shapiro to the delivery of enriched uranium to Israel.
Nor did the subcommittees realize that Duckett's 1974 CIA estimate was not without its critics at the time.
Intelligence officials at the Atomic Energy Commission insisted that a footnote be added to the estimate pointing out that ""any information"" about a diversion of uranium to Israel was unknown to the commission.
For example, Myers, a specialist on energy issues for the House Subcommittee on Energy, told the author at the beginning of his research into Zalman Shapiro that there ""are reasons to believe that NUMEC had been set up solely for the diversion.
There was a further allegation that CIA operatives in Israel had found ""traces of enriched uranium"" near Dimona that was similar to the enriched products that had been delivered for processing to Shapiro's plant.
There also was a highly suspicious meeting at the airport in Pittsburgh between Shapiro and Jeruham Kafkafi, an Israeli scientific attache, who flew, so the FBI reported, from Washington to Pittsburgh for the meeting and returned immediately to Washington.
Myers continued to believe well into the early 1990s that his statements were correct.
But the fact is that David Lowenthal was one of a number of investors in NUMEC, some of whom were not Jewish.
There was no special secure telephone or teletype at NUMEC, a fact acknowledged by Duckett and others who have investigated the alleged diversion.
Richard Helms may indeed have been convinced that Shapiro was the head of an Israeli spy ring, but there is no known factual basis for that assertion.
Duckett and other government investigators into NUMEC acknowledged that there was no meaningful correlation between the uranium processed in the NUMEC plant and the traces of enriched uranium picked up by American agents outside Dimona.
And, finally, Shapiro told the congressional investigators — who obviously did not believe him — that his airport meeting with Kafkafi was arranged at his request because he had not been paid for the antiterrorist equipment his company had shipped to Israel; NUMEC was owed $32,000 — a fact he found ""embarrassing"" — but the company needed the money.
Duckett, in a 1991 interview, essentially recanted many of his previous assertions.
It was a matter of trying to be sure when you had information that you passed it along.
Peter Stockton also acknowledged in a 1991 interview that he'd had continuing doubts about the credibility of Hadden.
He had been troubled, he said, when Hadden told one story to subcommittee investigators and legislators, and then told a different version of the same event to officials of the Government Accounting Office, which did a separate investigation of the alleged NUMEC diversion.
Yet Stockton continued to meet with reporters about NUMEC and continued to spread the same misinformation, and many journalists remain convinced that Shapiro diverted uranium for the Israeli bomb.
In their book Dangerous Liaison, published in 1991, Andrew and Leslie Cockburn, who interviewed Stockton in 1989, depicted Shapiro's role in the Israeli acquisition of nuclear weapons as being so ""delicate"" that five American Presidents covered it up.
Babcock & Wilcox shut down Zalman Shapiro's Apollo plant in 1978, when the nuclear fuels business suffered a downturn, largely because of reduced business from the Navy.
Shapiro's insistence that the missing uranium had seeped into the ground or been flung into the air eventually spawned a controversy over nuclear pollution; Babcock & Wilcox, under public pressure, agreed to keep the Apollo plant open in an attempt to determine how much contamination existed.
In 1989 the firm began to decontaminate the plant, an expensive process that involved the virtual dismantling of some areas.
Babcock & Wilcox told the community that it would explore ways to return the site to productive use — and promised that future operations would involve no radioactive materials.
Company officials acknowledged that many sections of the plant, including its concrete floor, were so contaminated that they had to be dismantled, piece by piece, and buried at appropriate sites — after the valuable uranium was removed.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission officials subsequently admitted that more than one hundred kilograms of enriched uranium — the amount allegedly diverted to Israel by Zalman Shapiro — was recovered from the decommissioned plant by 1982, with still more being recovered each year.
It also wasn't clear whether the $60 million allotted for the cleanup by the government and Babcock & Wilcox would be enough to do the job.
It brought to power a government that was even more committed than Labor to the Samson Option and the necessity of an Israeli nuclear arsenal.
Begin and his political followers represented a populist-nationalist view of a greater Israel with a right to permanent control of the West Bank; in their view, the mainstream Zionists, represented by men such as David Ben-Gurion, had fought three major wars with no grand strategy.
Israel's military aims were seen as having been dictated by the other side, whose leaders had chosen when and on which front war would begin.
Begin and his coalition were determined — as they would demonstrate with disastrous effect in the 1982 Lebanon War — to use Israeli might to redraw the political map of the Middle East.
Nuclear weapons appealed to another side of Begin's character — his fascination with dramatic military moves, as exemplified by his insistence on the bombing of Iraq's Osirak and his involvement, as a leader of Irgun, the underground Jewish terrorist organization, in the July 1946 bombing of the King David Hotel in Jerusalem.
The explosion killed eighty-two people, including forty Arabs and seventeen Jews, and led to international condemnation.
The British responded a week later by hanging three suspected Irgun terrorists, and Begin, in turn, ordered the execution of two British sergeants held captive by Begin's terrorist organization; their bodies were booby-trapped and left hanging upside down, to the long-lasting horror of many Jews.
He and his family had fled to eastern Poland after the 1939 German blitzkrieg and, like many Zionists, were arrested by Soviet troops and expelled to a Siberian gulag, only to be released into a hastily assembled Polish contingent of the Red Army after the 1941 Nazi invasion of Russia.
By all accounts, Begin had never visited Dimona before becoming prime minister, nor was he especially well informed about it.
His initial briefings on sensitive national security matters were provided by the outgoing prime minister, Yitzhak Rabin.
Ari Ben-Menashe, a former Israeli signals intelligence expert then serving as a civilian official in the ministry of defense, recalled that Begin strongly endorsed Dimona's plans for the nuclear targeting of the Soviet Union.
But Israeli military attaches and diplomats were running into a brick wall in Washington, as the Carter * Ben-Menashe served more than ten years in the External Relations Department of the Israeli Defense Force, one of the most sensitive offices in Israel's intelligence community.
He left the ministry in 1987, he said, to work directly for Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir as an adviser on intelligence affairs.
During preliminary proceedings and the trial, the Israeli government provided a series of conflicting statements about Ben-Menashe, who claimed that the illegal sale had been sanctioned by his government and the United States.
Israel initially told the court that it had no knowledge of BenMenashe.
It later accused Ben-Menashe of forging the four letters of reference that he had obtained upon leaving his job in External Relations.
After acknowledging that the letters were genuine, it then depicted Ben-Menashe as nothing more than a low-level translator for the Israeli intelligence community.
Ben-Menashe, in turn, accused his government of betrayal after Israel insisted to the court that he had been moonlighting as an arms salesman, and he began to talk publicly about what he alleged was his involvement in hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of authorized arms sales to Iran in the early 1980s that had been secretly endorsed by the Reagan administration.
He also accused Robert M Gates, a senior CIA official under Reagan, of direct involvement, despite Israeli protests, in the sale of arms, including chemical weapons, to Iraq from 1986 to 1989.
Ben-Menashe's allegations, which have been strongly denied in Washington and Jerusalem, were still under congressional review as of summer 1991.
The author was initially contacted by Ben-Menashe in mid-1990 and began interviewing him in Washington and elsewhere in early 1991 about the Israeli nuclear arsenal and his activities inside the Israeli signals intelligence establishment.
Ben-Menashe agreed — as no other Israeli would — to be directly quoted by the author on nuclear issues and other matters.
They were trying to get into overhead and they also wanted to know what our attaches were reporting and what our requirements were.
Begin's enthusiastic support for the targeting of the Soviet Union was not known to the American intelligence community, still obsessed with its efforts to prove that Zalman Shapiro had diverted uranium to Israel.
There was no doubt inside the intelligence community that Israel had the bomb, and yet no one in Washington — not even the new administration of Jimmy Carter, the first to be seriously committed to nuclear nonproliferation — saw any reason to raise the issue.
The Israeli government, worried about a backlash from its American supporters, continued to publicly deny the existence of any nuclear weapons — even when faced with evidence to the contrary.
Toon reported that he dutifully explained to Allon that Duckett's remarks were supposed to have been off-the-record.
They asked permission to inspect Dimona and were flatly told that no outsider had visited the reactor since the American inspections had ended in 1969, and none was welcome.
The senators were especially sensitive to the issue, for Congress had just approved an amendment to the Arms Export Control Act making it illegal to provide United States foreign aid funds to those nations that sold or received nuclear reprocessing or enrichment materials, equipment, or technology.
The amendment, as written, had no impact on those nations, such as Israel, which had been involved in the transfer or sale of nuclear materials prior to the bill's enactment.
The legislation, sponsored by Senator Stuart Symington, also provided for the President to override the law if he determined that the termination of such aid would be damaging to American national security.
Congress and the White House were, in essence, acceding to what had become the arms control community's rationalization * Mordecai Vanunu, in one of his many interviews with the London Sunday Times y told of finding a newspaper clip about the rebuff of the senators derisively taped to a wall in Machon 2, the chemical separation plant at Dimona, when he began working there in August 1977.
Israel was no longer a proliferation problem — it had already proliferated.
Although he was personally convinced Israel had developed nuclear arms, the official said that he repeatedly testified that he had ""no evidence"" of such weapons existing in Israel.
If there were any significant items of information that needed to be passed along, the official added, ""you told them over coffee.
America's tolerance for a nuclear-armed Israel may not have troubled the Congress or the media, but it rankled Pakistan's President Mohammad Zia ul-Haq.
The Israeli nuclear program ""wasn't anything people wanted to talk about or discuss,"" Rathjens said.
Cooperation between Israel and South Africa on nuclear issues began in earnest after the 1967 Six-Day War when Israel, rebuffed by Charles de Gaulle, was forced to look elsewhere for support.
Pierre Pean, in Les deux bombes, told of the surprising encounter in Johannesburg in 1967 between a French nuclear scientist who had been at Dimona and a group of Israeli nuclear scientists who had worked ten years earlier with the French at Saclay and Marcoule.
Israel was trading its expertise in nuclear physics for the uranium ore and other strategic minerals that existed in abundance in South Africa.
In 1968, Ernst David Bergmann, out of office in Israel but still influential on nuclear issues, traveled to South Africa, where he spoke publicly on the ""move toward international collaboration"" on nuclear issues.
Bergmann's talk of isolation seemed prophetic as all but three black African states broke diplomatic relations with Israel in the wake of the 1973 Yom Kippur War and Israel's continued insistence on holding on to the occupied territories.
Many of Israel's former allies in Africa increasingly began to support Palestinian aspirations.
Israel and South Africa, two ""pariah"" states, had turned to each other with renewed trading and arms sales after the war; within three years, joint trade grew from $30 million to $100 million a year.
Dayan left the Israeli cabinet a few months later, when Yitzhak Rabin became prime minister, but continuity on key Israeli-South African defense and nuclear issues was assured with Rabin's appointment of Shimon Peres to the defense portfolio.
Two years later, Prime Minister John Vorster, who had sided with Germany during World War II, visited Israel — the first official state visit by a South African prime minister in Israel's history.
His agenda included nuclear testing — the issue initially raised by Moshe Dayan — and he won a commitment in principle from John Vorster, according to Ben-Menashe, for a series of joint Israeli-South African tests in South Africa.
Vorster's highly publicized visit to Israel resulted in a renewal of full diplomatic relations, as well as secret arms transfer agreements that would enable the two countries, working together in defiance of international opinion and United Nations sanctions, to emerge by the early 1980s as economies that were highly dependent on foreign arms sales.
Israeli sources put the number of secret military and nuclear understandings between Israel and South Africa at u six or seven"" by the end of the Vorster visit.
The nuclear intelligence experts at Los Alamos and Livermore had been trying to monitor the shipment of uranium ore from South Africa to Israel since the early 1960s, but simply failed to see, or failed to understand, the full scope of South Africa's continuing efforts in nuclear technology.
In 1970, Prime Minister John Vorster informed Parliament that the nation's nuclear scientists had developed a unique uranium enrichment process involving jetnozzle enrichment and a sophisticated cascade technique.
Within a few years, South Africa began construction of a pilot plant for the production of enriched uranium, not subject to IAEA safeguards, at a plant called Valindaba near Pretoria.
By the mid-1970s, one American official recalled, ""he South Africans and Israel were suddenly doing things in such a different way that it took us by surprise.
The official's point was that the nuclear production process in the United States was so huge and unwieldy that innovations were difficult to achieve; any new process would be tested for years in pilot production before being adopted in the government's main weapons assembly line near Amarillo, Texas, which is capable of producing five thousand or more warheads a year.
And, like Israel, South Africa would need a weapon — a low-yield nuclear artillery shell — that could be used in case frontline defenses were breached and urban centers threatened.
In August 1977, Soviet President Leonid Brezhnev privately warned the Carter administration that his nation's Cosmos satellite system had detected evidence of South African preparations for a nuclear test, or series of tests, at what was determined to be an underground site in the Kalahari.
Similar warnings were sent to Britain, France, and West Germany, all participants — with the Soviets and the United States — in a 1975 conference in London that had set up the Nuclear Suppliers Group, which established a series of voluntary guidelines for limiting technical and material aid to non-nuclear nations.
Carter and Brezhnev, working together, led an international campaign of protest, and the South African government, facing the loss of diplomatic relations, backed down by the end of August.
The White House, jubilant over its first major foreign policy success, arranged for a series of elaborate briefings to the news media about the intricacies of its successful diplomacy.
The reporters were not told, however, that the CIA had reported that Israeli military personnel, in civilian clothes, were all over the Kalahari test site, and being ""quite open about it,"" as a CIA officer recalled.
The CIA would later conclude, in a formal assessment for the White House, that the strong international protests over Kalahari had deflected South Africa ""at least temporarily"" from carrying out its planned test.
Carter's heavily promoted diplomatic ""victory in the desert"" was far less significant than it appeared; a real triumph would have involved going a step further and taking on the Israeli nuclear program, and no one in the Carter White House had the stomach for that.
It was into this Washington that an Israeli with inside information about Dimona — seeking to trade that information for personal advancement — arrived late in the year.
He contacted a senior official in the American nuclear intelligence community with whom he had dealt professionally in the past, and immediately revealed the fact that Israel had assembled well over one hundred nuclear warheads.
There would be more than two hundred warheads, many of them low-yield devices, by the year 1980, the Israeli added.
The fact that Israel had nuclear weapons, the American rationalized, was ""general knowledge throughout the United States government.
And so he did not forward the information to his superiors and colleagues, although he had no doubt that the information was accurate.
The American said he knew of Israelis in other technical fields, apparently dismayed by the election of Begin, who had approached their American counterparts with offers to trade information and intelligence for a chance to emigrate to the United States.
There were other, and more traditional, approaches, as the relationship between Jimmy Carter and Menachem Begin became increasingly strained in the wake of Camp David, and as some Israeli officials tried — apparently without high-level approval — to get some strategic help for Israeli ambitions and put an end to America's refusal to recognize the reality of the Israeli nuclear arsenal.
Their starting point was an appropriately obscure corner of the Pentagon known as the Office of Net Assessments, whose director, Andrew W Marshall, a former Rand Corporation analyst, has been providing secretaries of defense with an independent flow of intelligence and analysis for two decades.
In the last months of the Ford administration, Marshall won acceptance of a plan to begin a strategic dialogue with Israel; one goal was to investigate a possible cooperative U.S.-Israeli defense treaty.
Some of Israel's most sophisticated strategic thinkers were assigned by Prime Minister Rabin to the ad hoc group, including Avraham Tamir, an Israeli Army general who would later serve as director general of the foreign ministry.
It was Tamir, one member of the Marshall group recalled, who repeatedly sought to discuss nuclear issues after Anwar Sadat's dramatic visit to Jerusalem in November 1977, the first step toward the Camp David talks.
One Israeli who has seen a high-level summary of the Begin-Sadat meeting said that the Egyptian leader sought assurances that Israel would pledge not to use nuclear weapons against Egypt if a peace treaty between the two nations was signed.
That question was supersensitive, as all involved understood — America was still officially accepting Israeli assurances it had no nuclear arms — and it was referred in writing on at least two occasions to Secretary of Defense Harold Brown for guidance.
Brown, interviewed later about Tamir's initiative, at first dismissed it as another example of the need for military planners to make contingency plans.
He finally acknowledged that he had rejected the Israeli approach without discussing it with President Carter.
The Carter administration, Brown asserted, ""would not have wanted to get involved in an Israeli-Soviet conflict.
The Israelis would say, 'Let us help you,' and then you end up being their tool.
The Israelis have their own security interests and we have our interests.
Andrew Marshall and his colleagues in the Office of Net Assessments viewed Brown's position as — as one American put it — ""a foolish constraint,"" but followed his instructions and, of course, told no one else in the United States government about the Israeli request for joint nuclear targeting.
That instinct reached its height in the fall of 1979, when the Israelis and the South Africans finally pulled off their test.
We all knew the French didn't have a back-door relationship"" with the White House, as Israel did.
The nuclear detection satellite, known as vela, had seen similar flashes of light on forty-one previous occasions, and in each case it was subsequently determined that a nuclear explosion had taken place.
Most of the sightings were over Lap Nor, where the Chinese atmospheric nuclear tests took place, or in the South Pacific, site of the French tests.
There were a few intelligence officials and nonproliferation experts in the Carter administration who immediately concluded that Israel and South Africa had finally conducted a nuclear test, a test that they had tried, and failed, to accomplish two years earlier.
Former Israeli government officials, whose information on other aspects of Dimona's activities has been corroborated, said that the warhead tested that Saturday morning was a low-yield nuclear artillery shell that had been standardized for use by the Israeli Defense Force.
The Israeli sources also said the event captured by the vela satellite was not the first but the third test of a nuclear device over the Indian Ocean.
At least two Israeli Navy ships had sailed to the site in advance, and a contingent of Israeli military men and nuclear experts — along with the South African Navy — was observing the tests. u We wouldn't send ships down there for one test,"" one Israeli said.
The vela satellite, as it was programmed to do, digitally relayed its sighting to the headquarters of the Air Force Technical Applications Center at Patrick Air Force Base in Cape Canaveral, Florida; it was Friday night, September 21, on the East Coast.
Once evaluated and confirmed, the intelligence was routed, via the Defense Intelligence Agency, to the Pentagon's National Military Command Center and relayed to America's top civilian and military leaders.
The nuclear event was estimated to have taken place off the coast of Prince Edward Island, about fifteen hundred miles southeast of the Cape of Good Hope in South Africa, halfway to Antarctica.
The intelligence was at the top of the CIA's and DIA's Saturdaymorning briefing for President Carter and his national security adviser, Zbigniew Brzezinski.
Oplinger had retired from the Foreign Service and worked at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission before joining Brzezinski's staff; he was familiar with the vela program and knew that its previous sightings of Chinese and French atmospheric tests had been unfailingly accurate.
Keeny realized, he said, that he and his colleagues ""needed to buy some time.
Keeny also was troubled by the intelligence community's assurances that its assessment was 90 percent accurate.
In Keeny's account, it was his idea to set up an outside panel to study the vela data and ensure that the satellite had not made an error — one with enormous political consequences.
He knew that the satellites were ancient by satellite standards — some having been launched in the early 1960s — and were constantly being updated and analyzed by scientists at the Los Alamos Scientific Laboratories, who had helped design the system, to ensure that no deterioration had set in.
There had been, in fact, recent concern about false alarms that could trigger a phony intelligence report.
The outside panel was a natural step, one that would indeed buy some time, and one that would also add a patina of legitimacy to the delaying effort.
Meanwhile, exis* Brzezinski, according to his aides, was never particularly interested in proliferation or nuclear-fuel-cycle issues.
President Carter had triggered an uproar by continuing President Ford's 1976 ban on the commercial reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel for power reactors.
Carter's action, based on environmental and proliferation concerns, was viewed by the American nuclear power industry as a foolish move that would stifle the sale of American reactors and equipment around the world.
His NSC aides weren't convinced that Brzezinski fully understood the issue.
At one stage early in the administration, Oplinger recalled being told, Brzezinski agreed to a briefing by Jessica Tuchman, Oplinger's predecessor on the NSC staff, and stood by as she described the nuclear fuel cycle, beginning with the insertion of nuclear fuel into a reactor and ending with the reprocessing of the spent fuel.
The officials at the top of the troubled Carter administration knew that public revelation of the vela sighting, with its strong inference of an illicit Israeli-South African test, would create a horrible dilemma for the President, just a few months away from the 1980 presidential campaign.
Carter had draped himself in the flag of nonproliferation, and if he did not get tough with the two pariah nations, he would be criticized for hypocrisy; if he did seek sanctions, there would be political hell to pay.
The official, who had access to all of the available intelligence on the vela sighting, said it was evident that the satellite had observed what ""could only be a nuclear event.
The American policy in Iran was in chaos, with the ailing shah — who had been so warmly toasted two years earlier by Jimmy Carter — in Mexico and pleading for admission to the United States.
During the tense discussions before the shah's arrival, recalled Nicholas Veliotes, then serving as the assistant secretary of state for Near East and South Asian affairs, the ousted leader confided that he had been negotiating with the Israelis for the purchase of long-range missiles capable of firing a nuclear warhead.
The intelligence leaked, and the administration, taking the hard line in public, demanded that the Soviets remove their troops.
Adding to the mortification was the fact that the administration was then preparing for what was sure to be a bitter fight with Senate Republicans over the United States government's ability to verify the June 1979 SALT II agreements.
The SALT agreement plus Carter's success at Camp David were scheduled to be featured in his reelection campaign.
An Israeli bomb threatened all this and made it imperative that the American President, once again, not know what there was to know.
The American bureaucracy had been in training for more than thirty years in looking the other way when it came to the Israeli nuclear program, and every part of the system instinctively sought to find a way to avoid calling the Israeli-South African test a test.
Ari BenMenashe recalled seeing correspondence on the issue in his ministry of defense office shortly after Menachem Begin's election in 1977.
It was widely assumed that there had been some secret diplomacy between former Defense Minister Shimon Peres and John Vorster during Peres's visit to South Africa in 1976, but just what commitments had been made were not widely known inside the Israeli government.
It was also understood, Ben-Menashe said, that Peres was not going to tell Menachem Begin about it.
And Begin, in turn, would not directly approach Peres, who — along with David Ben-Gurion — had treated him with contempt and ridicule throughout his career.
Begin's solution was to dispatch Ezer Weizman, the newly appointed minister of defense, to South Africa. intelligence data about Israeli nuclear intentions, was not made known to other American officials.
Ben-Menashe said he and others in External Relations understood that Begin responded by saying, in effect, ""Yes.
Another Israeli, who also had direct access to defense ministry information about the test in South Africa, said that Weizman signed an agreement before the 1979 tests calling for the sale to South Africa of technology and equipment needed for the manufacture of low-yield 175mm and 203mm nuclear artillery shells.
Ruina, a longtime consultant to the Pentagon on military and scientific issues, held many of the most sensitive clearances in the American military and scientific community; he had served as director in the early 1960s of the Advanced Research Project Agency , the Pentagon's research arm, and later directed the Institute for Defense Analysis , the Pentagon's most important think tank.
Ruina was an honorable and cautious man who could be counted on to follow orders and not talk to reporters, especially after his hush-hush introduction to the White House crisis.
Clearance was not required, as in normal operations, from any officer at the regional headquarters, corps, division, or brigade level.
Panofsky and Garwin had served often as government consultants and were known for their independence.
The panel's assignment, carefully drawn up by Spurgeon Keeny and Frank Press, was weighted, to no one's surprise, toward a thorough investigation into the possibility that the vela sighting had been a false alarm.
Despite its explosiveness, knowledge of the vela report remained a closely held secret for more than a month, until ABC television reporter John Scali was told by an old friend about a simulated Soviet nuclear attack on the United States that had been missed by America's early warning system.
Scali, who had been the ambassador to the United Nations under Nixon, ran the story by another old friend in the Pentagon.
Its spokesmen immediately informed the news media that there was ""no confirmation"" of a test.
Secretary of State Vance, following the company line, also told journalists there was no conclusive evidence of a test, and South Africa issued a heated denial.
Vance further told the press that within hours of the first vela signal, he had discussed the matter with Brzezinski and Defense Secretary Harold Brown.
None of the reporters knew, of course, that Harold Brown's Office of Net Assessments had already been approached two times by a senior Israeli official seeking to discuss joint U.S.Israeli strategic targeting of the Soviet Union.
Walters, who made public a statement suggesting that the flash could have been caused by an accident aboard a Soviet nuclear submarine.
The admiral offered no factual basis for his Cold War assertion, which soon sank from sight. t Victor Gilinsky, still serving in 1979 on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, recalled inquiring during an official briefing whether there were ships in the Indian Ocean and being told no.
Botha had reason to believe that his nation and its Israeli partners had pulled it off.
The Ruina panel members would spend months effectively poking holes in and raising legitimate questions about the reliability and integrity of the vela satellite system.
The panel chose to concentrate on what became known as the ""false alarm"" issue.
Nuclear explosions produce two distinctly characteristic and separate flashes of light — from the initial detonation and the subsequent fireball about one third of a second later — that are recorded as double humps on a graph by the vela satellite.
The panel also could find no collateral signs of a nuclear event — seismic signals, acoustic waves, ionospheric disturbances, magnetic or electromagnetic pulses that had accompanied previous vela reports.
No significant radioactive fallout or other debris was located; there was no ""smoking gun"" that made the panel's conclusion ineluctable.
The lack of such findings was not unusual in itself, given the low yield of the test and its isolated location; Press and the panel members knew there.
The panel eventually reported in July 1980, ten months after the event, that the flash observed by the satellite u was probably not from a nuclear explosion.
The findings outraged the nuclear scientists and professional bomb makers of Los Alamos, who had designed the vela system.
Many of these men were members of the Nuclear Intelligence Panel , the most highly classified nuclear intelligence group in the United States government.
NIP had done its own investigation into the vela test, and had been ordered by the White House — citing national security — not to discuss it publicly.
Its finding, openly discussed by NIP members in interviews with the author, was that a low-yield nuclear weapon most certainly had been detonated on September 22.
They were dismayed by the extent of White House interference in the investigation.
Another panel member, Louis H Roddis, Jr., who played a major role in America's postwar nuclear weapons development, concluded that the South African-Israeli test had taken place on a barge, or on one of the islands in the South Indian Ocean archipelago.
One mystery is why the Ruina panel scientists, all honorable men, would place themselves in a position where others could limit what information they could evaluate.
The panel members had been assured that they would be given all of the relevant intelligence about the satellite, and yet one of the most important discoveries — uncovered by Ruina himself and known to the White House — was not made available to them.
Ruina was a director of MIT's Defense and Arms Control Studies Program and, as such, was involved in late 1979 in the preparation of a federally funded MIT report that assessed the foreign availability of critical components for the assembly of short-range ballistic missiles and compared those components with those manufactured in the United States.
One of Ruina's three colleagues in preparing the report was an Israeli postgraduate student.
Shortly after Ruina's involvement on the vela sighting became known at MIT, the Israeli, who said he had worked on the Israeli nuclear missile systems, began talking to Ruina about Israel's nuclear capability.
Keeny, confronted with the potentially explosive intelli282 THE SAMSON OPTION gence about what had happened and who had been involved, remained loyal to the Carter presidency and dismissed the report as nonsense.
His colleagues in the White House, Keeny said, shared his view that Ruina's postgraduate student was peddling Israeli disinformation.
The information was not made known to the intelligence community or to Ruina's colleagues on the panel.
There were a few government experts on nonproliferation policy who were convinced that Frank Press and Spurgeon Kenny made the right choice in seeking to mitigate the impact of a South African-Israeli nuclear test.
Look at the issues involved — apartheid, Camp David, NPT, human rights, dealing with the Indians , stopping reprocessing worldwide.
The American intelligence community had done far better in its reporting on the South African test — the CIA insisted in internal estimates throughout 1979 and 1980 that there had been a test — but it basically remained in the dark about the sophistication of the Israeli nuclear program.
In 1980, the Agency published another Special National Intelligence Estimate on Israeli capability and came up with essentially the same numbers as Carl Duckett had produced in 1974.
Israel, the CIA said, had manufactured at least twenty and as many as thirty nuclear warheads.
The new estimate, however, was much more comprehensive than previous studies.
The CIA was able to report that the Israelis had upgraded the reactor to increase its output and also improved the reactor's cooling capacity — clear signs that a greater amount of plutonium for nuclear weapons was being generated.
There was no longer any doubt, the estimate said, that Israel had completed construction of a chemical reprocessing plant — but just where and how was not known.
Even so, the CIA report seriously underestimated the number of Israeli warheads and the sophistication of its nuclear operation.
The KH-11, with its brilliant photography, had captured an Israeli nuclear missile storage site and the experts at the National Photographic Interpretation Center had been able to count ten items that were subsequently confirmed as nuclear warheads.
No one had ever seen an Israeli warhead before, and the intelligence community chose to take the fact that only ten warheads were seen, one official recalled, ""as confirmation of our guesses.
We thought the pictures were extraordinary, but decided that they didn't add anything new.
The 1980 CIA estimate had been ordered by Deputy Under Secretary of State Joseph S Nye, Jr., who emerged as the Carter administration's key — and highly progressive — adviser on nonproliferation policy.
Nye acknowledged that coping with the Israeli bomb was a low priority under Jimmy Carter.
When arrested in November 1985, he claimed he had been turning over secret documents — many of which, he maintained, should have been provided to Israel by the United States — for only fourteen months.
The Israeli government apologized for its spying and insisted that the recruitment of Pollard was an aberration, an unauthorized ""rogue"" operation.
Pollard indeed spied for Israel out of misguided loyalty — and for money — but none of the other widely held beliefs about the case is true.
Pollard, who began working in 1979 as a civilian employee of United States Navy intelligence, offered to supply Israel with intelligence as early as 1980, but was not recruited as an operative until the fall of 1981, three years earlier than he and the Israeli government have admitted.
He was then working as an intelligence specialist with the Navy's Field Operations Intelligence Office.
At the height of his activity, in 1984 and 1985, one of his main assignments was the gathering of American intelligence relevant to Israel's nuclear targeting of the oil fields and Soviet military installations in southern Russia, a fact that was hidden from Justice Department investigators and prosecutors by Israeli officials.
In fact, Sella was one of the Israeli Air Force's leading nuclear bombing and targeting experts and was specifically assigned to serve as Pollard's handler.
The nuclear targeting data supplied by Pollard included topsecret American intelligence on the location of Soviet military targets, as well as specific data on the Soviet means for protecting those targets, by concealment or hardening of the sites.
Pollard also gave the Israelis American intelligence on Soviet air defenses, especially the feared SA-5 surface-to-air missile system, which was so effective against United States B-52S in the Vietnam War.
Pollard also provided Israel with the codes for American diplomatic communications, enabling Israel's signals intelligence agency to intercept cables and backchannel messages to and from the office of Samuel W Lewis, the well-informed United States ambassador who had been assigned to Israel in 1977.
In all, according to federal prosecutors, Pollard provided Israel with eighteen hundred documents — an estimated 500,000 pages — before his arrest.
The top political officials of Israel, including Shimon Peres, Yitzhak Rabin, and Yitzhak Shamir, understood that there was a high-level source inside the United States.
In fact, some of the most important Pollard documents were retyped and sanitized by Israeli intelligence officials and then made available to the Soviet Union as a gesture of Israeli goodwill, at the specific instructions of Yitzhak Shamir, a longtime advocate of closer Israeli-Soviet ties.
All of this was successfully hidden by the Israeli government after Pollard's arrest and subsequent plea bargain.
Israel still continues to depict the Pollard affair as a rogue operation that was conducted without high-level involvement.
Ariel Sharon, newly named by Menachem Begin as minister of defense, had come to Washington with Begin to present a far-reaching agenda for U.S.-Israeli strategic cooperation.
Israel would become America's military partner — and military arm — in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf, and serve as a depository for pre-positioned arms and ammunition for American armed forces.
The Israelis' most eagerly awaited meeting took place in the cabinet room with President Reagan and his top advisers, including Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger, Secretary of State Alexander Haig, and National Security Adviser Richard Allen.
Sam Lewis, as the United States ambassador to Israel, also was at the meeting.
Sharon then gave a half-hour outline about how the American and Israeli strategic interest should be established.
Dick Allen and the rest of the White House staff were also turning green.
Sharon's plan, as outlined at the cabinet-room meeting, also called for joint use of airfields and Navy ports.
One significant aspect was shared intelligence, including formal Israeli access to the KH-11 satellite, desperately sought by Israel — as most of the Americans at the cabinet-room meeting did not understand — for its nuclear targeting of the Soviet Union.
There would be no joint U.S.-Israeli bases in the Mid288 THE SAMSON OPTION die East, and Israel would not get the access it wanted to American satellite intelligence.
Sharon also was told that Israel would not be permitted a receiving station in Tel Aviv for the real-time KH-11 photography.
Sharon eventually was forced to accept the watered-down American version, which he vehemently opposed and then had to defend publicly before the Knesset.
Over the next few months, Sharon found a way to carry out his strategic goals without the help of Washington.
He led Israel, with the support of Begin, into an invasion of Lebanon in an effort to destroy the Palestine Liberation Organization and use Israel's military dominance to change the political structure of the Middle East.
Israel would carry the fight, under Sharon's plan, to the outskirts of Beirut, serving as an antiSyrian blocking force while its Lebanese Christian allies, the Phalangists, cleaned out the city of PLO followers.
But the Phalangists failed to move, and the Israeli Air Force was called upon to begin the bombing of Beirut.
Instead of victory, there was impasse, as five hundred Israeli soldiers were killed along with more than ten thousand Palestinians and Lebanese, some in the shocking massacre at the Palestinian refugee camps in Sabra and Shatila.
Before carrying out this plan, Sharon needed to control Israel's intelligence services and its ""Temple"" weapons — the nuclear arsenal.
The new head of LAKAM was a Sharon crony and long-time clandestine operative named Rafael Eitan, who was then also serving as Begin's special assistant for counterterrorism.
He had been forced to resign, nonetheless, from Mossad years earlier, and was bitter about his stunted career and the failure of Mossad and Israel's other intelligence agencies to cooperate with his counterterrorism office.
Sharon did not hide his political agenda, but publicly spelled it out on many occasions after leaving the Israeli Army in 1973.
His major goals included the overthrow of King Hussein of Jordan and the transformation of that country into a Palestinian state, to which Palestinian refugees would be ""transferred"" — or driven.
A few weeks after his return from Washington in the early fall of 1981, Sharon called together the senior officer corps of the Israeli Defense Force and told them for the first time about his specific plans to put his political agenda into effect — Israel was going to invade Lebanon.
He said, 'Americans treat us like an aircraft carrier — a floating base.
The increased Soviet freedom of maneuver in the Middle East and Africa, he added, ""endangers the stability of the region and vital interest of the free world.
The new minister of defense was telling his nation that Israel's national security now depended on its ability to influence events in a huge area that stretched from Kenya in the south to Turkey, and from Mauritania in the west to Pakistan.
But that could not be accomplished without KH-11 satellite information and other intelligence from the United States.
As Sharon was beginning to redesign Israel's strategic posture, Washington finally got some hard intelligence on the Israeli nuclear arsenal.
It was a ""walk-in,"" an Israeli scientist or technician who had worked at Dimona and who, as Mordecai Vanunu would do five years later, had taken some photographs of the underground storage bunkers there.
The men handling the defector were experts in weapons production and knew they were seeing the real thing — thermonuclear warheads.
The defector told them that Israel had more than one hundred weapons in storage.
We know twenty KTs will take out Cairo. was more advanced and better than any of our people had presumed it could be — clean bombs, better warheads.
The defector also provided specific data about warhead size and delivery systems — ""we got lots of paper"" — that convinced the Americans that the Israelis were capable of delivering a nuclear warhead with accuracy.
There was the usual disconnect, as there had been with all Israeli nuclear information since the late 1950s, and the defector's data was not shared with the State Department's proliferation experts nor with any of the analysts of Z Division at Livermore, who were seen as liberals.
The defector's information was left dangling, and those Americans who should have known the extent and nature of Israel's nuclear capability did not.
He told an interviewer that the ""turning point"" of his life came as a result of the Six-Day War, when he was thirteen.
Israel's vie292 THE SAMSON OPTION tory was ""emotionally intoxicating"" and triggered his lifelong obsession with Israeli security, and his fantasies of being part of it.
In early 1981, Pollard sought a job as a defense analyst with the American Israel Public Affairs Committee , one of Washington's most effective lobbies.
AIPAC officials found his bragging about access to top-secret information inappropriate and ""weird""; one AIPAC official recalled that Pollard's story sounded ""too incredible to be real.
Pollard also had been offering his services to Israel in 1980 and 1981, but no serious Israeli intelligence official would consider the recruitment of an openly pro-Israel American Jew who worked for the American intelligence community.
There also was an unwritten law prohibiting the recruitment of any American Jew, pro-Israel or not.
Pollard's repeated offers to spy for the State of Israel had unnerved the Israeli intelligence community.
Rafi Eitan, the aggressive new director of LAKAM, decided to change the rules after the unproductive meetings with the President and his senior aides in Washington.
He agreed with Sharon that the United States was holding back on intelligence that was essential to Israeli security — such as the KH-11 photography.
Ari Ben-Menashe and his colleagues in the External Relations Department were also appalled when Eitan recruited Pollard in October 1981.
Eitan needed Pollard, Ben-Menashe explained, ""to access papers he already had knowledge of.
By early 1982, Reuven ""Rudi"" Yerdor had been promoted to brigadier general and was in charge of Unit 8200, the Israeli communications intelligence service.
Yerdor was a senior analyst who worked closely with his counterparts in the American National Security Agency, traveling to Washington every three months for liaison meetings.
Yerdor's official title was deputy chief of staff for military intelligence in the Israeli Defense Force; his immediate superior was Major General Yehoshua Saguy, the head of Aman and a deputy to Sharon who, like Sharon, was dismissed after the Sabra and Shatila massacre.
Every senior officer understood that Saguy, as head of military intelligence, was directly responsible under military procedure for briefing the prime minister.
But Saguy was known throughout the upper echelon of the Israeli military for his reluctance to challenge Sharon and his willingness to step aside and permit Sharon to be the main conduit for military intelligence to Begin and the Israeli cabinet.
The first set dealt with highly technical American intelligence describing a Soviet military system in the hands of the Arabs.
The second documents, far less interesting to Yerdor, were copies of the daily and weekly summaries of worldwide NSA intercepts.
In February, Israel learned that the Soviets had decided to upgrade the Syrian air defense command and supply it with three battalions of SA-5S, their most advanced high-altitude antiaircraft missile.
The missiles remained under Soviet control, but they were assigned to protect Syria's short-range SS-21 missiles, which were capable of striking Israel.
They also posed a threat to Israel's most advanced F-15 and F-16 fighter-bomber aircraft.
An official request to the United States for intelligence on the capabilities of the SA-5 was made, but Yerdor was told, as he anticipated, that there was very little intelligence available on the system; it was too sensitive.
As for the source of the report, as Yerdor told his colleague, ""this doesn't come"" through normal channels.
In mid-May 1982, three weeks before the invasion of Lebanon, Yerdor's office was handed an astonishing assortment of invaluable American technical data about the air defense systems in Syria.
The Israeli Air Force, utilizing electronic countermeasures , would demolish the Syrian Air Force and destroy more than seventy Syrian missile launchers during the Lebanon war.
Lewis, a career diplomat who would serve as ambassador until 1985, was widely known as a good friend of Israel but also was strongly opposed to Ariel Sharon and his policies.
Yerdor had little respect for Eitan, and worried about the long-range implications of Israeli intelligence activities in the United States, its best ally.
He was convinced Eitan was driven by his personal ambition and his need to settle old scores with Yitzhak Hofi, the head of Mossad, and Avraham Shalom, Shin Beth's director.
Pollard, Yerdor learned later, had been cleared — despite his openly pro-Israel views — for access to the most sensitive intelligence in the United States government, and was using his office in Navy intelligence to place orders with abandon to classified archives throughout the Washington area.
Ben-Menashe, like Yerdor, remained convinced — even after Pollard's arrest and guilty plea — that Eitan had been working with more than one American.
Eitan's LAKAM operations in the United States produced a steady stream of routinely transferred scientific and technical documents — similar highly classified United States material had been arriving since the late 1950s, when the agency was set up.
Now, illicitly obtained intelligence was flying so voluminously from LAKAM into Israeli intelligence that a special code name, jumbo, was added to the security markings already on the documents.
His dislike of Sharon manifested itself in unprecedented public criticism, reported in the Israeli press after the invasion of Lebanon, in which Hofi, former chief of staff Mordecai Gur, and two other retired army generals accused Sharon of insubordination and cowardice under fire on repeated occasions in the 1950s, including the Suez War.
Israeli politics were in more disarray than usual over the next year; Menachem Begin's wife died in the spring, and a guilt-ridden Begin, who was in Washington at the time of her death, fell into a severe depression.
He resigned as prime minister in September 1983 and was replaced by Yitzhak Shamir, a former senior Mossad operative and conservative member of the Likud coalition.
Neither Labor nor Likud achieved a majority in the national elections in May 1984.
Peres would serve as prime minister and Shamir as foreign minister until September 1986, when they would trade jobs.
Throughout the turmoil, Rafi Eitan stayed on the job — and so did Jonathan Pollard.
Pollard's intelligence would be summarized by Eitan and presented, without analysis or assessment, in a memorandum to the prime minister and minister of defense.
By then, Pollard's material included essential KH-11 imagery as well as reporting and assessments from United States embassies and intelligence operatives inside Saudi Arabia, Jordan, and Egypt; such material is known in the diplomatic community as ""thirdparty"" information, and is never provided to outsiders.
In a pleading filed before he was given his life sentence in March 1987, he argued that his Israeli handlers told him that ""Israel's dependence upon a 'special source' "" had been mentioned at Israeli cabinet meetings.
He also said that he was routinely provided with lists of intelligence items wanted; the lists were coordinated and ""prioritized"" by the heads of all the various military intelligence services.
Pollard's handlers in the United States, who included Aviem Sella by mid-1984, had even arranged for the Israeli government to provide, via its embassy in Washington, the most sophisticated photocopying machines for the reproduction of top-secret documents, including KH-11 satellite photographs.
The photocopying machines arrived with special metal shielding to prevent the interception of electronic emanations.
Ben-Menashe, an Iraqi Jew, had close ties to Shamir; in 1987, two years before his arrest in the United States and subsequent disaffection from Israel, he left the External Relations Department and went to work directly as an intelligence adviser for"" Shamir, then again serving as prime minister.
The Soviets recognized the overture, Ben-Menashe said, and late in the year invited Israel to an intelligence conference in India to discuss the Pakistani nuclear weapons facility at Kahuta.
In early 1984, while still acting prime minister, Shamir ""authorized the exchange of intelligence with the Soviets on United States weapons systems.
Raw American intelligence was not handed over directly to the Soviets, but was reworked in an attempt to minimize the damage to American methods and agents.
The exchange of intelligence paid an immediate dividend, beyond the easing of diplomatic tensions and the increased flow of Soviet immigrants to Israel, Ben-Menashe said.
In late 1984 the Polish government permitted him, as a representative of the State of Israel, to travel to Warsaw and negotiate the sale of AK-47S and SA-7S, among other weapons, for shipment to Iran.
The organization's leaders made a brief attempt in 1940 to broker an agreement with the Third Reich that would permit the illegal passage to Palestine of Jews from Germany and Europe to continue the fight against the British, whose war effort was supported by David Ben-Gurion and even the Irgun, a rival terrorist group that would be taken over by Menachem Begin in 1943.
The Stern group, resisting pressure to fight with the Allies, sought direct negotiations at one point with Otto von Hentig, a representative of the German foreign ministry.
In his memoirs, von Hentig wrote of meeting with a Jewish delegation that offered to cooperate with the Nazis and, in essence, go to war against their pro-Allied Zionist compatriots, if Hitler guaranteed the postwar independence of Jewish Palestine.
Similar talks were held by Stern representatives with Benito Mussolini's Italy, calling on the Italians to provide transit camps and passage for Jewish refugees, as well as arms, in return for the Stern Gang's collaboration in expanding Italy's influence in the Middle East.
The Israeli said that Pollard material was sanitized and dictated to a secretary before being turned over to the Soviets.
Some material was directly provided to Yevgeni M Primakov, the Soviet foreign ministry specialist on the Middle East who met publicly and privately with Shamir while he was prime minister.
Shamir's turning to the Soviets was consistent with his personal and political beliefs, the Israeli said.
While in Mossad in the 1950s and 1960s, Shamir was known for his efforts to improve relationships with his KGB counterparts.
He worked diligently to develop new ties with the Soviet Union, which he envisioned as a means of balancing, or offsetting, Israel's traditional reliance on the United States ""Shamir has always been fascinated with authority and strong regimes,"" the Israeli said, ""and very suspicious of democratic governments.
Shamir's unilateral decision to forward the material to the Soviets is now widely known in leading political circles in Israel, the Israeli source said.
Rabin, who was close to the United States, went into a virtual ""state of shock"" upon being told, but kept his peace.
Rabin and Peres, and their political advisers, understood that Shamir's action, if exposed, would mean the end of the increasingly shaky Likud coalition.
They also realized, the Israeli source said, that the overall IsraeliUnited States relationship ""would be at risk.
Some officials of Mapam, the left-wing labor party with close ties to the Soviet bloc, also learned of Shamir's action and considered leaking that information to the press.
For his part, Shamir and his principals argued to their col300 THE SAMSON OPTION leagues that his goal was to end the long-standing enmity between Israel and the Soviet Union and initiate some kind of strategic cooperation.
One senior American intelligence official confirmed that there have been distinct losses of human and technical intelligence collection ability inside the Soviet Union that have been attributed, after extensive analysis, to Pollard.
The Israeli officials most tarnished by the scandal were Rafi Eitan and Aviem Sella, but Eitan did not suffer financially.
He was subsequently named to a high administrative position with the Israel Chemicals Company, the largest state-owned enterprise in Israel.
His surprising appointment was authorized by none other than Ariel Sharon, who had been named minister of trade and industry in 1984.
As for Sella, he was promoted to brigadier general after his return from the United States and assigned as commander of Tel Nof, the site of Israel's nuclearready air force squadron.
After American protests, Sella instead was named head of the Israeli Defense Force staff college.
His prospects for further advancement in the air force were bleak, and Sella retired.
The American, who conducted his own private inquiry into the Pollard affair shortly after it became known, said that the Israeli leadership agreed on a cover-up from the beginning, despite the huge political differences between the parties.
He told an Israeli newspaper in early 1987, ""All my actions, including the Pollard affair, were carried out with the knowledge of my superiors.
The one aspect of the Pollard story that no one wanted revealed revolved around Aviem Sella.
Earlier in his career he had served as an F-4 pilot at Tel Nof, assigned to one of Israel's ""black"" — nuclear-capable — squadrons.
Ariel Sharon's broadened view of Israeli national security and the Soviet threat had led to a dramatic upsurge in nuclear planning and nuclear targeting.
The air force also was responsible for the advanced Jericho missile system, with its steadily increasing range.
The new missile targets inside the Soviet Union required increased intelligence, and Sella's mission was to help Pollard gather the essential information and then evaluate it.
Israel would need the most advanced^ American intelligence on weather patterns and communication protocols, as well as data on emergency and alert procedures.
Any American knowledge of the electromagnetic fields that lie between Israel and its main targets in the Soviet Union also was essential to the targeting of the Jericho.
Sella's superb skill and knowledge of nuclear targeting blinded Eitan and the Israeli intelligence community to the fact that Sella was a pilot who knew nothing about running a covert operation.
Those Israelis who know of the Sella mission and the reasons behind it also believe that Jonathan Pollard had to understand what he was doing.
Pollard refused to cooperate with the United States Attorney's Office in Washington for six months before finally giving up Sella's name — and describing what he said was his involvement — as part of a plea bargain.
It is not known whether the prosecutors in Washington realized at the time of the Pollard plea bargain that Sella's mission was linked to nuclear intelligence; nor is it even clear whether anyone in the United States government learned it later.
Many of the government's submissions in the case, including an extensive presentation by Caspar Weinberger, were highly classified.
The government acknowledged that few involved in the case told the truth.
It was that awkward situation that led them to insist that Sella be extradited to the United States.
The Israeli government refused, and Sella was indicted in absentia in March 1987, in the United States District Court in Washington.
Since his retirement, Sella has given friends and colleagues an account of his involvement that is more credible, but still far short of the whole story.
While in Israel, he was recruited, he has said, for the job of trying to control Pollard, who was drowning the Israeli intelligence bureaucracy in documents.
Before taking the assignment, he checked with his superior, Major General Amos Lapidot, the air force chief of staff.
Lapidot assured him, Sella has said, that Pollard was not a rogue — and clearance for his new assignment had been obtained from Yitzhak Rabin, the minister of defense.
Israel did make one direct attempt, nonetheless, to get the charges against the young colonel dismissed.
In June 1986, shortly after Pollard gave up Sella's name, Israel hired Leonard Garment to represent the colonel.
He also was a strong supporter of Israel, and under Nixon had occasionally become involved in high-level diplomacy.
In late June, Garment flew to Tel Aviv to interview Sella and speak with Israeli officials.
His goal was to try to find some common ground between Washington and the government of Israel; to settle the matter before it led to even more damaging press.
They proposed that a factual proffer be offered the United States Justice Department, describing Sella's involvement— or lack of involvement.
The document claimed that Sella had done nothing more than meet socially with Pollard.
The Israeli position, as outlined to Garment, was that the United States had no case against the colonel; there wasn't the slightest indication of spying on his part.
Garment saw many state leaders while in Israel and even had dinner at the home of Shimon Peres.
Garment returned to Washington to try again to negotiate a diplomatic solution or find some way to come up with a document that could get his client off the hook without obstructing justice.
After much communication back and forth, a six-man Israeli delegation arrived in Washington in August 1986 for a meeting with the Justice and State departments to resolve the issue.
It was no ordinary group, but clear evidence that the necessity of protecting Sella reached to the top of the Israeli government.
Caspi, Shalom, and Bar-on had been appointed by Peres immediately after Pollard's arrest to conduct an internal investigation.
The three men reported within a week that Pollard was part of a rogue intelligencegathering unit that operated without any government awareness.
Garment invited the six men to his home on the day before their meeting with Justice and State.
The meeting went on past midnight, with Garment's wife, Suzanne, then a well-known Washington columnist for the Wall Street Journal, put in charge of typing drafts of the disputed proffer.
He retrieved his notes of the dinner conversation with Sella and read them to the group.
The Israelis listened quietly and then asked for a few moments of privacy.
It was later agreed that Garment would withdraw from the case, but do so quietly.
Garment's instinct for self-preservation — he was, after all, a survivor of the Nixon White House — was at its most acute.
He did not know that Aviem Sella was a leading nuclear targeter, he did not know that United States nuclear targeting secrets were involved in the Pollard affair, and he did not know that three of the six men who negotiated with him over the Sella proffer had been involved in an internal investigation and cover-up of the Pollard scandal.
What Garment did know, as he privately informed United States Attorney Joseph E diGenova, who led the Pollard prosecution, and Mark M Richard, a deputy assistant attorney general, was that he was leaving the case because he was not sure whether his client was Aviem Sella or the Israeli government.
With his withdrawal, the Israeli government ended its attempt to protect Sella — in effect, ending Sella's career.
Sella, who retired from the air force in disillusionment and disappointment, remained in Israel, as of mid-1991 a fugitive from American justice.
The hunt for ""Mr X,"" as the government called Pollard's alleged accomplice, had only begun.
The Sunday Times of London had every reason to anticipate that its October 5, 1986, revelation about Dimona, based on its interviews with Mordecai Vanunu, would be a sensation.
It was the first inside account of the Israeli nuclear establishment, based on a publicly named source.
Vanunu and Pollard were primarily driven not by financial gain , but by the conviction that they were doing the right thing.
The intelligence communities of the world were riveted by the Sunday Times account.
One key American nuclear intelligence official acknowledged that the Vanunu story and Pierre Pean's i982book on the early French involvement at Dimona ""together presented the evidence that filled in all the question marks.
The Sunday Times's competitors on Fleet Street ignored the story, and so did much of the world's press.
There was nothing in the Times, Post, and Wall Street Journal "" he said.
Peter Hounam, the primary reporter and writer of the Vanunu story, knew it was the most important of his career.
There were not even any calls from the major newspapers in the United States.
It might have been different, Hounam knew, if Mordecai Vanunu had been available in person.
The Sunday Times had worked out a careful public relations campaign to help promote the story.
But Vanunu had dropped out of sight the week before, and the Sunday Times was unable to produce him when he was most needed.
Vanunu, of course, had been duped by Israeli intelligence into leaving London on September 30 and lured to Rome, where he was abducted by the Mossad.
His decision to walk away from the London newspaper world had followed publication of Vanunu's photograph in the Sunday Mirror, Britain's secondlargest tabloid, and a hostile story the week before, on September 28.
The alleged con man in the headline was not Vanunu, but Vanunu's agent, Oscar E Guerrero, an opportunistic journalist from Colombia in South America who had befriended the hapless Vanunu in June, while he was still in exile in Australia.
It was Guerrero who convinced Vanunu that his story and spectacular photographs were worth as much as $i million.
After failing to interest Newsweek magazine, Guerrero approached the London Times in late August, and within a few days, Peter Hounam was in Australia, interviewing Vanunu.
Guerrero, apparently fearful that he would be cut out of Vanunu's agreement with the Sunday Times, also approached the Sunday Mirror — known for its checkbook journalism — while Hounam and the Sunday Times's ""Insight Team"" were preparing their story.
It was that approach that put Ari Ben-Menashe and the Israeli intelligence community into the picture.
Hounam and the editors at the Sunday Times did not know that as they worked, Mordecai Vanunu had been compromised to the Israelis by a Fleet Street colleague named Nicholas Davies, the foreign editor of the Daily Mirror, sister newspaper of the Sunday Mirror.
He and Ben-Menashe had been partners in an international arms sales firm initially known as Ora Limited, which had operated out of Davies's London home since 1983.
Ora Limited, set up with the approval of the Israeli government, according to Ben-Menashe, was designed to get arms flowing into Iran — one of many such undercover operations around the world.
Because of his ability to speak Farsi, Ben-Menashe had been assigned in November 1980 to a small working group inside the Israeli intelligence community that dealt with Iran, then an international outcast — like Israel — that needed arms for its war against Iraq.
Ben-Menashe's assignment was to find ways of getting around the arms embargo.
Davies accepted an invitation to visit Israel; it was just a few more steps before he became an Israeli asset.
As a Catholic from northern England, Ben-Menashe said, Davies was the perfect cutout, a well-dressed charmer with a strong taste for the good life.
Ben-Menashe's files include hundreds of telexes and other documents indicating that Ora Limited was actively involved in arms trafficking with Iran at the highest levels.
One 1987 cable, sent to Ayatollah Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani, provided terms for the sale to Iran of four thousand TOW missiles at a cost of $13,800 each.
Watters, an expert on satellite voice communications, recalled many meetings with Ben-Menashe in Tucson and many telephone conversations with Davies in London.
At one time, he said, he and Ben-Menashe had discussed collaborating on a book, but the prospective publisher was not interested.
Ben-Menashe was now telling stories about him, Davies said, in revenge.
Before agreeing to set up the company on behalf of Ora Limited, Watters added, he sought to check out Ben-Menashe and his London firm.
She said that she knew that Davies was selling arms in partnership with Ben-Menashe at the same time he was serving as foreign editor of the Daily Mirror.
Eventually, she said in a telephone interview, she became ""appalled"" by her then husband's activities.
Asked whether she knew that Ben-Menashe was an Israeli intelligence operative, Fielding responded, ""It wasn't difficult to put two and two together.
At the meeting, Guerrero, eager for another sale, displayed some of Vanunu's color photographs.
Ben-Menashe's problem, he recalled, was that he simply had no idea what they showed or whether they were significant.
There had been discussions, Ben-Menashe said, about what to do, with some officials urging Vanunu's assassination and the intelligence community recommending that he be ignored.
It wasn't clear how much Vanunu knew or how much damage could be caused by a lowlevel Moroccan-born technician.
The land mines had been put in place in the early 1980s, when Vanunu was still working at Dimona.
Davies did his part at the Sunday Mirror, BenMenashe said, working directly with Robert Maxwell, publisher of the Mirror Group newspapers, the largest group of popular tabloids in Great Britain, which included the Daily and Sunday Mirror.
Davies provided the framework for the September 28 Vanunu story, Ben-Menashe recalled, and then ""it went to Maxwell.
At one point, Ben-Menashe said, Davies set up a meeting for BenMenashe with Maxwell at his ninth-floor office.
Maxwell made it clear at the brief session, Ben-Menashe recalled, that he understood what was to be done about the Vanunu story.
Maxwell, Rupert Murdoch's fellow press baron and major competitor, was known for his closeness to Israel's top leadership.
The Sunday Mirror reporting and editing team that handled the Vanunu story had no contact with Nicholas Davies, whom they knew only as the foreign editor of the Daily Mirror.
What the reporters did know, however, was that the story that appeared under their names had been dictated in tone and content by the newspaper's editor, Michael Malloy.
There were heated debates with the Mirror's reporting team, led by Tony Frost, insisting that the real story was not about Guerrero and his antics, as Malloy wanted to make it, but about the Vanunu photographs.
The reporters recommended that the photographs be ""splashed"" across the front of the newspaper, with the accompanying story raising questions about their authenticity.
But Malloy wanted none of Vanunu's photographs published and insisted on holding up Vanunu, and the Sunday Times, to ridicule.
The crunch came on the Thursday before publication, when Frost and a colleague named Mark Souster were ordered by Malloy to take the Vanunu photographs and data to the Israeli embassy.
John C Parker, then Malloy's senior deputy, understood that Maxwell himself had given the order.
Parker and his colleagues were extremely concerned about what going to the embassy meant for Vanunu.
It could lead to his arrest and even put his life in danger from assassination.
Peter J Miller, the Sunday Mirror's senior news editor, who was fired by Maxwell in 1990 (Frost also was dismissed in the dispute), angrily complained that the newspaper's treatment of the Vanunu story had been turned around because of pressure from above.
Malloy, who was forced out in 1988 as editor of the Sunday Mirror, acknowledged that he had discussed the handling of the Vanunu story with Maxwell, but said there was ""nothing sinister or strange about Maxwell's involvement.
Told of the complaints by Parker, Miller, and Frost, Malloy said that he himself had misjudged the importance of the Vanunu photographs.
It was Maxwell, however, Malloy recalled, who ordered the staff to take the photographs to the Israeli embassy.
Malloy also said he could not deny that he had invoked Maxwell's name in telling Miller, Parker, and Frost how to handle the story.
Malloy also acknowledged that it was possible that Maxwell was not keeping him fully informed of his independent contacts, with the Israelis or others on the Mirror newspaper group, such as Nicholas Davies.
Miller, who was the publisher of a local London newspaper and magazine when interviewed, contested the firing before Britain's Industrial Tribunal, and in June 1991 won his case against Maxwell and the Sunday Mirror.
The Tribunal, as of August 1991, was considering how much compensation to award Miller.
Frost, now the deputy editor of the Sunday Sun in Newcastle, England, was also dismissed by Maxwell.
Handling Robert Maxwell's Sunday Mirror was one thing, but the Sunday Times was still known to be at work on the Vanunu story — and the Israeli intelligence community had no clout at the top at the Times.
The next step was to find Vanunu, still hiding out in London, and somehow manage to get him out of England.
Within days, the lonely Vanunu, who did not know about the land mines, Ben-Menashe said, was entrapped by the Mossad's Cindy Hanin Bentov and en route to Rome.
He initially sought to keep secret Davies's role in the ongoing arms sales, Ben-Menashe said, as any good intelligence operative would, but he decided to talk after Davies made no move to come to his defense.
If he had chosen to do so, Ben-Menashe claimed, Davies could have proven to the American prosecutors that the sale of the C-130S to Iran had been sanctioned by the Israeli government.
Epilogue For the men in the White House, the first day of President George Bush's Persian Gulf War couldn't have gone better.
As America — and the world — watched on television, United States cruise missiles and Air Force and Navy planes struck their targets in downtown Baghdad and elsewhere in Iraq with precision.
But the euphoria disappeared on the second day, as the Iraqi army carried out Saddam Hussein's pre-war pledge and fired eight Scud missiles at Israel from launchers that had supposedly been destroyed in the first hours of the war.
Two Scuds landed in Tel Aviv and another near Haifa, and the world listened with dread to the initial, and erroneous, newscasts reporting that the Scud warheads contained nerve gas.
Frightened Israelis, wearing gas masks, huddled in specially sealed above-ground rooms, waiting out the Iraqi bombardment; the streets below, as seen on television, were eerily quiet.
A senior American defense official rushed to Israel with a promise of future support, but it seemed inevitable that Israel would enter the Gulf War by sending its air force and its specially trained commando units into western Iraq, where the Scuds were located.
Adding to the tension was the fact that American intelligence had miscalculated in its predictions that Iraq had a limited number of Scud warheads and launchers — some estimates before the war put that number at fewer than 20.
It had been thought that Iraq could launch its Scuds only from fixed launcher sites or from mobile launchers — no one had foreseen that Saddam Hussein's troops would convert a newly purchased fleet of flatbed trucks into makeshift launching pads.
There was another element involved in those first hours, not known to the public but detected by an American satellite making its ninety-six-minute orbit around the earth.
The satellite saw that Shamir had responded to the Scud barrage by ordering mobile missile launchers armed with nuclear weapons moved into the open and deployed facing Iraq, ready to launch on command.
American intelligence picked up other signs indicating that Israel had gone on a full-scale nuclear alert that would remain in effect for weeks.
No one in the Bush administration knew just what Israel would do if a Scud armed with nerve gas struck a crowded apartment building, killing thousands.
All George Bush could offer Shamir, besides money and more batteries of Patriot missiles, was American assurance that the Iraqi Scud launcher sites would be made a priority target of the air war.
Such guarantees meant little; no Jews had been killed by poison gas since Treblinka and Auschwitz, and Israel, after all, had built its bomb so it would never have to depend on the goodwill of others when the lives of Jews were being threatened.
The escalation didn't happen, however; the conventionally armed Scud warheads caused — amazingly — minimal casualties, and military and financial commitments from the Bush administration rolled in.
The government of Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir received international plaudits for its restraint.
American officials were full of private assurances for months after the crisis that things had been under control; newsmen were told that Israel, recognizing the enormous consequence of a nuclear strike, would not have launched its missiles at Baghdad.
The fact is, of course, that no one in America — not even its President — could have dissuaded Shamir and his advisers from ordering any military actions they deemed essential to the protection of their nation.
By the mid-1980s, the technicians at Dimona had manufactured hundreds of low-yield neutron warheads capable of destroying large numbers of enemy troops with minimal property damage.
The size and sophistication of Israel's arsenal allows men such as Ariel Sharon to dream of redrawing the map of the Middle East aided by the implicit threat of nuclear force.
Israel also has been an exporter of nuclear technology and has collaborated on nuclear weapons research with other nations, including South Africa.
In September 1988, Israel launched its first satellite into orbit, bringing it a huge step closer to intercontinental missiles and a satellite intelligence capability — no more Jonathan Pollards would be needed to steal America's secrets.
Scientists at Z Division concluded that the rocket booster that launched the Israeli satellite produced enough thrust to deliver a small nuclear warhead to a target more than six thousand miles away.
Israeli physicists are still at the cutting edge in weapons technology and involved, as are their American and Soviet counterparts, in intensive research into nuclear bomb-pumped X-ray lasers, hydrodynamics, and radiation transport — the next generation of weaponry.
None of this has ever been discussed in the open in Israel, or in the Knesset.
The basic target of Israel's nuclear arsenal has been and will continue to be its Arab neighbors.
Should war break out in the Middle East again and should the Syrians and the Egyptians break through again as they did in 1973, or should any Arab nation fire missiles again at Israel, as Iraq did, a nuclear escalation, once unthinkable except as a last resort, would now be a strong probability.
The Samson Option is no longer the only nuclear option available to Israel.
Acknowledgments No author could have been blessed with a more intelligent, enthusiastic, or caring researcher, fact checker, editor, and colleague than Max Friedman of National Public Radio, an Oberlin College graduate who worked closely with me on this book for the past three years.
Benjamin Frankel of Washington, a political scientist and an expert on national security, provided a seemingly unending tutelage on Israeli politics, history, and sociology.
Thomas B Cochran and Robert S Norris graciously gave me a series of ad hoc, but expert, seminars on nuclear weapons and how they are made.
Cochran is senior scientist and Norris is senior analyst with the Natural Resources Defense Council in Washington.
My longtime editor and friend Robert Loomis of Random House cared about this book and what it said, and how it said it.
Esther Newberg, my agent, knew when to crack the whip and when to share a joke.
It is a delight to be represented by someone of her integrity and intelligence.
My thanks to Heather Shroder for her help in getting this book to foreign publishers.
Notes Few books have been written specifically on Israel's nuclear arsenal.
The best reference work on the status of world proliferation is compiled and written by Leonard S Spector, of the Carnegie Endowment in Washington, who publishes periodic updates.
There were many newspaper and magazine articles on the Geoffrey Prime spy scandal in Britain; see, for example, ""The Treason of Geoffrey Prime,"" Economist, November 13, 1982, page 63.
Richard Allen was first interviewed for this book on May 19, 1989, and many times thereafter.
For a good account of the internal feuding in Israel over the bombing of the Iraqi reactor at Osirak, see Israels Secret Wars, by Ian Black and Benny Morris , beginning at page 332.
The Scientist Not surprisingly, very little has been written about Ernst Bergmann.
The article, because of Israeli censorship, only hints at Bergmann's important role.
The diaries of Moshe Sharett, Personal Diary, in Hebrew have been translated only in part.
Details of the early announcements of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission can be found in Jabber and Pry.
Bar-Joseph's is one of many excellent scholarly articles on the Suez Crisis; see also ""Israel's Relations with the Arabs,"" by Avi Shlaim, Middle East Journal, Spring 1983, beginning at page 180.
The death of Aharon Katzir-Katchalsky was reported in the Jerusalem Post, June 1, 1972, ""Leading Scientist Killed,"" page 3.
Herman Mark was interviewed December 14, 1990, in Austin, Texas, and by telephone many times thereafter.
The announcement of the Canadian-Indian reactor can be found in ""Canada to Help Build Atom Research Reactor for India,"" by Grey Hamilton, Toronto Globe and Mail, April 30, 1956.
Arthur Lundahl was interviewed in Bethesda, Maryland, on June 19, 1989, and many times by telephone afterward.
Dino Brugioni was interviewed dozens of times by telephone at his home in Hartwood, Virginia, beginning on July 5, 1989.
Andrew Goodpaster was interviewed by telephone in Washington on January 11, 1991.
Internal Wars See Jabber for the generally held and mistaken view of the early resignations of the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission, as well as Every Spy a Prince, by Dan Raviv and Yossi Melman , page 69.
Raviv and Melman, however, mention Binyamin Blumberg's important and early role in the Israeli bomb on the same page.
Going Public John Finney was interviewed in Washington on April 18, 1989.
Walter Elder was interviewed in his suburban Virginia home on August 28, 1989, and many times by telephone thereafter.
Philip Farley was interviewed in Palo Alto, California, on October 30, 1989.
Myron Kratzer was interviewed in Washington in June 1989, and by telephone thereafter.
Christian Herter's testimony to the Senate Foreign Relations Committee can be found in Vol.
Carl Kaysen was interviewed in Cambridge, Massachusetts, on November n, 1989, and thereafter by telephone.
William L Strauss was interviewed by telephone on April 3, 1991; Alice Strauss was interviewed by telephone on May 6, 1991.
None of the accounts discusses Feinberg's relationship with the Israeli nuclear program.
Ben Bradlee and Arthur Schlesinger discussed President Kennedy on April 9, 1991.
A good account of Kennedy's efforts on campaign financing can be found in Congressional Quarterly's ""Congress and the Nation 1965-1968,"" Vol.
Myer Feldman was interviewed in Washington on June 13, 1989, and many times thereafter.
Robert Komer was interviewed in Washington on April 3, 1989, and two times thereafter.
Israel's diversion of the Norwegian heavy water has been thoroughly researched and reported by Gary Milhollin, director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control in Washington.
Milhollin was the first to expose the issue, and has been more than generous in sharing his files and research.
Robert McNamara's cryptic conversation with the author took place on January 11, 1991.
The more logical account of why the Israeli Atomic Energy Commission fell apart in the late 1950s was supplied by Yuval Neeman, minister of energy, in a conversation in Washington on April 15, 1991.
Neeman would not discuss any current issues relating to Israel's nuclear capabilities.
Floyd Culler was interviewed on November 30, 1989, in Palo Alto, California, and later by telephone.
The Gazit book provides invaluable background on Israeli policy in the Kennedy period.
Much detail about Ben-Gurion's attitude and the history of that period, it should be noted again, comes from Michael Bar-Zohar's abridged biography.
The most complete summary of Johnson's early ties to American Jews can be found in ""Prologue,"" by Louis S Gomolak, unpublished doctoral thesis , available through UMI dissertation information service.
The Samson Option Excellent work on this period has been done by Shlomo Aronson, the Israeli political scientist and advocate of the deterrent value of Israel's nuclear arsenal.
It was a lecture given on December 11, 1988, at a workshop on Verification of Nuclear and Conventional Arms Reductions, Robin Brook Centre, St.
A number of books are useful on the background of international control of nuclear energy.
For a discussion of the Sam328 NOTES son and Masada psychologies, see A Psycho-History of Zionism, by Jay Y Gonen , Chapter 13.
Mangold shows that Angleton always had the support of Richard Helms in his paranoid treatment of defectors.
Samuel Halpern was interviewed in his suburban Virginia home on April 29, 1991.
The Ambassador Walworth Barbour is rarely mentioned in any of the contemporary books about Israel or Middle East policies.
One of the few to single out Barbour was Abba Eban, in his Autobiography ; Eban correctly described him as ""corpulent, good-natured and brilliantly incisive,"" at page 297.
Edward Dale was interviewed the first of many times at his home in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, on September 7, 1990.
John Hadden was interviewed in Brunswick, Maine, on June 8, 1989, and many times thereafter by telephone.
Peter Jessup was interviewed in Washington on March 20, 1989, and later by telephone.
The late Robert Webber's widow, Clytie Webber, discussed her husband with the author on May 21, 1991.
Eugene Braderman of Washington was interviewed twice by telephone about his 1960s visit to Israel, on October 1, 1990, and again the following April.
Arnold Kramish told of his meeting with Barbour in an interview on June 5, 1990.
Walter Rostow was interviewed at the LBJ Library in Austin, Texas, on October 14, 1990.
A Presidential Gift Dan Rather' s question for the President came during a December 19, 1967, news conference.
James Critchfield was interviewed April 13, 1989, and later by telephone.
Carl Duckett was interviewed at his home in Hutchins, Virginia, on June 27, 1991.
There have been many published accounts of Richard Helms's aborted attempt to brief Johnson on the Israeli bomb; see ""LBJ Was Told in '68 That Israel Had Bomb,"" by John J Fialka, Washington Star, March 1, 1978, page 1.
The late Harry Schwartz was interviewed July 14, 1989, at his home near Easton, Maryland.
The Secrets of Israel's Nuclear Arsenal,"" London Sunday Times, October 5, 1986.
The story was written by the newspaper's ""Insight"" team, led by Peter Hounam.
The use of robotics in the nuclear weapons production process is briefly described in ""Machining Hemispherical Shells,"" in the 1988 edition of Research Highlights, published by the Los Alamos National Laboratory.
George Cowan was interviewed by telephone from New Mexico on September 9, 1990; Hans Bethe was interviewed at his office at the California Institute of Technology on January 21, 1991.
Prelude to War Nixon's comments about the NPT were made September 8, 1968, in Pittsburg and September n, 1968, in Charlotte, North Carolina.
David Long was interviewed by telephone on January 18, 1991; Curtis Jones was interviewed in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, on September 6, 1990.
The Norris, Cochran, and Arkin essay is ""History of the Nuclear Stockpile,"" Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists, August 1985.
There have been many published accounts of Gerald Bull; a good one is ""The Guns of Saddam,"" by William Scott Malone, David Halevy, and Sam Hemingway, Washington Post, Outlook Section, February 10, 1991.
Nicholas Veliotes was first interviewed on June 20, 1989, in Washington.
Nuclear Blackmail There have been scores of analyses of the Yom Kippur War, besides the memoirs of the participants.
Mohammed Heikal was interviewed by telephone from his office in Cairo on July 3, 1991.
Despite many calls to his office and to his former colleagues in the United States government, Kissinger would not be interviewed about the 1973 war.
Hermann Eilts was interviewed on July 10, 1991, by telephone from Boston.
James Schlesinger was interviewed on April 25, 1989, in Washington; William Colby was interviewed on January 10, 1991, also in Washington.
Orwin Talbott was interviewed by telephone from Annapolis, Maryland, his retirement home, on December 10, 1990, and again on June 20, 1991.
Duckett's problems with the 1974 estimate have been widely reported; see ""How Israel Got the Bomb,"" by John Fialka, Washington Monthly, January 1979.
Both reporters, while raising repeated questions about Shapiro's actions, were careful to note that he had not been formally accused of any wrongdoing.
Zalman Shapiro was interviewed repeatedly by telephone from Pittsburgh, beginning on April 12, 1991.
George Murphy was interviewed by telephone on May 30, 1989, and thereafter.
Victor Gilinsky was interviewed on June 12, 1989, in suburban Maryland, and thereafter by telephone.
Cynthia Virostek was interviewed by telephone on July 17, 1991; she has assembled extensive files on NUMEC, and the author wishes to thank her for her generous help.
The Spread of Nuclear Weapons in the Middle East,"" an ABC News Closeup, April 27, 1981.
Henry Myers first discussed NUMEC and Shapiro with the author on November 17, 1980, and many times thereafter.
Peter Stockton's first conversation with the author about Shapiro took place on January 26, 1988.
The estimate of more than one hundred kilograms of recovered uranium was provided by a senior technical official of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission who reviewed Babcock & Wilcox inventory reports to the NRC; such reports are available under the Freedom of Information Act.
The Carter Malaise Ari Ben-Menashe initially contacted the author in August 1990 and was first interviewed in Cincinnati, Ohio, on April 11, 1991.
He was subsequently interviewed in Washington and many more times by telephone.
Malcolm Toon was interviewed by telephone on May 20, 1991; his cable to Washington about the senatorial visit was made available under the Freedom of Information Act.
The footnote about Vanunu and the senators' rebuff was reported in Triple Cross.
George Rathjens was interviewed by telephone on March 25, 1989, and thereafter.
The best account of the Carter administration's diplomacy on the 1977 Kalahari test was written by Murrey Marder and Don Oberdorfer of the Washington Post; see their story as syndi332 NOTES cated in the Philadelphia Inquirer for September 4, 1977, ""How the Powers Stopped a Test,"" page 1.
The CIA's assessment of the attempted 1977 test was provided under the Freedom of Information Act to the Natural Resources Defense Council and made available to the press by the council on September 26, 1990.
Harold Brown discussed the Israeli joint targeting request by telephone on April 26, 1991; he was previously interviewed in Washington on October 20, 1989.
Gerald Oplinger was interviewed at his suburban Virginia home on January 9, 1991.
Spurgeon Keeny was interviewed on March 24, 1989, in Washington and many times by telephone thereafter.
Louis Roddis was interviewed on May 7, 1991, and Donald Kerr was interviewed in Washington on February 13, 1991.
Israel's Nuclear Spy The only book-length study of the Pollard affair is Territory of Lies, by Wolf Blitzer , which professionally summarizes all of the known and published information about the case.
Blitzer, however, accepts far too much of Pollard's account at face value.
Many of the essential details of Pollard's early life come from Blitzer and the press accounts at the time.
Samuel Lewis was interviewed about the White House meeting on February 22, 1991.
Sharon's December 15, 1981, speech is available in abridged form from the Israeli embassy in Washington; it initially was issued as an embassy press bulletin.
For more on the Stern Gang, see Wanted, by Mordechai Schreiber , beginning at page 142.
An Israeli Asset Peter Hounam was interviewed on July 30, 1991, by telephone from London, and thereafter.
Robert Watters was interviewed September 3, 1991, by telephone from Suva, Fiji, where he was on assignment as an electronics technician for the South Pacific Commission.
Nicholas Davies (no relation to Nick Davies, a former reporter for the Independent) was interviewed by telephone from his home in London on July 26, 1991.
Janet Fielding was interviewed by telephone from London on August 5, 1991.
Peter Miller was interviewed by telephone from London on August 21 and 22, 1991.
Tony Frost was interviewed by telephone from Newcastle, England, on August 6 and thereafter.
Press Gazette for April 29, 1991, ""Sacked Mirror Man Finds Place in Sun,"" by Jean Morgan.
Michael Malloy was interviewed by telephone on September 2, 1991, from the Passford House Hotel in Lymington, Hampshire, England, where he was on vacation.
He began his newspaper career as a police reporter for the City News Bureau in Chicago.
After Army service, he was hired by United Press International in Pierre, South Dakota.
In 1963 he joined the Associated Press in Chicago and in 1965 went to Washington for the AP to cover the Pentagon.
He served as press secretary and speechwriter for Senator Eugene H McCarthy in the famed ""Children's Crusade"" — the 1968 New Hampshire Democratic primary campaign against Lyndon Johnson.
In 1969, as a free-lance journalist, Mr Hersh wrote the first account of the My Lai massacre in South Vietnam, distributing five newspaper stories on the atrocity through Dispatch News Service.
In 1986, he rejoined the Times' s Washington bureau to write a series of critical articles about Panama's Manuel Noriega.
He again joined the Times in Washington in September 1991, on a special assignment.
For his account of the My Lai massacre he earned the 1970 Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting, the George Polk Award, the Sigma Delta Chi Distinguished Service Award, and the Worth Bingham Prize.
For his reporting on the secret B-52 bombing of Cambodia, he was accorded the Roy M Howard Public Service Award and a second Polk Award in 1974.
The next year he won the Drew Pearson Award, the John Peter Zenger Freedom of the Press Award, the Sidney Hillman Foundation Award, and a third Polk Award for his stories on the CIA and Chile and on CIA domestic spying.
After army service, he joined United Press International and then the Associated Press.
He served as press secretary and speech writer for Senator Eugene H McCarthy in the 1968 New Hampshire Democratic primary campaign.
In 1969, as a free-lance journalist, Mr Hersh wrote the first account of the My Lai massacre in South Vietnam.
Mr Hersh has won more than a dozen major journalism prizes, including the 1970 Pulitzer Prize for International Reporting, George Polk Awards, Sigma Delta Chi Distinguished Service Awards, the Worth Bingham Prize, the Drew Pearson Award, the John Peter Zenger Freedom of the Press Award, and the Sidney Hillman Foundation Award.
