Background The Problem On October 16, 1962, a U-2 spy plane over Cuba discovered that the Soviet Union was building missile-launching sites on the island.
President John F Kennedy was informed that the Soviet Union was building launching sites in Cuba for nuclear missiles with a range of 1000 miles.
The Response On October 22, Kennedy announced to the world that the United States was setting up a naval blockade around the island of Cuba to prevent anymore shipments of missiles from the Soviet Union to reach Cuba.
He also demanded that the Soviets pull out all of their offensive weapons from Cuba.
The Crisis During the next five days, tensions ran quite high, especially when a Soviet Union boat came to the point of crossing the blockade line.
Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev responsded to Kennedy’s demands on October 26 with an angry letter in which he proposed that the Soviet Union would withdraw the missiles if the United States promised not to invade Cuba.
The next day he sent a second letter to Kennedy and demanded that the U.S. also withdraw its nuclear missiles from Turkey, which bordered the Soviet Union.
That morning a United States surveillance plane was shot down by a Soviet air missile.
Get the missiles out in 48 hours or the United States will attack Cuba.
Tensions Rise Khrushchev also feared events were spiraling out of control.
In addition to nuclear missiles, the Soviets had “tactical” nuclear missiles in Cuba, which would be used to stop an invasion by the United States The United States was ready to invade with 180,000 troops stationed on October 29th.
If the United States invaded and was hit with tactical nuclear weapons, Kennedy was sure to retaliate with a nuclear strike.
It was clear that the Soviet Union and the United States were headed toward nuclear war.
They would withdraw its missiles from Turkey, but would not make this public.
The announcement made to the United States people would be that Khrushchev decided to remove the Cuban missiles to avoid a United States invasion.
From October 24 to November 20, 1962, historians say, the world came closer to the brink of nuclear war than at any other time in history.
