Withdraw of Soviet Missiles 3 Aftermath DEFCON Defense Readiness Condition was effectively a countdown timer to nuclear war and the army’s readiness to retaliate.
Exiled Cubans who opposed Fidel Castro’s revolution landed on the southwestern coast of the island nation.
Territorial Militias loyal to Castro were able to defend the coast from the rebels and the invasion resulted in an utter, embarrassing failure.
Discovery of Soviet Missiles in Cuba American Lockheed Martin U-2 spy planes took several pictures of what looked like mobile Soviet-made missile launchers in Cuba.
Certainly enough, those were SS-4 mid-ranged ballistic missiles, presumably equipped with nuclear warheads.
News of this revelation was quick to reach Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, who was hosting a Hickory Hill Seminar at the time.
This would stop any new missiles from reaching Cuba, but it wouldn't remove the ones already there.
This was technically not an act of war , so Kennedy could claim that he wasn't escalating the conflict.
Televised Quarantine Announcement On October 22, Kennedy announces the quarantine of Cuba on television.
The world was holding its breath, hoping it would blow over, but it was easily the longest and most stressful 13 days of the Cold War.
The Organization of American States , a group of Latin American nations and the U.S., approves of the quarantine, giving Kennedy some legal justification for his actions.
Soviet ships en route to Cuba began to slow down or change course the following day.
Withdraw of Soviet Missiles Following a meeting between the leaders of the USA and USSR, Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba as long as John F Kennedy and the rest of the USA respected the island nation’s territorial sovereignty.
In addition, Kennedy secretly agreed to remove United States ballistic missiles from Turkey.
Aftermath Though nuclear war was narrowly avoided, the crisis had a lasting effect on America’s European allies, who were kept in the dark for much of it.
Castro had also accused the USSR of abandoning the Cuban revolution and this was one reason as to why Khrushchev would later be kicked out of office.
Two years later, Leonid Brezhnev and Aleksei Kosygin pushed him from power and proceeded to lead the Soviet Union on a massive military buildup.
However, the crisis also led to cooler heads in both nations who gained some control over using their nuclear weapons.
Categories Categories Real Life Events Community content is available under CC-BY-SA unless otherwise noted.
