A trade may benefit both teams, but each also believes that holding out may lead to better terms.
Maybe a more parallel two-party negotiation is the Cuban missile crisis.
But the game theory has more than a bit in common.\n\nThen, as now, two sides moved toward calamity over a relatively small issue.
We shouldn’t have a debt ceiling, and the differences between the current Republican and Democratic plans are slim.
Soviet missiles in Cuba would not have vastly altered the strategic balance in the Cold War because the Soviets already had missiles that could hit us.
Cuba shot down an American pilot; another American military plane got lost above Alaska and strayed over Russian territory.
Khrushchev was so rattled, he spent the last night sleeping in his clothes.
But of course we didn’t fry.\n\nWhat’s discouraging about the analogy, however, is that the Cuban missile crisis was ultimately resolved largely because of an asymmetry.
They would pull the missiles out of Cuba and we’d pull missiles out of Turkey; however, to protect the Kennedy political brand, the Soviets would have to keep the agreement secret.
That trade worked because they United States cared more about something than the Soviets did, which meant that the Soviets could offer something which seemed small to them but big to us.
Asymmetries are why teams with little chance to win this year trade good old players for promising young players .\n\nIn our current crisis, however, there are no obvious asymmetries.
Neither side wants default, but there’s nothing that the Democrats want that the Republicans don’t.
Obama wants to improve his 2012 election chances; Republicans want to weaken them.
The Red Sox never make a deal with the Yankees at the trade deadline because both teams want the same thing, and both teams want the other to lose.\n\nThe other discouraging fact is that Cuba should also remind us that things can be worse than the worst-case scenario.
During the crisis, Americans planned out the battle meticulously, based on the best intelligence they could get on Soviet weaponry and the large nuclear weapons our spy satellites had spotted.
But at the time—and for forty years thereafter—the United States didn’t know that the Soviets had hidden small nuclear weapons on the island.
If we’d sent in an invading force, they’d have been hit with much more than machine-gun fire.
When Robert McNamara, the Defense Secretary in 1962, learned that in 2002, he said it “sent a chill down my spine.”\n\nThankfully, whatever happens now won’t be remotely as bad as what could have happened then.
As every fan of the sport knows, there’s …"",""description"":""It’s interesting that the debt-crisis talks are happening concurrently with baseball’s trading deadline.
As every fan of the sport knows, there’s always a flurry of transactions right at the annual 4 P.M. deadline on July 31st.
When the Red Sox traded away Manny Ramirez, they filed the paperwork at 3:59 P.M.But perhaps baseball, which is essentially meaningless, is the wrong analogy for Washington’s current self-inflicted crisis.
But the game theory has more than a bit in common.Then, as now, two sides moved toward calamity over a relatively small issue.
John Boehner and Nikita Khrushchev.Maybe, in fact, Cuba should make us sanguine.
But of course we didn’t fry.What’s discouraging about the analogy, however, is that the Cuban missile crisis was ultimately resolved largely because of an asymmetry.
The Red Sox never make a deal with the Yankees at the trade deadline because both teams want the same thing, and both teams want the other to lose.The other discouraging fact is that Cuba should also remind us that things can be worse than the worst-case scenario.
Thankfully, whatever happens now won’t be remotely as bad as what could have happened then.
Ad ChoicesFacebookTwitterSnapchatYouTubeInstagramDo Not Sell My Personal Infowindow.
As every fan of the sport knows, there’s …"",""head.promo.dek"":""It’s interesting that the debt-crisis talks are happening concurrently with baseball’s trading deadline.
But the game theory has more than a bit in common.""],,,"" and Nikita Khrushchev.""],,"" that Defense Department official Paul Nitze wrote in a meeting in the office of Under-Secretary of State George Ball’s office on Saturday, October 27th.
