In mid-October 1962, high-flying American reconnaissance planes photographed Soviets constructing nuclear missile sites in Cuba.
President John F Kennedy, once he was briefed on the photographs, met privately in the White House with the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, or ExComm, several times over a crucial two-week period to deliberate and figure out how to respond.
Since Kennedy surreptitiously taped most of the ExComm discussions, historians have the opportunity to ""witness"" the decision-making process and the making of history from an insider's perspective.
In this book, Sheldon M Stern uses the tapes to provide the first narrative account of those meetings.
From 1977 to 1999, Stern was the John F Kennedy Presidential Library Historian.
Stern's knowledge of the ExComm meetings, along with his admiration of President Kennedy, are evident throughout this extensively researched and detailed account of nuclear war avoided.
Stern presents a stunning number of corrections to May and Zelikow's transcripts.
Since the publication of their book, May and Zelikow have re-transcribed the tapes for a three-volume collection of Kennedy transcripts, but Stern, in an appendix, offers several pages of corrections to those new transcripts as well.
May and Zelikow's errors consist of misidentifying or misquoting speakers, with results that sometimes alter the historical record.
Stern, who relied on the tapes that the Kennedy Presidential Library provides to the public , suggests that the expensive digital filtering used by May and Zelikow might have distorted the sound quality of their tapes, unintentionally resulting in their many errors.
By presenting the tapes in narrative rather than transcript form, Stern seeks to capture the flavor of the meetings, describing the tone, mood, emotion, and even dark humor among the ExComm participants.
When ExComm participants speak, Stern often depicts them as having ""murmured,"" ""whispered,"" or spoken their words ""in a particularly somber tone of voice,"" descriptions which give the reader a sense of either the intensity, exasperation, or light-hearted banter of various exchanges, important atmospheric touches absent from transcripts.
For the most part, Stern avoids detailed commentary and lets the ExComm participants's words speak for themselves.
As a result, much of the book reads like a transcript in narrative form, with single, long paragraphs frequently consisting entirely of dialogue among as many as four participants.
Stern's commentary on disputes over the historical record, including the errors made by ExComm participants in their previous accounts and oral interviews, are usually placed in the footnotes or the introduction or conclusion.
While Stern, like Zelikow and May in their own volume, prefaces each meeting with a short summary of ongoing domestic and worldwide events, his narrative is devoted to presenting the details of the taped discussions.
Despite the often dramatic conversations and Stern's efforts to include only the most important material, the book is sometimes tedious, dense, and repetitive.
Stern's reliance on long excerpts from letters Kennedy wrote while fighting in World War II as well as admiring block quotes from the journalist Hugh Sidey, while interesting, will not sway skeptics.
Robert Dallek, Kennedy's most recent biographer, offers a similar though more compelling defense than Stern, who does not even mention Southeast Asia, a rather large blind spot when dealing with Kennedy's alleged Cold War sins.
Nonetheless, Stern clearly hopes to bolster Kennedy's historical stature by showing him reluctant to plunge the nation into war.
Despite Stern's overly enthusiastic brief for the president, it is difficult to quarrel with his assessment of Kennedy during the crisis itself.
A strength of Stern's narrative is that one can follow the contributions and viewpoints of various ExComm members from one meeting to the next.
Kennedy distinguished himself as thoughtful and independent-minded, willing to challenge assertions made by both his military and civilian advisors.
Had decisions been made by majority vote, military action against Cuba would likely have resulted, rather than the mostly diplomatic gambit favored by Kennedy.
Given that the island contained nuclear missiles and more than five times the number of Soviet personnel than had been estimated by United States intelligence, the consequences of a United States attack on Cuba would have been horrifying.
Unswayed by tough-talking hawks, he successfully proceeded with the naval blockade, negotiations with Khrushchev's underlings, and attempts to get inspectors into Cuba to remove the missiles.
Time and again, Kennedy emphasized that the ""Cuban"" missiles were more of a political than a military problem.
Most impressively, the tapes demonstrate Kennedy's ability to offer a detached and critical analysis of his own mania over Cuba.
Here, Kennedy's insight was remarkable, especially since he and his brother were among those most fixated on Castro, and it certainly contributed to his reluctance to intervene militarily.
The tapes reveal the ExComm membership to have been predominantly hawkish.
However, several, if not most participants, including Treasury Secretary C Douglas Dillon and Robert Kennedy, consistently voiced their support for military action and articulated their skepticism over ending the crisis with a proposed trade whereby obsolete NATO missiles would be removed from Turkey after the Soviet missiles were removed from Cuba.
Some scholars, such as historian Mark White, suggest that ExComm lacked ideological breadth, a weakness that meant the debate was not as wide-ranging as it should have been.
Indeed, the only authentic ""dove"" was Adlai Stevenson, the United States ambassador to the United Nations who favored a diplomatic solution.
Oftentimes the only voices that halted the pro-war momentum of the conversations were those of the president or Robert McNamara, the Secretary of Defense whose viewpoints sometimes clashed with those of the more hawkish Joint Chiefs.
Were it not for the assertiveness of the president, things would have turned out much differently.
There is little doubt that President Kennedy, for all the blame he warrants for helping to incite the crisis, also deserves a bulk of the credit for resolving it peacefully.
Kennedy's independence does seem to undercut Stern's assurances about how much influence ExComm had on the president, however.
Kennedy might have appreciated the give-and-take among his advisors, but he ultimately did not heed their advice at one of the most important points in the crisis.
On the pivotal afternoon and evening of Saturday, October 27, most ExComm members urged the president not to agree to the missile trade and even urged him to consider military action.
Some historians, as Stern acknowledges, suggest that Kennedy might have already made up his mind at this point and merely been using these discussions as a last-ditch--and fruitless--effort to gain a consensus.
Stern instead concludes that ""President Kennedy's inclination to pursue the Turkish option actually seems to have hardened in response to the dogged intractability of his advisers.
One is left to wonder what evidence would ever convince Stern that ExComm might not have had a ""major impact"" on the president's October 27 decision.
Nevertheless, Stern's narrative of the ExComm tapes is a welcome single-volume source of the American side of one of the most important and dangerous moments in recent world history.
He offers just enough of a guiding hand to make sense of the conversations and exercises enough restraint to let the evidence speak for itself, allowing room for divergent conclusions on various matters.
Stern offers an unmistakable portrait of Kennedy as an almost dovish hero instead of the macho cold warrior his detractors present.
In the specific--and significant--case of the missile crisis, Stern persuasively revises the anti-Kennedy accounts.
Yet one cannot help, while reading this book, but think about current events, when threats to national security, both real and perceived, receive so much attention.
We know that Kennedy was a curious individual interested in current events who did overrule the war hawks surrounding him in the fall of 1962.
Even when weapons of mass destruction were undoubtedly in Cuba, Kennedy successfully sought to remove the missiles without resorting to a unilateral war.
One wonders whether the current president of the United States--a man who prides himself on not reading newspapers--hears enough disparate opinions on matters of foreign policy or whether he has ever rejected the counsel of his closest, most hawkish advisors.
My cursory listening to parts of two tapes issued by the Kennedy Presidential Library confirm Stern's account of conversations that May and Zelikow either label """" or incorrectly transcribed.
But Stern does have a distracting tendency to overuse italics when quoting speakers.
Only the word ""ample"" was given any emphasis, and it was minimal at that.
Dallek's recent biography of Kennedy presents the same evidence found in his article.
