Not thinking anything of it, she turned onto Gumwood Street between a military vehicle and what she thought was a moving van.
Barb drove through the main gate into Malmstrom Air Force Base and guided her 1960 black-and-white Plymouth Fury to Cedar Street, where her friend Exie lived.
She stopped in front of Exie's house, gathered her purse and coat, and reached for the car door.
Barb jumped when she saw several Air Force Police Officers peering at her over the barrels of their guns.
The officer on the driver's side motioned to her to roll down the car window, which she did with shaking hands.
The officer demanded her identification and then asked her if she knew what she had done.
Still unnerved by the multiple guns pointed at her, Barb nervously answered no.
The officer informed her that she had interrupted a missile convoy on its way to the base.
Shocked, Barb cooperated as the officer interrogated her as to her purpose.
After the officer ascertained that she had not been trying to sabotage the Minuteman missile that the convoy had been transporting, he and his fellow officers stayed their guns, climbed into their vehicle, and drove off.
Barb sat for a moment, then grabbed her purse and fled into Exie's house.
Normally, the grave manner in which the officer handled the situation would have seemed excessive.
I would also like to thank each of my interviewees for granting me time out of their busy schedules to answer my questions and further my research.
First, thank you to my grandparents Joe and Barb Stroup for both granting me interviews and for giving me plenty of support and encouragement for my thesis.
Thanks also to Sunny Ray Mandeville, Lori Balcerzak, Mary Lamb, Tom and Kathy Miller, Dr.
Philip Pallister, Father William Greytak, Guido Bugni, and my mother Lynn Thompson, for all your help.
Erik Pratt for allowing me to take pictures of their civil defense paraphernalia.
Also, thank you to Pearl Pallister for her help in editing the illustrations.
Finally, thank you to all of the professors who have aided in the completion of this thesis.
Also, thank you for keeping me in line and helping me get this thesis done in time.
David Messenger and Nathalie Caulliez for agreeing to be my readers and helping make this thesis the best it can be.
Radiation Measuring Kit, 1962..............................................................................................................34 5.
THE UNITED STATES, THE SOVIET UNION, AND CUBA On October 22,1962, President John F Kennedy announced to an unsuspecting public that Soviet missiles had been discovered in Cuba.
After demanding a Soviet removal of the weapons, Kennedy informed his audience that an American blockade would be placed around Cuba to halt any further missiles from reaching the insular communist nation.
Montanans, like millions of other American citizens, braced themselves for an unprecedented Cold War showdown.
Although thousands of miles from Cuba, Montanans knew they could not escape the shadow of nuclear war.
Kennedy had known about the missiles six days prior to his address to the nation.
The tension between the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba had been brewing for several years.
Millions of dollars were spent on assassination attempts on Castro and economic warfare.
Backers of Operation Mongoose wanted a reason for an American invasion of Cuba; and when the day came, Operation Mongoose and the CIA would be ready.
One of the active backers was Attorney General Robert Kennedy, who actively supported and worked on Operation Mongoose.
It was likely his persistence and near obsession with the project that kept the operation active.
China was challenging the Soviet Union for the dominant role in the Communist world.
The Soviets needed an opportunity to show their toughness, and that opportunity presented itself in Cuba.
The small island nation, which had become communist under Castro in 1959, appeared to be an ideal spot for the Soviet Union to prove to Communists around the globe that it was not being too soft on the West.
In the spring of 1962, the Premier of the Soviet Union, Nikita Khrushchev, decided to begin secretly ‘ Called after a cobra-killing mammal found in Southeast Asia. -4shipping missiles to Cuba.
Unaware of the Soviet transportation of missiles to Cuba, Kennedy announced on September 13,1962, that the United States would do whatever it needed to do to protect itself and its allies.
Implied in this statement was an American intolerance of Soviet missiles in Cuba, which would come back to haunt Kennedy in October when the missiles were discovered.
The increasing friction between the three nations was evident to the American public.
Many Americans believed that the Soviet Union and Cuba were threatening the national security of the United States, and were flagrantly challenging America's supremacy in the Western Hemisphere.
Another factor in leading up to the crisis was a city thousands of miles away from Cuba, Berlin.
Deep in Soviet-controlled East Germany, Berlin's welfare was of considerable concern to the Kennedy administration.
Khrushchev and Kennedy had been at odds with each other about Berlin since the Vienna Summit in June 1961, but after the closure of East Berlin to the West on August * This plan was known as Operation Anadyr.
The name was meant to mislead, the Anadyr region was a far cry from tropical Cuba.
These tensions colored Kennedy's actions up to the crisis and his handling of the crisis itself.
The American Jupiter missiles in Turkey were within quick striking distance of the Soviet Union.
This gave the Americans an advantage, because the Soviets had no missiles in the Western Hemisphere to offset the American threat.
Constructing missiles ninety miles off the coast of the United States would give the Soviets a foothold in the western hemisphere, and keep the Americans from invading Cuba or firing nuclear weapons against the Soviet Union.
An obvious reason was that Castro believed that Cuba's national security was at risk and that the presence of the Soviet missiles would deter an invasion from other countries, -7especially the United States.
The Bay of Pigs invasion and Operation Mongoose were two of the main reasons why Castro decided to let the Soviets build the missiles to aid the Communist movement in the western hemisphere.
Throughout the summer and into the fall of 1962, the Soviets secretly shipped missiles to Cuba.
On Sunday, October 14, American U-2 spy planes discovered and photographed the missiles.
The news reached Washington, D.C., and National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy the next day.
Instead of going immediately to the president, Bundy held the shocking evidence overnight.
The following morning, Bundy presented Kennedy and his advisors with the damning photographs.
Kennedy and the majority of the ExComm1 realized what the photographs represented, even though they could not identify the individual missiles.
The photographs stunned Kennedy and the ExComm; they immediately began brainstorming to figure out how to respond to this threat.
Over the next few hours, Kennedy and his advisors hashed out several possible reactions to the Soviet buildup of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The first option was considered because of the fact that missiles in Soviet territory could already hit the United States, therefore making the missiles in Cuba technically irrelevant.
The fate of Berlin also factored into this option, as the Soviets would likely retaliate if the United States responded explosively to the missiles in Cuba.
This option was never a high-ranking choice, however, because public opinion and political pressure on Kennedy would not allow him to watch the Soviets construct missiles and not do anything to halt it.
The second option, diplomatic pressure, both secret and public, was only slightly more viable than the previous option.
The United States was not willing to trade both the Guantanamo Marine base in Cuba and the American missiles in Turkey for the missiles in Cuba, especially not publicly.
Also, approaching Khrushchev secretly could have backfired, as he might have forced an agreement on the United States, rather than the other way around.
The sole voice of Adlai Stevenson, the American representative in the United Nations , called for the removal of American missiles in Turkey as a trade for the Soviet missiles in Cuba, a suggestion that Kennedy and his other advisors rebuffed.
Kennedy disagreed with Stevenson about the removal of the Jupiter missiles on the basis that if the United States tore down the missiles in Turkey it -9would appear that the American government had given in to Soviet pressure.
Ironically, Kennedy had originally wanted the missiles removed from Turkey due to the fact they were obsolete, but with the discovery of the Soviet missiles in Cuba, there was no way Kennedy could remove the missiles without losing face.
Also, if the Soviets discovered the secret negotiations, the Americans might then be forced to accept an agreement with the Soviets, such as in the previous option, rather than delivering an ultimatum.
The fourth option, invading Cuba, was the most likely option to lead to nuclear war with the Soviets.
An invasion appealed to high-ranking American officials, due to the fact it could remove the man who had irritated the United States since his rise in the late 1950s, Fidel Castro, and it would also destroy the Soviet missiles assembled in Cuba.
If American bombers carried out a successful strike and took out the missiles, then both the Soviet and Cuban threats would be neutralized.
He preferred a limited strike that would take out the missiles and the surface-to-air missile sites.
Kennedy did not rule out a general strike, but he was more willing to move forward with a limited one.
The Soviets could retaliate with nuclear weapons or with an attack on the United States from Cuba, Soviet personnel could be killed in an air strike, the Soviets might take Berlin or fire on Turkey, or the Soviets might simply choose to reconstruct the destroyed missiles.
This option played heavily on Kennedy's mind the week before he announced the presence of the missiles to the nation.
If the American Navy placed an effective quarantine on Cuba, then the Soviets would be unable to continue to ship missile parts to the island.
As with the previous options, the blockade could produce a negative Soviet reaction.
The Soviets could respond by refusing to yield to the blockade, which would likely result in a naval battle in the middle of the Caribbean Sea.
Another problem was whether or not the blockade would be effective enough to bring about a removal of the -11missiles in Cuba.
After the first day, this option, as well as the air strike and the invasion, appeared to be the most likely reactions to the missiles in Cuba.
The next few days, President Kennedy and his ExComm advisors debated between the various options they had discussed.
The Joint Chiefs supported the full military invasion, rather than the blockade and the air strike.
McNamara explained to Kennedy that even a surgical strike would not necessarily take out all the missiles or the missile sites and that an invasion had a better chance of succeeding.
The president's brother, Robert Kennedy, did not initially support the blockade.
He stated,""... the argument against the blockade is that it's a very slow death, and it builds up, and goes over a period of months, and during that period of time you've got all these people yelling and screaming about it, you've got the examination of Russian ships, shooting down the Russian planes that try to land there.
Almost every action the United States took could lead to a Soviet retaliation against the European city.
Throughout the Thursday, October 18, discussions, Berlin played a prominent role.
Later in the day, Kennedy and Soviet foreign minister Andrei Gromyko discussed Cuba and Berlin.
Gromyko evaded Kennedy when the latter prodded him about and warned him against offensive weapons on the small island.
The next day, Kennedy and his advisors bickered about which action should be taken in response to the missiles.
The Joint Chiefs continually pressed Kennedy on the advantages of an invasion, but the president managed to evade being forced into a hasty decision that would lead to military action. -13Later that day, Kennedy left Washington, D.C., to attend a series of campaign rallies for the upcoming congressional elections.
After the first rally, however, he commanded the White House physician, Rear Admiral George Burkley, to announce to the public that Kennedy had a cold, so the president could return to Washington, D.C., to deal with the crisis without causing public alarm.
No one doubted Kennedy's illness; newspapers across Montana and the nation ran stories on Kennedy's cold.
The 1962 congressional elections were less than three weeks away when Kennedy learned of the missiles, and the elections might have influenced how he dealt with the crisis.
On the other hand, choosing to deal with the missiles in Cuba prior to elections could have backfired on Kennedy, as there was no way to predict how the public would react to the news or Kennedy's solution to the crisis.
Politics and the election might have had some influence on Kennedy's decision, but they were far from the primary cause. -14On Saturday, October 20, the hawks and the doves presented their respective sides to the president.
McNamara, who had wavered on his stance in the group, proclaimed his support for the blockade.
Robert Kennedy vacillated between the blockade and air strikes, but in the end he came out a dove.
The discussion between the two sides became extremely heated and the hawks pressed President Kennedy to side with them and go forward with an invasion, air strikes, or both.
By the time the meeting had concluded, President Kennedy clearly supported a blockade.
This, however, did not satisfy the doves either, as Kennedy also had refused to negotiate.
At the end of the day, Kennedy ordered Theodore Sorensen, Special Counsel to the President, to write a speech announcing a blockade of Cuba to the American public.
He had realized that there were too many nuclear risks involved with an invasion and air strikes.
The rest of Sunday was used to discuss possible Soviet reactions to the blockade and American justification of the quarantine to the world.
Next, Kennedy decided it was time to inform America's allies of the missiles in Cuba and of the American blockade around the island.
He then dispatched messengers to each North American Treaty Organization country.
Kennedy managed to convince the two newspapers to hold their stories until after his Monday presidential address in the interest of national security.
The day ended on a relatively positive note for the Kennedy administration.
On Monday, October 22, was a flurry of activity for President Kennedy and his administration.
Kennedy's speech that night required some fine-tuning, and Adlai Stevenson and the American delegation to the UN needed a plan of attack for the approaching debate.
Also, military issues around the world such as European defense and the Jupiter missiles in Turkey had to be sorted out.
Kennedy did not want any rogue military personnel firing missiles on the Soviet Union.
It was discovered later that Khrushchev had given similar orders to Soviet personnel.
On Monday afternoon, the Joint Chiefs moved American forces to DEFCON 32 and the military prepared itself for the blockade that was less than forty-eight hours away.
On late Monday afternoon, Kennedy briefed his cabinet and leaders of Congress in separate meetings.
He then revealed his plan to blockade Cuba, which although considered an act of war, it was unlikely to provide a militant, possibly nuclear response from the 2 DEFCON, which was short for Defensive Condition, was an alert for American military forces.
DEFCON ranged from DEFCON 5, which was simple preparedness, to DEFCON 1, which was the most serious alert of all, the DEFCON for war.
The DEFCON level was elevated when the President and his advisors believed American national security was at risk. -16Soviets and Cubans.
Kennedy then defended his choice from interrogations by various senators, especially from the vigorous attack of Senator Richard Russell of Georgia.
After the meetings, the Soviets received a copy of the president's upcoming speech from Secretary of State Dean Rusk, as well as a letter to Kennedy from Khrushchev.
In his speech, Kennedy briefed the nation about the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy made no attempt to cushion his words; instead, he utilized stark phrases to describe the situation in Cuba.
He revealed the extent of the missiles in Cuba and how far from the island the missiles could reach if fired.
Kennedy reminded the public that the Soviets had lied about their missile capabilities both inside and outside the Soviet Union.
He then vividly illustrated the horrors of nuclear war and the fears of living in a world where nuclear war was always possible. -17Next, Kennedy outlined the American response.
He also described the military buildup and military reinforcement of Gitmo.
Kennedy stated that a missile launch from Cuba would bring about an American retaliation.
Kennedy warned the American public about the treacherous road ahead, and then he concluded by calling for freedom and peace.
The entire world was now aware that the United States and the Soviet Union were coming alarmingly close to nuclear war.
The next day, October 23,1692, newspapers across Montana reported on Kennedy's speech.
Residents in Billings were some of the many Montanans who proclaimed their support for Kennedy and his actions.
The advent of the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union, combined with the newly acquired fear of a nuclear holocaust, frightened the American public.
Many searched for a way to escape the potential Armageddon, and they thought a shelter provided that safe haven.
Montana's Office of Civil Defense began asking the national government for assistance as early as 1955.
Hugh K Potter, Montana's Director of Civil Defense in 1955, wrote United States Senator Lee Metcalf to request aid for Montana.
He explained to Metcalf that Montana was not prepared for an emergency and would not fare well if such an emergency came.
In March 1957, Potter asked Metcalf to support bills that would give more financial aid to Montana.
One of the bills was the Holifield bill, named after its creator, Chet Holifield, a Democrat from California.
The bill called for the creation of several committees, including a Military Liaison committee, a Scientific Advisory Board, and a Civil Defense Advisory Council.
Potter supported it due to the fact that he believed it would aid Montana's civil defense.
Senator Lee Metcalf tried to keep Montanans informed about civil defense matters.
In one radio address on June 14,1957, Metcalf explained to Montanans about nuclear fallout.
He described the effects of radiation on the human body, even through indirect exposure to atomic fallout.
The majority of the money was designated for Malmstrom Air Force Base and Glasgow AFB, to help build up the defense of the two areas.
Metcalf did -23not attempt to cushion his words when he informed Montanans on this serious topic.
Montanans sent many letters regarding civil defense to United States Representative Arnold Olsen.
Eslick of Bigfork wrote Olsen asking for instruction regarding the construction of a fallout shelter in a new school in Bigfork.
The language of such documents was often vague and difficult to discern when the documents could be applied.
Both Olsen and Metcalf were asked by many Montana constituents to explain legislation and find out if it was applicable to each person's respective situation.
Both Senator Metcalf and Representative Olsen received numerous letters from Montanans, especially Butte citizens, petitioning then to have the Regional Office of Civil Defense established in Butte.
The Young Democratic Club presented Olsen with four reasons why the new office should be created in Butte.
Butte had a stellar civil defense program already in place; the town's miles of tunnels would be excellent for storage and shelters; it had a very efficient transportation system; and the town's people were in dire need of the economic boost that would come from the establishment of the office there.
Mr -24Carroll College in Helena, Montana, also tried to prepare its students and its campus for a nuclear attack.
Carroll had some civil defense plans, but they were far from extensive.
Some of these spots included Helena High School, the Civic Center, and Helena Junior High School.
A typical set-up included walls covered with bunk-style beds, but instead of two levels of beds, there were at least three to four beds on top of one another on the wall.
The food and water supply was kept in a different area, away from the sleeping quarters.
The barrel gave instructions on how to fill, dispense, and use as a commode.
Photograph of United States Aqua Can from private collection, taken by author. -28Individual Montanans also had their own plans for civil defense.
Philip Pallister, M.D., built a fallout shelter in his house in the 1950s, after the tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union began to escalate.
His shelter included its own sewer system, water and food supply, air system, radiation detector, and solid eight-inch concrete walls encased with one inch of lead.
Pallister had a freezer to keep a stockpile of meats and tanks of water.
Pallister began learning about radiation and its effects on certain types of plants and animals.
Goats, for example, were one of the best animals for surviving and recovering from a nuclear attack.
He also studied how to remove radiation from the soil, so crops planted would grow to feed the survivors of a nuclear holocaust.
Although some Montanans chose to fortify their homes and implement their own civil defense plans in the same manner as Dr.
Mary Lamb, a senior at Helena High School during the crisis, stated that her family, which lived up in the mountains around Helena, had planned on evacuating to one of the caves near her home.
Mary recalled that she had friends whose parents were building bomb shelters and that several shelters were being built within the Helena city limits at the time.
Her main concern was not being able to find shelter if she was in the city when a nuclear bomb hit. -29When she was younger, Mary participated in drills designed to prepare the students for a nuclear attack.
She attended a one-room country school, which had a wall made entirely of windows.
The students practiced moving all of the desks against the wall opposite the windows and crawling behind them so that they would be shielded from flying shards of glass if a bomb went off and shattered the wall of windows.
Barb Stroup, who lived at Malmstrom AFB with her husband, Tech Sergeant Joseph Stroup and their eight-year old daughter Lynn, stocked up her basement with bedding and food in case it needed to be used as a shelter.
According to her husband, Joe, Malmstrom had no shelters to offer its servicemen and their families, so each family had to prepare on its own.
On the other hand, Tom and Kathy Miller of Darby, Montana, had no shelter to flee to in the case of an emergency.
They made no attempt to stock up on food and supplies, if the crisis turned nuclear.
Lori Balcerzak, a junior in high school during the crisis, remembers that her town of Clancy had distributed maps to various places in the area that were to serve as fallout shelters.
Other than knowing where their shelter was, Lori's family did not practice any other form of civil defense.
One couple from Missoula, the Minnerlys, wrote Senator Metcalf in December 1961, asking him not to support an upcoming appropriations bill for civil defense and fallout shelters.
Montanans were not the only citizens who braced themselves for possible nuclear war.
Those who could afford it had veritable mansions underneath the earth's surface.
Homes such as the one Christopher Walken's character, Calvin Webber, built in the film Blast from the Past were not as far from reality as one might think.
Webber's shelter mirrored his home on the surface and was complete with a dining room, kitchen, living room, bedrooms, fishery, grocery store, and garden.
Not all shelters may have been as fancy, but there is little doubt that some were.
It was very extravagant, but it failed to protect the French from the German invasion in World War II. -31Webber also employed an extensive lock system to keep others out that was a necessity in the real world as well.
As Robert Kennedy's character explained to Kevin Costner's character, Kenneth O'Donnell, the identity cards were ""for morale.
Less than half of Montana's counties had made decent civil defense preparations.
On October 25,1962, Governor Tim Babcock ordered Montana's National Guard to go and help these counties step up their civil defense work.
The day before, Montana's air bases were placed on alert, which included sending jet fighter planes from Malmstrom AFB in Great Falls to the airport in Billings.
Other airports and reserve bases, such as the base in Missoula, readied themselves as well, even though they had not yet been put on alert.
At Malmstrom AFB, servicemen were ordered to place the Minuteman Missiles on alert.
In Great Falls, the local government instructed schools about what to do in case of a nuclear attack.
Children who lived over ten minutes away from their school were supposed to stay in the structure, whereas children who lived under ten minutes away were instructed to evacuate to their homes.
Philip Pallister, interview by author, October 30,2005, Boulder, MT, tape recording. -3913 Ibid.
Molly Holz, ""The Minuteman Missiles in Montana"" 6,15; and Joseph Stroup.
Director Fives Rules for Action in Crisis,"" Carbon County News (Red Lodge), November 1,1962,1.
For some the crisis created immense fear, whereas in others it wrought no reaction.
Some people fully supported the president in his reaction and implementation of the quarantine, whereas other people believed that Kennedy had not responded forcefully enough and that he should have acted more aggressively.
Montana politicians at the national, state, and local levels all began proclaiming their support for Kennedy and his decisions regarding the crisis.
One Billings Gazette headline -42$gaHa*4tn• >.jin®ig hfaoriseog made --you^wanfc&to ^DidAth® 4ax ^iU .ornvftJpdaYuOn^^oA1 J-« fty.
In this article, Governor Tim Babcock proclaimed his support for President Kennedy and the quarantine.
Wayne Montgomery, the Republican who was challenging the incumbent Arnold Olsen, promised he would support * James Battin was one of the two United States Representatives from Montana, the other being Arnold Olsen.
The two United States Senators from Montana were Mike Mansfield and Lee Metcalf. -44Kennedy's policies regarding Cuba, even if that meant more aggressive action.
Graybill said he appreciated the manner in which Kennedy handled the crisis, as it would hopefully allow the two super powers to avoid war, or even worse, nuclear war.
Engles stated, ""Either he does not enjoy the confidence of the President and Montana's senior senator , the majority leader, or he does not recognize a serious national threat when he sees one.
Jim Battin ran advertisements in Montana newspapers for his reelection to Congress.
Originally, Senator Mike Mansfield, who was a ranking member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, was away from Montana and Washington, D C., when he learned about the missiles in Cuba.
Mansfield's Florida vacation was cut short when Kennedy had him flown back for an emergency briefing.
In a speech given the same day as Kennedy's presidential address, Mansfield revealed that Kennedy had informed him and other members of Congress on the situation.
Mansfield also reiterated that ""We can do nothing else now that the decision has been reached but give our full support to the President of the United States who under our Constitution is charged with the awesome responsibility which is his.""10 -46preservation o' peace.# on. a preparation for war and to make certain -, aggressor is ever tempted again, Olsen has supported strengthening the military might emphasising mis­ sile, air and submarine striking power 'as never before in the history of the s.
Olsen believes it is essential to our national defense that we dominate the heavens with our satellites.
Congressman Olsen has given un­ wavering .support to legislation for space satellites.
A move against Cuba, however, would only occur under the most dire circumstances.
In another statement, Mansfield addressed the fact that Cuba was going to play a large role in the upcoming Congressional elections.
Cuba should not be used politically and Mansfield totally supported the president and his actions regarding Cuba.
Mansfield was not the only member of the Montana delegation who worked to keep Montanans informed as the crisis progressed.
Senator Lee Metcalf attempted to assuage fears that the people might have about the missiles in Cuba.
On October 26, he stated that he thought the Cuban crisis would be over soon, because the Soviets would fold to the Americans.
When asked by the Red Lodge Chamber of Commerce on his position on -49the crisis, Battin responded that he supported the blockade, but would support other options as well.
He also warned Montanans that Cuba already had intermediate range ballistic missiles that could reach places twenty-three hundred miles from Cuba, including Montana.
At a rally in Billings, Battin asserted that he supported Kennedy's action, he just thought that the federal government should have acted on the Cuban threat months earlier.
He reasserted these sentiments to a crowd in Glasgow a few days later and he added that a ""tough policy toward Russia"" was essential in the handling of the crisis.
In Butte, Olsen informed the city's inhabitants that he supported the quarantine of Cuba.
At Babcock's forty-third birthday party, he expressed his support for Kennedy and -50his stance in Cuba.
Although Montanans appreciated the news their Montana and national government officials were giving them, it did not mean that Montanans waited placidly for information to come to them.
Many people wrote their Senators both asking for information and giving it.
They also wrote to commend and sometimes to condemn the actions of the nation.
Senator Lee Metcalf received several letters during and immediately after the crisis.
John Ricks of Lima asked Metcalf why the United States had not dealt with Fidel Castro more forcefully before the crisis, therefore preventing the entire situation.
James Eakland of Fortine praised -51Kennedy's action and asked Mansfield to not allow a retreat from this policy.
Leonard Bashor, the State Representative of Toole County from Kevin, Montana, concurred with the Eaklands in his telegram to Mansfield, where he ""rge no retreat on present position"" in Cuba.
The American Legion of Harlowtown also expressed their full support in a telegram to Mansfield on October 27,1962.22 During the crisis, Mansfield received numerous letters from Montanans informing him of their support of the government and its actions regarding Cuba.
Martha and Frank Palssy of Rollins, Montana, expressed a mixture of feelings regarding the crisis.
Mervin Karr, on the other hand, was entirely negative about the United States Policy in Cuba.
Ben Middleton of Anaconda wrote Mansfield a letter in which he stated his concerns with the Soviet offer to take the nuclear missiles out of Cuba.
He told Mansfield that he had a nagging feeling that -52Khrushchev planned on replacing the missiles with nuclear submarines to prowl the Caribbean Sea.
He then called for the liberation of Cuba from the clutches of Castro and the Soviet Union.
Mansfield received numerous telegrams from Montanans who concurred with the Montana Council of Churches.
Robert Romanowski of Bozeman also urged Mansfield to agree to the UN proposal.
Lori Balcerzak, then a junior in high school from Clancy, Montana, remembered being ""scared that we were in trouble"" and was afraid the confrontation might lead to nuclear war.
Looking back on the crisis, Bugni totally agreed with the stance taken by Kennedy regarding Cuba.
His wife, Barb, remembered feeling ""nervous"" and after the crisis was over she was relieved and she hoped that it would stay resolved.
The most frightening moment for her was when she interrupted the missile convoy and had several guns pointed at her head.
After the crisis cooled down, Tom remembered that he was content with the path the United States had taken and he thought the quarantine was the most sensible choice.
She wished that Kennedy had taken much more aggressive action and invaded Cuba.
Sunny Ray Mandeville, a sophomore at Helena High School during the crisis, expressed exactly the opposite sentiment.
She stated that although the crisis was ""magnified"" by the loss of her father a year and a half earlier, it ""sounded almost like a declaration of war,"" which was ""very -55scary"" for her.
Sunny Ray was very relieved when the crisis was over and was grateful it had not escalated into nuclear war.
Mary Lamb, a senior at Helena High School during the crisis, was also very frightened when the world was made aware of the crisis.
She stated that at the time she did not think the blockade was a strong enough reaction.
Other Montanans fell within this spectrum of being extremely frightened to barely registering the crisis as a cause for concern.
Many newspapers ran articles about Montanans and their reaction to the crisis.
In its regular column, ""Minute Interviews on Main,"" the Lewistown Daily News asked people what their reaction was to President Kennedy's decision to quarantine Cuba.
Also, four of the men added they only wished Kennedy had done it earlier.
Local groups such as the 40 and 8 of Bozeman also announced their support for Kennedy and his decision.
Montanans went into Sunday, October 28,1962, unsure of what the day might bring.
Newspapers ran several ads on Sunday that urged people to go to church.
Father Greytak recalled that although people at Carroll College were concerned, there was no rush to attend religious sevices.
Still many people felt the pull to go to church when they saw church advertisements in the newspapers.
Many church ads did not directly mention the Cuban situation, but the serious undertones of the ads alluded to the missile crisis.
The large number of religious advertisements added to the fear felt by many Montanans, causing people to rush to church to pray for the survival of humanity. -57.
The variety of reactions to the crisis was likely mirrored throughout the nation, as each day in the crisis triggered a new ripple of feelings in the American public.
The emotions of the nation and Montana reached a fever pitch as the crisis unfolded in that fateful week in October 1962.
People watched and waited as Kennedy and Khrushchev danced precariously around nuclear war.
Khrushchev Must Decide 'PeaceWar,'"" Great Falls Tribune, October 27,1962,1. -6014 ""Mansfield Hints at K, JFK Meet,"" Great Falls Tribune, October 26,1962, 4; ""Sen.
Atomic Warheads Already in Cuba,"" Billings Gazette, October 27,1962,1,5.
KENNEDY, KHRUSHCHEV, AND THE NUCLEAR TANGO While Montanans braced for possible nuclear war, Kennedy and his advisors gathered to see if the Soviet Union would challenge the blockade set to begin October 24,1962.
They were unsure as to how the Soviets and Cubans would react to Kennedy's Monday evening presidential address.
On Wednesday, October 24, Kennedy and his advisors anxiously awaited news from the quarantine.
Kennedy and his advisors knew that several Soviet vessels were in proximity of the Q-line,* and they were due to cross the line at any moment.
The rest of the day, Kennedy and his advisors waited for any other news from the Q-line.
No Soviet ships threatened to break the blockade, but Kennedy refused to allow a false sense of relief and security.
Late Wednesday evening, Kennedy received a message penned by Khrushchev, in which he criticized Kennedy severely for the American quarantine.
He also accused Kennedy of forcing terms on Khrushchev that Kennedy would never accept if the situation was reversed.
Khrushchev concluded his letter stating,""... shall not be simply observers of piratical actions of American ships on the high seas.
The comparison of the crisis to an old West gunfight was interesting as in these duels held at ""High Noon,"" only one party was left standing.
Thursday, October 25, came without event and Kennedy and other ExComm members met to continue plotting the course of the United States for the days to come.
Kennedy and his advisors also discussed American responses to the possibility of a Soviet ship challenging the Q-line.
They also needed to decide whether or not to stop every Soviet ship that approached Cuba.
One ship, the Bucharest, most likely did not have missile paraphernalia on board, so it would be wise for the Americans to let the ship pass.
Later on Thursday, Kennedy and his ExComm gathered in the Cabinet room to discuss the progress of Soviet ships nearing the blockade.
The president learned that the Bucharest had been momentarily stopped at the line, but had not been boarded and had been allowed to pass without incident.
McNamara also announced that the Volkerfreundschaft, an East German passenger liner, was drawing closer to the Q-line.
The Ex-Comm members bickered back and forth as to whether to make a stand and stop the ship, or let it pass into Cuban waters unmolested.
The quarreling continued until President Kennedy dictated that the ship would be allowed to cross the line without interference for two reasons.
One, Kennedy wanted to push forward U Thant's proposal for a decrease in -67tensions.
Two, according to Kennedy, ""If you try to disable it, you're apt to sink it.
Adlai Stevenson, the American representative to the UN, was prepared to debate the Soviets on the issue of the missiles in Cuba in the UN meeting on the evening of October 25.
When the Soviet representative to the UN, Valerian Zorin, continued to deny the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba and accused the United States of bringing the world close to a nuclear catastrophe, Stevenson retaliated by announcing that the American government had proof of weapons in Cuba.
He interrogated Zorin as to whether he was denying the existence of missiles in Cuba.
Zorin attempted to sidestep the question by claiming he did not have to answer Stevenson, as they were not in an American courtroom.
Stevenson then proceeded with his presentation of the damning photographs of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The evening ended on a high note for the Kennedy administration. -68Friday, October 26, followed a similar format to Wednesday and Thursday; Kennedy and his advisors continued to work on contingency plans for Cuba.
The ExComm realized that sooner or later the American naval vessels that were enforcing the quarantine would have to stop a Soviet ship, but it was still not positive as to how the Soviets would react.
The discussions shifted to various topics, including a UN inspection, UN and OAS support of American initiatives, and the missile sites in Cuba.
Unlike the day, the evening of October 26 was an exciting one for the Kennedy administration.
A letter arrived from Khrushchev that proposed a cessation to the hostilities that had sprung up between the nations.
In the letter, Khrushchev promised that if the United States would agree not to invade Cuba, the Soviet Union would stop shipping Castro weapons.
The next day, however, Kennedy received a new letter from Khrushchev that stated that he would agree to the removal of the Cuban missiles in exchange for the removal of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
Confused, Kennedy and his advisors tried to reason why Khruschev had hardened his position overnight.
They then immediately began to determine how to respond to these messages.
First, an American U-2 spy plane in Alaska had accidentally drifted out of American airspace and into the Soviet airspace, which the Soviets might have thought was gathering information for a -69preemptive strike on the Soviets.
On Saturday, October 27, Cubans under Soviet command fired upon an American U-2 spy plane.
The pilot, Major Rudolf Anderson, who was on a reconnaissance mission to learn more about the progress of the missiles, was killed when a missile struck his plane and it crashed.
The loss of Major Anderson deeply saddened Kennedy and his advisors, but a deeper issue bubbled beneath the surface.
There was the realization that the Soviet Union and Cuba apparently were preparing to do battle.
The ExComm members met to discuss what action should be taken in response to the killing of Major Anderson.
The members had to determine if the Cubans had been acting alone or with Soviet help and if the plane had been shot down because the Cubans thought it a threat or if they did so under Soviet, specifically Khrushchev's, command.
No matter what, Kennedy had to tread carefully, as one wrong move could lead to nuclear war.
In the end, Kennedy decided to negotiate directly with Khrushchev and the -70Soviet Union, leaving Cuba out of negotiations.
In fact, the Cubans had not been party to the negotiations since the crisis had first erupted.
Later Saturday evening, during the midst of the U-2 controversies, Kennedy decided to make a move for peace.
Carefully ignoring Khrushchev's second letter that called for a quid pro quo exchange of the missiles, on October 27, Kennedy accepted the terms of the first letter sent the day before.
On October 28, Khrushchev responded to both Kennedy's letter and to the U-2 problems.
The Soviet Premier chastised the president for flying spy planes into both Soviet and Cuban airspace, but instead of using these incidents as a reason to negate his initial proposal, Khrushchev called for caution and rational thought to keep the two nations from taking up arms; with this, he was in fact accepting an end to the missile crisis.
Tensions between the Soviet Union and the United States had decreased substantially after the two countries reached an agreement about the Cuban situation.
The agreement required the Soviet Union to dismantle and remove the missiles in Cuba and an American quid pro removal of the Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
It also included an American pledge not to invade Cuba, which pleased Castro.
On October 30, a miscommunication on the bridge of an American naval vessel almost led to that vessel firing upon a Soviet submarine.
Peter A Huchthausen, October Fury , 215. -73CONCLUSION Not all people believed that the crisis would stay resolved or that the Soviets were really making a deal.
It warned of a Trojan-horse situation, which may have reflected what many Americans felt at the conclusion of the crisis.
Cuba would remain a major concern for the American government and American public for years to come.
After the crisis cooled down, some Montanans wrote to members of Montana's Congressional delegation to ask questions or give advice to their senators and representatives.
Don Peterson of East Helena, Montana, wrote Senator Lee Metcalf, ""Never before ... has an American President allowed a foreign nation to... flagrantly flaunt the United States in this hemisphere.
Dean Wilcox of Missoula, on the other hand, supported Kennedy's action.
He simply wanted the United States to keep firm on its policy with Cuba.
Senator Mike Mansfield spoke to a crowd in Butte after the crisis had concluded.
He reassured Montanans about the situation and reconfirmed his support of Kennedy's decisions during the crisis.
He stated, ""It was a power decision by the President, approved unanimously by both Democrats and Republicans of the House and Senate.
The comparison of the Khrushchev deal to the Trojan Horse was particularly revealing of the feelings of many people.
Battin served as the chairman of the Special Subcommittee on Cuba and Subversion in the Western Hemisphere.
The committee was created to study ""past errors and present dangers"" in American-Cuban relations.
In an interim report presented to the House on May 20,1963, Battin revealed that the number of Soviet officials still in Cuba had been drastically underestimated.
On another day, June 24,1963, Battin asserted that the American government needed to enforce the Monroe Doctrine in regards to the Soviet Union and Cuba.
Deer Lodge, Powell, Dawson, and Custer Counties all distributed similar booklets that included information about fallout, nuclear flashes, evacuation, public shelters, private shelters, and how to protect one's family from nuclear fallout.
They also included a checklist of shelter supplies, diagrams for basement shelter building, family emergency plans, and a map of available shelter space in each county.
Cascade County began issuing annual reports regarding the area's civil defense to assess the county's readiness for a nuclear attack.
The information included in the report were items such as available shelter spaces and plans for nuclear attacks.
It renewed the shelter-building frenzy that had swept the nation in the 1950s and helped to increase the number of civil defense programs in Montana.
The crisis also helped to unify Montana politicians behind Kennedy in a bipartisan display of support for the president's policy in Cuba.
This bipartisanship helped to reassure Montanans that the crisis would not become a nuclear exchange.
The missiles in Cuba were altogether too close in the minds of Montanans.
In actuality, the missiles in Cuba were too far away from the Northwest to strike Montana, but that did not matter to the state's inhabitants.
The Cold War had been building since the late 1940s and the arms race had dramatically escalated in the 1950s.
This resulted in an era of growing tension between the Soviet Union and the United States that left people on both sides believing they were vulnerable to a nuclear attack.
