However, a new series of specials about the 1962 Cuban missile crisis reminds us that the threat remains.
Jennings says it was ``fascinating and frightening'' working on Missiles.
Jennings notes that Cuban President Fidel Castro and his people, ``were quite relaxed about the crisis.
But it was all real, and Shriver set out to show the real people involved.
His job was to intercept secret messages sent by his Soviet counterpart about the Soviet’s military operations.
It was May 1962, the height of the Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The United States had recently placed ballistic missiles along the Russia-Turkey border.
To retaliate, Khrushchev secretly slipped medium-range ballistic missiles into Cuba.
On Oct., an American spy plane was sent to search the island for Soviet nuclear missiles.
They were told to remove them or face the possibility of a nuclear war.
For a few days in late October 1962, relations between the United States and Russia became unusually tense.
Curtis LeMay, commander of the Strategic Air Command, recommended to President Kennedy that we “nuke” Cuba and send in the Marines.
The incident was defused when Khrushchev sent a letter to Kennedy suggesting that he would pull the Soviet missiles out of Cuba if Kennedy would do the same thing with the American ballistic missiles along the Russia-Turkey border.
A bargain between the Americans and the Soviets was struck, and the crisis was over just as quickly as it began.
A short time later, Hutchinson completed his four-year hitch in the Air Force.
He got out and went to East Tennessee State College for a couple years, where he studied business administration.
About this time he got married and dropped out of school while his wife, Francine, continued her college education.
Initially he went to work for Firestone for three years, but then he started his own carpet business.
He sold the carpet business after eight years and went into real estate in the Norfolk, Va., area with his wife.
Hutchinson hung up his license in 1995 and moved to Burnt Store Marina.
He and his wife own two homes, one here and the other on Virginia Beach near Norfolk.
PETER ORSI Associated Press Section: International 1947 Words OpenURL Link HAVANA — The world stood at the brink of Armageddon for 13 days in October 1962 when President John F Kennedy drew a symbolic line in the Atlantic and warned of dire consequences if Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev dared to cross it.
An American U-2 spy plane flying high over Cuba had snapped aerial photographs of Soviet ballistic missile sites that could launch nuclear warheads with little warning at the United States, just 90 miles away.
It was the height of the Cold War, and many people feared nuclear war would annihilate human civilization.
Soviet ships carrying nuclear equipment steamed toward Kennedy's ""quarantine"" zone around the island, but turned around before reaching the line.
In the five decades since the nuclear standoff between Washington and Moscow, much of the long-held conventional wisdom about the missile crisis has been knocked down, including the common belief that Kennedy's bold brinksmanship ruled the day.
On the eve of the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis, historians now say it was behind-thescenes compromise rather than a high-stakes game of chicken that resolved the faceoff, that both Washington and Moscow wound up winners and that the crisis lasted far longer than 13 days.
Declassified documents, oral histories and accounts from decision-makers involved in the standoff have turned up new information that scholars say provides lessons for leaders embroiled in contemporary crises such as the one in Syria, where President Bashar Assad has ignored international pleas to stop attacks on civilians in an uprising that has killed more than 32,000 people.
Another modern standoff is over Iran, which the West accuses of pursuing a nuclear weapons program.
In a recent United Nations speech, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu drew a red line on a cartoon bomb to illustrate that a nuclear Tehran would not be tolerated.
Historians say the resolution of the standoff was really a triumph of backdoor diplomacy.
Kennedy resisted pressure from aides advising that he cede nothing to Moscow and even consider a preemptive strike.
He instead engaged in intense behind-the-scenes diplomacy with the Soviets, other countries and the United Nations secretary-general.
Washington would publicly reject any invasion of Cuba, and Khrushchev would withdraw the missiles from the island.
The real sweetener was that Kennedy would withdraw Jupiter nuclear missiles from United States installations in Turkey, near the Soviet border.
It was a secret pledge known only to a handful of presidential advisers that did not emerge until years later.
Nevertheless, the brinkmanship myth persists, with President George W Bush in 2002 citing the missile crisis as a historical lesson in fortitude that justified a preemptive invasion of Iraq.
The Jupiter missiles are sometimes described as nearly obsolete, but they had come online just months earlier and were fully capable of striking into the Soviet Union.
Their withdrawal, along with Kennedy's assurance he would not invade Cuba, gave Khrushchev enough to feel he had saved face and the following day he announced the imminent dismantling of offensive weapons in Cuba.
Soon after, a U.S.-Soviet presidential hotline was established and the two nations initiated discussions that led to the Limited Test Ban treaty and ultimately the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Pastor said he had many discussions about the missile crisis over the years with his late father-in-law, Robert McNamara, who was Kennedy's defense secretary.
Pastor said domestic politics made it tough for both Kennedy and successive presidents to heed that lesson, as evidenced by Kennedy's intense efforts to keep the deal secret.
President Barack Obama, for example, faces considerable pressure to maintain a tough line on Cuba.
Among the issues are the United States embargo, demands for political change, an American government subcontractor imprisoned in Cuba as an alleged spy and five Cuban intelligence agents serving long sentences in the United States.
On Oct., a United States warship dropped depth charges over a nuclear-armed Soviet sub and the Soviets shot down a U-2 spy plane over Cuba.
Yet after Kennedy on Oct. announced a United States naval quarantine around the island to prevent more military equipment from arriving, Khrushchev recalled ships carrying nuclear equipment the following day, according to the 2008 book ""One Minute to Midnight"" by Michael Dobbs, which was based on newly examined Soviet documents.
That means that on Oct., when Secretary of State Rusk made his famous ""eyeball-to-eyeball"" statement reacting to supposedly up-to-the-minute intelligence, the vessels were already hundreds of miles away, steaming home.
That confrontation never took place,"" said Kornbluh, who is a Cuba analyst at the nongovernment National Security Archive, which has spent decades working to get missile crisis documents declassified.
Along with being a day late on the turnaround by Soviet ships, the CIA missed several key developments that would have helped Kennedy and his advisers navigate the crisis.
The CIA learned late in the game about the ballistic missiles' presence in Cuba, and they were already operational by the time Kennedy was informed of their existence.
The agency was also unaware of other, tactical nuclear missiles in Cuba that could have been deployed against a United States attack.
The Soviets had even positioned nuclear-tipped missiles on a ridge above the U.S. naval base at Guantanamo Bay in preparation for an invasion.
This myth has been perpetuated in part by the title of Robert F Kennedy's posthumous memoir, ""Thirteen Days,"" as well as the 2000 movie of the same name starring Kevin Costner.
Indeed it was 13 days from Oct., when Kennedy was first told about the missiles, to Oct., when the Soviets announced their withdrawal.
But the ""October Crisis,"" as it is known in Cuba, dragged on for another tense month or so in what Kornbluh dubs the ""November Extension,"" as Washington and Moscow haggled over details of exactly what weapons would be removed.
The Soviet Union also had problems dealing with Fidel Castro, according to a Soviet document made public this month by Svetlana Savranskaya, a Russia analyst for the National Security Archive.
Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan traveled to Cuba that Nov. and spent 20 days in tense talks with the Cuban leader, who was angry the Soviets had reached a deal without consulting him.
Castro lobbied hard but unsuccessfully to keep the tactical nuclear weapons that the Americans had not learned about.
Ministers' Council Vice-President Jose Ramon Fernandez showed his satisfaction with the meeting, which in his opinion is a victory over the hostile actions and all kinds of aggressions that the United States government has achieved against Cuba ever since the revolution triumphed.
Fernandez quoted Fidel's words when he said that a respectful environment should be created among the participants and that the truth about ""La crisis de octubre"" should be said with an entire freedom of speech.
During his intervention, MacNamara thanked the Cuban government for the opportunity they are giving them through this meeting to search for the real truth in our own country, something that will teach the world a lesson and will allow them to clear up a few points that are still unascertained.
Apart from a few Russian guests, Cuban Parliament President Ricardo Alarcon, Chancellor Felipe Perez Roque and some of the leaders of the island's army and government who had to put up with the critical events are taking part in the conferences.
But they will also deal with the crisis result, its impact on Havana, Washington and Moscow and the message it left for present and future generations.
The event will finish next Saturday and on Sunday the participants will visit some of the places that had to do with the fact under question.
This brought up a conflict between the USA and the USSR, however the leaders of these two world potencies later decided to retire those weapons from the island without consulting its government.
But in the camaraderie and openness glasnost has produced, there were no steely glances or angry ``nyets'' over geopolitical tensions.
A quarter of a century after they edged to the brink of oblivion, Soviets and former United States officials sat together and laughed, joked and tried to learn from their mistakes.
With the help of new thawing in Soviet society, McNamara, McGeorge Bundy and Theodore Sorensen heartbeat of the New Frontier could share memories of their two-week roller-coaster ride to the edge of disaster.
In the autumn ease and beauty of Harvard, the memories of the fall of 1962 seemed impossible.
McNamara, 71, Kennedy's secretary of Defense, remembererd simply ``the horror.'' Former Undersecretary of State George Ball, unable to make the conference, remembered in an interview that morning of Oct., when the United States was to hear the Soviets' final word on the missiles.
In a sense, said Sorensen, 59, a key Kennedy aide and speech writer, the tension brought forth brave action.
The fear the crisis' major players felt has been joined by open pride over the years.
The missiles were silent and the lessons of why are still important, they say.
Beyond the academic give and take at Harvard, there also came across the bonds that were formed on both sides.
And the Kennedy advisers expressed, sometimes eloquently, the relief that what they and the Soviets did kept the world from war.
Khrushchev and Kennedy may have approached the crisis with mistrust and misunderstanding, but conferees agreed that the two men emerged as statesmen trying to avoid war at all costs.
Fedor Burletsky, ex-speech writer for Khrushchev and a conference participant, echoed his old boss' sentiments.
Former Defense Secretary Robert McNamara and former special aide Arthur Schlesinger Jr. are among those expected at the conference that starts Friday.
President Fidel Castro, who was in power at the time, also is expected to attend.
The crisis, marking one of the Cold War's tensest moments, was defused when Soviet premier Nikita Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles discovered on the Caribbean island south of Florida.
Cuban Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez, an organizer of the conference that will bring together American and Cuban protagonists of the Cold War standoff, was an army commander when Castro put 400,000 soldiers in position to repel a possible invasion of the communist-run island.
As President John F Kennedy's words clicked onto the paper rolling off the teletype machine at military headquarters Oct., 1962, Fernandez knew the Americans meant business.
Earlier in the day, some 2,500 relatives of United States forces stationed at Guantanamo Bay, were given 15 minutes to pack a bag before being evacuated to Norfolk, Va.
Fernandez said that when the United States discovered the nuclear missiles on the island, he had only known about their existence for a short time.
Most of the Americans invited to the conference, including McNamara, Schlesinger, former Kennedy speechwriters Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen and ex-CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, will arrive today.
Kennedy, the president's brother who was attorney general and a key player in the crisis.
In conjunction with the gathering, Cuba will release some formerly classified documents about the days known here as the Crisis of October.
Garbage had just been thrown overboard as a hatless George, in the Marine Corps about a year, watched sharks feed below.
George, 58, shakes his head at the recollection that the United States armada was dogged by the Russians.
Until then, George was a teen more concerned about his gunnery sergeant finding rust on his M-14 rifle than about actually getting shot at.
George's father, James Horton was probably more worried at the time as he sat in his Conesville, Iowa, home listening to his ham radio.
James had been in the Army and had hoped his son would following his lead.
Stationed in Southern California when the missile crisis broke, George sailed through the Panama Canal.
Out of high school a little more than a year, he had been trained in demolitions.
These days, George checks and repairs rails for Union Pacific Railroad.
He and his wife, Midge, married more than 26 years, have lived in Vining, about 40 miles west of Cedar Rapids, since 1973.
As a Marine, he learned more about demolitions, even working in the Mojave Desert to see how fast an airfield could be built.
Having signed up for a special three-year hitch rather than the standard four, George was discharged on time in June, 1964.
No way did he know that, just two months later, the rest of the division would sail off to a place called Vietnam.
Vice President Jose Ramon Fernandez, who organized a similar conference last year on the Bay of Pigs invasion, provided no details about the documents in announcing the conference on Thursday.
A Political Vision 40 Years Later,'' the Oct.-12 conference in Cuba is expected to include people from the United States and the former Soviet Union.
Most Russians associated with the 1962 crisis have died, but several of the late President Kennedy's advisers are living, Fernandez said.
He said conference organizers are studying the possibility of taking participants to sites related to the crisis in the Havana area.
The Cuban missile crisis ''was the most dramatic episode of the Cold War,'' said Fernandez.
He said the conference's aim is to shed light on events leading up to the crisis, which peaked when the United States learned there were Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuba an island just 90 miles from the United States.
Following several tense days of negotiations with Washington, Moscow withdrew the weapons without consulting with Havana a move that enraged Fidel Castro's government.
The opening session of a three-day conference on that Cold War drama und erscored Cuban fears of a United States military attack at the time feelings that contributed to escalating tension before the crisis in October 1962.
They include documents from the Cuban government, the CIA, the Pentagon, the White House, the Soviet Foreign Ministry and other governments that played a role in the crisis.
The letter said President John F Kennedy told him in Washington in January that he had no plans to attack Cuba.
Before the morning session, McNamara ultimately credited Castro, Kennedy and Khrushchev with saving the world from destruction.
The crisis began in October 1962 when Kennedy learned that Cuba had Soviet nuclear missiles capable of reaching the United States.
The crisis was defused two weeks later when the Soviet Union agreed to remove the missiles.
Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen all former aides to Kennedy also are attending the conference, as well as former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, who interpreted United States spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
A portion of the documents, made available to The Associated Press in Washington, demonstrate that the crisis did not end Oct. with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove the offensive weapons, as is widely believed.
Weeks after the Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba, Khru shchev worried that an ""irrational"" Castro would renew tension with the United States perhaps even provoke war.
Cuba ""wants practically to drag us behind it with a leash and wants to pull us into a war with America by its actions,"" Khrushchev said in a letter to diplomatic aides in Cuba on Nov., 1962.
At issue were United States surveillance flights over Cuba to monitor dismantling of the missiles that Moscow had installed on the island.
But Khrushchev was concerned that Castro would order his forces to shoot down the low-flying U.S. surveillance flights, which the Cuban leader saw as an intolerable intrusion on Cuban sovereignty.
Fernandez said most studies of that period concentrated on the two superpowers, the United States and the Soviet Union, with Cuba's role lesser known.
OFFICIALS BEGIN THREE-DAY CONFERENCE ON THE EVENTS OF 40 YEARS AGO', St.
PBS's popular ""History Detectives"" opens its fifth season Monday with a visit to Dayton.
Series co-host Wes Cowan tracks a specialized 1950s screen used to project 3-D photographs to Wright-Patterson Air Force Base.
Cowan interviews Ben Jakobowski, acting director of reconnaissance engineering at Wright-Patterson during the 1962 standoff with the Soviet Union that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Cowan also traveled to Portland, Ore., and Washington D.C. to learn the truth about the unassuming silver screen.
Cowan is the founder and owner of Cowan's Auctions, Inc., in Cincinnati.
Monday's episode marks the second time in two years that ""History Detectives"" has come to Dayton.
Host Gwendolyn Wright visited the Library of Congress Motion Picture Conservation Center at WrightPatterson Air Force Base in 2006 to investigate a fragment of silent film dated to 1921.
Unlike college and high school history survey courses that cover the grand sweep of historical events, ""History Detectives"" focuses on family artifacts and stories.
For them, the crisis turned a temporary stay in the United States into a permanent residency.
Twenty-five years later, the images remain vivid and the disappointment is still keen.
Then it was like a cold bucket of water fell on our spirits,'' said Raymond Molina, a Miami developer.
We lost one of the best chances to get away from communism,'' she said.
The crisis ''really did seal what happened at the Bay of Pigs,'' Monsignor Bryan Walsh noted.
Betrayed twice, according to Jose Rasco, a retiree who lives in Miami. '' abandoned us first (at the Bay of Pigs), then in Miami.
We had an opportunity, then betrayed us,'' said Botifoll, chairman of the board at Republic National Bank.
Raymond Molina was in a Cuban prison when he first learned of the crisis.
Jailed for his participation in the Bay of Pigs, Molina faced at least 30 years in prison.
As the only pro-American military group in Cuba, the imprisoned Bay of Pigs brigade would be valuable in case of an attack, Molina explained.
While Molina prepared for battle, his wife was in Miami, praying for his safety.
Separated from her husband, she had two small children and was pregnant with a third.
At the time of the crisis, Luis Botifoll was part of the Consejo Revolucionario, an exile government recognized by the United States.
The group was told to ''be alert in case the United States took action,'' recalled Botifoll.
Despite the threat of bloodshed, the Cuban exiles were ready to fight, Botifoll said.
As the tension between Russia and United States grew, so did the exitement, Rasco said.
The excitement rumbled through the Cuban refugee children under the care of Monsignor Walsh.
About 5,000 children had been placed in Dade County through the Archdiocese of Miami.
During the crisis, Walsh was recruited by the United States government to investigate the state of the church in Cuba, and possible areas of support for American troops.
Like Rasco, Walsh was struck by the number of troops stationed in Florida.
Rockets around the city and enormous convoys of trucks along the coastline,'' Walsh said.
Loaded with weapons and troops, the trains rumbled over the tracks near her house.
Diaz was afraid, not only for her family in the United States, but also for the relatives still in Cuba.
The change of heart meant that the U.S.-Soviet understandings that resolved the 1962 crisis were never made permanent.
But, while both countries took some steps to carry out the agreement, including Soviet removal of offensive missiles, attempts to reach a formal agreement failed.
The crisis was triggered by the United States discovery in the fall of 1962 that Moscow had sent missiles to Cuba.
The disclosure sent the two superpowers closer to nuclear war than at any other time in their 46-year Cold War.
An anxious world was uncertain whether Moscow and Washington would settle peacefully or reduce each other to ashes.
The trade-off that ensured peace involved a Soviet promise to remove the missiles in exchange for an end to a United States quarantine of Cuba, coupled with a United States no-invasion pledge.
In the decades after the missile crisis, successive United States administrations were vague about whether the Kennedy-Khrushchev agreement was legally binding.
The documents strongly suggest it wasn't because there was no formal settlement.
In a Nov., 1962, telephone conversation with George Ball, the State Department's third ranking official, Kennedy said he was worried about how a no-invasion pledge would affect the United States ability to respond if Cuba undertook a major arms buildup, shot down United States planes or attacked a pro-American country, such as Guatemala.
In response to that scenario, Ball said the United States had a right to act under the Rio Pact, the common defense treaty of the Western Hemisphere.
Kennedy agreed that a no-invasion pledge could not supersede United States rights under the Rio Pact.
The promise of a Soviet removal of ground forces from Cuba was not enough to sway Kennedy.
Now an NBC News correspondent, Shriver remembers ``getting in a little line for drills on what we would have to do if in fact `it' happened.
On Oct., Shriver narrates a two-hour NBC special on the crisis, talking to key members of the Kennedy administration and others about those dark days.
At the Democratic convention, she got high marks for hustling speakers from the podium onto NBC first.
Not great news for correspondents, who must line up like schoolchildren.
The Learning Channel has big plans for its upcoming commercialfree children's programming block, Ready, Set, Learn.
Moyer says he hopes Learn will become its own channel so its hours could be increased beyond the planned 6m.-to-noon daily program.
Francis Hospital School of Nursing in Peoria, Ill., for three years and became RNs.
An Air Force recruiter told me if we joined the Air Force we would not only be nurses, but we’d also get to see the world.
For a little Chicago girl who had never been out of the state of Illinois, it was like going to a foreign country, going down south in 1960s,” she recalled.
All we did was get our uniforms and march in straight lines for hours,” Carr said.
So we worked in the clinic for a while, then we worked in the wards for a while and then in the emergency room.
That was the beauty of our job, we provided nursing for the whole base,” she said.
From the back door of my house I could see a couple of B-52 bombers sitting on their concrete pads, loaded with nukes.
Today it’s a Navy station, but in those days in was a refueling stop for planes flying in from Europe and elsewhere,” Carr said.
We didn’t have a clue what to do with our rifles, so we put them under our beds.
The monkey that was part of the United States space program was supposed to come to our hospital after his capsule splashed into the sea, but it never did.
As a 1st lieutenant he was flying a C-131 ‘Super Constellation’ for the Military Air Transport Command.
His plane developed mechanical problems and they made an emergency landing at Kindley.
Dick, my future husband, was playing the slot machines at the club and didn’t have time for me.
Eventually, I was transferred to a C141 jet transport that could fly 40 mental patients and 40 ambulatory patients at one time.
There was one young man who died on a flight home with me,” she recalled.
Then I got pregnant and was forced out of the Air Force nursing program at that point,” she said with a frown.
For almost the next three decades she served as a squadron momma, a wing momma and eventually a general officer’s wife and mother.
After Dick retired as a major general from the Air Force in 1994, they moved to Punta Gorda.
In 1971 the couple purchased a lot in Burnt Store Isles, where they built their retirement home.
Co pyrig ht 20 12, Charlo tte Sun Cit at ion DON MOORE; Sun Correspondent, 'Capt.
Thirty years ago today, President John F Kennedy went on TV to announce United States spies had spotted Soviet missiles in Cuba, 90 miles from the United States coast.
Former defense secretary Robert McNamara, one of Kennedy's key advisers, says the situation was worse than even pessimists then imagined.
He and Kennedy, McNamara recalls in an interview, ``believed the risk was somewhat greater than our associates.
Kennedy's revelation sent a chill across the nation and pitted him in a globe-circling showdown with Soviet boss Nikita Khrushchev, as well as Cuban President Fidel Castro.
As the nation waited, hoped and prayed, Khrushchev blinked; but so did Kennedy.
The Soviets agreed to withdraw the missiles, and the United States secretly agreed to remove warheads in Turkey.
Since Kennedy showed the nation spy-plane photos of missile sites, the Cold War and much of the secrecy surrounding the crisis have melted.
Former Soviet generals and officials disclosed that in addition to the long-range nuclear missiles Moscow had sent to Cuba, Soviet troops there also had smaller ``battlefield'' nuclear arms.
If Kennedy had ordered Marines to go ashore in Cuba, those weapons would have been their welcome.
Kennedy's advisers were divided over whether to launch ``surgical'' air strikes to take out the Soviet missile sites.
But his advisers warned that air strikes would fail without a parallel ground invasion, scant months after a U.S.-sponsored invasion force had come to grief at the Bay of Pigs.
Any military action, or mistake, was likely to lead to an armed response.
The Soviet missiles, and Soviet lies, were a slap at the United States.
Navy ships sailed toward Cuba to ``quarantine'' Cuba from further Soviet shipments.
Central to days and nights of crisis-management was the knowledge that the situation, and the terrible dangers, were unprecedented.
The worry was evident in photos and TV footage showing Kennedy's haunted look and hunched shoulders as he weighed the risks of tipping the world toward a mushroom cloud of horrors.
The Soviets chose an unusual messenger, ABC News correspondent John Scali, to deliver their first signal.
Summoned to lunch with a KGB contact, Scali was told to tell the White House the Soviets might pull their weapons if the United States pulled its missiles out of Turkey.
Resolving the crisis required several days, and the exchange of cables some hostile, some conciliatory between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
The world breathed easier when Soviet ships bound for Cuba stopped on reaching the Navy picket line.
McNamara, who had been sleeping at the Pentagon, went home as the Soviet missiles were withdrawn, stacked on the decks of ships.
The opening session of a three-day conference on that Cold War drama underscored Cuban fears at the time of a United States military attack feelings that contributed to escalating tensions before the October 1962 crisis.
Historic papers are being released publicly during the gathering, including documents from the Cuban government, the CIA, the Pentagon, the White House, the Soviet Foreign Ministry and other governments that played a role in the crisis.
Former Kennedy aides Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Richard Goodwin and Ted Sorensen are also attending the conference, as well as former CIA analyst Dino Brugioni, who interpreted American spy photos of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
A portion of the documents, made available to The Associated Press in Washington, demonstrate that the crisis did not end on Oct. with the Soviet Union's agreement to remove the offensive weapons, as is widely believed.
Weeks after the Soviet Union agreed to pull the missiles from Cuba, Khrushchev worried that an ""irrational"" Castro would renew tensions with the United States perhaps even provoke war.
Cuba ""wants practically to drag us behind it with a leash, and wants to pull us into a war with America by its actions,"" Khrushchev said in a Nov., 1962, letter to diplomatic aides in Cuba.
At issue were United States surveillance flights over Cuba to monitor dismantling of the missiles Moscow had installed on the island.
No real surprises are expected regarding the October 1962 confrontation that brought the world to the brink of a nuclear war.
But experts are very curious about why Cuban leader Fidel Castro decided to permit the forum.
Some say Castro hopes to show that the recent Soviet abandonment of his cause was similar to its 1962 """"betrayal'' of him.
The former Soviet Union announced in September it was pulling its troops from the island, although negotiations for the removal apparently have been stalled by the collapse of the union and Cuban intransigence.
The conference is occurring against a backdrop of unprecedented crisis in Cuba, left adrift without major trading partners in the wake of the collapse of European communism.
Oil and most food is severely rationed and public utilities are on staggered schedules to offset huge losses in vital supplies.
Garthoff, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution who worked in the United States State Department at the time of the missile crisis.
Although the center of the drama geographically, Cuba's role in the crisis was really minimal.
It never controlled the missiles, and the Soviet decision to remove them was done without consulting Castro.
In letters to Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev published last year, Castro seemed unhesitant in supporting a launch of the nuclear missiles if the United States attacked Cuba.
Cuban and Soviet support of revolutionaries in such countries as Bolivia, Colombia, El Salvador and Nicaragua following the missile crisis heated up a Latin cold war from which the region is only now beginning to recover.
I think Castro may have some fascinating things to say about his subversive activities in South and Central America,'' Brenner said Tuesday.
Key players on both sides still debate whether any nuclear warheads were actually delivered to Cuba with the missiles.
Raymond Cline, deputy director for intelligence at the United States Central Intelligence Agency from 1961-66, says there weren't any.
But the Havana forum will hear from Soviet technicians who insist they placed warheads on the missiles, Brenner said.
So far, the most interesting revelation swirling about the conference is that President John F Kennedy made no written agreement with Khrushchev not to invade Cuba.
By supplying arms against standing governments, Cuba didn't fulfill that agreement, conservative leaders like Sen.
Jesse Helms, R-N.C., and some Cuban exile leaders who have advocated invasion are likely to argue.
The issue has come up before, especially during the Persian Gulf war when some exiles called for an invasion of Cuba similar to the attack that pushed Iraq from Kuwait.
But Brenner and others agreed that the idea of a pledge not to attack Cuba was cemented by every administration since Kennedy's and has now become the status quo along with the 32-year-old economic embargo of the island.
In the end, unraveling what exactly Castro the only surviving leader and one who is still in power really did during the crisis and afterward may have to await a Cuban glasnost and new leader.
