Terms: Cold WarTechnology: countries that bordered it to prevent attacked.
Explain the notes Marshall Plan, Television, The United States wanted to help rebuild Europe to help those who had and essential communist, Computers, suffered because of war and to help western European nations be strong question to an capitalist, Internet against the growing threat of the Soviet Union.
Communism is a political and economic Quizlet, and watch Berlin Wall, Cold War system where the government owns all businesses and land.
Truman Doctrine, Winston Churchill, government controls everything and there is little personal freedom.
Capitalism is an economic system where Fri., April 5 Crisis, Space Race, individuals/ companies own businesses and land.
In a democracy, people vote on what the Sputnik , NASA, Fidel Castro, government does and personal freedom is valued.
Arms Race, Nikita Khrushchev, “an iron curtain John F Kennedy, After WWII, the Soviet Union controlled much of Eastern and Central has descended Civil RightsLyndon Johnson Europe.
Once they were controlled by Stalin and Moscow, these countries couldn’t make their own laws or decisions.
The people of these countries across the Brown the Board of could not travel freely or communicate with anyone outside of Soviet continent” Education, Ronald Reagan, control.
In June 1948 the Soviets stopped all traffic “I have a dream…” Gulf War, Thurgood Marshall, into West Berlin.
Between June 1948 and Sept 1949 almost 280,000 flights from western countries brought food and supplies to the West Berliners.
On August 13, 1961, West Berlin was surrounded by Rachel Carson barricades and barbed wire by Soviet-controlled East Germany to keep their FQ: Explain FQ: Compare and FQ: How did nonown people from leaving.
Eventually, the city was surrounded by a tall, Kennedy’s and contrast communism violent protest help concrete wall.
The Soviet 1961Kennedy creates NASA and sets goal of reaching the moon; 1969Union wanted to spread communism around the world.
While we never fought in battles directly, we did fight over other countries.
President Reagan had the United States begin the Strategic Defense Initiative to block nuclear weapons from entering United States air space.
Communist North Korea invaded democratic wanted to show the Soviet Union that America was strong and built up our South Korea on June 25, 1950.
It was not finished. with the 38th parallel once again being the dividing line between the 2 countries.
The United States became involved in the 1950s trying to help Vietnam become a He wanted to be on good terms with the West.
In signed a treaty to reduce nuclear weapons. 1975 the North Vietnamese army entered Saigon, South Vietnam.
The Berlin Senator McCarthy accused many Americans of being communists Wall was torn down and Germany was reunified into one country.
Televisions became popular in could not find jobs and some were jailed. the 1950s.
The Internet became available in peoples’ homes in the 1990s The 1950s was a great economic time for Americans, but a fear hung over and has changed the way we communicate and receive information.
We had communication tools helped end the Cold War because they made it easier bomb drills and evacuation plans.
Some families built fallout shelters made for people to know what was going on in the world.
These tools also made to withstand nuclear attack and stayed stocked with food/water/supplies. it harder for repressive governments to control what people believed.
In October 1962, the Soviet leader, Nikita Khrushchev, placed nuclear missiles sites in Cuba and had nuclear missiles in ships off the coast of Cuba.
President John F Kennedy set up a blockade and demanded the missiles be removed.
There has been to the Supreme Court in 1954 and the court determined that violence between different groups in the Middle East with each other segregation in schools was illegal…separate is NOT equal. and with Europe for over 1000 years.
Land that was a British colony Thurgood Marshall was the children’s lawyer.
He later became in the Middle East was turned into Israel after World War II to help the first African-American member of the Supreme Court.
This caused a great deal the integration of schools. of anger from the Muslims who were already living there.
There was After WWII, the Army was integrated, but much of our country was supposed to be a balanced process to help everyone, but both sides still segregated and many Southern states had Jim Crow laws. became angry.
There has been much violence between the different Leaders like Martin Luther King, Jr., Rosa Parks, and Malcolm cultures in the last 60 years.
We have been allies with Israel since X helped our government and citizens realize segregation was its creation.
We have had both positive and negative relationships wrong. with other Middle Eastern countries.
Others do not like anything Many people marched in protest in Selma, Montgomery, and in associated with Western culture.
When Rosa Parks was arrested for not giving up allies and because our country depends on oil produced in the her seat, King and others led the Montgomery Bus Boycott which region.
The United States and the United Nations have been led to segregation on buses being against the law.
King is most involved several times in maintaining peace in the Middle East. known for peaceful protest and his “I have a dream” speech at the March on Washington.
Iraq, led by Saddam Hussein, invaded Kuwait to passed making segregation illegal.
In 1965, the Voting Rights Act gain control of their oil fields and ports.
Kuwait was our ally so we was passed making voter intimidation, poll taxes, and literacy tests illegal.
He envisioned a Great Society where we could get we successfully drove Iraq out of Kuwait. rid of poverty through social programs.
Rachel Carson was an environmentalist who taught people about We soon entered the Second Gulf War/War on Terror in Iraq to get the dangers of pollution through her work, “Silent Spring.” rid of Saddam Hussein and Afghanistan to get rid of Al Qaeda.
