About One Minute to Midnight In October 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear conflict over the placement of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
About One Minute to Midnight In October 1962, at the height of the Cold War, the United States and the Soviet Union appeared to be sliding inexorably toward a nuclear conflict over the placement of missiles in Cuba.
He shows how these two leaders recognized the terrifying realities of the nuclear age while Castro–never swayed by conventional political considerations–demonstrated the messianic ambition of a man selected by history for a unique mission.
Dobbs brings us onto the decks of American ships patrolling Cuba; inside sweltering Soviet submarines and missile units as they ready their warheads; and onto the streets of Miami, where anti-Castro exiles plot the dictator’s overthrow.
Read An Excerpt Read An Excerpt Read An Excerpt Also by Michael Dobbs See all books by Michael Dobbs Also by Michael Dobbs See all books by Michael Dobbs Also by Michael Dobbs See all books by Michael Dobbs About Michael Dobbs MICHAEL DOBBS was born and educated in Britain, but is now a United States citizen.
He has taught at leading American universities, including Princeton, the… More about Michael Dobbs About Michael Dobbs MICHAEL DOBBS was born and educated in Britain, but is now a United States citizen.
John F Kennedy would later remark that the site could be mistaken for &#8220;a football field.
If the warheads were present, one would expect to see some kind of secure storage facility at the missile sites, but nothing was visible.
The Soviets could be in a position to fire their missiles &#8220;very quickly.
During the 1960 presidential election, Kennedy had used Cuba as a stick to beat the Republicans, accusing the Eisenhower government of doing nothing to prevent Fidel Castro from transforming the island into &#8220;a hostile and militant Communist satellite.
He thought that the president had been &#8220;completely overwhelmed by the ruthlessness and barbarity of the Russian Chairman.
The news from Cuba reinforced Kennedy&#8217;s impression of Khrushchev as a &#8220;fucking liar.
It had been put together by the CIA in response to prodding from the Kennedy brothers to be much more &#8220;aggressive.
But it was difficult for him to conceal his anger as he talked about &#8220;the change in atmosphere in the United States government during the last twenty-four hours.
No part of this excerpt may be reproduced or reprinted without permission in writing from the publisher.<\/span>"",""9780307269362"":""Americans Tuesday, October 16, 1962, 11:50m.
