Photographs taken by a high-altitude U-2 spy plane offered incontrovertible evidence that Soviet-made medium-range missiles in Cuba—capable of carrying nuclear warheads—were now stationed 90 miles off the American coastline.Tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union over Cuba had been steadily increasing since the failed April 1961 Bay of Pigs invasion, in which Cuban refugees, armed and trained by the United States, landed in Cuba and attempted to overthrow the government of Fidel Castro.
During the next year, the number of Soviet advisors in Cuba rose to more than 20,000.
Rumors began that Russia was also moving missiles and strategic bombers onto the island.
Russian leader Nikita Khrushchev may have decided to so dramatically up the stakes in the Cold War for several reasons.
He may have believed that the United States was indeed going to invade Cuba and provided the weapons as a deterrent.
Facing criticism at home from more hard-line members of the Soviet communist hierarchy, he may have thought a tough stand might win him support.
Khrushchev also had always resented that United States nuclear missiles were stationed near the Soviet Union , and putting missiles in Cuba might have been his way of redressing the imbalance.
Two days after the pictures were taken, after being developed and analyzed by intelligence officers, they were presented to President Kennedy.
HISTORY reviews and updates its content regularly to ensure it is complete and accurate.ALSO ON THIS DAYArt, Literature, and Film History1957“Wake Up Little Susie” becomes the Everly Brothers’ first #1 hitHarmony singing was a part of rock and roll right from the beginning, but the threeand four-part harmonies of doo-wop, derived from black gospel and blues traditions, would never have given us Simon and Garfunkel, the Beatles or the Byrds.
To get those groups, you first had to ...read more United States Presidents1912Theodore Roosevelt shot in MilwaukeeBefore a campaign speech in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, presidential candidate Theodore Roosevelt is shot at close range by saloonkeeper John Schrank while greeting the public in front of the Gilpatrick Hotel.
Schrank’s .32-caliber bullet, aimed directly at Roosevelt’s heart, failed to ...read moreGreat Britain1066The Battle of HastingsKing Harold II of England is defeated by the Norman forces of William the Conqueror at the Battle of Hastings, fought on Senlac Hill, seven miles from Hastings, England.
At the end of the bloody, all-day battle, Harold was killed–shot in the eye with an arrow, according to ...read moreBlack History1964Martin Luther King Jr. wins Nobel Peace PrizeAfrican American civil rights leader Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr., is awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for his nonviolent resistance to racial prejudice in America.
At 35 years of age, the Georgia-born minister was the youngest person ever to receive the award.
Martin Luther King Jr., ...read moreInventions & Science1947Chuck Yeager breaks the sound barrier United States Air Force Captain Chuck Yeager becomes the first person to fly faster than the speed of sound.
Yeager, born in Myra, West Virginia, in 1923, was a combat fighter during World War II and flew 64 missions over Europe.
After graduating from West Point in 1915, Eisenhower embarked on a stellar military career–he would eventually become the supreme commander of Allied forces in Europe during World War II and the ...read moreArt, Literature, and Film History1892""The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes"" publishedOn October 14, 1892, The Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, by Arthur Conan Doyle, is published.
The book was the first collection of Holmes stories, which Conan Doyle had been publishing in magazines since 1887.
The family’s house was later said to be haunted and served as the inspiration for the Amityville Horror book and movies.
On the evening of ...read moreWorld War II1944German General Erwin Rommel—aka “The Desert Fox”—dies by suicideOn October 14, 1944, German Gen.
Erwin Rommel, nicknamed “the Desert Fox,” is given the option of facing a public trial for treason, as a co-conspirator in the plot to assassinate Adolf Hitler, or taking cyanide.
Rommel was born in 1891 in Wurttenberg, ...read moreWorld War I1918Adolf Hitler wounded in British gas attackAmong the German wounded in the Ypres Salient in Belgium on October 14, 1918, is Corporal Adolf Hitler, temporarily blinded by a British gas shell and evacuated to a German military hospital at Pasewalk, in Pomerania.
