That solved so many things, because if you're drawing up a policy, it should consist of an objective and ways to get there.
I find in Washington, more argument is expended on the first, they never get to the second.
Once we got such information as was available — and of course, the information is never complete, or entirely satisfactory — I would say we grouped ourselves around three possible alternatives.
The -chird was to shoot them out, which was a surprise attack on the missiles in Cuba at the outset, without any notification to Khrushchev.
As an artilleryman, when I saw ■chose missiles, with their transporter vehicles along side of them, my immediate thought was they can pull them out and hide 'em any time they want to.
So if that's the case, and we announce to Khrushchev ""ve gotcha down there,"" certainly at a minimum he'll hide those missiles in the jungles of Cuba, and we can never get 'em out unless we invade the island.
Well, invading the island was the last thing I thought we should do, in our interest.
We were having trouble in Europe; Berlin was being threatened by Khrushchev; in the Far East we had the Laotian problem; the Vietnam problem was just burgeoning; and our forces were (relatively speaking) low, in numbers and readiness.
You could have the seed of guerrilla warfare against our occupying forces, and again tie down a large part of our conventional strength.
So there's a possibility if you hit the missiles before the*/ got hidden, at least you'd have that many accounted for, in a positive sense.
But furthermore, you will have really shaken Khrushchev; he will know we're moving right in.
He doesn't want us to invade, either; and I felt there was a fair chance of him giving way on that point.
It was argued very eloquently by Bobby Kennedy that that would be our doing the act of the Japanese in attacking Pearl Harbor.
Now, having said that, we found the quarantine, as you know — the world knows now — the President, after listening to all the pros and cons of these three points, the first one dropped out very quickly.
And then it was not to eliminate the ""shoot 'em out"", bait to use the lesser method first, and then meanwhile, the military were told to get ready for an attack on the missiles, and also ready for an invasion of Cuba.
General, you were loyal to the decision, but I take it you didn't think that the quarantine was going to work.
I thought it had dangerous possibilities, because Khrushchev could simply bring his ships just short of the quarantine line and stand there and scream to the world over the violation of international law we were indulging in, and meanwhile start that argument going while his missiles completed their readiness in the island.
Well, Khrushchev could have done two things with the missiles: continue to build 'em up, or hide 'em, which was always the option which I thought most likely.
We analyzed very carefully the military 5 requirements of an air strike, and like most military requirements, the longer we studied, the more we needed.
I believe that the total number of aircraft which the Air Force wanted to use was around 500.
But then it was an honest estimate, because not only would you have to get the missiles on the ground, but meanwhile Cuba was prickly with SAM missiles — surfaceto-air — many of which we knew were operational.
So you had to protect your aircraft attacking the ground missiles the anti-air threat.
So yes, that was thought about, and the President, very wisely, had General Sweeney, a three-star general who would be responsible for the outcome, and he came up and he gave a very frank statement.
And these other requirements of collateral use of aircraft — yes, that was a requirement.
So really, Sweeney, at the last minute, by a straightforward statement — which the Joint Chiefs did not disagree with one minute — certainly tilted the President, if he needed anyreal tilting, to the quarantine option as the initial option, to be followed, if necessary, by the second.
I was so sure we had 'em over a barrel, I never worried much ^bout the final outcome, but what things might happen in between.
You have written in your retrospect in the Washington Post on October 5, '82, as I remember — the 20th year — that you don't recall any concern about the strategic balance, or any fear of nuclear exchange in this whole period.
Now, some of the civilians do recall worries about the tine of that second Saturday; worries that really run to two or three steps up the ladder of escalation.
It's the nature of same people if they can't have a legitimate worry, they create them.
Because he was bound to lose with conventional forces right on our doorstep.
Except only explanation that I can find that has a certain appeal is that the meeting of Khrushchev with President Kennedy in Vienna had so impressed him with the unreadiness of this young man to head a great country like the United States, plus the experience that he had seen in the Bay of Pigs, he could shove this man around any place he wants.
Incidentally, when President Kennedy finally decided on the second Saturday to disarm the missiles in Turkey — those old missiles in Turkey — I take it, having disarmed them, he was going to announce it to try to demonstrate that we weren't there, that there was nothing there worth the Russians bombing.
Yes, it would have been a great mistake to do it right in the middle of this thing.
I was not aware of the fact the President had discussed with State the desirability of getting the missiles out of Turkey until this time.
It would again show these uncertain Americans, they're not sure of themselves.
It's quite true, the missiles were outmoded, and I was very happy to get 'em out after very careful negotiations with Turkey and them by the presence of a nuclear submarine.
