In desperation Castro turned to the soviets for balance of powers to weigh up the balance of communism ideologies.
In February 1960, Castro signed a trade pact with the Soviets, which eventually led to close diplomatic relations.
By authority of Eisenhower, Cuban Exiles that were in the United States at the time were given aid.
When Kennedy was sworn into parliament in 1961 he took over the proceedings with hesitation for his states security.
Although this strategy was a dangerous one the Soviets were thinking of the opportunities that could arise from this.
West balance that the Soviets could start to infiltrate the Americas with their ideologies.
The second and most important advantage was the stationing of nuclear missiles close to the United States.
Disturbing reports were received in July of 1962 by the United States that showed disturbing Soviet activities on the island.
A U-2 in August showed pictures of anti-aircraft facilities around Havana and in October Soviet aircraft capable of carrying nuclear weapons were spotted on the island.
Tow days later Kennedy was informed by his intelligence chiefs that there was no doubt about Soviet intentions.
From the proceedings Kennedy decided to initiate a naval blockade against Soviet Ships carrying missile equipment.
On the 22 October Kennedy addressed the nation of what was to happen, which was a quarantine around Cuba, where no ships carrying offensive military equipment were allowed to pass.
During the quarantine all American forces were to be placed on alert and that any missile attacks from Cuba would be taken as a deliberate Soviet attack and would be responded to accordingly.
All eyes were fixed on Cuba and America aware that the slightest naval incident could trigger a nuclear holocaust.
No offensive weapons were found on the Marcula and were allowed to proceed.
A the day progressed the United States Navy received reports that the other Soviet ships had halted and that they had turned back.
The day after an ultimatum was received from Khrushchev that he would only withdraw his missiles if the United States promised not to invade Cuba.
The United States was short relieved from this news for Khrushchev sent another message stating that the Americans also had to dismantle their missile sites in Turkey and withdraw nuclear weapons from both Britain an Italy, all of which were causing anxiety to the Soviets.
Kennedy refused and the crisis yet again seemed to flare up when a U-2 was shot down over Cuba and another, on a routine flight over Alaska, somehow strayed into Soviet airspace.
United States government was once again put on alert and had to devise a plan to avoid war.
So they decided to assumingly ignore the second letter and reply to the first, promising not to invade Cuba.
A the end of the 13 day crisis, the Soviets withdrew their missiles from Cuba as soon as the United States agreed to demobilize the invasion forces gathered in Florida.
Three decades later a conference was held in Havana, Cuba attended by former Kennedy Administration members, Soviet participants in the crisis, and a Cuban delegation led by Fidel Castro.
It was there that the Soviets, Cubans, and Americans learned how close the world had come to a nuclear holocaust.
Soviet General Anatoly Gribkov informed participants that, in addition to their intermediate-range ballistic missiles, the Soviets had deployed nine tactical missiles in Cuba to be used against any United States invasion force.
Even more significantly, General Gribkov stated, Soviet field commanders in Cuba had the authority to fire those tactical nuclear weapons without further direction from the Kremlin.
