Bundy says, ""Well, we have"" and JFK says, ""But that was a long time ago"")) having no sense of responsibility for the actual deployment, e ven th ough he had raised the question of postponing it; as Eisenhower had actually done, for the very reasons that proved valid in 1962.
Consider what this public move looked like to Khrushchev after the Gilpatric speech, when he knew that the Americans were well aware that they already had vast superiority and would retain it.
Instead, programs that were designed to counter a supposed Soviet superiority were committed to and pursued in the presence of great Soviet inferiority.
For the first time I can recall, I see that this applies to the IRBM deployment as well.
Conceived as a response to the Soviet ICBM test and Sputnik of 1957—though then postponed by Eisenhower because he saw them as provocative , the deployments actually took place under Kennedy, despite his doubts about their appropriate ness _as responses to a gap , even after it had been definitively established that there was no strategic necessity for them at all.
They could only have appeared to be strengthening the basis of the public threats! ,OS Of course, in this instance, to have r econsider ed the deployment policy after the missile gap was demolished would have been to have ""weakened the NATO alliance"" (as in the case of the Pe rshinq s and n eutron bom bs.
But to say this is to acknowledge that the real function of the IRBMs was in deterrence of fco nventional atta ck, a first-use function, as with the Pershings land neutron bombs.
JF|< _ , But not only could we not acknoweldge that his feelings might be similar to ours and on at least a comparably legitimate basis.
Most of our analysts were not even aware, any more than our public, that ""we""—the President and CIA and the JCS—were confront ing Kh rushchev with .this prospect, by Mongoose and invasion preparations.
Nor, prior to Vietnam, would they have easily imagined the lengths a President would go to avert that, the risks he would run.
Thus, the real problem with most ""mirror-image-analysis"" is not that it is false to suppose that our adversary may react as we would to similar circumstances or understanding.
They start by looking at ourselves and what we are doing in a distorted, fun-house mirror.
A realistic mirror image analysis might not be right or adequate, but it would usually be wort h consid ering.
I.e., this approach could be valuable to someone who really did know what our leaders were doing and what 6 they were really like:g., the President himself, if he was selfaware.
This seems to have been true for JFK; and he did succeed in placing himself in Khrushchev's shoes, with results that dismayed his hawkish advisors.
M Actually, the missiles were . photographed on the 14th and the photos interpreted on the 15th.
It also meant that roost of them had already discussed the matter with one or more others the night before or Tuesday morning:g., Rusk and Nitze.
Moreover, Nitze had been considering options for a number of days, having been convinced by L DIA of the presence of the missiles before the photos were taken.
That is, there is inadequate understanding, even at top levels, as to what actions brought us close to the brink on this past occasion, thus how to recognize what s orts of actions t^o avoid in future.
This supported both a mood of American righteousness which M underpinned a violent response and a sense of perplexity, uncertainty as to possible Soviet intentions which seemed almost ^ incomprehensible, with a tendency to see them in the most ominous light.
Perhaps all Powers present themselves as reacting to the illegitimate, aggressive actions of their rivals, especially when 9 justifying their own violent, dangerous, and apparently lawbreaking actions, or ""responses.
Indeed, Garthoff notes that on the day of Kennedy’s speech, October 2j^, ""with ceremonial fanfare, the first Jupiter missile launch position in Turkey was turned over to Turkish command.
This fact, remarkably, has only recently been noted; it was not by the American leaders at the time.
Likewise, McNamara and Kennedy probably felt no responsibility for loading Europe with tactical nuclear weapons, since the program had been set earlier.
Moreover, the latter program was not unrelated to the Cuban ' Missile crisis either, to the extent that the latter was related to the Berlin Crisis, since Trachtenberg supports Ulam s emphasis on Soviet fears of German nuclear weapons as a source of that .crisis.
I Then, there was Khrushchev’s embarrassing backdown on Berlin, perhaps partly provoked by humiliating Gilpatric speech.
It would be an amazing example of se 1 f—censorship at the time if they reall> j 1 r efrained from mentioning it in the larger group, when it came to l trying to explain the Soviet action.
Of course/ missiles were not a plausible response to Mongoose per se, except as this pointed toward invasion.
Only a few of ' those present knew of EGL ’ s emphasis on the need for invasion, or of the pattern of exercises, and the urgent planning in October for possible invasion.
Even Garthoff, at this late date, stresses the incorrectness of the Soviet expectations of American invasion of Cuba, l emphasizing , ""But there was n_o firm American / political decision or intention to invade Cuba before the crisis / erupted in October 1962.
The mere absence of documentation on it, far from proving this, tells almost nothing at all.
He points out that the Soviets and Cubans ""correctly assumed"" that the exercises in the spring of 1962 were testing a war plan for invasion.
They knew, from penetration of Mongoose, that that program was aimed at the ov ert h xxuy of Castro, and the> could calculate just, as well as Lansdale that that aim would require invasion.
It was hardly a ""distorted impression"" to see the exercises as ""part of the preparation for further direct United States military action against Cuba,"" which is what G says later Soviet accounts ""charged"" , merely ""because the plans were contingency plans, not plans adopted in pursuance of a decision to invade.
Bolshakov noted political pressures on the President, and ""said he believed the United States would attack.
Neither of these opinions implies certainty nor that Kennedy had yet made a definite committed decision.
These assertionre never contradicted in the available documentation, nor are the aims modified.
All the diplomatic and military moves G describes are consistent with making full preparations for an October invasion which would as usual—only be ""decided"" at the last possible moment.
They were all a good deal more than ""possible,"" from the spring of 1964, if not earlier.
Just as, looked at honestly and objectively, the belief that an American invasion of Cuba was much more than ""possible"" by the end of 1962 was better than ""not unreasonable"" in the spring of 1962.
Kennedy appeared, in public, more than prepared to do something about the mTssiles he had found; either they had been found ""too ear ly ""--**whi chjwas almost sure to occur, reflecting a failure of Soviet camouflage and underestimate of American survei 1 ance^-or else, he might have been equally determined whenever he found them.
They-especially the President—did not stress this judgment in front of the ExComm, still less to the JCS or the public.
Here is a case where McNamara implies that he had ""decided"" not to attack or invade, early in the crisis, so that preparations to do so were a b 1 u f S • He believes the President agreed with him.
JH-trl even if Mcbamara was right that the President had ""decided,"" the pressures described by Sorensen might, as Sorensen suggests, have forced his hand, changed his decision.
It did help Kennedy, and hurt Khrushchev, that the discovery was made early enough that it could be claimed publicly that the missiles were not yet operational. gv^4 Thus the risks of action (which were properly high enough in the President’s mind to deter him) could be claimed to be low enough to permit action without losing public support.
The President’s bluff that he was willing to risk attacking was plausible, given his ability to reassure the public, and his willingness and political ability to take the risks of the b1ockade.
If he thought it might be at the stage it happened, and that this would deter the President from attacking, (this was reasonable, even right, more so than generally believed.
Yet it would still have been a miscalculation, because it failed Ito consider that the President would not be deterred from making [powerful and plausible threats , even though they might be (and 'probably were) bluffs.
The account on 13 suggests that Khrushchev did expect the missiles to be found later, when they were fully ready.
Or rather, he did not expect them to be found at all; he expected to revea _ l them to Kennedy, after the election.
I am not fully convinced yet that Khrushchev felt certain that the missiles would be undetected till he revealed them.
Either the missiles were found earlier than Khrushchev expected (the Soviets do believe there was a simple failure to camouflage them), and/or Khrushchev overestimated the length of time Kennedy could manage to keep this particular secret from the electorate, during an election campaign in which it was highly relevant and when the mi litary would have w an t e d to 1 eak i t t o force Kennedy to act.
Khrushchev may have been misled by Eisenhower’s ability to keep the secret of what a U-2 found over the Soviet Union in the late Fifties.
He may have missed the point that a finding of n_o missiles would be kept very obediently by the Air Force, since publicity would have hurt their budget, whereas a discovery of actual missiles, in the Soviet Union or, in 1962, in Cuba, was bound to be leaked very soon.
Perhaps 10 days later, Kennedy might well have acted as — I conjecture — Khrushchev.hoped and perhaps wrongly counted on.
Another effect of finding them this early—before it was cle ar* that they were armed and operational—was that Kennedy was led to make his initial commitment at the first meeting of the ExComm that ""the missiles must go.
M This commitment, made in front of the Republicans Dillon and McCone among others (which may have been a purpose of the ExComm format, and of Dillon s presence) , was crucial in setting the terms of later ExComm discussion. and the basis for them, as reflected in an unwillingness to take this motive as seriously as others or to give Far from inferring Soviet motives on mirror image of ourselves, there is first a failure to see ourselves realistically in a mirror, and then a failure to imagine that Soviets might react ve ry simila rly.
As the transcript shows, especially on October 2/, this worked pretty well with the President personally.
Not only did he see the parallel with Turkey, and preferred even a trade to attacking the missiles, but he saw the strategic situation as basically parity, despite the United States numerical ; superiority.
Hence to acknowledge diplomatic parity by either accepting the missiles in Cuba or trading the Turkish missiles /against them would have been ""premature, "" a radical shift, >v 4 I contradicting Kennedy’s earlier warnings and initial position in w 1 the crisis.
Moreover, many members of the President s own ExComm would have disagreed with him on these judgments, still more many in the public and the Alliance, and it would have been politically costly for him to express^jand act on his views in this context.
Khrushchev did think that ""In addition to protecting Cuba, our missiles would have equalized what the West likes to call the 'balance of power.’"" 40—70 missiles wouldn’t fully do this, but a few hundred would go far to equalize at least first-strike capabilities.
What he seems to have missed is that the Americans regarded Turkey as being in their sphere of influence and interest despite its proximity to the SU—and that although he regarded Cuba 1 likewise, the Americans by no means had reconciled themselves to Ithe ""loss"" of Cuba from their sphere of control.
That was especially true for those Americans (the majority) who did not acknowledge a strategic parity in 1962.
And' the"" risk of their attacking the missile u ftTm at e T y-h owever reluctantly and nervously—was not zero , 1 either, though McNamara is reluctant to acknowledge this.
Their (bluff created pressures and a context in which their control might [ have been lost.
There was a lesson here for the Soviets to learn about what irrational risks pragmatic Americans might take.
And they were not wrong—to the amazement of United States intelligence -about their ability to keep that process secret.
This does suggest that the absence of SI about Soviet ICBMs in 1959-61 was a less reliable indicator of the non-existence of a missile gap than some supposed. —18.
T 18 4 Khrushchev motives In his chapter on ""The Soviet Decision,"" 21, G says.
In his memoirs, Khrushchev mentions the reason stressed by American analysts, redressing the balance of power,"" but emphatically and repeatedly cites as the principal, reason his desire to avert a Soviet ""loss of Cuba to American invasion.
In his speech of December 1962, Khrushchev gave the defense of Cuba as the on 1y reason for the deployment.
American analysts, on the other hand, mostly gave this reason no real role in the decision, which they attributed entirely to reasons relating to the strategic balance and Khrushchev’s ambitions in Europe and worldwide.
Garthoff is now acknowledging that what Khrushchev eventually described as his main reason was ""a factor,"" after all.
On the evidence available, it is s imp1y not t ru e to say that no other explanation' than one which assigns principal importance to the strategic balance can satisfactorily account for the decision.
No one has ever defended Khrushchev’s December 1962 claim that defending — tLx 12 Cuba was the only incentive; that is not really an issue.
The answer is, I would say, that there is no logical or evidential basis for doing so—either for dismissing all or any of these judgements or, from an American perspective, for choosing among them.
I believe that the explanation for the continued insistence by Garthoff and other American analysts that Khrushchev’s concern about American invasion cannot have played a major determining, causal role in Soviet decisionmaking must be found elsewhere.
Indeed, Garthoff is, so far, almost uniquely candid in acknowledging in his new edition his own previous underestimation of the realistic basis for Soviet expectations of invasion.
But he does this, oddly, in the following chapter, on ""The United States Decision"" , without allowing the striking new information on United States contingency planning for invasion to modify the judgements on relative Soviet motives that he repeats from 1987 in the first chapter.
This mirrors, almost word for word, statements by McNamara and Bundy in the Cambridge conference, October 1987, responding to the Soviet perspective/ prior to the release of documents, described below, revealing the^character of the planning they themselves had directed.
Garthoff, it seems to me, fails to relate the exercises and invasion planning, and in particular the circumstances postulated by McNamara that might trigger a decision to invade, to the aims, time-table and concrete activities of the Mongoose program (see below, and note the comments to Hershberg by Sam Wilson and Admiral Anderson on this point, which G does not cite), nor does he relate either of these to the timing of and pressures arising in the election campaign.
McNamara’s immediate reaction, in the transcripts, indicates that it was; he asserted that their presence, potentially operational, virtually precluded United States attack, hence invasion.
To say this is not n cc eosar -i-1 y to justify Khrushchev s choice, from a perspective that is also critical of the United States first — use policy and deployments in Europe and Turkey.
As a long-term defense approach, Khrushchev’s deployment was no less reckless I would say irresponsible and dangerous—than United States and NATO policy.
If this consideration u»de-reudrs the legitimacy of Khrushchev’s action—by focussing on its dangers as a provocation of United States aggression — it does the same, more sharply, for the United States response.
Note G’ s ignorance of this explanation at the time, as an advisor and analyst; and his continued ignorance 25 and more years later.
See risks of operating with such ignorance among intelligence analysts, and of perpetuating it.
G has shifted his opinion from saying that this has been thoroughly debunked to saying it is "" quest i onab 1 e . "" cites Burlatsky on Andropov.
But see comments in Blight book on alternative SU reading on JFK! --22. [consider possibility that SU saw outcome, with no invasion pledge, as considerable victory.
While JCS saw it as a cause for ...coup, assassination... (along with Diem, next year...move to test ban...] —reasons for, and effects of secrecy. reasons for Castro desire for publicity.
Garthoff is one of the very least ideologically constrained of official intelligence analysts and Sovietspecialists, the most open to non-ominous, non worst case interpretations of Soviet behavior.
Yet to be a government official and trusted intelligence analyst at all, for so long, he has had to share at least some Cold War assumptions, some sacred beliefs,"" including false ones.
A good guess would be that these relate, in particular, to his perception of United States intentions, aims and activities.
As an intelligence analyst, he might or might not have a clear picture of the scope—and secrecy—of covert operations and of secret military planning.
He might have put too much evidential ^ weight on his own lack of knowledge of Mongoose or of invasion planning, along with official statements that we did not intend to at tack.
Thus, Garthoff and apparently virtually all others in the intelligence community, in ignoring the reality of Soviet warnings about possible invasion of Cuba, failed even to consider that as a deterrent to such invasion the Soviets might be putting in vsizeable combat contingents and Soviet-manned equipment.
On October 22 , with invasion possibly a week away, the estimate was 8-10,000.
The actual figure was 42,000 troops—with more coming, if the blockade had not interfered.
Earlier in his text, Garthoff adds in 1989 the point that ""Deterrence of an American attack on Cuba, and reassurance of the „ Cubans, were, however, clearly the only reasons for deploying the * Soviet air defense and coastal defense forces.
Oddly, he does not mention in this connection the large Soviet troops commitment, nor the I l-28s, aimed at attacking an invasion force.
But in fact, Khrushchev had consistently made this point earlier, in public statements and in his letters to Kennedy.
Rejecting this as a real perception or concern of the Soviets also meant ignoring the impression created correctly!--by American exercises in the spring, summer and fall of 1962 (which Garthoff describes only in the 1989 edition) and the demands of Republicans and,g.
How did their expectatons of invasion relate to the time-schedule of their deployment, to their secrecy, and to their planned time of revelation 0 G says, ""The missile facilities were to be completed and made operational by a date in November or December 1962.
And even then, that might have seemed more a provocation than a deterrent unless the missiles looked at least possibly operational, which could not be till later.
If it were not for the fact that the coastal defenses and large numbers of Soviet troops were clearly for no other purpose than deterring or repelling invasion, this matter of timing and secrecy might almost seem to reject the new premise.
But in that case, September and early October should have been a time of intense apprehension in Moscow.
Whereas all the information from the Soviets so far is that the Soviets were increasingly assured, by Kennedy’s inaction and assurances to the public, that their missiles had not been detected, or else that they were being accepted.
But if they were really anticipating at least the possibility, let alone a high likelihood, if a surprise American invasionexecuted as a fait accompli — in the ab senc e of the missiles, this absence of reaction to the actual presence of the missiles themselves should not have been so reassuring.
The latter discovery would be a propaganda boon for the Americans apparently more than justifying their invasions—while the former encounter would be a catastrophe for everyone, possibly everyone in the Northern Hemisphere.
We still don’t know—especially since McNamara and McGeorge Bundy are still lying about these preparations—the real state of mind and motives that led to the urgent contingency planning for invasion on October 1, 1962, with a target date of October 20.
Yet by all accounts, the Soviets were caught thoroughly by surprise on October 22.
That is, perhaps by the time the missiles actually went in, the Soviets were no longer as convinced of the immediate need for them, for deterrence, as they were when the decision was made in May and June.
They could nevertheless have continued the deployment, for other motives and because of a longterm threat to Cuba, as well as because of inertia.
I thought he applied this to Kennedy’s preference to conceal his awareness of the missiles, if he detected them before the election.
Rostow thought he might have missed, in 1962, the difference between a Presidential and a Congressional election, and in any case have exaggerated the passivity of the decision apparatus during such an event.
In any case, these speculations not only bear on possible unrealism or incoherence in Soviet decisionmaking on the project, but on the very real possibility that it was heading toward a disaster that has scarcely been measured in past analysis.
An American invasion—which was significantly more likely than past analysts have realized even in the absence or in ignorance of Soviet missiles—might not only have been undeterred by the actual, secret presence of the missiles and the Soviet troops, but might have been ola-de triggered by the known buildup accompanying the ^missile and troops, »and brought the United States into immediate, large-scale ground combat with Soviet forces.
All this because the Soviets, I trying to deter such an invasion, had inserted missiles and forces but without yet revealing it 1 -j.
Stance love when the Soviet Ambassador reveals that the single, out-of-control 22 Aneri can strategic bomber acting with the' initiative and lack of feedback of whoever it was who ordered the firing of the Soviet SAM against Major Anderson’s U-2 on October 26—was about to trigger a Soviet Doomsday Machine that had been wired automatically to end all life on earth with a cloud of radioactive cobalt when any nuclear explosions went off on the Soviet Union.
Strangelove points out that if this were meant, as it was, to deter American attack, why had not the Americans been told' 7 A secret device could not deter, it could only do...what was about to happen.
The term is surely meant to suggest an analogy to the United States forces in Europe, which serve as a tripwire to American nuclear response.
In this case it might also refer to assuring Soviet commitment and response elsewhere if necessary.
But such responses would quickly encounter American tripwires to nuclear war.
The troops alone, if inserted secretly and then revealed, would have been a major deterrent to United States invasion, though not quite certain.
Combined with missiles, they do add force to the possibility that American invasion would lead to a , launch, authorised or not. — As with the above question of what the Soviet concerns were or should have been with respect to the effect of their secrecy, comparable issues are raised by their deployment of actual warheads to Cuba.
At the Cambridge Conference in 1987, both some Soviets (e.g., Burlatsky) and Americans found it inconceivable, on ""rational"" grounds, that the warheads could actually have been deployed, so far from Soviet territory.
Yet in 1989, General Volkongonov’s detailed assurances finally persuaded Garthoff reluctantly to believe that twenty nuclear warheads had probably arrived.
The ""rational actor"" model, in the economist’s technical and limited sense of ""rational,"" is working better and better for the crisis; but the ""reasonable and prudent leader"" model, a part of the ideologies of both sides, not so well.
On the other hand, Volkogonov confirmed that there were no nuclear warheads with, or intended for, the dualcapable short-range FROG rockets which accompanied the Soviet troops.
Except that the presence of these rockets led the American JCS to plan ""prudently"" for the possibility that the Soviet troops did have tactical nuclear weapons.
TLke-r-r~idea of a prudent response to this possibility was to plan to have tactical nuclear weapons with the American troops that—they hoped and expected, as of this discussion on October 27—would be invading within a day or two.
The United States belief that Castro was simply a tool of Moscow was wrong, and led to wrong inferences at the climax of the crisis; it might have led to an air attack and everything that might have Ifollowed.
G reports in the previous chapter the unanimous opinion—as he understood it--that deterrence of invasion was not a primary 24 motive, indeed, was not_ among th e real motives of the deployment.
G, and some of those on the ExComm, may not have realized this United States motive.
Thus United States secrecy and lies on 1 these precursors were critical to establishing a legal basis for the blockade and threats.
The Soviet secrecy and evasions on this cost them dearly, on and after October 22.
Assuming that the Soviet principal motives were defensive, to deter attack on Cuba, the Soviet secrecy lent itself to being depicted as evidence of aggressive intentions.
One guess would be that, once the Soviet Union had decided to do something secretly--which was hardly uncommon for them--they had no experience, reflexes, procedures for deciding to reveal that secret quickly, prior to the time they had earlier planned. (• t (■ More recent examples would be their ""public information handling"" of the KAL-007 shootdown and of the Chernobyl disaster.
Prior to Gorbachev, the instinct for secrecy in the Soviet Union was not counterbalanced, as in the US, by any tendencies toward, experience with, or procedures for managing timely candor , when appropriate.
But this may be a general risk of attempts at faits accomplis . , If the other party discovers the project prematurely, the very fact that public attention has not been aroused may give it the option of keeping its own knowledge and initial planning and responses secret while it prepares its own fait, accompli as a counter.
And part of its counter may be to reveal, at a moment of its own choosing, the secret planning of the adversary, and to interpre^,tile opponent’s secrecy as indicating aggressive intent, and a guilty_conscience over an illegitimate activity.
The adversary may well find it difficult to explain away this ~ interpretation.
If JFK, on October 22, had not been able to say, over and over, ""secret,"" ""deceptive,"" and ""clandestine,"" about the Soviet move, the facts that, first, the Soviets were ""changing the status quo"" in precisely the way the United States had done in Turkey, and second, that the Soviet move was perfectly legal while the announced United States blockade was either illegal or an act of war, would have been j embarrassingly blatant.
Moreover, aside from the fact that, as Soviet officials later pointed out, the Soviet Union had no obligation to tell the United States in advance of what it was doing, al] this denunciation of clandestinity and deception was coming from the Administration that 26 I was at that moment carrying' out A covert raids against and penetrations into Cuba for purposes of sabotage, and attempting to , assassinate Fidel Castro.
All of which—had it been known, which it wasn’t —not only provided a precedent for the secrecy surrounding the legal Soviet move, but /which' mocked the United States charge that the Soviet effort at deterring a jUS invasion—which was also under clandestine preparation as an I imminent option—was an ""unjustified"" change in the status quo.
That the Soviet move was ""provocative"" can hardly be questioned, given the United States response.
The answer scarcely supports the selfrighteous tone of the United States complaint.
The difference, from the United States point of view, was that our neighbor Cuba was regarded as being within ""our hemisphere, our immediate sphere of influence, whereas the Soviets neighbor Turkey was not to be regarded as within ""their” hemisphere; in fact, it, too, was within our sphere of influence.
It^ was [above all a change in the balance of ""superpower 'rights , a change in the direction of asserted parity of status and rights.
It meant a new assertion by the Soviet Union of an equal right to treat a friendly government in the shadow of the other superpower as a sovereign state and an ally, to be protected by the supply or emplacement of arms and forces.
It meant the assertion by Cuba of a parity of sovereign rights between the United States and Cuba, which the United States had never come to recognize and was secretly contradicting in its covert Mongoose program an its secret contingency planning for invasion.
But the judgment by the k heretofore hegemonic power that this assertion of autonomy is 27 ^""unjustified"" is not the last word.
It was, primarily, the United States * unwillingness to accept an assertion of diplomatic or sovereign parity with either the Soviet Union or Cuba that underlay the danger, recklessness and provocativeness of the Soviet-Cuban jproject.
It is also true that the_way in which the Soviet Union carried out the operation turned out to be provocative, though hardly ""deliberately"" so.
The successful secrecy and deliberately misleading statements of intention inadvertently tempted Kennedy I to make public assurances and commitments that he would probably i not have made if he had been less certain and less mistaken about I Soviet intentions.
The Soviets were either inattentive to or inconsiderate of the /effects of this on Kennedy’s domestic political embarrassment when his assurances and commitments were confronted with the reality of Soviet actions.
Khrushchev certainly underrated the likelihood that this prospect would ""provoke"" Kennedy to take aggressive action to avert or avenge this embarrassment.
Thus he underrated the danger of relying on secrecy to produce a surprise.
My general study of crises as "" faits malaccomplis ""--t4rg result attempted faits accomplis that were miscalculated or discovered prematurely—shows this pattern of inadvertent — an d—unforeseen pro vocation as a frequent generator of crises in the relations of states.
It is a threat of massive escalation , meant to deter Soviet nuclear first-use —whether directed by Moscow or unauthorized—in response to a United States invasion or air attack on Cuba.
By not mentioning the latter contingencies, and by referring to ""any nation"" as though nations other than the United States were plausible targets for these MRBMs, Kennedy focussed attention, deceptively, on an aggressive threat posed by these missiles rather than any defensive, deterrent function.
He also presented the United States action as protecting other Latin American countries, further I justification for his stance.
This is not to say that the missiles deployed to Cuba posed no ""offensive"" Soviet threat.
They did challenge US/NATO 28 A/y ^ 3 arrangements—which relied on credible United States first-use nuclear threats--to deter and defend against a Soviet challenge to the status of West Berlin, or West Europe in general.
The Berlin issue was an aspect to the crisis which was certainly real in United States minds and probably in Khrushchev’s as well, though so far the Soviets have not acknowledged this.
The Cuban-based MRBMs did pose a th reat of S oviet esc alation to United States first-use of nuclear weapons in the context of NATO attempts to break a possible Soviet blockade of Berlin.
Thus, the deployment of MRBMs and IRBMs to Cuba did serve to neutralize the United States first-use threats on which NATO relied to defend Berlin and West Europe.
Of course, if such an escalation was implemented, it would not be in the form of a single missile, or only a few missiles, being launched from Cuba, or the Soviet Union; and it would go without saying that a sizeable launch from anywhere would lead to full retaliation against the Soviet Union.
So Kennedy’s explicit threat was redundant in this context; it really applied much more I to the contingency of Soviet first-use in response to United States invasion or attack of Cuba.
Nevertheless, McNamara, and according to him, the President, was far from fully confident that this massive deterrent threat would work, in the event of United States attack on the missile or invasion.
He reports that he estimated a small but highly 1 significant probability that such an attack would lead to an unauthorized launch of one or more missiles, outside Moscow s control.
This small probability was enough in McNamara’s mind to deter him from recommending such an attack or invasion, as soon as he recognized a real possibility that some missiles were operational, which was by October 17 or so.
Moreover, he reported at the Cambridge Conference in 1987 that he and the President, alert to the possibility of unauthorized launches of one or a few missiles, would almost certainly not have authorised a ""full"" retaliatory response on the Soviet Union; they might not have launched a nuclear response at all.
So the threat in Kennedy’s speech that such a full response would be M required, e., inevitable, was a conscious bluff.
However, this deterrent threat of escalation of ""overreaction""—was basically intended to strengthen the credibility of an offensive threat of non-nuclear action against the missiles and other Soviet forces in Cuba, as well as against Castro s forces, by weakening the credibility of Soviet nuclear response to such a United States non-nuclear attack.
This reassertion of United States first-strike superiority served to deter not only Soviet first-use from Cuba but Soviet ""horizontal escalation,"" responding to United States blockade or invasion by creating challenges elsewhere, as in Turkey or Berlin.
By thus hinting strongly that the United States was prepared to act aggressively despite the possibility of such counter-moves , on the basis in part of its nuclear superiority (which permitted it to wield such a threat of ""over-reaction""), this statement was, as Garthoff says, ""a sign of Amer^aTcah determination.
Even if United States officials had felt certain that Soviet leaders had no intention of launching a deliberate attack, even against United States invasion—and indeed, McNamara did feel confident of this — this United States threat was not irrelevant to United States concerns about possible Soviet unaut horized launch, and the efforts the Soviets might, take to prevent this.
Even though the United States threat of escalation did not eliminate the fear of unauthorized action in the minds of United States leaders, it could be expected to encourage the Soviets to take greater precautions.
Whenever they gave such instructions, precautions could always use strengthening.
Unauthorized actions during the Cuban Missile* Crisis —According to General Keegan, ""the SAC full-alert process was reported ' in the clear’ rather than in normal encoded messages.
Soviet communications interception personnel must have been shocked 6o C> 30 Jr suddenly to hear the SAC commander-in-chief address all his senior commanders in an unprecedented message in the clear, stressing the seriousness of the situation faced by the nation, and assuring them that SAC plans were well prepared and were being executed smoothly.
Soviet political and military leaders must have been puzzled and alarmed at this flaunting of the American strategic superiority, so great that the United States could afford to ignore normal perational security in order to drive home the extent of its power.
The decision for this bold action was taken 6by General Thomas Power, commander in-chief of SAC, on his own initiative.
Nor did he even inform higher authority after the fact... —On this very same day, October 22, the Soviets arrested in Moscow the United States and UK spy, their officer Colonel Oleg Penkovsky, presumably hoping to find out what he might have transmitted about the missile deployment.
Earlier, ""He had tried to egg the Western powers on to more aggressive actions against the Soviet Union during the Berlin crisis in 1961^ So when he was about to go down, he evidently decided trcr-'pTay Samson' and bring the temple down on everyone else as well.
Fortunately, his Western TnTelTigence handlers, at the operational level, after weighing a dilemma of great responsibility, decided not to credit Penkovsky’s final signal and suppressed it.
It was not, after all, a miraculous coincidence that such a false warning—perhaps unprecedented in our ’’human intelligence program, in which Penkovsky was our highest sources should come exactly at the outset of a major crisis, when it was most likely to be believed and to be acted on preemptively.
The adversary’s high-level alert, accompanying threats at the onset of an intense crisis, is likely to trigger a round-up of “suspected enemy agents.
For example, the warnings of imminent attack just before the Bay of Pigs invasion led Castro to roll up all the American networks the Cubans had had under surveillance up to that time.
And the American strategic alert was not only meant to be visible, but Power’s unauthorized action made it even more blatant, immediately credible, and threatening.
VA^ I In particular, more planes were being put on continuous air alert than ever before.
Both of these facts, the general readying and the airborne alert, meant that the chance of an accident involving a nuclear weapon—either with high—explosive yield, partial nuclear explosion or full nuclear explosion was higher than ’’normal,” perhaps higher than ever before.
Indeed, the increased chance of this was such as to make the sending of such a strong ""signal"" very questionable in terms of its dangers of ' accident.
Yet another ominous ""coincidence-waiting-to-happen” was a possible nuclear accident coming on this same day, or on subsequent days.
SAC’s DEFCON 2 was an unprecedented alert, meaning that throughout the world at SAC bases nuclear weapons were being loaded onto planes and deployed on an unprecedented scale, with unprecedented urgency.
I This was especially true of the decision to relocate B 4/s to 1 thirty-three civilian airports, such as Boston.
The risk seemed far from justifiable in view of the vastly inferior Soviet first-strike forces (from one to several dozen operational missiles in the Soviet Union and less than two hundred intercontinental bombers) which made a Soviet first-srike seem extremely unlikely.
Yet these same measures—other than the relocation of B-47s—could have seemed to the Soviets preparations for a LS preemptive attack.
Knowing that, NORAD and SAC would have been especially sensitive to indications of Soviet attack and hair-trigger prone to preempt it.
It is just at the time of high tension and alert, when an unauthorized action is most dangerous, that such an action is also I most likely, despite heightened precautions. —The same day, a SAC U-2 flew ""mistakenly"" over the northern USSR, causing Soviet fighters to scramble in pursuit, in the same area where the KAL-007 was shot down in 1983.
This might or might not have been an accident unrelated to the high tension.
X ** j H-—*■—~ — rtr Severa 1 days into the crisis, a member of the ExCorom in his other duties by chance became aware of another routine IsicJ ongoing operation that should have been reconsidered under crisis conditions.
Garthoff cites this simply as an example of what could have happened—i.e-, a Cuban attack on the vessel — inadvertently, from operations be'Tow the attention of most high level decisionmakers, like the aggressive antisubmarine tactics of the Navy.
Or to the 34A missions—sabotage missions against North Vietnam which helped trigger the attack on the de Soto patrol destroyer on August 2, 1964.
Or, in this connection, to the exactly comparable Mongoose operations! , The other examples he mentions were probably not cases of deliberate United States provocation.
The intelligence ship was probably emplaced near or in Cuban waters before October 15, the discovery of the missiles hence its i description as ’’routine” — either, or probably both, as part of the Icon tin gency preparations for blockade or invasion launched on lOctober 1, and in combination with Mongoose operations against Cuba \during that period.
At least three meetings, followed, including one on October 16 in between the two meetings in the White House that day on the missiles in Cuba.” /fly.
Admiral son himself has told James Hershberg ^t^at he '/understood the''Mongoose operations to be aimed at provok ing; a iCuban military response that would justify and trigger a United States invasion.
General Sam Wilson (later my colleague in pacification in Vietnam, still later head of Defense Intelligence Agency, at the time working under Ed Lansdale in the Pentagon on covert operations) told Hershberg the same.
This particular patrol was offshore just ' prior to the deadline for maximum readiness for an invasion, October 20; it was almost certainly undertaking aggressive passes toward the shoreline to force the Cubans to turn on their coastal defense radars.
October 1, 1962-,—""tw^ ^eeks bef ore +&£ ^ The notion that events were moving toward a crisis before the discovery of the missiles and before the eTe~ction, has just taken a great, leap forward in my mind.
This means to him that virtually the only risk of nuclear operations reflected the possibility of accident or unauthorized ^action, which he rated as low.
The likelihood that one accident or unauthorized action would lead to others was not low at all.
And the record shows that although the President and Secretary of Defense did not seem to underrate the likelihood of accident, unauthorized action or more generally, loss of their control of ') events, they nevertheless ""accepted” what they saw as significantly high probabilities of such events in deciding to undertake belligerent actions—like the blockade, antisubmarine action, low[ level reconnaissance — and to prolong the crisis.
Moreover, they did this in preference to settling the crisis on terras they personally judged to be compatible with United States national security interests.
And the same was true for Khrushchev, for at least some period after he became fully aware of the risks of the l course he was on.
The net effect is less reassuring about the overall risks of nuclear war than Bundy makes it out.
And indeed, by the people of As it happens, I am inclined to judge that the leadership behavior in these cases i s subject to reproach by their citizens as irresponsible and reckless, as well as servile.
This is really the issue underlying the controversy about short-range nuclear forces, missiles and artillery in Europe today, this very summer.
Actually, the missiles were photographed on the 14th and the photos interpreted on the 15th.
It also meant that most of them had already discussed the matter with one or more others the night before or Tuesday morning:g., Rusk and Nitze.
Moreover, Nitze had been considering options for a number of days, having been convinced by DIA of the presence of the missiles before the photos were taken.
This supported both a mood of American righteousness—which underpinned a violent response and a sense of perplexity, uncertainty as to possible Soviet intentions which seemed almost incomprehensible, with a tendency to see them in the most ominous light.
Indeed, Garthoff notes that on the day of Kennedy's speech, October 22, ""with ceremonial fanfare, the first Jupiter missile launch position in Turkey was turned over to Turkish command.
It explains why Khrushchev had felt a timely thing to complain about to Ambassador Kohler on October 16.
Then, there was Khrushchev’s embarrassing backdown on Berlin, perhaps partly provoked by humiliating Gilpatric speech.
It would be an amazing example of self-censorship at the time if they really refrained from mentioning it in the larger group, when it came to trying to explain the Soviet action.
They knew, from penetration of Mongoose, that that program was aimed at the overthrow of Castro; and they could calculate just as well as Lansdale that that aim would require invasion.
Thus, while acknowledging that the explicit aims of Mongoose were to bring about a ""popular revolt"" (or appearance of one) in Cuba, ""a development that in turn was expected both to require and to justify American military intervention, in October 1962"" , G stresses that the ""projected program was, however, not accepted by the administration, which at that time approved only the intelligence infiltration stage of the plan.
These assertionsT^are never contradicted in the available documentation, nor are the aims modified.
Kennedy appeared, in public, more than prepared to do something about the missiles he had found; either they had been found ""too early""—""which A 'was almost sure to occur, reflecting a 'failure of Soviet camouflage and underestimate of American s survei 1 anceor else, he might have been equally determined whenever he found them.
Here is a case where McNamara implies that he had ""decided"" not to attack or invade, early in the crisis, so that preparations to do so were a bluff.
It did help Kennedy, and hurt Khrushchev, that the discovery was made early enough that it could be claimed publicly that the missiles were not yet operational.
Thus the risks of action (which were properly high enough in the President’s mind to deter him) could be claimed to be low enough to permit action, without losing public support.
The President’s bluff that he was willing to risk attacking was plausible, given his ability to reassure the public, and his willingness and political ability to take the risks of the blockade.
Yet it would still have been a miscalculation, because it failed to consider that the President would not be deterred from making powerful and plausible threats , even though they might be (and probably were) bluffs.
Either the missiles were found earlier than Khrushchev expected (the Soviets do believe there was a simple failure to camouflage them), and/or Khrushchev overestimated the length of time Kennedy could manage to keep this particular secret from the electorate, during an election campaign in which it was highly relevant and when the military would have wanted to leak it to force Kennedy to act.
This commitment, made in front of the Republicans Dillon and McCone among others (which may have been a purpose of the ExComm format, and of Dillon’s presence), was crucial in setting the terms of later ExComm discussion.
He might have wanted to leave the option of ""eating them,"" as Nitze had put it * to Rusk the night before.
Or, if the missiles had been clearly operational by the time they were found, likewise.
Ignorant of Mongoose and invasion preparations, American analysts—nearly all of whom dismissed this alleged motive—seem never to have considered how Khrushchev might have been expected to feel about the prospect of ""losing Cuba.
This is still true, even now they know of the Soviet expectations 4a>^ Afe _ <*v K<V) V® — ^ I $ <dZX8 and the basis for them, as reflected in an unwillingness to take this motive as seriously as others or to give it primacy.
Far from inferring Soviet motives on the basis of a mirror image of ourselves, there is first a failure to see ourselves realistically in a mirror, and then a failure to imagine that Soviets might react very similarly.
This is a case when that approach would have worked quite well, by Khrushchev’s testimony.
Hence to acknowledge diplomatic parity by either accepting the missiles in Cuba or trading the Turkish missiles against them would have been ""premature,"" a radical shift, contradicting Kennedy’s earlier warnings and initial position in the crisis.
Khruschev ""then mused on whether the SU shouldn’t do the same thing in Cuba, just over the horizon from the United States.
What he seems to have missed is that the Americans regarded Turkey as being in their sphere of influence and interest despite its proximity to the SU—and that although he regarded Cuba likewise, the Americans by no means had reconciled themselves to the ""loss"" of Cuba from their sphere of control.
Again — contrary to what I thought at the time he was not wrong about Kennedy’s and McNamara’s unwillingness to take the risk of attacking the missiles.
And the risk of their attacking the missile ultimately—however reluctantly and nervously—was not zero, either, though McNamara is reluctant to acknowledge this.
And they were not wrong—to the amazement of United States intel1igence-about their ability to keep that process secret.
This does suggest that the absence of 1^1 about Soviet ICBMs in 1959-61 was a less reliable indicator of the non-existence of a missile gap than some supposed. —18.
In his speech of December 1962, Khrushchev gave the defense of Cuba as the only reason for the deployment.
On the evidence available, it is s imply not tru e to say that no other explanation""than one which assigns principal importance to the strategic balance can satisfactorily account for the decision.
No one has ever defended Khrushchev’s December 1962 claim that defending «fco— 12 Cuba was the only incentive; that is not really an issue.
To say this is not n ee^ ss ar iriy to justify Khrushchev’s choice, from a perspective that is also critical of the United States first-use policy and deployments in Europe and Turkey.
If this consideration u43^l~eHF~etrtrs the legitimacy of Khrushchev’s action--by focussing on its dangers as a ""provocation"" of United States aggression — it does the same, more sharply, for the United States response.
G has shifted his t , opinion from saying that this has been thoroughly debunked to saying it is ""questionable."" cites Burlatsky on Andropov.
In the same way that Garthoff may have been misled about invasion plans and Mongoose, I was misled about the United States role in Indonesia in 1965, in part by private assurances by William Bundy; and about the United States role in Cuba in 1961-62, partly by Lansdale’s total silence to me about Mongoose.
Thus, Garthoff and apparently virtually all others in the intelligence community, in ignoring the reality of Soviet warnings about possible invasion of Cuba, failed even to consider that as a deterrent to such invasion the Soviets might be putting in sizeable combat contingents and Soviet-manned equipment.
The role of ideology in warping intelligence analyses and interpretation of evidence—not only ideology about the opponent but about one’s own country, and the purposes, openness and veracity of one’s own leaders—could hardly be clearer.
Even in 1989 Garthoff repeats his 1987 put-down of the Soviet statements.
G says, ""The missile facilities were to be completed and made operational by a date in November or December 1962.
As it is, the best guess would seem to be that there was a major incoherence in the Soviet program; they were acting as if there was no real threat of an American invasion before the election, when their earlier, well-justified concerns had offered them no such assurance, and their very program of military aid to Cuba was increasing the likelihood of an American invasion sooner rather than later.
Another possibility was that they were taking a tense gamble which they saw as unavoidable; they were moving as fast as they could, taking a conscious chance that it would not be fast enough and that their own efforts might be self-defeating by speeding the 20 American timetable; and they saw secrecy as essential, because otherwise a blockade was probable, or even worse, this news would tip the scales toward an immediate invasion which was almost certain anyway.
The latter discovery would be a propaganda boon for the Americans apparently more than justifying their invasion^—while the former encounter would be a catastrophe for everyone, possibly everyone in the Northern Hemisphere.
Khrushchev might have gotten it into his head quite inappropriately (judging by the contingency planning actually going on, as well as by what actually happened!)—that there was almost no chance of an invasion before the election.
An American invasion—which was significantly more likely than past analysts have realized even in the absence or in ignorance of Soviet missiles—might not only have been undeterred by the actual, secret presence of the missiles and the Soviet troops, but might have been m&de t rigge red by the known buildup accompanying the missile and troops, 4nd brought the United States into immediate, large-scale ground combat with Soviet forces.
Stangelove when the Soviet Ambassador reveals that the single, out-of-control 22 American strategic bomber—acting with the y initiative and lack of feedback of whoever it was who ordered the firing of the Soviet SAM against Major Anderson’s U-2 on October 26—was about to trigger a Soviet Doomsday Machine that had been wired automatically to end all life on earth with a cloud of radioactive cobalt when any nuclear explosions went off on the Soviet Union.
A secret device could not deter, it could only do...what was about to happen.
Note that Garthoff describes the intended function of the large Soviet troop contingent as being, in addition to security for the missile sites and other forces, ""a 'trip wire’ in case of a large United States attack.
Combined with missiles, they do add force to the possibility that American invasion would lead to a ^launch, authorised or not.
As with the above question of what the Soviet concerns were or should have been with respect to the effect of their secrecy, comparable issues are raised by their deployment of actual warheads to Cuba.
So McNamara’s — and CIA’s ""prudent assumption"" that the missiles were capable of being fired was not misplaced (although the warheads may not have been at the missile launching pads, yet, or routinely). _ tv* *■ — The ""rational actor"" model, in the economist’s technical and limited sense of ""rational,"" is working better and better for the crisis; but the ""reasonable and prudent leader"" model, a part of the ideologies of both sides, not so well.
Except that the presence of these rockets led the American JCS to plan ""prudently"" for the possibility that the Soviet troops did have tactical nuclear weapons. ocs' Th-e^r idea of a prudent response to this possibility was to plan to have tactical nuclear weapons with the American troops that—they hoped and expected, as of this discussion on October 27—would be invading within a day or two.
The United States belief that Castro was simply a tool of Moscow was wrong, and led to wrong inferences at the climax of the crisis; it might have led to an air attack and everything that might have followed.
One guess would be that, once the Soviet Union had decided to do something secretly—which was hardly uncommon for them—they had no experience, reflexes, procedures for deciding to reveal that secret quickly, prior to the time they had earlier planned.
If the other party discovers the project prematurely, the very fact that public attention has not been aroused may give it the option of keeping its own knowledge and initial planning and responses secret while it prepares its own fait accompli as a counter.
And part of its counter may be to reveal, at a moment of its own choosing, the secret planning of the adversary, and to interpret the opponent’s secrecy as indicating aggressive intent, and a guilty conscience over an illegitimate activity.
If JFK, on October 22, had not been able to say, over and over, ""secret,"" ""deceptive,"" and ""clandestine,"" about the Soviet move, the facts that, first, the Soviets were ""changing the status quo"" in precisely the way the United States had done in Turkey, and second, that the Soviet move was perfectly legal while the announced United States blockade was either illegal or an act of war, would have been embarrassingly blatant.
All of which—had it been known, which it wasn’t —not only provided a precedent for the secrecy surrounding the legal Soviet move, but which mocked the United States charge that the Soviet effort at deterring a United States invasion—which was also under clandestine preparation as an imminent option—was an ""unjustified"" change in the status quo.
Again, the Soviets were doing what the United States had done in Turkey, and on the same basis of an ally’s ""request"" (actually, in both cases, the ally’s compliance^* vSkAs The difference, from the United States point of view, was that our neighbor Cuba was regarded as being within ,, our ,t hemisphere, our immediate sphere of influence, whereas the Soviets* neighbor Turkey was not to be regarded as within ""their"" hemisphere; in fact, it, too, was within our sphere of influence.
That was the asymmetric ""status quo M whose change we would not accept; and it was disingenous to imply that we would have M accepted M the change in better spirit if it had not been accomplished suddenly and secretly.
It meant the assertion by Cuba of a parity of sovereign rights between the United States and Cuba, which the United States had never come to recognize and was secretly contradicting in its covert Mongoose program and its secret contingency planning for invasion.
But the judgment by the heretofore hegemonic power that this assertion of autonomy is 27 ""unjustified"" is not the last word.
It was, primarily, the US’ unwillingness to accept an assertion of diplomatic or sovereign parity with either the Soviet Union or Cuba that underlay the danger, recklessness and provocativeness of the Soviet-Cuban project.
The successful secrecy and deliberately misleading statements of intention inadvertently tempted Kennedy to make public assurances and commitments that he would probably not have made if he had been less certain and less mistaken about Soviet intentions.
My general study of crises as "" faits malaccomplis "" — trh* result tfM —attempted faits accomplis that were miscalculated or discovered prematurely—shows this pattern of inadvertent, — and — U D for g s e en pro vocation as a frequent generator of crises in the relations of states.
He also presented the United States action as protecting other Latin American countries, further justification for his stance.
They did challenge US/NATO 28 arrangements—which relied on credible United States first-use nuclear threats—to deter and defend against a Soviet challenge to the status of West Berlin, or West Europe in general.
So Kennedy’s explicit threat was redundant in this context; it really applied much more to the contingency of Soviet first-use in response to United States invasion or attack of Cuba.
So the threat in Kennedy’s speech that such a full response would be ""required,"" e., inevitable, was a conscious bluff.
Soviet communications interception personnel must have been shocked 30 2>o^ suddenly to hear the SAC commander-in-chief address all his senior commanders in an unprecedented message in the clear, stressing the seriousness of the situation faced by the nation, and assuring them that SAC plans were well prepared and were being executed smoothly.
The decision for this bold action was taken oby General Thomas Power, commanderin-chief of SAC, on his own initiative.
Earlier, ""He had tried to egg the Western powers on to more aggressive actions against the Soviet Union during the Berlin crisis in 1961.
So when he was about to go down, he evidently decided to play Samson and bring the temple down on everyone else as well.
Fortunately, his Western intelligence handlers, at the operational level, after weighing a dilemma of great responsibility, decided not to credit Penkovsky’s final signal and suppressed it.
The adversary’s high-level alert, accompanying threats at the onset of an intense crisis, is 1ikely to trigger a round-up of suspected enemy agents.
In particular, more planes were being put on continuous air alert than ever before.
This was especially true of the decision to relocate B-47s to thirty-three civilian airports, such as Boston.
I felt at the time that this was a reckless policy (as was the airborne C NA4T TH<S 32 alert), risking nuclear accidents (including the spreading of radioactive plutonium from a high-explosive detonation) in the immediate vicinity of metropolitan areas.
Yet these same measures—other than the relocation of B-47s-could have seemed to the Soviets preparations for a United States preemptive attack.
It is just at the time of high tension and alert, when an unauthorized action is most dangerous, that such an action is also most likely, despite heightened precautions. — The same day, a SAC U-2 flew ""mistakenly"" over the northern USSR, causing Soviet fighters to scramble in pursuit, in the same area where the KAL—007 was shot down in 1983.
Garthoff cites this simply as an example of what could have happened—i.e., a Cuban attack on the vessel—inadvertently, from operations below the attention of most high-level decisionmakers, like the aggressive antisubmarine tactics of the Navy.
Garthoff observes, ""There is a strong tendency to ignore lessons from near-misses; in 1967 a similar ship in a similar situation, the Liberty , was attacked by Israeli aircraft and ships, and in 1968 its sistei—ship, the Pueblo. was captured by the North Koreans.
The intelligence ship was probably emplaced near or in Cuban waters before October 15, the discovery of the missiles —hence its description as ""routine""—either, or probably both, as part of the contingency preparations for blockade or invasion launched on October 1, and in combination with Mongoose operations against Cuba during that period.
As in the Tonkin Gulf, the ""logical"" targets for ""reprisal"" would be targets ""related"" to the attack on the Navy ship; in 1964, these included the naval bases for North Vietnamese patrol boats, and petroleum depots.
October 1, 1962-,—""twoweeks before fAtr —cL i rrn . ..< » ■« e ^ The notion that events were moving toward a crisis before the discovery of the missiles and before the election, has just taken a great leap forward in my mind.
McGeorge Bundy bases his fundamentally reassuring appraisal of the past, and future, risks of nuclear war on the record that leaders of both superpowers have been prudent, determined to maintain control of nuclear initiatives in their own hands, and very reluctant to decide on any combat employment of nuclear weapons.
Moreover, they did this in preference to settling the crisis on terms they personally judged to be compatible with United States national security interests.
And the same was true for Khrushchev, for at least some period after he became fully aware of the risks of the course he was on.
As it happens, I am inclined to judge that the leadership behavior in these cases is subject to reproach by their citizens as irresponsible and reckless, as well as servile.
