Analyzing these images the next day, photo interpreters at the National Photographic Interpretation Center identified SS-4 medium-range ballistic missiles deployed outside the town of San Cristobal.
National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy informed President John F Kennedy of the deployments the following morning.
The movie Thirteen Days, for example, opens with a montage of a U-2 flight and photo interpreters poring over black-and-white film reels and finding the missiles.
In such accounts, American intelligence collection was comprehensive, persistent, and effective, implying discovery of the missiles was inevitable.
Quite to the contrary, however, the United States failed to detect the secret operation to install Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba for nearly six months.
The medium-range ballistic missiles were actually in Cuba five weeks before United States intelligence discovered them.
While the intelligence community counts the missile crisis among its historic successes, it might be considered more of a near-failure, as multiple scholars have noted.
Many have mined the missile crisis for lessons regarding political decision-making, estimative intelligence, and critical thinking.
Yet intelligence collection remains a relatively unexplored angle of the case.
This essay considers just how the missiles were discovered and the enduring implications this holds for intelligence collection and its relationship with analysis and policy.
He hoped this operation, codenamed ANADYR, would improve the credibility of Russia’s nuclear deterrent, provide a rhetorical response to recent United States intermediate-range ballistic missile deployments in Turkey, and demonstrate solidarity with Russia’s newest client state.
Conceived personally by Khrushchev and predicated upon secrecy, ANADYR was known only to select Soviet political and military leadership.
Imagery and signals intelligence collection inside the USSR itself was limited and sporadic.
U-2 IMINT was no longer viable over the USSR after the May 1960 shoot-down of Francis Gary Powers.
Corona photoreconnaissance satellites provided valuable but infrequent coverage and lacked the frequency and resolution to identify missile regiments departing garrisons or ANADYR cargos being loaded in Soviet ports.
SIGINT largely involved radio-frequency intercepts from platforms outside the Soviet periphery.
Fictional intelligence officers uncover such plans by taking the right photograph, decrypting the right communication, stealing the right document, or interrogating the right person.
When you don’t know you’re dealing with a secret plot , intelligence collection won’t be optimally postured to discover the threat, and limited resources will be dedicated to other priorities.
In the spring and summer of 1962, there was no American embassy in Cuba and the few American HUMINT sources there were focused on regime stability, state security, and socioeconomic issues, as well as supporting covert efforts to topple Castro.
Secret plots also allow adversaries to employ extensive denial and deception.
Soviet personnel took steps to avoid American SIGINT, minimizing sensitive communications and writing them down or passing them verbally when necessary.
Crews camouflaged sensitive equipment while underway and loaded and offloaded only at night, behind secure perimeters with high walls.
To throw the Americans off the trail with false indicators, some crews were issued Arctic gear, and the very name of the mission was meant to convey some connection to the Anadyr region in the Soviet Far East.
The Soviets even lied to their own ambassador to the United States, Anatoly Dobrynin, who served as an unwitting deceiver.
Rumors and speculation regarding possibly nefarious Soviet activity on the island further complicated United States collection.
Such churn confused the intelligence community’s understanding of actual activity without adding any real information.
Following the Bay of Pigs and Berlin blockade crises, Republican politicians and pundits pointed to acknowledged Soviet military activity in Cuba as evidence of Kennedy’s failure to prevent Soviet aggression on America’s doorstep.
Kenneth Keating claimed there might be Soviet rocket installations in Cuba.
Pressed for details by Director of Central Intelligence John McCone, Keating refused to cooperate.
Whatever the source of the senator’s claims — reliable, real, or otherwise — their partisan nature further drove many in Kennedy’s cabinet to question and dismiss the notion of Soviet offensive missiles in Cuba.
The SNIE concluded there was no clear evidence of Soviet nuclear weapons in Cuba and that the Soviets probably would not deploy such weapons.
Before mid-October, IMINT and SIGINT were ambiguous about the broader nature of the Soviet buildup.
Yet every data point — arrivals of aircraft, cruise missiles, surface-to-air missiles , and the overall spike in secretive military cargos arriving in Cuban ports with incomplete or false manifests — was equally consistent with either 1) Soviet claims these were conventional military shipments meant purely for Cuban self-defense or 2) fears by individuals like McCone that the buildup might contain nuclear weapons.
Unlike IMINT and SIGINT, some HUMINT — from Cuban émigrés debriefed in Florida and clandestine sources inside Cuba — offered reporting explicitly claiming the presence of offensive missiles.
Additionally, they came from sources with little vetting or reporting records.
Yet despite the need to continue monitoring the buildup for evidence it might possibly include such weapons, on Sept 10 Bundy and Secretary of State Dean Rusk directed future U-2 flights to avoid Cuban airspace to dodge the recently discovered SAMs — disregarding protests by IMINT representatives that this would cripple collection over central Cuba.
Administration officials were only pressured to resume flights over the Cuban interior on Oct. in the wake of concerns by McCone and Defense Intelligence Agency leadership over mounting HUMINT reporting of missiles in western Cuba.
This resulted in the fateful Oct. flight and NPIC’s discovery of the missiles.
Enduring Implications As this case highlights, collection platforms and sources are themselves political devices and actors whose peculiarities, limitations, and risks shape how intelligence is produced.
The implications of this case are enduring because they reflect basic realities of human nature and political behavior.
Successful collection requires complementary coverage from multiple disciplines.
This is the conclusion that the modern intelligence community has arguably taken most to heart.
Multiple sources are essential for production of accurate, comprehensive intelligence.
Eventual discovery of the missiles was only possible through cross-cued, multi-INT collection.
SIGINT failed to provide independent proof of an offensive buildup, but identified increased maritime shipments and unusual communications, drawing further attention.
HUMINT justified overturning the “photo gap” restrictions and cued the IMINT flight that ultimately revealed the missiles.
Such collaborative, multi-INT collection is a hallmark of modern intelligence operations.
Despite being frequently depicted as sequential steps, collection, analysis, and policy are in a constant state of interaction and backflow.
As others have noted, the notion of a sequential “intelligence cycle” is deeply flawed.
In the months preceding discovery of the missiles, the intelligence community published an analytic assessment that the Soviets wouldn’t install such missiles even as it pushed for increased collection to look for said missiles.
Policymakers hamstrung this collection request based on analysis that, in turn, suffered from insufficient collection.
A politician, perhaps aware of classified reporting on the issue, shaped the debate over collection and analysis by publicly making it a partisan political issue.
Satellites could overfly the USSR and Cuba with impunity, HUMINT sources were available inside Cuba, and SIGINT collected information from a variety of sources around the world.
While a Corona satellite mission did image western Cuba on Oct., it lacked sufficient resolution to identify the missile sites and poor weather conditions made matters worse.
Though present in Cuba, clandestine HUMINT sources tackled a plethora of competing priorities and lacked sufficient vetting and collector confidence.
While SIGINT was collected both at sea and inside Cuba, effective Soviet communication security and encryption forestalled any SIGINT-derived reference to “missiles” or “nuclear” activity.
Intelligence consumers receive data from non-intelligence sources that compete for attention and confidence.
Conversations with Dobrynin and Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, press speculation, and politicized rumors all shaped policymakers’ and intelligence professionals’ understanding of reality.
Graham Greene’s 1958 novel Our Man in Havana and its movie adaptation the following year revolved around false rumors of foreign weapons deployments in Cuba and spies’ gullibility in falling for such rumors.
It is no great leap to imagine that this is where CIA and DIA analysts’ thoughts might have turned when seeing HUMINT reporting of powerful weapons deployed on the island.
Today, Russia’s emphasis on information operations that similarly eat away at the fabric of evidence-based analysis is well-established.
As various outlets have noted with regard to Russian efforts to shape perceptions regarding Crimea, MH17, Syria, and other issues, it is highly effective to simply flood news outlets and social media with counter-narratives and anti-Western cynicism.
Such efforts may overwhelm any evidence-based narrative drawn from intelligence collection, undermining our understanding of threats and attribution.
Collection is an inherently political act, with the potential to drive developments as well as inform them.
As the shoot-down of a U-2 at the peak of the crisis on Oct. illustrated, intelligence collection is not a passive research function.
In turn, policy realities either enable or inhibit effective collection.
The Eisenhower administration’s strong support for developing technical intelligence made possible the very existence of the U-2 and the operations that allowed United States intelligence to find the missiles.
Yet Eisenhower also closed the embassy in Havana, which crippled HUMINT collection.
The Kennedy administration’s reluctance to risk another international crisis essentially blinded United States collection to the presence of the missiles for five weeks.
Even before the “photo gap” decision, the administration made clear the political sensitivity of potential Soviet offensive deployments.
We see today decisions where sensitivity and risk aversion result in self-imposed collection constraints, which in turn risk the kind of collection blinders that nearly forestalled discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Intelligence success during a crisis requires effective collection prior to the crisis.
It is possible to increase or revise collection during a crisis; however, agencies must constantly collect, catalog, and disseminate baseline information to prepare for these events.
Details of Soviet equipment — required to detect them and inform policymakers of their capabilities — were acquired many months before the crisis via Penkovsky, attaché reporting, and technical collection by overhead imagery, radioactive sampling, seismographs, and ground-based radars.
The intelligence community could not simply request and collect such knowledge ad hoc once nefarious activity was suspected.
NPIC’s archives and knowledge of targets, built from years of U-2 and Corona coverage, were essential for analysts to quickly and accurately identify equipment in Cuba.
SIGINT had previously gathered and cataloged communications frequencies and radar emissions, allowing analysts to locate and characterize activity.
Major crises will occur in the countries near the bottom of the collection priority list.
Decisions to refocus collection efforts and operations carry real risk.
Because collection is inherently a zero-sum game — there are only so many aircraft, sensors, case officers, and antennas to go around — this will remain an enduring challenge for intelligence collection.
Though 2017 is a very different time for intelligence collection than was 1962 — given today’s multipolar world filled with diverse threats and a globally networked, public information environment — there are insights we can take away from this seminal event 55 years ago.
While intelligence collection platforms and methods inevitably change with the passage of time, the interplay between collection, analysis, and policy described above will endure.
We would be foolhardy to ignore the hard-won lessons of the discovery of Soviet nuclear missiles deployed 90 miles off our shores.
