On the 50th anniversary of this key historical event during the Cold War, students will gain a better understanding of the causes, events, and outcomes of the “hottest days” in Cold War history.
Students will view the same photos as President Kennedy and his executive committee, determining their own opinions about whether or not actions were necessary.
Similarly, students will listen to Kennedy’s address to the United States public, followed by reading and evaluating Premier Khrushchev’s response to Kennedy’s requests.
Students will then work both individually and in teams representing the three Navy branches, compiling research on specific ships, planes, or submarines of their choice from the crisis.
Finally, students will end with a formative assessment of their choice through artistic or written impression.
Each student, beginning with volunteers, will write something on the board.
They can write comments, questions, etc. in response to original phrase or to fellow student comments.
After sufficient time, teacher reviews comments for further explanations.
Teacher will instruct students to define words using textbook or teacher supplied definition.
Next, students will then create a nonlinguistic representation of the word, such as a symbol or basic drawing.
Students will analyze photos, and then evaluate the photos to determine what if any threat is evident.
Groups will have to weigh options of possible responses to Cuba and the Soviet Union.
Each group representative will advise President Kennedy as to actions they feel necessary.
Students will assume the role of President Kennedy and write what actions they would take if the decision was theirs.
A link to an audio recording of President Kennedy reading his speech is listed under resources, if preferred.
Teacher will divide students into small groups and distribute poster sized copies of Khrushchev’s response letter and different colored wet erase markers.
Teacher will model text annotating process, reminding students to read through the letter once without comments.
On second and subsequent readings, students should write questions, comments, underline and then define unfamiliar terms, etc.
Following the text annotation, groups will then begin discussing what actions President Kennedy should take.
Teacher will facilitate class discussion of group advice, followed by sharing of what actions President Kennedy actually took.
Naval branches will publish their research findings, highlighting their branches’ contribution in the crisis, with specific information from each individual student.
JFK, Khrushchev, Castro, quarantine, missile, reconnaissance, Cuba, United States, and the Soviet Union.
All choices should include appropriate use of at least 2 vocabulary words given at beginning of unit.
For average to advanced learners, I would require students to write at least a phrase for each letter.
