Now, with the opening of Robert F Kennedy’s personal papers on the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis, there can be no doubt that before Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev blinked, President John F Kennedy winked.Graham AllisonIn the official narrative, Kennedy stood tall, hung tough and stared his opponent down.
What this obscures is the critical role that cunning, craft and willingness to compromise played in resolving this crisis.This narrative has informed — and misinformed — many presidential decisions over the past five decades.
This same attitude was echoed by, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, in his September address to the United Nations.
There, Moscow held all the high military cards, and Washington was committed to defending Berlin — even if it meant using nuclear weapons.So the question arose whether Kennedy could give Khrushchev a way out by accepting his demand that the United States withdraw missiles from Turkey.
Thanks to secret tapes made by JFK of the meetings, we can be flies on the wall — listening to men debating choices they believed might lead to quick death for hundreds of millions of people.From the transcript, it is clear that Kennedy was intrigued in the possibility of trading the obsolete United States missiles in Turkey for withdrawal of missiles in Cuba.
But the overwhelming consensus in the room rejected that option, insisting it would undermine the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance, a pillar of Washington’s Cold War strategy.With his advisers stalemated and exhausted, Kennedy dismissed the group for dinner, asking them to come back for further discussion at 9:00 pm.
But he retained six of his closest advisers, including his brother, to shape a further option.This imaginative combination included a public deal, a private ultimatum and a secret sweetener.
Publicly, Washington would pledge not to invade Cuba if the Soviet Union withdrew the missiles.
Privately, the United States would state as fact that unless Khrushchev announced withdrawal of the missiles within 24 hours, the United States would act to eliminate them.
And secretly, while asserting that the United States would not make any deal if the missiles were withdrawn from Cuba, within six months the missiles in Turkey would be gone.Robert Kennedy met Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin during the dinner break.
His papers include a number of drafts in which he explores alternative language for conveying the essence of the president’s message.
Dobrynin got word to Khrushchev, who accepted the deal publicly on Soviet radio so there could be no mistaking his response.
President John F Kennedy meets with members of the Executive Committee of the National Security Council during the Cuban missile crisis Kennedy, Defense Secretary Robert S McNamara, and Deputy Defense Secretary Roswell Gilpatric.
As President Kennedy said in October of 1962…’We no longer live in a world…where only the actual firing of weapons represents a sufficient challenge to a nation’s security to constitute maximum peril.’”""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""This same attitude was echoed by, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, in his September address to the United Nations.
There, Moscow held all the high military cards, and Washington was committed to defending Berlin — even if it meant using nuclear weapons.""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""So the question arose whether Kennedy could give Khrushchev a way out by accepting his demand that the United States withdraw missiles from Turkey.
Thanks to secret tapes made by JFK of the meetings, we can be flies on the wall — listening to men debating choices they believed might lead to quick death for hundreds of millions of people.""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""From the transcript, it is clear that Kennedy was intrigued in the possibility of trading the obsolete United States missiles in Turkey for withdrawal of missiles in Cuba.
But the overwhelming consensus in the room rejected that option, insisting it would undermine the North Atlantic Treaty Organization alliance, a pillar of Washington’s Cold War strategy.""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""With his advisers stalemated and exhausted, Kennedy dismissed the group for dinner, asking them to come back for further discussion at 9:00 pm.
But he retained six of his closest advisers, including his brother, to shape a further option.""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""This imaginative combination included a public deal, a private ultimatum and a secret sweetener.
And secretly, while asserting that the United States would not make any deal if the missiles were withdrawn from Cuba, within six months the missiles in Turkey would be gone.""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""Robert Kennedy met Soviet Ambassador Dobrynin during the dinner break.
Withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey, he insisted, could “not be a quid pro quo,” but if missiles left Cuba, the United States would no longer keep missiles in Turkey.""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""When Dobrynin summarized this agreement in writing the day after, RFK flatly rejected the piece of paper — asserting that he could “have my word on this and that’s sufficient.”""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""The gambit paid off.
Withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey, he insisted, could “not be a quid pro quo,” but if missiles left Cuba, the United States would no longer keep missiles in Turkey.""},{""type"":""ad_slot"",""name"":""mpu_native"",""sizes"":,,,,""fluid""],""targeting"":{""type"":""native"",""template"":""article"",""p_count"":19,""topic"":}},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""When Dobrynin summarized this agreement in writing the day after, RFK flatly rejected the piece of paper — asserting that he could “have my word on this and that’s sufficient.”""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""The gambit paid off.
John F Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum, Boston\u003c/em\u003e""},{""type"":""paragraph"",""content"":""""}],""ric_list"":,""images"":,""videos"":,""related_stories"":,""channel_stories"":,""lede"":""In the official narrative, President John.
