One of those hot spots was the small island of Cuba, 90-miles off the Florida coast.
In early 1959, Fidel Castro had risen to power in a revolution which ousted dictator Fulgencio Batista who had ruled the island since the 1930s.
Castro, once in power, quickly denounced America as an imperialist nation, and then took ownership of United States property on the island.
Losing patience with the new island dictator, America soon cut-off the heavy imports of Cuban sugar into the United States.
In retaliation, Castro confiscated more property, as he took steps to appease the Soviets and make Cuba a “satellite nation” of the Soviet Union.
Then, in early 1961, America broke diplomatic relations completely with the Castro government and imposed a strict trade embargo on the island.
The Bay of Pigs Cuban insurgents during the Bay of Pigs invasion When Kennedy entered office in 1961, he inherited this tumultuous situation from the Eisenhower administration.
While in office, Eisenhower and his military advisors had created a plan to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba.
After some convincing from the Joint-Chiefs of Staff that the invasion would succeed without issue, Kennedy ordered the invasion of Cuba to begin on April 17, 1961.
Nearly 1,200 American-trained Cuban exiles, with the backing of the CIA, returned to the island to depose Castro.
But, the invasion force was bogged down in the Bay of Pigs and the operation ended in failure.
Twenty months later, Kennedy was forced to negotiate the release of 1,189 survivors of the invasion, in exchange for $53 million dollars worth of food and medicine from the United States.
In the end, Kennedy accepted full responsibility for the invasion’s failure, as it also pushed the Cuban government into an even closer relationship with the Soviet Union.
Now, the stage was set for an international show-down which would push the two nations – and the world – to the brink of nuclear war.
U2 Flights and the Discovery Map showing how the distances the missiles can travel from Cuba In September 1962, unbeknownst to the Americans, the Soviet Union began building 9 medium-range ballistic missile sites on the island of Cuba.
It was then that a U-2 spy plane flew over the island, taking aerial photographs which revealed the construction of the missiles, and, of even greater concern, that these missiles were nuclear.
According to American intelligence, the Soviets intended to use these weapons to not only shield Castro from future American attacks, but to also blackmail the United States – for instance, forcing America to leave Berlin or back-down in other Cold War hot spots around the world.
This committee consisted of 14 high-ranking administration officials, and Kennedy’s Attorney General, closet-advisor, and brother, Bobby Kennedy.
Their mission was to determine what action – if any – should be taken to deal with the newly discovered missiles.
Do nothing Use diplomacy to remove the missiles Use an air attack to destroy the missiles Launch a full military invasion of Cuba to remove the missiles Implement a naval blockade of the island The Joint Chiefs of Staff advised that a full-scale attack and invasion of the island was the only feasible solution.
Kennedy, however, believed attacking Cuba would signal to Soviets they could attack and conquer Berlin.
Another military option was to conduct a “surgical” bombing strike against the missile sites in Cuba.
The problem, Kennedy believed, was that the air force needed to be completely successful in hitting their targets.
If even one missile site was left operational, and just one missile was launched, it would mean the deaths of millions of Americans and the start of the Third World War.
In the end, the Joint Chiefs believed the missiles would alter the military balance in the region, while Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara disagreed.
However, where all parties agreed, was the belief that the missiles would affect the political balance of power between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Therefore, Kennedy understood – even after ruling out an invasion or air strike of the island – that some type of action needed to be taken.
The problem, however, was that a blockade was, technically, an act of war, and the Soviets could use this action as an excuse to launch the missiles.
Therefore, instead of calling the naval actions taken by the United States a blockade, it was labeled a quarantine and said to be more selective than a blockade and focused only on offensive weapons going into Cuba.
On October 22, 1962, after obtaining approval from other nations in the area, Kennedy ordered a quarantine placed on Cuba.
Kennedy then demanded the immediate removal of all threatening weaponry on the island nation and warned that any attack from Cuba would be regarded as an attack coming from the Soviet Union.
Such an attack, Kennedy warned, would trigger nuclear retaliation against the Soviet Union – including Moscow itself.
The Crisis Deepens For a week, Kennedy – and all Americans – waited as Soviet ships approached the quarantine line established by the American navy off the Cuban coast.
Most Soviet ships stopped or turned back, but one Soviet vessel slipped through the quarantine line and continued on his voyage.
If the American navy seized or sank that – or any – Soviet vessel it would be regarded by the Kremlin as an act of war – and, again, World War III would begin.
Luckily, calmer heads in the Kennedy administration prevailed as officials were fairly certain the ship did not have military material on board, the ship was allowed to pass, and war was averted.
But, just as tensions seemed to be diminishing, Kennedy learned the missiles in Cuba were still actively being constructed by the Soviets.
It was SACEUR that had the duty of carrying out the first air strikes on the Soviet Union should war begin between the United States and the Soviet Union.
Kennedy now told EXCOMM, and his brother, that he believed only an invasion of Cuba would successfully get the Soviets to remove the missiles.
Luckily, Kennedy was convinced to give the matter more time as other actors applied diplomatic pressure to the Soviets in an effort to resolve the nuclear crisis.
The Kennedy brothers In fact, throughout the show-down telegrams were being sent between the White House and Kremlin as the two sides strived to find a peaceful resolution to the crisis.
Then, at 6:00pm on October 26, 1962, a message was received from the Soviet Union that seemed to have been written personally by Khrushchev.
The telegram was filled with emotion and reiterated the terms presented in earlier telegrams about how the crisis could end.
In it, Khrushchev said the Soviets would declare all ships bound for Cuba had no arms, if America would declare/promise it would not invade Cuba.
The telegram demonstrated that Khrushchev was just as stressed by the situation as Kennedy, and that neither nation wanted to descend into nuclear war.
Then, suddenly, Moscow began broadcasting a new message “from Khrushchev” – only this new message contained much harsher language than the first and it complained of American nuclear missiles which had been placed in Turkey.
Regardless of why the change in language occurred, Kennedy had to act – he had to respond to the telegrams.
Kennedy ignored the second harsher-worded telegram and responded only to the first, acting as if America never received the second message from the Soviets.
The Crisis Ends Finally, on October 28, 1963, in the global show-down Khrushchev finally flinched, agreeing to a compromise with Kennedy.
Khrushchev would pull the missiles out of Cuba Kennedy, in return, would end the quarantine of Cuba Kennedy would promise not to invade Cuba America would, quietly, and months later, remove the nuclear missiles from Turkey This last element of the compromise – that the missiles be removed from Turkey – was a secret component of the deal between Kennedy and Khrushchev.
Thus, to the global community it appeared the Soviets backed down in Cuba and all America had to do was promise they would never again try to invade the island and end the naval quarantine.
Khrushchev, in the aftermath of the Cuban missile crisis, was pushed out of the Kremlin as Soviet hard-liners vowed they would never again be humiliated in a nuclear face-off with the United States.
Soon, the Soviet Union launched an enormous program of military expansion, which led America to also intensify its own military spending.
While Kennedy had brought the nation back from the brink of nuclear war, the Cold War was now heating-up even further.
In the aftermath of the crisis, Kennedy advocated more passionately for a stronger nuclear test-ban treaty with the Soviet Union.
Then, in late 1963, America engaged in negotiations in Moscow which resulted in a pact with the Soviet Union prohibiting trial nuclear explosions in the atmosphere.
Finally, in August 1963, Washington and Moscow installed the Moscow-Washington “hot line” which allowed immediate teletype communication in case of a future crisis.
It was only in 1991 that the realities of how close the world came to nuclear war became public.
It was then that the Soviet Union/Russia revealed that, at the time, Soviet ground forces in Cuba not only had operational nuclear weapons at their disposal, but they were authorized to launch them if the United States attacked.
In the months after the Cuban missile crisis, Kennedy began focusing more of his attention on his upcoming 1964 reelection bid.
