United States unsuccessful efforts to overthrow Cuban regime prompted Soviet to furtively erect bases in Cuba to provide medium and intermediate range of airborne nuclear artilleries to prove to the world its military supremacy.
The United States administration of the time believed that Moscow‘s activities in Cuba were a threat to International security, hence; the ballistic missiles deployed in Cuba enhanced a major security blow to the leadership of United States.
Perhaps, the United States intelligence was convinced that Soviet would not succeed in installing nuclear missiles in Cuba.
However, this was not the case; the Soviet had gone ahead and installed the missiles without prior knowledge of United States security intelligent.
To mitigate the risk, the Kennedy administration discussed various options to reduce the likelihood of a full blown crisis.
Mitigation measures adopted included; military, quarantine and diplomacy among other measures The John Kennedy administration embraced using military to designate Missile sites in Cuba by using military prowess.
United States Military interventions were well developed thus the Kennedy administration found it easy to order posting to strategic sites on the Atlantic Ocean.
Concentrated air monitoring in Atlantic was instigated, tracking more than 2,000 foreign ships in the area.
The government was determined in case the Soviet Union launched nuclear assault; United States military was standby to answer.
Get your 100% original paper on any topic done in as little as 3 hours Learn More Beginning 20th October, 1962, The United States’ Strategic Air Command began diffusing its aircraft, fully equipped on an upgraded alert.
According to White , heavy aircraft such as B-52 began a significant aerial vigilance that involved 24 hour flights and instant standby response for every aircraft that landed.
Besides, Intercontinental Ballistic Missile troops assumed analogous vigilant authority.
Moreover, the POLARIS submarines were deployed to reassigned locations in the sea bordering United States and Cuba.
Divine points out that United States air defense troops, under the operational control of North America Defense Command, were also organized.
When command organizations were officially constituted, the Commander in Chief Atlantic was chosen to lead the team and provide a unified authority.
The John F Kennedy administration implemented all these plans through the Joint Chiefs of Staff who later named Chief of Naval Operations to administer all necessary actions and subsequent execution.
The John F Kennedy administration imposed a quarantine to exert more pressure on Soviet Union with a view of subverting possible war.
This was one of the flexible methods unlike others that United States government embraced.
Quarantine was aimed at constraining buildup of offensive military weapons en-route to Cuba.
Get your first paper with 15% OFF Learn More To thoroughly execute the strategy, all kinds of ships en-route to Cuba from whichever country or port were scrutinized to confirm the presence of aggressive artilleries.
Byrne explains that if toxic artillery were located, the ship was forced to unwind the voyage or risk being confiscated.
Quarantine provided more opportunity to Soviet Union to reconsider their position and destroy all offensive military apparatus in Cuba.
Though it started at a low pace, it exerted more pressure on Soviet Union thus yielding to United States demands.
Soviet Union sentiment was that United States was contravening international law.
However, it was hard for the Soviet to test the applicability of this strategy.
They knew if they dare rise the situation at hand would become even worse.
The Soviets acknowledged installing missiles in Cuba to secure it against the United States invasion.
John Kennedy and ExComm team prodded every probable diplomatic system to truncate a nuclear holocaust.
According to Byrne , Kennedy himself was skillful and embraced compulsion to gain a diplomatic success.
Potency was used shrewdly by Kennedy administration as a powerful, discreet component to urge Soviets cede the plan without embarrassment.
United States and the Soviet exchanged letters and intensified communication both formal and informal.
The Soviet through Khrushchev dispatched letters to Kennedy administration explaining the circumstances of Missiles in Cuba and peaceful intention of Soviet Union.
Further, diplomatic efforts were strengthened by more letters from Soviet Union explaining the intent of dismantling the missile installations in Cuba and subsequent personnel relocation.
This was only after United States dismantled its missile it had installed in Italy and Turkey.
Byrne alleges that, if Kennedy’s responses were altered, it would have led to another world war. hence his diplomatic finesse succeeded in convincing Soviet Union to dismantle its Missiles in Cuba under United Nations supervision whereas the honoring its commitment in removing its missile installations in the continental Europe.
Measures undertaken such as; military intervention, quarantine and skillful diplomacy necessitated subversion of the crisis.
Besides, the plans facilitated the Kennedy administration to effectively prove to the world it was capable of handling similar magnitude of threats to enhance world peace and security.
You are free to use it for research and reference purposes in order to write your own paper; however, you must cite it accordingly.
Removal Request If you are the copyright owner of this paper and no longer wish to have your work published on IvyPanda.
We utilize security vendors that protect and ensure the integrity of our platform while keeping your private information safe.
It contains thousands of paper examples on a wide variety of topics, all donated by helpful students.
You can use them for inspiration, an insight into a particular topic, a handy source of reference, or even just as a template of a certain type of paper.
The database is updated daily, so anyone can easily find a relevant essay example.
Please upgrade your Browser Unfortunately, your browser is too old to work on this site.
