Essential Questions and Answers… Cold War Crises and the end of the Cold War, 1958-1991 QUESTION ANSWER 1.
What was the Berlin Khrushchev’s demands to the Western allies to leave West Berlin.
They could not agree on a way forward for Berlin but David in the USSR did withdraw the Berlin Ultimatum.
It could fly at 70,000 feet and take photographs of Soviet bomber plane bases and missile sites.
Khrushchev renewed the Berlin Vienna summit Ultimatum, demanding western forces leave West Berlin.
Why did the East They wanted to stop people leaving communist East Germany.
They then build a 45 km concrete wall around West Berlin, with watchtowers, guards and guard dogs.
Peter have on the people of Fechter. people were shot in the first year.
On 27 October 1961 there was a stand-off between Soviet have on the Cold and United States tanks at Checkpoint Charlie which lasted 18 hours.
He said Berlin was a symbol of the struggle between freedom and communism.
What caused the In 1958, Fidel Castro took over Cuba after a revolution.
The USSR provided Cuba with weapons and in 1962 American spy planes photographed Soviet missiles on Cuba.
These had a range of 2500 miles and could destroy most American cities.
What did America do On 20 October they put a naval blockade around Cuba to stop missiles reaching to stop the Soviet Cuba.
In letter 2, he said he’d take the missiles off Cuba if the USA took their missiles off Turkey.
Kennedy ignored the 2nd letter and responded to the 1st; the crisis was over.
What were the results  Both countries realised how close they had come to nuclear war so they took of the Cuban Missile steps to improve relations.
Why did both  Khrushchev said he was the peacemaker as he had turned the ships around and countries claim they tried to resolve the crisis.
Countries who signed it agreed not to develop nuclear weapons, limiting nuclear weapons to only those countries who had already developed them.
What was life like in It was communist and had been under the influence of the USSR since 1948.
Most protests by the Czech people was passive but Jan Palach set himself alight in protest.
The Prague Spring reforms were removed and Husak replaced Dubcek as the leader of Czechoslovakia.
What were the  Temporary worsening of relations between the West and the USSR. consequences of the  Some communist countries criticised the USSR for attacking another communist Soviet invasion of country.
A period of improved relations between the USA and the USSR in the 1970s.
Why did the USA and Both sides had realised how close they had come to war over Cuba.
They also the USSR need to get needed to cut back on the amount of money they spent on weapons.
It limited the number of ICBMs (Inter-Continental Ballistic Missiles) each side could have.
They also agreed they could spy on each other to make sure they stuck to their agreement.
What was the Helsinki An agreement signed by 35 countries, including the USA and the USSR, in 1975.
They recognised the frontiers in Europe and the USSR accepted the existence of West Berlin.
What happened The USSR fought Mujahideen rebels who used guerrilla tactics.
The Mujahideen was during the war in supplied by the USA, China and a rich Saudi called Osama Bin Laden.
President Carter said the USSR was threatening world peace and the USA to the invasion of boycotted the Moscow Olympics of 1980.
This angered the USSR who then Afghanistan by the boycotted the Los Angeles Games in 1984.
This said the USA would support anticommunist rebel groups trying to overthrow communist governments.
The USA would put satellites Strategic Defence in space with powerful lasers.
Their missiles would now be no use but they did not have point in the arms race the computer technology or the money to build their own SDI system.
There was little industrial growth and standards of living there in the USSR were low. when Mikhail  There was unrest in communist countries that was only kept in check by the Gorbachev became secret police.
What was The new leader of the USSR knew that there were many problems in the USSR and Gorbachev’s ‘new things had to change.
This led to the collapse of the Brezhnev Doctrine communist rule in all Eastern European countries between 1989-1990.
For example, have on communist in November 1989, the ‘Velvet Revolution’ in Czechoslovakia, overthrew the countries in Eastern communist government and elected the anti-communist, Vaclav Havel, as president.
In October 1989, Gorbachev said he East Germany in would not help the East German government stop public demonstrations.
November, 1 million East Germans demonstrated, demanding democracy and free elections.
The government announced the border crossing to West Germany would be opened.
Gorbachev officially announced the dissolution of the Soviet Union in December 1991 and resigned.
