The first is the realization since Sept. of United States vulnerability to thousands of terrorists trained and willing to carry out attacks against Americans.
The other is the recognition that time is evaporating for Washington to act against another, old, longanticipated threat chemical, biological, and, most critically, nuclear weapons programs carried out by ""rogue"" states such as Iraq, Iran, and North Korea.
Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, before the Senate Armed Services Committee Feb., 2002 advocated the expansion of the Bush anti-terror doctrine to include preemptive strikes.
When the issue of Iran enriching uranium in 2006 made it to the UN, Bush said that all options were on the table.
The mortars were set up and registered so that they could cover the most likely place a pontoon bridge could go in.
We dressed some of the Tejanos up in customary Mexican clothing and sent them across the river to scout out the Mexican Army.
They reported back that we were up against what they concluded was probably a couple of Companies.
Prior to 1987, most conscripts into the Mexican Army drilled on weekends but never really had formal military training.
Our Tejanos said these people looked to be well trained soldiers and each Company had about 3 Platoons.
Whether shooting from an angle above or below the tar575 get, the sniper's round will impact above the point of aim.
They had Tank Companies at all bridge crossings and strung out along the New Mexican and Arizonan borders.
They were using Apache Longbows with newer generation Hellfire missiles to take out the tanks the Mexican Army had acquired from the Nationalist Chinese.
The remaining F-15E Strike Eagles and 2 Squadrons of F-22s from Tyndall AFB were moved to Texas, New Mexico and Arizona.
It mattered little whether the F-22s or F-35s could carry B61s, we had Strike Eagles and F/A-18s.
In the summer of 2021, the United States inventory of tactical nuclear weapons numbered 1,290.
When Mexico invaded the US, they broke an agreement with Russia, forcing Russia to bow out or feel the full retaliatory effect of our Ohio class submarines.
The scouts hadn't been back more than an hour when the sun exploded about 30 miles south of us.
While the wind was out of the west, he instructed us to move out at the first sign of any radiation.
In either direction along the border, for as far as we could see, there was an occasional mushroom cloud.
It was late in the day to be moving, but the radiation couldn't tell time, leaving us little choice.
It took us the better part of 6 hours to make it up to the Park Headquarters at Panther Junction.
The next morning we started early and made it the 26 miles to Maverick Junction.
One more day and we'd be back to Ten Bits Ranch where Jason should be waiting.
The people were being held back by about 12 Rangers and 3 Deputies from the Brewster County Sheriff's office.
When the Sheriff arrived, our injured were transferred by ambulance to Alpine.
Jason unloaded our pickups, trailers and horse trailers and loaded up the stock and equipment.
The Sheriff indicated there'd be an inquiry and we told him we'd be staying in Alpine until our injured could travel anyway.
The military equipment, with the exception of our personal weapons, was returned to Kansas along with our other things.
When we arrived at Alpine, we seemed to attract a lot of attention, perhaps because much of the population of the area was of Hispanic heritage.
We decided we'd be well served to wear our weapons, open carry, of course.
The inquiry ruled the deaths as justifiable homicide, seeming an unpleasant outcome for several members of the community.
As soon as the medical staff said the boys could travel, we rented an aircraft to fly them back home and departed very late one evening.
Avoiding the major cities, we followed a meandering course back to Kansas, arriving 4 days later.
Don was in the hospital in Garden City and the others had been released and sent home.
The day after we arrived, the Sheriff drove up and demanded all 8 of our reserve Deputy badges.
We four old soldiers decided we'd limit our fishing to the local area from now on.
We did attract a bit of unneeded attention with this last thing, though.
The only ones of us that can keep our Ml 6s are the one who are Reserve or actual Deputies.
I think the only reason they said no was because the problems aren't over.
The operated and got out the bullet fragments and other than a long healing process, he should be ok.
We broke camp and headed back to that dude ranch so Jason could pick us up and bring us home.
When we got to the Park's west entrance, there was a group of NOA activists trying to gain entrance to the Park.
Those old war horses offered to help if the Brewster County Sheriff would temporarily deputize us as a posse.
They didn't disperse when the Ranger's gave them that last warning and instead opened fire.
After that, we were too busy returning fire to worry about whether or not what we were doing was morally justified.
Those Tejanos went through their ranks and made sure none of the NOA people survived.
We were followed by bad guys who turned out to be the good guys, saw a nuclear weapon up close and personal and then had the firefight to end all firefights.
If you find him, tell him you were referred by Manny, Moe and Jack Smith.
Find John Doe in Tulsa, Oklahoma and buy an H&K gun from him and a suppressor.
I suppose I could put an ad in the paper asking John Doe to contact Manny, Moe and Jack Smith at the Holiday Inn.
It wasn't that hard to find the store, there was only one authorized dealer in Oklahoma and the store was in Tulsa.
He was to flash the badge and say that Manny, Moe and Jack Smith referred him to John Doe.
I was embarrassed just being there and listening to Jeremy asking for John Doe.
I sold them H&K USP Tactical's in .45 ACP with those Knight Armament suppressors.
I should hope he'd throw in some ammo, $3,750 for 2 guns that cost maybe $2,100 retail and a suppressor that went for maybe $600.
On the other hand, there wasn't any paperwork and I did have the revolver June wanted me to get.
I can't say that I was totally pleased; I was retired from the Army and wanted my gun toting days to end. miles each way just to buy an item the ATF still frowned upon, especially if it wasn't registered.
We had 10 of the M4FA fitted to Ml 6s or M4s and several of the Ml A had the 7.62mm version of the same suppressor.
It made sense for a sniper to use a suppressor, but we were only farmers.
June said the feds probably wouldn't show up until the fall when we had the corn harvested and could be expected to be producing alcohol.
With that in mind, we stored the corn and used our existing supply of anhydrous to produce biodiesel.
These were uneasy times; the United States may have defeated Mexico, but the NOA and the National Council of La Raza were keeping things stirred up.
Our new employees help clean them up and we set them, expanded the septic systems on the 3 farms and hooked them to the big wind turbine.
Most of them were ranch hands down in Texas, but there was a plumber and an electrician amongst the group.
Ralph Barrows said he was too old to maintain the turbine any longer and Johnny and he were moving back to Leoti.
The plumber had plenty to do and we sent 12 families to Gunny's and 12 to Hanks.
Marilyn was ready to resume teaching but with the number of children we now had, the school district said it was cheaper to bus them to Lakin.
That was a kick in the teeth; home schooling had been a good source of income.
We bottled the bourbon Jason said was ready and unloaded it quickly, if June said ATF was coming, they'd be here.
Go ahead and look, aside from a partial bottle of the stuff, the only alcohol we have is a keg of beer and the anhydrous we use to make biodiesel.
I went down to the barn and told Dan the AFT was here and suggested he come with me to Marilyn's.
I normally carry my Chief's Special in a holster in the pit of my back.
I strapped on that new Laredoan rig on the way out and got my Winchester, that raised a few eyebrows.
They can't possibly find the entrance since I got a couple of the Tejanos to build that storage case in the basement.
I told them about the unit that removes the ethanol from the biodiesel.
I wonder what they thought they'd find in my underwear drawer, a Ma Deuce.
I'd managed to keep my figure and Dan liked the frilly stuff so I kept wearing it.
I could still wear some of the size 4 stuff, but mostly wore size 5 now.
I was careful what I cooked because Dan had a tendency to gain weight and wasn't getting quite as much outside exercise as when we first got married.
I had to slowly nurse him back into chili, the stuff those gals made in Texas had nearly ruined his taste buds.
I still dusted daily but she came in once a week and spent most of a day cleaning it back to the shine. ...another bombing in Houston.
No one claimed credit for this bombing of a predominately Anglo private school.
The assassination of Minutemen founder Jim Gilchrist last week led to a wave of anti-Hispanic unrest in Tucson, the new headquarters for the Minutemen Organization.
About the only countries that helped Mexico after this past spring were Russia and China.
Over the last decade Cantarell's crude oil production has consistently been > 1,000,000 b/d and in 1999 Cantarell's production was over 1,200,000 b/d, 41.7% of Mexico's crude oil production.
In the last few years, Cantarell's crude oil production level has been maintained by a massive nitrogen injection project that forces oil out of the field.
A production decline rate of 10%/year or greater is reasonable for Cantarell based upon the decline rates of other giant and supergiant fields around the world that are in decline.
If Cantarell starts declining in 2002, as appears likely, at a rate of 10%/year, production from Cantarell would decline approximately 500,000 b/d by 2007 and approximately 800,000 b/d by 2012.
Such a decline would have a significant impact on future Mexican oil production.
Other large fields in Mexico such as Ku and Abkatun , which provided another 13% of Mexico's crude oil production in 1999, are in decline.
This has led to smaller than projected oil production increases in Mexico for the last few years.
Randy spent hours copying files from the internet and converting them to pdf files.
I think it was she who suggested I move to Garden City because the pay was better.
I had to consider the risk of marrying you and having you end up like Randy.
The only difference between me and Rachel is that she dwelled on her loss.
Marilyn, on the other hand, got over her grief quickly and began looking for a replacement.
Before the war, more than 10% of the United States population lived in California.
It had to be devastating, two earthquakes and a tsunami and then the ash they must have gotten from Yellowstone.
It listed highway re-openings, but had scant news about the trouble in the southland.
There were several articles about communities in northern California rebuilding, after digging out of the ash.
The cities on the Peninsula, especially San Francisco were all sealed off.
I tried the Portland Oregonian and was surprised to learn that Portland hadn't been badly hit by the Tsunami although the earthquake did some damage.
They had reports on the Cascade Range and nothing was currently erupting.
There was nothing out of Seattle, but I didn't really expect to connect to any of their papers.
Conclusion, the trip was possible, depending on the roads and one other small problem, changing trailer partners.
Marilyn had confided that she couldn't take much more of Rachel's mood swings.
I'd work on Dan and Marilyn would nudge Gunny into the change providing we went.
Long sections of 1-80 were closed; 1-70 wasn't much better and 1-40 was in the southern tier of states.
Still, the best route would be to take United States 84 out of Garden City and pick up United States 54 in Liberal and take it to Tucumcari, New Mexico where we could get on 1-40.
Like those holsters, with the buckle in the back they were hard to get on and off.
You had to remove the revolvers, buckle on the holsters and belt, reverse it and then add the guns.
Beside one long barreled and one short barreled Colt made more sense, I'm glad Dan could get them.
Dan just told me that Mom and he were thinking about taking another vacation, out west this time.
I expressed my opinion that with the civil unrest related to the NOA and La Raza it wasn't the best place for a vacation.
Dan explained that they wanted to borrow my pickup and the new 6 horse trailer because they'd be taking 6 of the Tejanos with them for security reasons.
I'd heard around about that Tom's wife Elle had a thing for one of those Tejanos and wondered if he would be making the trip.
He also said that Gunny and Marilyn would be staying with them on this trip, probably one of Mom's ideas to get the Mistress of the Dark away from her man.
I'd found photos on the internet and they were, shall we say, most revealing... but not shocking.
If they weren't going until March, Julia and I had more than enough time to try and talk some sense into them.
In the past, the gangster's tended to shoot each other but now they were going after the rest of us.
I'll wager that concealed carry permit or not, many of the folks were carrying these days.
On another subject, the ATF came 3 times and finding nothing, had to give up.
We finally got the semi back home in October and unloaded it, hopefully for good.
We made the sour mash and filled up 36 more barrels after we charred them.
Dan told me to plan on selling some of the horses, we weren't going to have enough feed next year, according to Hank and Gunny.
I have to look at the herds with Jason and pick out the likely candidates, probably some of the older mares.
It seemed to me that the geldings seemed to run a bit bigger than the stallions, but I have no idea why.
I was surprised when Mom and Dan gave our kids and Jim's kids 12 silver Eagles each for Christmas plus clothing gifts.
Later she told me they planned to do that from now on, until they were both gone.
I stammered something about her being way too young to die and she said the kids would probably all have 20 years' worth of silver Eagles before then.
I tried to talk her out of the trip to the west coast but she said unless we had a blizzard, they were going.
We got snow all right, but no blizzard; in fact the snow was about normal and almost back to before Yellowstone erupted.
Race relations had always been poor in America but now several minorities and the near majority Hispanic population were working to change things.
The really sad thing was that they had learned about how our Constitutional Republic worked and now had enough votes to divide the Congress into something that no longer represented what we'd always had, a 2-party system.
I guess I shouldn't have been surprised, they intentionally moved to areas creating large voting blocks and controlled about one-third of the House and soon would control onethird of the Senate.
The marches in streets represented various groups, sometimes Latinos, other groups were Muslims and somewhere in between were the militant blacks under the Nation of Islam.
The white citizens were still a majority but the self-initiated Gerrymandering was changing things.
One form of gerrymandering, packing is to place as many voters of one type into a single district to reduce their influence in other districts.
A second form, cracking, involves spreading out voters of a particular type among many districts in order to reduce their representation by denying them a sufficiently large voting bloc in any particular district.
The methods are typically combined, creating a few ""forfeit"" seats for packed voters of one type in order to secure even greater representation for voters of another type.
Once the new representatives were elected, they formed a coalition and more often than not sided with the liberal Democrats.
Many credited Jesse Jackson and his Rainbow Coalition for the practice, but in truth it was Farrakhan's idea.
Jackson was old and although he still had a big mouth, few listened to him any longer.
The initial coalition was between the Nation of Islam and the newly elected Muslims, they had a common cause.
They then extended an olive branch to the outspoken new Latinos and we had a 3 party government.
In nothing flat another immigration bill was introduced in the House for yet another amnesty program and it passed.
The Senate not being fully packed thought they could defeat the measure, but they failed by a single vote.
With that many new voters, you can imagine the outcome of the next elections.
They replaced the small freezer with a bigger upright and had we ladies make suggestions this time around.
Although the freezer had a locking door, Dan added a strap for insurance.
I checked with what was left of AAA and they didn't recommend travel to the west coast because unavailability of food, housing and fuel.
I noticed that our Ml 6s now sported M203's and all of our magazines were new or refurbished.
Gunny and Dan had new boy toys although I have no idea where they came up with a pair of Tac-50s, fully equipped.
Jim had relented and allowed our 6 security people to use his pickup and 6 horse trailer.
The old upright went into their trailer and they stocked it with whatever they wanted to take.
I half figured Gunny and Dan would buy H-1 Alpha Hummers, there were several on the market in good shape with all of the options and low mileage.
Since our set to with Mexico, that source dried up and Chavez was the President for life of Venezuela and he didn't like us.
The Trans-Alaskan pipeline had been extended and now came to the US, but that second Alaskan field wasn't as good a producer as projected and they were afraid to drill off the California coast for fear of causing more earthquakes.
They weight about 9,000# empty and then you add 6 horses, the tack and the total weight gets you into the commercial class of vehicle.
It was all but humorous, a million dollars' worth of equipment, animals and extras, all for a 3-4 week vacation, in, of all places, the dead zone.
We wouldn't be out of touch this time; Gunny bought an Iridium satellite phone.
Its financial failure was largely due to insufficient demand for the service.
The increased coverage of terrestrial cellular networks and the rise of roaming agreements between cellular providers proved to be fierce competition.
The cost of service was also prohibitive for many users, despite the continuous world-wide coverage of the Iridium service.
In addition, the bulkiness and expense of the handheld devices when compared to terrestrial cellular mobile phones discouraged adoption among users.
The Iridium satellites were, however, remained in orbit, and their services were re-established in 2001 by the newly founded Iridium Satellite LLC, owned by a group of private investors.
The system is being used extensively by the United States DOD for its communication purposes through the DOD Gateway in Hawaii.
The commercial Gateway in Tempe, Arizona provides voice, data and paging services for commercial customers on a global basis.
Typical customers include maritime, aviation, government, the petroleum industry, scientists, and frequent world travelers.
Because the military had a vested interest, they now make sure the system was always up.
Originally envisioned as a system with 77 satellites, the system had 66 for several years and coverage wasn't available to North Korea and Sri Lanka.
After the war and into the recovery, the military and its contractors launched the other 11 satellites plus a few spares.
Iridium Satellite has contracted with the Boeing Company to operate and maintain the satellite constellation, and Celestica has agreed to provide subscriber equipment.
While the phones were expensive to purchase and expensive to operate, as long as you were outside with a clear view of the sky, you were in contact with the whole world.
No doubt they bought the Hummers the minute we left and started cutting in machinegun mounts.
A person can drive from Los Angeles, California to Des Moines, Iowa in 24 hours flat, if you push a little, ergo, average 70mph.
With that in mind, we could putt our way to California in a couple of days unless we stopped to sight see.
According to the mapping software, the route we chose wasn't the shortest, but going through Colorado, wasn't a good idea because of Yellowstone.
On the other hand, going through the southern tier of states wasn't the best idea either, but we were prepared for a little adventure.
Lakin, Kansas Departure Time: 0800 Ricardo is driving our truck and Marilyn and I are passengers.
When we left Garden City, Jim and John stopped off to look at the used Hummers.
We made it to Tucumcari and found a place to board the horses and then motel rooms.
Bobby Troup wrote the song and one of the other actors in the series, Martin Milner aka Officer Pete Malloy, starred in the old TV series Route 66.
Boris Karloff, Lee Marvin, Robert Duvall, Warren Stevens, Lew Ayers, Michael Rennie, Martin Sheen, Dorothy Malone, Ed Asner, Walter Matthau, Edward Andrews, Leslie Nielson, Anne Francis, Jack Lord, William Shatner and Dan Duryea, just to name a few.
There is almost nothing to see between Lakin and Tucumcari, so I thought I'd tell you about what I picked up at the motel desk, the info on Route 66.
We have a male, tunnel worker, approximate age 60, was trapped under a digging machine.
Considering we were all in our 60s, I thought having the things I needed to treat a heart attack or a stroke were a very good idea.
The E85 gensets had been replaced by diesel fueled mounted gensets with demand switches replacing the automatic transfer switches.
I don't understand how they work, but when the freezer starts to warm up, the demand switch starts the genset and it runs until the temp is back at zero.
The switch is usually added to an existing circuit just after the circuit breaker and switches the hot, or black wire, of that circuit.
Please note that the circuit will still be protected by the circuit breaker.
The switch is by no means a circuit breaker replacement but an additional in-line device.
For example, if a switch is installed on a lighting circuit in the bedroom, the switch will automatically sense when the last light on that circuit is turned off at night.
In the morning, when we awake and switch on the lights, the demand switch senses a demand for electricity and automatically restores electricity to this circuit for normal operation.
In most cases, the demand switch is the most effective way of eliminating unwanted electric fields in the bedroom.
Ours worked by initiating the genset's controller's start circuit and when the freezer shut off, it shut down the generator.
Tucumcari, New Mexico Departure Time: 0830 We got a late start today because the diner was busy and we had to pick up the horses.
According to the desk clerk, most people took the advice of the various travel services and didn't come west often.
We were stopped by a cop who saw the guns we were wearing and he explained the local rules to us.
He said he didn't know if NM had reciprocity with Kansas, and we assured him that Kansas now had reciprocity with everyone.
That happened as a result of the problems they were having in some Kansas cities with their Latino population.
Because we had all been reserves at once time, he filled them out and brought them to us without even being asked.
We were taking old route 66 as much as possible because we weren't in a hurry and wanted to see what was left of those old towns.
Most of them were all but ghost towns, down to few stores serving the locals.
There for a stretch near Santa Rosa, we got back on the freeway because the old road was in bad shape.
We did drive through Santa Rosa and had lunch there at Joseph's Bar and Grill.
We went through Clines Corners, Moriarty, Tijeras and on in to Albuquerque where we housed the horses and then ourselves.
There were all kinds of choices on the menu at the cafe, as long as you liked Mexican food.
The population, which before the war had been about 40% Hispanic, was closer to 66% Hispanic.
This close to California, we could get some news, but we were told that it would be better to stay on 1-40 the remainder of the way west, banditos, you know.
Rather than spend the 2 days we had planned on, we left the next morning intent on making it to Holbrook, Arizona.
Albuquerque, New Mexico Departure Time: 0700 We made it as far as Pinta Road in Arizona where we exited.
Pinta Road is just a lonely exit out in the desert a few miles east of Petrified Forest National Park.
There are no services here and most Interstate travelers pass it by without giving it a second glanceHolbrook is just down the road.
We drove north of the Pinta Road exit down a dirt road almost a mile where we came to the crumbling asphalt of a once major highway.
Route 66 cuts through the Painted Desert, a forgotten line of dark gray against the desert shrubbery, a ghost road winding its way to an even ghostlier destination.
Once we found the remains of Route 66 we turned towards the west and the setting sun.
I only hoped we would get to it before the sun set and left us in the blackness of desert night.
We continued on for about two and a half miles and came to one of the loneliest ghosts I have encountered on Route 66 in all my travels.
All alone surrounded by the vast desert stood the shell of the once great Painted Desert Trading Post.
As the shadows lengthened and the sky turned a brilliant red I stood in the silence and pondered what once went on here.
The fellas strung a picket rope for the horses and then when the horses were settled, we opened the tent trailers for the first time and made do with canned goods.
Oh yeah, they brought a bunch, 4 cases, this was only a 3-4 week trip but at least we didn't have 16 cases of bourbon and 5 kegs of beer this time.
I didn't offer her the pill, it's just freeze dried alcohol anyway and she had a drink.
I finished my drink a little quickly and encouraged everyone to do the same.
Once we had a couple of drinks in us the canned beef stew would taste better and hopefully she'd be chilled out.
The hands were heating a can of refried beans to make burritos, I think.
We didn't have any tequila, but Dan gave them a bottle of bourbon and they were doing quite well with the substitute.
Painted Desert, Arizona Departure Time: 0645 Unless looking at a big coal fired power plant trips your trigger, there was nothing to see in Holbrook and we were at the Meteor Crater by the time they opened.
There are a lot of Native Americans in Arizona and that sort of served to keep the Latino population in check.
The Hispanics had taken over much of the non-reservation property, but that whole thing last year happened during the winter when Arizona was full of snowbirds that happened to enjoy Arizona's rather open gun laws.
Old, yes, but they were also mostly conservative and had survived the H5N1, WW III, the Supervolcano and civil unrest at home.
They were, on the average, a bit narrow minded when it came to people taking over 'their town' , so many of the new arrivals ended up staying in Tucson.
As with movies of moral implication do, this movie begins with mysticism and keeps going.
But not for the viewer who does not like The Seventh Sign or The Prophecy.
These movies are in a league of their own and can be viewed more than one time to see more than you saw the first time.
Gunny was right; it was just a large hole in the ground but to think that it was caused by a rock only 150' across was scary.
Examples include the Silverpit crater in the UK, and the Boltysh crater in Ukraine, both much smaller than Chicxulub but likely to have been caused by objects many tens of meters across striking the earth.
This has led to the hypothesis that the Chicxulub impact may have been only one of several impacts that happened all at the same time.
Another crater thought to have been formed at the same time is the Shiva crater.
The Shiva crater is a hypothesized impact crater located in the Indian Ocean west of India.
It has been suggested that it formed around 65 million years ago, the same time as a number of other impacts that are recorded in the K-T boundary.
The Deccan Traps are located in the theorized center of the crater, lending support to the idea that the traps were created by the impact event.
South Rim, Grand Canyon, Arizona Departure Time: 0730 If you've seen one hole in the ground and later the same day a bigger hole in the ground, you're tired of looking at holes in the ground.
We looked, said wow a couple of times and went to something rather nice, southern Utah.
I don't know that those Latter Day Saints are God's chosen people in this Country, but from the look of southern Utah, He gave them some nice digs.
We saw much of it, it took a week and quite honestly, I lost track, we'd seen so many natural wonders.
The best I could manage was to mark our route on a highway map with brief notes.
We were taking digital pictures and loading them into the laptop for later viewing.
Somewhere in the middle of all that was a Sunday and Sunday was a day of rest.
We sat and looked at the Utah map, lining out our next stops and planning on being in St.
That way, we could get to Barstow and Gunny could try and find his friends on the afternoon of day 12.
I'd be inclined to say it was a shame he didn't live to see how it all turned out, but my name isn't Van Gogh and that would be cutting off my nose to spite my face.
The farm was now 4 times larger, totally paid for and had almost more livestock than the land could support.
We made money from bourbon, biodiesel, selling livestock and grain and had been darned lucky.
Hard work is its own reward, and as someone said, God helps those that help themselves.
I was enjoying myself this time and we even took a little time to fish.
If we do run into trouble in California, we'll probably have to shoot our way out.
I heard something rather disturbing from a lady from California I was visiting with.
You couldn't leave the state without a doctor's certification that you were disease free and they weren't letting many people in.
I ran through my records and everyone was current on all of their shots including the standard influenza shots.
She also said something about the agricultural border station but I didn't understand what that was all about.
Maybe if that had been our only destination, it would have been different.
We camped out each night and I was looking forward to getting a motel room in St.
You couldn't really get a good shower in that unit in the tent trailer.
I had noticed that once we got to Utah, we didn't see quite as many Hispan606 ics.
We left early and had to go through a border inspection station just to leave Utah.
It was a spectacular drive down the Virgin River Canyon and then we hit another inspection station when we hit Nevada.
Seemed disappointed that we were just passing through, but really checked the papers for our Tejanos.
After 3 hours or so of steady driving, we hit Vegas but didn't even slow down.
The streets appeared to be nearly deserted; I wondered what that was all about.
The parking lots of Whiskey Pete's and the other casinos were nearly empty.
The men at the Inspection Station weren't agricultural inspectors, they were members of the California Defense Force and they were armed.
We turned around and pulled over to the side of the road to talk this over.
We can take that to Kingman and pickup United States 40,"" Gunny suggested.
I'm going to call my friends on the fancy phone and see what they can tell me.
There was general agreement that Gunny would place his calls on the way back to Vegas and we'd have lunch at a buffet where we could discuss what he'd learned.
Two, it seems that they have an unidentified virus going around that's high contagious.
John said it would take about a week to arrange it and we could pay the escort.
Right, that's intelligent guys, the main reason people have left us alone is probably because we have six bodyguards who happen to speak the language.
Three hours later we were in Kingman and bade goodbye to our companions.
We weren't interested in the museum and got directions and information about the Hualapai Mountain Recreation area.
The Hualapai Mountains remain green year-around, being covered in pine trees, namely Pinion Pine.
A recent threat to the community was a mountain lion, a danger to pets and small children.
It had been drawn to civilized areas like Pinion Pines and Atherton Acres due to the large deer population.
People had been feeding the deer, causing them to rely on humans for food, instead of fending for themselves.
There are some animals only native to the Hualapai Mountain range, including a breed of ground squirrel, and a tarantula.
At the top of the mountain, just past the park, is a community known as Pine Lake.
Several amenities are located in Pine Lake, including the Pine Lake Bed and Breakfast, the Hualapai Mountain Lodge, the Pine Lake General Store and several individuals even rent out their homes for daily or weekend get-a ways.
The escort had Gunny's satellite phone number and was supposed to call when he arrived in Kingman.
Most ammo shipments out of Barstow go west to the Pacific Fleet Marines, it would probably take some special arrangements to ship it east.
Hualapai Mountain Recreation area We went riding most of the time; we are getting too old for a lot of hiking.
One thing I noticed was how much more comfortable the Laredoan cross draw rig was, especially when I was riding.
Marilyn confided that as soon as they got home, she was making Gunny get them the same setup as Dan and I had.
In the meantime, she took off one of the holsters, exchanged them and wore the belt the right way around with the buckle in the front.
I began to think about what it meant with California closing the border.
Some of my questions answered themselves, it had to be very contagious, and the prognosis couldn't be good.
I say that because, except for what I heard up in Utah and what the guard had said, we knew nothing about it and it couldn't be good news if they were withholding it.
This is a breaking news alert, please stay tuned for an important announcement about a widespread virus in California resulting in the closure of the state's borders 3 days ago.
As of 3 days ago, the state of California, in concert with the CDC, implemented a statewide quarantine.
Signs and symptoms of virus typically occur 1 -3 weeks after the patient comes into contact with the virus.
These include fever, retrosternal pain , sore throat, back pain, cough, abdominal pain, vomiting, diarrhea, conjunctivitis, facial swelling, proteinuria , and mucosal bleeding.
Neurological problems have also been described, including hearing loss, tremors, and encephalitis.
Because the symptoms of the disease are so varied and nonspecific, clinical diagnosis is often difficult.
The most common complication of the illness for those who survive is deafness.
Various degrees of deafness occur in approximately one-third of cases, and in many cases hearing loss is permanent.
The disease is believed to be spread by rodents however until it is specifically identified, quarantines will remain in effect.
It has been shown to be most effective when given early in the course of the illness.
Patients should also receive supportive care consisting of maintenance of appropriate fluid and electrolyte balance, oxygenation and blood pressure, as well as treatment of any other complicating infections.
Initial cases of the disease appeared in the Long Beach area and have been tentatively tied to the arrival of a ship carrying goods from Africa.
Ebola, Marburg, Lassa and Crimean-Congo viruses are examples of hemorrhagic fever viruses.
The only case of Ebola in the United States was in Reston, Virginia in 1989.
This specific strand of the Ebola virus caused a rather large panic, but after containment, eventually it was discovered that this specific strand of the Ebola virus, although resembling Ebola Zaire, proved fatal only to non-human primates.
They aren't all the same; Ebola Zaire, Ebola Sudan and Marburg are very deadly.
When I could get to a computer connection, I could confirm what I suspected.
In the meantime, we were fairly isolated and as soon as the ammo came in for the Tac-50s, we'd be gone in a heartbeat.
I told him that to my knowledge, there had never been a case outside of Africa, but a rodent could have been aboard the ship from Africa and somehow spread the disease to our species of rodents.
I went on to explain that a frequent side effect of Lassa fever was deafness.
IIRC, the disease was spread through contract with rodent leaving and contact with infected human material,e., blood, stools, etc.
Jim said he'd check it out and if what I told him didn't connect, someone would let us know.
The CDC published hundreds of fact sheets on exotic diseases, like Ebola, and I nearly forgot that I had the fact sheets on the laptop.
After reading the fact sheet on Lassa, I was pretty sure that was what was in California.
Signs and symptoms of Lassa fever typically occur 1 -3 weeks after the patient comes into contact with the virus.
On the way back, June said she'd had enough traveling, everywhere we went we ran into trouble.
Plus, when a person started to figure the cost of one of these 'vacations', they ate through a whole year's worth of earnings in a very short time.
Those National Parks were in a sorry state anyway, this wasn't the Country of 30 years ago when everyone had 2 or 3 cars and gas was in the $2 range.
We would have been much better off if it weren't for the environmentalists.
They complained about the volume of hydrocarbons in the air and drove gas guzzlers.
When the Country tried to convert to wind power to eliminate carbon based fuel production of electricity, they worried about birds get killed by the wind turbines.
Solar power was way overrated; consider the amount of energy it took to produce a solar panel.
Many of the countries, like Japan, that produced them were not the industrial giants of the same time frame.
I half suspected that the planet Earth was in an overall population decline, the past 20 years had seen disease, war and hunger.
It was only 5 years since the super eruption and scientist had warned it would take 6-10 years for the air to completely clear.
The last 2 wars, WW III and the war with Mexico had been fought with nuclear weapons.
In areas of Africa where the disease was endemic , Lassa fever was a significant cause of morbidity and mortality.
It was like the Africanized honey bees, nothing could keep them from spreading north.
Africanized Honey Bees also called ""Africanized bees"" or ""killer bees"" are descendants of southern African bees imported in 1956 by Brazilian scientists attempting to breed a honey bee better adapted to the South American tropics.
The first swarm of Africanized bees was detected in the United States in October, 1990 when they were captured in a baited trap at the border town of Hidalgo, Texas.
AHB colonies were first reported in Arizona and New Mexico in 1993 and in California in October, 1994.
Within a year, more than 8,000 square miles of Imperial, Riverside and northeastern San Diego counties were declared officially colonized by Africanized Bees.
On July 15, 1993, 82-year-old Lino Lopez became the first person to die in the United States from Africanized honey bee stings.
He was stung more than 40 times while trying to remove a colony from a wall in an abandoned building on his ranch near Harlingen, Texas.
The Black Death ended, mostly, with the great fire of London in 1666 when most of the population of black rats was wiped out.
The brown rats weren't good hosts for the fleas that carried the bubonic plague.
The reservoir, or host, of Lassa virus is a rodent known as the ""multimammate rat"" of the genus Mastomys.
It is not certain which species of Mastomys are associated with Lassa; however, at least two species carry the virus in Sierra Leone.
Mastomys rodents breed very frequently, produce large numbers of offspring, and are numerous in the savannas and forests of West, Central, and East Africa.
All these factors together contribute to the relatively efficient spread of Lassa virus from infected rodents to humans.
The Praomys/Mastomys species complex is a group of morphologically similar species that occur in very diverse habitats throughout subSaharan Africa.
The taxonomy of this group has been clouded by a diversity of opinions and this confusion has been further compounded by many external and cranial similarities between species, and thus the systematics of this group remains poorly understood, with many species yet to be described.
The genus Mastomys is well represented in southern Africa, especially by the ubiquitous multimammate mice, Mastomys coucha and Mastomys natalensis.
The distribution of both species is only provisional at this stage, and the species are known to be sympatric in some areas, and allopatric in others.
These common agricultural pests are also commensal with man, often sheltering in houses in order to safely rear their young.
In African kraals they occur in very large numbers, living in the fabric and thatch of pole and mud huts.
Mastomys coucha acts as a reservoir for the Rickettsian Yersinia pestis, the organism causing plague.
The three forms of plague are bubonic, primary pneumonic and primary septicaemic.
Bubonic plague, which is the most common type in epidemics, is fatal in about 25% to 50% of untreated cases.
Pneumonic plague, a highly contagious form, and septicaemic plague, a generalised blood infection, are more rare forms, and usually fatal.
Plague still exists as a threat in southern Africa, with much current concern over the possibility of outbreaks in rat infested inner cities.
We had already had a round of pneumonic plague, during the H5N1 pandemic, introduced by terrorists; or, so was claimed.
Both species are also carriers of the Banzi and Witwatersrand viruses and M natalensis is a natural reservoir for the arenavirus causing Lassa fever.
This infection, occurring predominantly in West Africa up until now, has a high mortality rate, especially amongst pregnant women and even in patients with modern health care.
The Mopeia virus is another similar virus carried by M natalensis, but the effect thereof on man is as yet unknown.
Mastomys rodents were also linked to an outbreak of encephalomyocarditis among African elephants in the Kruger National Park.
However, due to the fact that both species occur within the boundaries of the park, it is uncertain as to whether only one or both of these species may carry the EMC virus.
Referring to the highway's dangers, the article quoted a resident who ""blames Satan.
On January 21,2003, Governor Bill Richardson delivered his first State-of-the-State Address to the New Mexico Legislature.
We must coordinate the business interests of Native Americans and the state.
Moreover, United States 93 did not have any branches; if AASHTO were to number branches of United States 93 in sequence, the first would be United States 193, not 393.
At the suggestion of AASHTO, the States agreed to renumber the route as a spur of United States 191, with ""491"" chosen to avoid duplicating State route numbers.
After AASHTO's Standing Committee on Highways approved the change, it became official on Saturday, May 31.
However, I was giving some thought to taking the EMT-1 class being offered in Garden City.
They had both EMT-1 and EMT-2, but I wasn't sure I wanted to spend a year become a Paramedic, I had Julia and our 3 kids to take care of.
I went to Lakin and got myself clipped, 3 were enough kids and we only had a 3 bedroom house.
The pastor keeps bring up the 4 Horsemen of the Apocalypse and the End of Times.
Some of those reruns on TV Say this and that and any one of the disasters we've had seem to qualify as what they warn about.
I believe that the first 4 seals were broken at the beginning of the Industrial Revolution.
However, the Bible also says that only God will know the minute and hour of the end.
The movie that Time is on my side was in was Fallen starring Denzel Washington.
Jim getting me thinking about Revelations slipped into me thinking about some of the implications.
We'd learned in school that results of a nationally representative study show that genital herpes infection is common in the United States.
Between the late 1970s and the early 1990s, the number of Americans with genital herpes infection increased 30 percent.
I hoped Jim became a Paramedic; I could retire completely once I showed him how to use the lab equipment.
If I started that now, maybe he would become interested in going to school for a year.
Then he could work in Garden City for a year and return to the farm, like I had.
Of course, I'd brought back more to the farm than an education when I gave up my job.
Twenty years ago international news was usually the first news the media brought to our attention, it was shortly after 9/11.
We had gone in Afghanistan looking for Osama and ended up removing the Taliban from power, but Osama evaded us.
We'd eventually heard that bin Laden was dead, but we'd found him and SEAL Team 6 killed him.
Africa had been starving for years and the pandemic, the war and the Israeli attack on Muslim countries only worsened their conditions.
If anything helped them it was Yellowstone erupting, it ended the drought in Africa.
The United States had tried more than once to help starving countries in Africa but each attempt had ended badly.
Clinton pulled us out of Somalia and Bush only made a halfhearted attempt to help those starving in '05-'06.
The 4 Horsemen are the white horse the Antichrist, the red horse war, the black horse famine and the pale horse death, which would naturally follow the first 3.
Opinions on which rider carried pestilence, an alternate interpretation, likely based on differing translations, holds the first Horseman to represent War or the Antichrist, the second to represent Pestilence, while the third and fourth riders remain famine and death, respectively.
Apache an important late comer to Texas Akokisasa part of the Atakapans Atakapan coastal Indians of east Texas Alabama Coushatta Late comers from the east, still here in east Texas Bidas a part of Atakapans Black Seminoles Escaped slaves, adopted and married into the Seminoles Caddo East Texas farmers Coahuiltecans South Texas hunter gathers Comanche Raiders of the south plains Concho West Texas friends of the Jumano Cherokee Important late comers.
Patarabuay, another name for the Jumanos Pueblo, see the Tigua for Texas Puebloan Indians Mexican Hispanic they are Indian too Tigua The Pueblos of Texas Tonkawa central Texas hunter gathers.
Waco a band of the Wichita Wichita farmers and hunters of central Texas The only way the end would come all at once if that rock came in from behind the sun.
Statistically, every morning when you get up, there's 1 chance in 20,000 that it could happen.
I started reading the signs after I lost the baby and couldn't have more.
Revelations also says that there will be a great upsurge in knowledge just before the end.
I don't think so, the 1,000 years of tribulation comes AFTER the battle of Har Megiddon.
It was planting time, again, and I took take of baby Julia while Jim worked on the farm and Julia worked in the gardens and cannery.
One of these days, our vehicles would be worn out and we'd be walking or riding a horse.
Jim did get the parts for the wind turbine from Big Jake, but was told there weren't any more.
We were in that period after the disasters where you have technology but no means to replace it when it wears out.
Knowing this, we could plan ahead and locate parts before they were needed.
If properly cared for some things, like computers, have a very long life.
Technological advances had come to a screeching halt on July 4th, 2009.
We were coming up on July 4th, 2022, 13 years after the war and ~5 years after Yellowstone.
We'd seen enough of the Country to know that we didn't want to travel anymore.
The CDC announced today that the unidentified illness affecting California is Lassa fever.
A vaccine was developed and is being produced to meet the needs of the popula620 tion of that state and its contiguous neighbors, Arizona, Nevada and Oregon.
The disease vector is rodents and it requires contract with the virus to become infected.
In anticipation of the disease possibly spreading, sufficient doses of the vaccine will be prepared to immunize the entire remaining population of the United States.
It seems to be spread by human contact with an infected animal and amplified in health care settings.
My biggest concern is what I'm going to use when we can't get Zoloft any more.
Instead of interrupting the recycling of serotonin as in the case of SSRIs, and instead of preventing the end consumption of serotonin as in the case of MAOIs, 5-HTP supplements provide more raw materials that may be used in the body's natural serotonin production process.
Mom told me that Marilyn suggested that we grow turkeys because they contained some chemical that would help Rachel with her depression.
I finally gave in and told her that I'd enroll in Paramedic school this fall, provided we could find one.
I should have known she wouldn't have pushed if there wasn't a school I could attend.
I've always been concerned because she was the only one on the 3 farms that had more than Combat Lifesaver training.
See if you can take course on homeopathic cures, we aren't always going to be able to get drugs.
Your generation may well be the last one to have access to large amounts of technology.
That ammo that we picked up from Gunny's friend may be the last we can get.
The only relationship I have to him is that I bought some of those reproduction First Blood knives.
There are a couple of communities down there that the illegals are taking over.
It was good for him and I sent his completed application along with payment in full to Topeka.
Buying another freezer for FFP didn't make a whole lot of sense, yet, and I had all the equipment we needed.
We could haul 6 horses in one trailer and 4 in the other, leaving room for all the freezers and stuff we needed.
Of course that meant getting a second 6 horse trailer, but it was only money.
I could say that now, it wasn't like back when Randy and I first got into preparedness.
The only problem I could see with 20 and 30-year men was that they never stopped being soldiers.
Production was up a little this year and in another 4-5 years we'd be back to normal, provided the weather holds.
Back when I was an 18-year-old in the Army, I never thought I'd see the day where the end times became a reality.
This trip, I think I'll wear the Chief's Special in my ankle holster and carry the FID .45 as my backup in the middle of my back.
That's regardless of what guns I'm carrying, the military arms or the cowboy guns.
It's just a shame I'm not bigger in stature, I end up carrying about 50% of my weight in gear when I'm all fitted out in the military gear.
One day in mid-June, a military truck pulled in and the driver said he had a delivery for Tom.
I ask where he was from and he said he came from Tennessee, but made a stop in Missouri on the way to pick up more goods.
It was a 5-ton truck and it was full, I wonder how much that stuff cost.
You seem to think you can never have too much toilet paper and I think that you can never have too much ammo.
Tom lined up production overruns from Milan Army Ammunition Plant in Tennessee and Lake City Army Ammunition Plant in Missouri.
You'll have to move the stuff from the 4 horse trailer to the new one, but only plan on using 4 of the stalls for horses.
But scientists now have a much better understanding of the complex issues related to reactions to incompatible blood donor types.
Even donors with Type O Rh negative blood may have antibodies in their blood that cause serious reactions.
Before a blood transfusion, small samples of the recipient's and donor's blood are mixed to check compatibility.
Dextrose solution may cause red cells to clump in the tubing and, more important, to swell and hemolyze as dextrose and associated water diffuse from the medium into the cells.
Lactated Ringer's solution contains enough ionized calcium to overcome the chelating agents in anticoagulant-preservative or additive solutions and allow small clots to develop.
There have been complications reported with massive infusions of saline-containing solutions.
These clinical complications include dilutional acidosis, edema, and hypokalemia.
Not a problem this time and Kansas and Texas acknowledged each other's.
Because I had so much room in the horse trailer, I changed my mind, ladies have been known to do that, and got a larger FFP freezer, capable of handling 72 units.
I never the less insisted that we loan the Dragon Skin to our Tejano friends, I didn't want to use it, just because I had it.
The corporation was clearing at least $300,000 or more a year now and it was akin to winning the lottery.
Donating the 6-month-old FFP to Lakin Hospital was a nice tax write-off.
That was very important, you know, $100,000 wasn't what it used to be, not with a pound of gold officially valued at $15,000.
I guess we finally managed to saturate Lakin with pint and quart mason jars; we got all we needed this season back.
And, you know how much that cuts our costs and increases our prof628 its.
Floyd 'Red Crow' Westerman plays a Cherokee in Walker, Texas Ranger, although he is a Lakota.
Having seen the movie, Cheyenne Autumn, I thought the Trail of Tears referred to the Cheyenne being moved to Oklahoma.
The Trail of Tears refers to the forced movement of the Cherokee from north Georgia to Oklahoma.
Hollywood has left the impression that the great Indian wars came in the Old West during the late 1800's, a period that many think of simplistically as the cowboy and Indian days.
By that time the Indians were nearly finished, their subjugation complete, their numbers decimated.
The killing, enslavement, and land theft had begun with the arrival of the Europeans.
But it may have reached its nadir when it became federal policy under President Jackson.
I would sooner be honestly damned than hypocritically immortalized Davy Crockett His political career destroyed because he supported the Cherokee, he left Washington DC and headed west to Texas.
No better symbol exists of the pain and suffering of the Trail Where They Cried than the Cherokee Rose.
The mothers of the Cherokee grieved so much that the chiefs prayed for a sign to lift the mother's spirits and give them strength to care for their children.
From that day forward, a beautiful new flower, a rose, grew wherever a mother's tear fell to the ground.
It has a gold center, for the gold taken from the Cherokee lands, and seven leaves on each stem that represent the seven Cherokee clans that made the journey.
To this day, the Cherokee Rose prospers along the route of the Trail of Tears.
And today, when you celebrate your hundred years, Oh Canada, I am sad for all the Indian people throughout the land.
For I have known you when your forests were mine; when they gave me my meat and my clothing.
I have known you in your streams and rivers where your fish flashed and danced in the sun, where the waters said come, come and eat of my abundance.
But in the long hundred years since the white man came, I have seen my freedom disappear like the salmon going mysteriously out to sea.
The white man's strange customs which I could not understand pressed down upon me until I could no longer breathe.
When I neither understood nor welcomed this way of life, I was called lazy.
My nation was ignored in your history textbooks they were little more important in the history of Canada than the buffalo that ranged the plains.
I was ridiculed in your plays and motion pictures, and when I drank your fire-water, I got drunk very, very drunk.
Let me humbly accept this new culture and through it rise up and go on.
Like the Thunderbird of old I shall rise again out of the sea; I shall grab the instruments of the white man's success his education, his skills, and with these new tools I shall build my race into the proudest segment of your society.
Before I follow the great Chiefs who have gone before us, Oh Canada, I shall see these things come to pass.
I shall see our young braves and our chiefs sitting in the houses of law and government, ruling and being ruled by the knowledge and freedoms of our great land.
He was also known as Chief Dan George Old Lodge Skins in Little Big Man.
The thing about the Indians of North America was that they would have the last laugh.
We killed them with our diseases, stole their land and moved them to places they didn't want to go called Reservations.
They started to chuckle when we found oil and repaid the Cherokee for the Trail of Tears.
I wasn't that long ago that Dan passed out bows and arrows for Christmas.
Our technology doomed us and one day, we'll have used the last grain of gun powder and be hunting with bows and arrows, much as the Indians once did.
There won't be cloth and we'll make our clothing out of skins, as the Indians once did.
At the end of the day when work was done, we worked on getting ready for the trip to Texas.
We'd been there and almost ended up fighting the Mexican Army but for the fact that an F-15E dropped a bomb and stopped them dead in their tracks, literally.
They dropped a lot of bombs that day and luckily, neither Russia nor China reacted.
They just continued to sell the surviving Mexicans whatever they needed to rebuild their Country.
It created a nearly perfect fence in a way, the overlapping fields of radioactivity made the best possible fence.
Unfortunately, they planned poorly, parts of the United States extended south of the line of radioactivity.
They were airbursts reducing the fallout, but still... there was this strip across Texas just north of Big Bend Country.
The United States uses fairly 'clean' bombs and most, but not all, of the radiation is associated with a ground burst.
Not that we knew what was coming, because it was a total surprise to us.
It takes a very high airburst for the widespread EMP effect to take place and we didn't lose much.
Manny told us that we'd be wise to take some kind of protective clothing although it had been 2 years.
We bought kits that included the Suit, 1 pair of protective gloves and boot covers and 1 roll of duct tape.
DEMRON RADIATION SHIELDING GARMENTS had been tested by the Department of Energy and confirmed to be effective in shielding for various forms of ionizing radiation.
The specific molecular engineering of the compound provides significant protection against X-ray and low energy Gamma emissions, as well as high and low energy Beta and Alpha particles.
The DEMRON coverall is constructed with an integrated hood, heat sealed seams, and seam seal tape for added protection.
It was only after the suits were delivered that Dan pointed out that we could have worn MOPP suits.
Ok, so it's going to be the fall and with winter coming, but a MOPP suit is hot and heavy and just plain uncomfortable.
The lightweight suits I bought would offer the same protection as a MOPP suit and possibly more.
We were well into September before we were ready, but when the harvesting was done, we completed last minute preparations, like the FFP & PRBCs for example, and off we headed to Texas with the Tejanos leading the way.
They had a survey meter in the lead vehicle which was carrying munitions.
It wouldn't hurt the munitions to be exposed to radioactivity if there were any, whereas, the horses weren't all geldings.
Another thing, those radiation suits $1,300 each and that didn't count the gas mask.
This time I inventoried the bourbon and limited the total to 6 cases, a one year supply.
I also made sure we didn't have more than 3 kegs of the liquid dynamite Ray called beer.
Same rule, prepare for the worst and hope for the best and if we did find ourselves defending ourselves, we were going to be bright-eyed and bushy-tailed.
This time we had reservations at Terlingua Ranch's campground, we made back in July.
When the subject of our boarding horses came up, they finally remembered us.
Manny and Juan told us they needed to gather information and would get back to us.
I had medical histories on all 44 of us and made sure that everyone was up to date on their shots including the new Lassa vaccine.
We didn't tell him we also had 1 Ma Deuce, 2 M240s and 4 M249s plus 2 60mm mortars.
For the first time in memory, we went looking for trouble albeit in the guise of helping our Tejano friends.
MOAB was filled with 18,700 pounds of H6, an explosive that is a mixture of RDX , TNT, and aluminum.
Some initial reports had stated that this replacement for the BLU-82 bomb uses more of the slurry of ammonium nitrate and powdered aluminum used in the BLU-82.
Other reports indicated that the MOAB might use tritonal explosive as opposed to the gelled slurry explosive of the BLU-82.
Contrary to some reports, it is not capable of deep ground penetration.
The reason being that they didn't have enough and our B61-10s were getting old and either had to be refurbished or used up.
The MOAB was built to use in Iraq, but they didn't use them for whatever reason.
We assumed it would be some of the cities along the Rio Grande, but life has its little surprises.
The residents may want to get even for the abuse they've suffered and we'll have the captured weapons to arm them with,"" Gunny pointed out.
We're going to need to infiltrate the communities and we'll need sniper fire to cover the infiltrators.
Carlos Hathcock didn't use suppressors in 'Nam, but he was making one shot kills and moving on.
What Dan told me they planned to do was set up snipers -90 apart and they could use the Spearheads to coordinate the attacks of the infiltrators.
That would place a heavy burden on the spotters to identify the individual targets that needed taking out.
The infiltrators would try to do knife work and only use their suppressed handguns or rifles if that failed.
Some of our Tejano friends had some wicked looking Bowie's sharpened to a razor-like edge.
Assuming that even if we started with the smallest towns first, the final decision, we would most likely be out numbered, if not by bodies, then by position.
I immediately started tapering Rachel off the Xanax; we didn't need a repeat performance of her Dustin Hoffman skit.
That's a knife not unlike the Fairbairn Sykes pattern and a double edged, 5Vi"" blade boot knife.
We had spotting scopes to use plus a pair of binoculars for each sniper team.
Initial appearances were deceiving; it appeared to just be a normal small town with a few people going about their business.
We'd tied our horses to some shrubs and had moved into position where we waited until the infiltrators signaled that they were ready to go.
It was close to sundown and Dan was using the binoculars and pointing out targets of interest to me and the others.
If the operation came off as planned, we'd get through this with few, if any, shots being fired.
Using the information that came over the Spearheads, our people slowly moved into position, getting as close as they dared before dark.
I watched them creep in, intent on their targets with an occasional twinkle when light caught the edge of a knife blade.
Just as the tenth guard was falling, blood gushing; a man walked out of a building and saw him go down.
They were far enough away, we didn't hear the Tac-50 fire, but I saw the results, Gunny took out 4 men.
I was doing my best to mark were our people had gone down; you don't get into an all-out battle without losing people on both sides.
One building had a sign reading Clinic and I hoped it was a medical clinic with a full time doctor.
More likely it was one of those remote clinics where a doctor visited town and saw patients one day a week.
I'd take care of the opposition people only once I was sure our injured were out of danger.
The suppressors on our sniper rifles eliminated the flash and those illegals had no idea where the sniper fire was coming from.
We had 3rd generation night vision, MUNS, but it wasn't required, the town was reasonably well lit up.
What we thought would take 30 minutes tops ended up taking the better part of an hour.
Once we had their numbers down, it turned into a seek and destroy operation.
We saddled up and worked our way into town, there was almost no fire now.
Juan started to point out people who were still alive and I could see most of them had Ringer's and ACS bandages.
Most would make it, but I'm only a Paramedic and a couple need surgery.
Gunny asked. ""3 dead, 2 require surgery and 9 more with wounds we can handle.
Our people were wearing Dragon Skin body armor and most of the wounds were in the extremities.
I was able to direct some of the others exactly what to do and men with minor wounds were cleaned up, wounds debrided and bandages applied.
As soon as they brought in the supplies, I began establish additional IVs, administering PRBCs and a plasma drip.
I wasn't sure if they make it to Alpine, but Gunny had used his Iridium to call the Sheriff and a chopper was only a few minutes out.
An extra Paramedic was aboard and he helped us finish up with the people who weren't being transported.
The 3 dead and 2 seriously wounded men weren't any of our 36 people, but some oth638 ers that had joined in to help.
Some of the less seriously wounded were; the Dragon Skin doesn't protect you from head to foot.
There are only 13 known pygmy owls left in Arizona, said Jenny Neeley of the Defenders of Wildlife.
Neeley said the owl, which has been listed as endangered since 1997, will face imminent extinction if the protection is removed.
Critical habitat designations for the owl covering more than a million acres in Arizona will be lifted if the owl comes off the list.
Never mind those million acres could grow enough food to feed millions of people; we only have 13 of those owls left.
The two men transported to Alpine made it, barely, but they were out of the fight permanently.
It wasn't a bad trade off; we picked up 75 people who were more than willing and all but dying to get revenge.
The guys passed out the weapons and gave them instruction, but only 55 of the people proved to be suitable for direct combat.
The fellas found 4 others who could work as spotters. of those 55 men were veterans of one conflict or another.
We had a surplus of weapons, mostly G3s and our entire cadre of troops either had G-3s or machineguns backed by M4s.
I had to make a trip to Alpine to replace the PRBCs, FFP and solutions we'd used up in treatment.
I checked on my patients and they were both awake and wanted to thank me.
I felt bad that I hadn't been able to do more, any clash/crash you can walk away from could have been worse.
I spent the next 4 days giving Rachel, Marilyn and Elle a quick course in advanced first aid.
It was akin to the CLS training but we didn't have the time to do any more.
I intended to use Marilyn and Elle for the next battle and have Rachel stand by and thaw plasma as needed.
It turned out that the Sheriff saw to it that the event had NO media coverage.
That helped and by the time we were ready to move on, several of our targets had been eliminated.
That left us only one community that we knew of and it was bigger than we could handle by ourselves.
Gunny called the Sheriff and told him where we were going and wanted to know what he could do to help us.
The Sheriff wanted to get specific, exactly what did we have in the way of weapons, people and munitions.
Gunny laid it all out and later said he could hear the Sheriff had near panic in his voice.
He sort of assumed we had a couple of old WW II machineguns, not 2 mortars, and 7 machineguns.
Our wives will supply medical support, 2 in the field and two in our medical facility such that it is.
You can talk to June and determine what we have in the way of medical supplies, but she went to Alpine and replaced what we used last time.
We'd brought them and when we arrived at the park the next day, we set one up as a medical tent.
Our Tejanos supplied folding cots and the gals and I moved our equipment into the tent.
We used 4 cots set on blocks as examination tables and had our supplies set up and ready to go.
I had one retired doctor and the same Paramedic to help me in our little MASH unit.
I didn't know the details of the plan and didn't care; this was the Battle of the Alamo, in reverse.
We weren't that far away, we heard everything and the closest I'd come to hearing something like that was in the Army during training.
Presidio doesn't have a hospital and depended on the Big Bend Regional Hospital in Alpine for medical care.
We couldn't really tell anyway, many of our allies were Tejanos and I hadn't met them all.
We had 2 choppers available for evac, a Blackhawk and the Brewster County Sheriff's.
The tags have 4 places to identify the condition of the patient if you have triage tags.
Black no care needed; Red life threatening injuries; Yellow non-life threatening injuries; and, Green minor injury.
The first responder can tear off the lower sections of the tag, leaving the bottom strip reflecting the patient's condition, provided they remembered to tag them in the first place.
The next stage is transportation to a frontline care facility, like what we had set up.
Red were treated if the doctor was available, otherwise stabilized and transported to the hospital.
I cannot under emphasize the importance of getting the triage part right; if a person should be Red and you tag them as Yellow, they may go from Yellow to Black.
I'm sure you can speculate about what happened; we began to run low on supplies.
When they brought Dan in, he was wearing a Yellow tag, I'm surprised he even let them bring him in and I let the Paramedic treat him, I couldn't although I sure wanted to.
Phase one was to secure the border crossing and that went off without a hitch.
They set the Ma Deuce and both mortars up there to prevent the many thousands of Mexicans from crossing the border from Ojinaga, Chihuahua, Mexico.
In phase two, the attacks on the northwest and southeast sections of Presidio were launched simultaneously following the previous plan of infiltrating first.
That lasted nearly 24 hours, not the quick and decisive campaign of the last time.
All four of you made it to our tent, but nobody's dead and none of you needed to be transported.
You shouldn't see many patients from the other side; I heard our Tejanos say the order was ningun cuarto, no quarter.
Rachel lost it completely and Marilyn was the one who had to treat Gunny and Tom.
Dan, we ran out of supplies and had to airlift in more plasma and IV solutions.
Our antibiotics are gone although Big Bend Regional is trying to find us replacements sometime in the next 3-4 weeks.
We're in good condition as far as our supplies go, except for the meds and you said you have them by the time we're healed up.
I couldn't tell June that you could take the man out of the Army, but not the soldier out of the man.
Marines say, once a Marine, always a Marine, so I was sure Gunny and Hank would agree with me.
Come to think of it, I think we 4 old soldiers needed a few drinks too; we were just waiting until we were off the meds.
Juan had taken a bullet in his right leg, severing the femoral artery and shattering his femur.
The doctor at the hospital said it would take weeks to heal and he'd need physical therapy.
According to Manny, out of our 36 men, we had 2 dead, Juan seriously wounded and several more that would be back in fighting trim is about 3-4 weeks.
This trip we intended to see the Country because last time we were too busy dodging our Tejanos and getting ready to fight a war with Mexico.
We did, if there hadn't been those people trying to get into the Park, the only shots fired would have been on the practice range.
A friend had talked about how nice the Park was and thankfully Gunny's wound was high and it didn't affect his ability to sit a saddle.
Rather than have a Ranger try and seize our guns, we only carried concealed.
It was just a short ride from the ranch to the Park and the Country was both rugged and beautiful.
We cooked steaks every night to improve our men's supply of red corpuscles and help them heal.
When they couldn't ride anymore, they went fishing and the other girls and I saddled up and returned to the Park.
There are lots of forged documents floating around and the government has lost most of its records.
People of Hispanic origin may be of any race and should answer the question on race by marking one or more race categories shown on the questionnaire, including White, Black or African American, American Indian or Alaska Native, Asian, Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander, and Some Other Race.
Most Tejano are Mexican Indians in terms of ethnicity and originally spoke Spanish as a first language and learned English as a second language.
Over the years, that changed to the point where some people with Hispanic surnames don't even speak Spanish.
The population of Ochiltree County was about % Hispanic before all of the recent illegal immigration.
I called John and asked them to arm themselves and meet us in Perryton.
He wanted to know how it went and I explained about how everyone had managed to get shot or otherwise injured, like Dan.
They had the ethanol produced for both the bourbon and E85 and were processing the soybean oil into biodiesel, most of which they'd been selling.
I suggested they just bring the submachine guns, the MP5K-PDWs; we weren't up against that many people and had enough heavy weapons.
The remaining antibiotics finally came in about the time everyone was healed up enough to head home.
We got ourselves around, settled our bill with the ranch and headed to Alpine to pick up Juan.
We self-insured, if you know what that means, there wasn't such a thing as a healthcare policy anymore.
They told me I could get physical therapy in Garden City at the hospital there.
They said once the cast is off it will take 4-6 weeks for my femur to regain its strength.
Rachel was ok at the moment and there hadn't been any reemergence of her chronic lymphocytic leukemia and the doctor said she was still in stage 0.
I think I was developing an ulcer and began to take Prevacid and or Nexium, whichever was handy, and took Pepcid AC when that didn't do the trick.
If we were going to hook up with the boys in Perryton on Black Friday, we didn't have much choice.
A headline in the UK Guardian once said, Hope for the best, expect the worst.
If you do that, it doesn't much matter what happens, you'll probably get through it.
Way back in the beginning, that was the philosophy my first husband, Randy, had.
It turned out to be a good thing, however, when we got the bird flu, the pneumonic plague and the war came.
He didn't live to see Yellowstone erupt and by that time we had too many people to shelter in the underground shelter.
Kansas is about mid-Country so we didn't get the terribly heavy snowfall that Nebraska and the Dakotas did.
We were nearly back to normal but the growing seasons in North Dakota were still pretty short.
It was becoming a real challenge to farm and provide for our own security and farm at the same time.
We the People of the United States, in Order to form a more perfect Union, establish Justice, insure domestic Tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general Welfare, and secure the Blessings of Liberty to ourselves and our Posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the United States of America.
A gun is a tool, the same as a hoe or a rake, it's just used for a different purpose, as in primarily for killing living animals be they human or other.
Very few guns pull their own triggers, the bad guy is the human holding the gun and using it to do something he or she shouldn't.
England tried to keep their law enforcement officers, the Bobbies, disarmed for a very long time.
Not any more, by 2000, ""Armed police on the beat have been introduced to the British mainland for the first time.
The decision by Nottinghamshire police to arm officers patrolling two inner-city housing estates breaks one of the longest standing traditions of unarmed Bobbies on the beat.
Dumb questions, the world is changing and you folks on the other side of the pond best change with it.
The Department oversees enforcement of criminal laws, serves civil process and operates the 32-bed county jail.
Its communications center dispatches officers from the Texas Department of Public Safety as well as Texas Parks.
The Perryton Police Department has ten uniformed officers to enforce state and local laws around the clock throughout the city,"" Manny explained.
We'll come down from Perryton a few at a time and spread out through the town and find the illegals.
It was also unlawful for CCW permit holders to openly display firearms.
Needless to say when the 8 of us showed up armed to the teeth with our Colt revolvers, there was some concern voiced.
If the station attendant had been paying attention, he'd have noticed that our latigos were loose.
If the mere presence of the 'Colts' alarmed him, that would have made him pee his pants.
The counterman looked like he was going to rub a hole clean through the counter in the one spot he kept cleaning.
People came in, but nobody left, it reminded me of Hotel California, You can check out anytime you like, but you can never leave.
A sheriff's car from Ochiltree County Sheriffs Department pulled into town and who should get out but Dan and Jeremy, looking a whole lot like feds.
Before they were even out of the patrol car, a black bread company type van pulled in looking just like a SWAT vehicle.
About 10 agents poured out of the back, most wearing Kearny County Deputy badges.
Jeremy yelled out INS and it appeared that at least some people in Farnsworth believed him.
Our guys looked impressive dressed as they were and carrying those MP5K-PDWs, if I hadn't known better, I've have been impressed too.
I'm sure the fellas holding the town hostage must have thought someone had tipped the Sheriff off and he'd brought in the feds, which wasn't all that far from the impression Manny wanted to create.
We finished our sandwiches, left money on the table and walked outside to watch.
There were 3 roads out of Farnsworth, route 15 northeast and southwest and county roads to the north, south, east and west.
I assume they realized this and the sight of 10 feds in body armor suggested that if they resisted, they'd end up dead.
Gunny and Manny began to question them; we didn't need our cover any longer.
I didn't see it but Gunny must have very persuasive or perhaps it was Manny.
While we Kansas vacationers guarded the prisoners, the feds rounded up the remaining men using the info provided by the prisoners they questioned.
Bu this time the entire Sheriff's Department and some of the Perryton cops were cuffing the prisoners and herding them into the patrol cars and the SWAT van.
The owner of the cafe came out and refunded our money, saying lunch was on the house.
It must have taken 40 minutes from the time we hit town and no shots were fired.
Our 1 st and 3rd outings had lasted about 7 months and had involved our Tejanos and us.
In the process we'd made quite an impression and more than a few friends.
It had been very rewarding but hadn't made much of a dent in the problem; but then, neither had the Border Patrol.
We were a private group and we had an advantage, no embedded reporters.
Thanksgiving was rescheduled for the following week and everyone on the farms came.
Every morning a person gets out of bed, life begins all over and although you never know what life's going to bring you that day, we never felt more ready for whatever was coming next.
When called upon to identify us the local law enforcement authorities were consistent in saying no comment.
That had had been our only request, don't tell anyone who we are so they couldn't track us down and target us.
The generosity of the American people had long been recognized, we weren't in it for the glory; we were just helping some friends.
Dan set the case on the kitchen table and the Sheriff responded by laying down 12 $20 gold certificates.
We weren't sure what to wear so we dressed up a bit and attended the next City Council meeting.
Not only have they provided food and garden spaces, they have steadfastly aided the Sheriff's Department in helping maintain law and order in our community.
In recognition of those accomplishments, Kearny County and the City of Lakin will reissue their reserve Deputy Sheriff's credentials and issue them the appropriate firearms, courtesy of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
After being sworn, we were presented with Certificates of Appreciation, our same old badges and cases contain the MP5s and the H&K handguns.
We expected the identification cards to be stamped 'Retired' but they weren't.
There had to be a hook, there always is; however, whatever it was, it wasn't apparent.
The Sheriff explained that he'd gotten a call from the Sheriff of Ochiltree County to thank the Sheriff for sending the 2 Deputies and Reserve Deputies to deal with a problem that had slipped his notice.
Our Sheriff got all of the details because he hadn't heard anything about the event.
Pride eventually replaced his initial anger and he had those MP5K-PDWs collected from FEMA collecting dust.
He had gotten together with the County Commissioners and this was what they had worked out.
And, by the way, since our Tejanos were now residents of Kansas, have them stop by the office and pick up Reserve Deputy badges and their special equipment.
That military hardware we'd picked up had better keep a low profile and only appear if National Guard troops were around, unless we had proof of ownership which technically would put us in violation of Kansas law.
When Jim completed Paramedic training in the spring of 2023, they came home and he went to work in Garden City.
When he had time, I began to complete his training by teaching him use of our old equipment.
From then on I'd cover the farms when he was working and he'd cover them the rest of the time.
We'd had a few of the MP5K-PDWs, and now we had enough to allow us all to play fed.
Apparent Dan and Jeremy and our other Reserve Deputies had checked them out for target practice before they went down to Texas.
Santa Anna made the rules at the Battle of the Alamo, we just followed them.
It wasn't going to happen, not with Russia and China supplying Mexico and Venezuela still angry with us and would be until Chavez unelected himself.
If you read any newspaper from 2006, most of what we've experienced could easily have been predicted.
Then, we could look back and pick whichever prediction came true, just like people do with Nostradamus.
George's popularity was down to 31% and falling, which was 31% higher than is was in some homes in California.
The Air Force had limited its attacks to an area just south of the border.
The military was all deployed in the Southwest and from El Paso to Los Angeles they were forcing the Mexicans back across the border.
Anyone of Mexican heritage was carefully screened in a detention camp and once citizenship was established, they were released with an apology.
There was, nonetheless, a backlash; some of the supporters of La Raza and NOA were American citizens.
Temporary Visas and Work Permits were cancelled and the holders transported to the border and forced to return home.
The fence paid for by taxpayers didn't extend the full length of the border; hence people like us were covering the open areas.
The Minuteman Organization incensed over the death of Jim Gilchrest weren't taking prisoners.
This had been the reason for our second trip to Texas; the illegal aliens were seizing towns.
With few exceptions the southern tier of states had very liberal gun laws.
During our free time during the summer of '23, we made plans concerning defense of our farms.
In the summer with the extra gardeners, we didn't believe that would be difficult, whereas during the winter with just the folks on the farms it was a different situation.
Not one we hadn't dealt with in the past, but we weren't going the mere route again.
Why should we, with our hired hands and our Tejanos, our force was nearly the size of our previous security force.
By now everyone on the farms was battle seasoned with the exception of some of the wives.
Tom determined the sizes and quantities we needed and reached for the phone.
By the time the harvest was in, we were ready for anything but an attack with tanks or nuclear weapons.
The girls and I had organized the wives into a force we call The Amazons, allowing us to overcome one problem that couldn't be addressed in any other way, the machismo of the Latin male.
Rachel was out of the loop because, she was too unpredictable and she was put in charge of protecting the children.
She and the children would use our underground shelter, getting the kids and grandkids out of the way.
The only difference between a Latin male and a non-Latin male is the label the used, with Latin's, it's machismo, with non-Latin's it's chauvinism.
I think that related directly to the fact that Yellowstone had put out as much ash as it could have.
June, Marilyn and Elle got together and formed a group they called the Amazons.
Although the Amazons were largely myth, there was ample evidence of female soldiers throughout history.
Lord knows they had plenty of weapons to choose from, the MP5K-PDWs and the Ml 6s.
They became proficient in both and then started in using bows and arrows.
Juan, who was about 95% recovered and used a cane, told me this went against tradition but with their wives now wearing the M9s, he and most of his companeros were reluctant to say much to the women.
I told him to get used to it, women had been wearing the pants in Anglo families for years.
He said he'd heard rumors that La Raza was trying to organize some of the Latinos in Garden City.
I explained that some of us thought that was why the Sheriff had created such a large body of Reserves.
In times gone by, the Sheriff's office typically had maybe 30 Reserve Deputies and only used them for special events, usually directing traffic.
Our fighting force was large, consisting of the 36 Tejanos and 36 Tejano Amazons.
There were the 8 of us, make that 7, Rachel was going to watch the kids.
There was Jason and Karen, plus 2 hired hands and their wives on each farm.
The soybeans were converted to biodiesel and meal, some of the corn became alcohol for E85 and bourbon and we had a total of 90 acres of gardens and canned a fair amount of produce.
We were all but energy independent, purchasing only propane, a little gas to blend E85 and coal when we could get it.
With our wells we could irrigate in dry years and don't forget the livestock.
Horse sales were improving now that peoples' tractors began to wear out.
About the only thing we didn't have was June's fire engine, Yellowstone erupted before she got the purchase made.
June found a used pumper from the same place she found the engine 5 years before.
We'll run the truck through the diesel repair place in Garden City and get the fuel tanks cleaned so we can use biodiesel.
I suppose we could pull the metal posts and insert them in the top of the barrier and re-string the barbed wire.
The Sheriff never had more than 30 reserves at any one time until recently.
A lot of the folks in the area know how productive our 3 farms are and how we've built large herds of livestock.
In a way, our farms are almost completely independent of the community as a whole.
When Dan came to me with the idea about merging the three farms and three corporations into one, I smelled his breath to make sure he hadn't been drinking.
I expected some resistance on their part, but Jim had spent a year in Topeka and he was surprisingly unopposed.
I explained that it would only have a marginal effect on our income because the other 2 farms also had outside sources of income.
Trying to think ahead, I suggested that we give Jason a 10% share and he could manage all 3 farms.
When they agreed, I called Marilyn and Rachel filled them in on the suggestion.
They said they'd talk to their kids and if everyone agreed they'd let me know and we could have the meeting.
Perhaps if we merged, we could consolidate our operations, after all we didn't really need 3 separate cheese operations.
I should also point out that we kept an eye on the bulletin boards in town and whenever we saw some something we could use, like another freezer, etc. we bought it if it worked ok.
Something like pinto beans will keep forever, but you have to soak them longer because they dry out unless you seal them in plastic bags, which we didn't.
We didn't have a lot of the rolls of seal-a-meal bags left and I hadn't seen them in the store for a long time.
In fact I was surprised we could get toilet paper, but that was one of the first manufacturing plants reopened.
I think there's probably enough to do that and Randy rolled up the barbed and woven wire and stored it too.
In the process, we'd gained about 10 acres of land, or would, by converting the 2 roads back to farm use.
And, by eliminating one the 2 fences at the end of 2 sections, we'd gain plenty of extra steel posts and fence wire.
MPR Ranch would be its own little kingdom away from the daily strife besetting the Country.
We decided that we'd have Tom contact everyone he knew in any branch of service and see what he could do about getting some pedestal mounts and more of the machineguns.
Rather than try to acquire Mk 19s, we'd buy LAW rockets, if we could get them.
Only developmental models were available, anyway... the project was dropped in 2007.
To handle the project, we'd get a construction loan from the bank and then pay it off once the barrier wall was completed.
We figured to follow along behind the contractor by about a month and put up one roll of pig wire and 3 stands of barbed wire.
There really isn't anything such as an impenetrable barrier, but a 7' high concrete and wire barrier sure would slow anyone down who decided they wanted on the farm.
You can pull out fence a whole lot faster than you can put it in and we started our people on the project immediately.
They were pulling the steel fence posts and the wood posts and coiling the wire.
We figured to cut up the wood posts for our furnaces; the creosote was well leeched out.
Generally concrete isn't something you pour during the winter, but the weather was actually agreeable and they were making good progress.
So much so that they nearly caught up to our guys and they had to hurry.
While they wouldn't stop a tank or a bulldozer, they would stop a semi-tractor.
Being married into this family had introduced me to what seemed to be an endless cycle.
We'd prepare for the worst and hope for the best, but believe me when I tell you best must have taken a wrong turn in Albuquerque and got lost.
Tom said he'd try to get more of the medium and heavy machine guns, but he wasn't too sure he could pull it off; most of the fellas he knew in the Army had retired.
Pedestals could be manufactured right here in town, we had one that the machine shop could use for a pattern.
The military had intended to replace the Mark 19s with the M307 and while there weren't any of the 307s available, nor could we afford the ammo, the Mark 19s were a different story.
They cost us about 10 ounces of gold each and only one type of ammo was available, the M430 cartridges.
The HEDP M430 cartridge, joined with M16A2 links, is the standard round for the MK 19.
The impact-type round penetrates 2 inches of steel armor at 0-degree obliquity and inflicts personnel casualties in the target area.
It arms between 18 to 30 meters and has a casualty radius of 15 meters.
We had two of the Mark 19s, which we mounted on the two Hummers that already had the gun mounts cut out of the roofs.
The Ma Deuces weren't hard to get, the military had never really fully replaced them with the M312s.
The M240 was still in inventory and we bought 6 more of those, the B models.
We had about 8 too many of the M249s, they worked good until they jammed and then they were just exactly what Semper Fi said they were, a piece of chit.
While the military had phased out the M72 LAW in favor of the Ml 36, AT-4, during Iraqi Freedom they found the new weapons to be too cumbersome in MOUT operations and re-introduced the LAW rocket.
We had enough of those that the standard issue was 2 rockets per person with extras being carried in the pickups.
We wouldn't be up against tanks if we were attacked and a LAW rocket could destroy the average vehicle.
We just put in a median barrier all the way around the 3 farms and added the fence on top of it.
It won't stop a tank, but I don't believe we're going to have to go up against those.
We upgraded a bit and now have 8 of them plus a total of 10 of the .30 caliber machine guns.
There are two ways to look at it, assume you can buy what you need when trouble comes or buy it before and hope you never have to use it.
An H-1 Alpha Hummer would maintain patrols around the farm 24/7, commencing the summer of '23.
They were old models; AMC stopped building the H-1 after the 2006 model year and converted the production line to building the military vehicles.
These 2 vehicles were special; they were transitional vehicles and had the military diesel engine and electrical system and therefore the correct voltage for regular SINCGARS radios.
Used military vehicles were on the market, but they were nearly worn out.
We bid on 12 of them at a government auction, brought them back to Garden City and had them completely rebuilt after which we installed the Ma Deuces.
Military HMMWVs aren't available to the public because they don't meet DOT standards for road vehicles, thus the complete rebuild to make them road legal.
Of course, you know who was driving the Hummers, our wives; and we old war dogs were manning the machine guns.
Even Rachel, it really seemed unlikely we actually have to shoot the guns.
The United States may have stopped the Mexican Army dead in its tracks, but they didn't stop the Mexicans.
Digitalized tiger stripe using four soft earth tones consisting of tan, grey, green and blue colors.
Even the Navy went to a new BDU in 2008, but its colors were modified to reflect the water environment.
In 2011, the military changed to MultiCam and none of our uniforms reflected the change.
SFC Randy Shughart was armed with an Ml 4 rifle when he and MSGT Gary Gordon were dropped in to protect the crew of the 2nd Blackhawk Down.
He wasn't responsible for the M9, which was a Congressionally-directed NonDevelopmental Initiative to standardize DOD with NATO and field one handgun for all United States armed services.
Unfortunately, the matching pistol, the Px4 Storm doesn't, 9mm and 40S&W only.
The bad guys never come when you expect them, they almost always come when you aren't ready, hence the patrols.
If you ever pulled guard duty on a holiday, you know how lonesome it can get.
Nevertheless, we kept it up and patrols were roving on Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and even Christmas Day.
God, where did the time go it wasn't that long ago that we got back from Texas; and then I realized it had been over a year.
I calculated the cost, $1,478,400 at $35 per lineal foot of block not counting the foundation; and, that was only a 6' high wall.
The median only cost us about $500,000 in round numbers, but we did most of the work and the contractor only moved his slip form machine that he used to pour a continuous median.
If the state had put it in, it probably would have cost $10 million a mile, you know how the government is, 4 workers with 3 leaning on shovels.
We patrolled inside the wall and kept the gates closed, except during the summer.
We had a total of 8 gates, a front and back gate for each of the old farms plus a north and south end gate.
We were beginning to feel foolish, probably because Garden City, Lakin and MPR Ranch hadn't been attacked.
Every time someone came up with a better solution, somebody else came up with an alternative.
I don't really know, they've talked about taking back their Country since about 1966 when they formed the Brown Beret Movement.
La raza or La Raza Mexicana is a term which Mexicans commonly use to denote mestizo (mixed European and Native Indian) ancestry.
Outside of Mexico, the term La Raza has also been adopted by members of other countries to recognize Hispanic heritage as one single race.
Santa Anna ceded Texas and Mexico ceded Arizona, California, Nevada, Utah and portions of New Mexico and Colorado in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
We bought the remainder of New Mexico and Arizona with the Gadsden Purchase for $10 million.
We didn't of course and now we were sporadically fighting with Hispanic guerillas.
They hadn't hit Kansas because they hadn't defeated Texas, New Mexico, Arizona and California.
If they ever did, we'd end up in a pitched battle trying to save our farms; which is why I told Gunny we'd probably be running patrols until we died.
New Mexico was the 47th state and Arizona the 48th, admitted to the union in January and February of 1912.
We all took a week off while the fields were plowed and readied them when they turned to farming with the Clydesdales again.
Meanwhile, south of the border, down Mexico way, and across the Gulf from Louisiana, the governments of Mexico and Venezuela were hatching a plot.
They were shipping it to Russia and Nationalist China, in ex671 change for modern weapons and munitions.
The United States was not far away from getting a dose of its own medicine.
Mexico had raised an Army of 2 million this time and Venezuela had turned its oil into a powerful navy.
That hot fiery Latin tempter had been replaced by a coolly reasoned plan.
Venezuela wasn't as populous as Mexico and couldn't raise a fighting force of near the size of Mexico's.
Mexico supplied the FX-05 rifles, Russia the ships and China the electronics.
The ships they bought included 6 newly constructed Kirov class cruisers, 18 new constructed Sovremenny class destroyers and 18 of the Gepard class frigates.
Mexico replaced the downed fighter aircraft with more of the same and got the Chinese to teach them fighter tactics.
Russia also sold them a fleet of new AN-12 Cubs, their equivalent to our C-130.
They were slightly improved; Russian hadn't built any Cubs since the '70s.
Although Russia hadn't had much luck building nuclear subs, their diesel electric boats were magnificent especially using modern technology.
All of the construction was ongoing while the United States considered it appropriate to nuke Mexico.
Satellite photos showed Mexico building massive hangers and a new port facility for the military.
None of the military preparations Mexico and Venezuela were making went unnoticed.
The United States was in a very difficult position, the military had been cut, another peace dividend, and faced with massive devastation from first the war and later Yellowstone, Congress had continued to cut back on the acquisition of aircraft and slowed other programs like the conversion of the Ml A2 Abrams to Ml A3 models.
Faced with aircraft accumulating hours, they were only building enough of the F-35s to replace retiring aircraft and no more of the costly F-22 Raptor.
We only built 16 of the Virginia class submarines; the last one was started in 2009.
No new reactors had been licensed in several years and when licenses expired, they weren't renewed.
Substantial portions of the United States supply of clean coal were buried another several hundred feet by Yellowstone and we lacked the manufacturing capacity to build solar.
A significant portion of the United States electrical supply was now generated by wind turbines and natural gas supplied plants.
The only supply of gasoline generally available was E85 and it was expensive.
Diesel fuel had generally been replaced by biodiesel but there weren't many cars on the roads these days.
Anything that couldn't be converted to diesel or E85 probably didn't get driven unless the owner had money to burn; gasoline remained in the $10 a gallon range.
We weren't the breadbasket of the world any longer; we were doing good to feed ourselves.
We had all those Nimitz class carriers, the Ford under construction, Guided Missile Cruisers and Destroyers and our submarine fleet.
Not to mention the thing that really made people fear and hate us, our nuclear weapons.
We'd now used them 3 times, against Japan, against the People's Republic of China and against Mexico.
If anything good had come out of what had happened in the 21st Century, it could be said that we quit trying to export Democracy.
We kept our Navy close to their home ports and didn't rush off every time someone else in the world had a problem.
We had enough on our plate with La Raza and NOA picking away piece by piece.
I have always been fond of the West African proverb Speak softly and carry a big stick; you will go far.
This is the first known use of this phrase, which became a signature motto of Roosevelt's after he used it in a speech as Vice-President at the Minnesota State Fair.
There is a homely adage which runs Speak softly and carry a big stick; you will go far.
If the American nation will speak softly and yet build and keep at a pitch of highest training a thoroughly efficient Navy, the Monroe Doctrine will go far.
Any Country whose people conduct themselves well can count upon our hearty friendship.
If a nation shows that it knows how to act with reasonable efficiency and decency in social and political matters, if it keeps order and pays its obligations, it need fear no interference from the United States.
Chronic wrongdoing, or an impotence which results in a general loosening of the ties of civilized society, may in America, as elsewhere, ultimately require intervention by some civilized nation, and in the Western Hemisphere the adherence of the United States to the Monroe Doctrine may force the United States, however reluctantly, in flagrant cases of such wrongdoing or impotence, to the exercise of an international police power.
In the first place we should insist that if the immigrant who comes here in good faith becomes an American and assimilates himself to us, he shall be treated on an exact equality with everyone else, for it is an outrage to discriminate against any such man because of creed, or birthplace, or origin.
Any man who says he is an American, but something else also, isn't an American at all.
We have room for but one language here, and that is the English language...and we have room for but one sole loyalty and that is a loyalty to the American people.
No man is above the law and no man is below it; nor do we ask any man's permission when we require him to obey it.
If there is not the war, you don't get the great general; if there is not a great occasion, you don't get a great statesman; if Lincoln had lived in a time of peace, no one would have known his name.
The military had been in constant flux, Reagan built it up and Clinton tore it down.
The Defense Department had this concept they called the Objective Force Warrior.
The bottom line was they wanted to turn every soldier into a computer console running the Windows operating system.
He'd have a gun to shoot around corners, a TV screen to watch movies when there wasn't much fighting and about 10 rounds of ammo.
With all the junk he'd be carrying, he couldn't carry much more than that.
That $85 ACU would be replaced by a fancy suit that had microclimate controls.
They wanted to give him a weapon that was a 25mm cannon and a 5.56mm kinetic force weapon.
The government got it into its head that combat casualties were unacceptable.
During WW II, the total was about 61 million fatalities and didn't take into account the 3 million Indians who died due to famine in 1943.
During 8 years of Vietnam, the United States lost about 58,000 soldiers, sailors, Marines and airmen.
I think that was an improvement over Vietnam and we were in many cases fighting the same enemy, insurgents, freedom fighters or whatever they called themselves.
Our fatalities may have been lower if our weapons killed with one shot.
They could make them in their United States plant along with USP Tactical's.
H&K still made a 7.62x51 mm rifle that with lightening could make a respectable main battle rifle.
In the tradition of the G3 automatic rifle, roller locked accuracy reaches its full potential in the MSG90A1 sniper rifle.
Taking the legendary HK manufacturing processes to their fullest extent, the MSG90A1 is capable of minute of angle accuracy, combined with the best features found on the PSG1, only with less weight, a removable scope platform, and open sights for field expediency.
At only 14 lbs, the MSG90A1 is also a lower cost alternative to the PSG1, with no compromise in accuracy or reliability.
And, bless their hearts, Springfield Armory couldn't keep up with demand as it was.
On the morning of August 6, 2024 Tom and Elle were on patrol and we were baling hay.
I told Julia I'd appreciate it if she could bring us a cold drink around 10am.
We shut down the engine on the baler and I could see her riding this way, about a quarter mile off.
The weapon fires about one round a second and we generally used short bursts 4-6 rounds.
There was no mistaking the sound of Tom firing the machinegun or the return fire from the AK-47s.
I yelled Red Alert south gate into my radio and John and I began to un-harness the horses.
In the time it took us to get to the gate, people had piled into to the surplus Hummers and made it there ahead of us.
The Dragon Skin doesn't protect your face and you couldn't recognize them if you hadn't known who they were.
John and I loaded the bodies in the back of a pickup and we took them back to Mom's house.
They roared out the gate with 3 Hummer's, one going west on the road, a second east and the third straight ahead.
We left the bloody Hummer sit, the Sheriff would probably want to examine it.
We'll run those tire tracks but they might not mean a lot unless we know what kind of vehicle they were on.
Gunny, Dan and Hank might have been warriors once, but that was going on 20 years ago.
Juan was younger, but crippled and more often than not he drove and let Satina man the gun.
All were in their 60s excluding Juan and Salina and Hank wasn't much good to anyone because of Rachel.
We decided to have a dinner in the large Quonset hut that doubled as a school and a shelter and give them all the bad news at the same time.
These were top ranking NCOs and we hoped they'd understand our decision.
If they didn't that was just too bad, they bought the Hummers in the name of the corporation and collectively, we held a majority of the voting stock.
We've talked it over and all of you are in your 60s, and a bit slower than when you were in your prime.
I think what happened to Tom and Elle should make that perfectly clear.
The Sheriff recommended doubling our patrols until this business is over.
None of us want to seem ungrateful but if fighting does break out, it's for young men and women while the more experienced among the group handling staff duties.
They put their own spin on what we told them and there was nothing we could say to change their attitudes.
Tom was dead too and to tell the truth, Hank might as well be, he spent all of his time with Rachel.
Every day, they got their fishing tackle around a left early in the morning.
We harvested the soybeans and the corn and the ladies put up the potatoes.
Sometimes they took Mom and Marilyn and I can't once remember them bringing home any fish they caught.
Dan's answer was ambiguous at best; a sucker could be a fish or a gullible person.
It would make more sense for them to have a machinegun if they were fishing for men.
The compromise satisfied no one, though it was a particularly sharp embarrassment for Khrushchev and the Soviet Union because the withdrawal of American missiles was not made public.
This was considered by John F Kennedy but cooler heads would prevail and used his patience to his advantage and ran a successful quarantine on Cuba.
Massive Mexican buildup, La Raza and NOA raising hell and Russia backing the whole thing with a threat to use nuclear weapons.
I wonder who wrote the script, Robert A Heinlein, Isaac Asimov or Arthur C Clarke.
Because no one knew for sure, all we could do was fight the fight that came our way.
You didn't know your grandfather when he was your age, but he knew you and remembered when he was your age.
People never really change as a whole and what our father's did we'll end up doing, eventually.
Our once proud nation was a shambles what with the pandemic, the war, Yellowstone and yet another war.
Apocalypse, you saw the Country disassemble itself, but that was Mother Nature taking her revenge, or something.
We maintained a 2 vehicle patrol, one carrying an Mk 19 and the other a Ma Deuce.
Gunny and I weren't having much luck, there were too many vehicles to check and we started to write down license numbers of the vehicles we eliminated.
It was quite a job and June set up a spreadsheet that sorted the license numbers to help us out.
I meant sucker as in a gullible human being, but maybe that wasn't the right word.
Stupid, would be more correct, but I didn't know any fish by that name.
The only reason whoever did this thing got away with it was because the Sheriff didn't have time to check the tires on 3,000 motor vehicles.
We were guessing, we didn't know how many vehicles were actually running or if the perps were actually from Kearny County.
We eventually exhausted our search of Kearny County and flipped a coin to see if we'd go to Hamilton or Finney County.
We've checked all of Kearny County and are nearly done with Hamilton County.
He said he would have joined us sooner, had he not had to switch houses with Ray.
Ray immediately set out to put in a bomb shelter next to the big house that was the same as the shelter Randy and June built.
I can only guess what he was thinking, maybe that the United States would try to call Russia's bluff, which quite naturally, made one wonder if Russia was really bluffing.
Our forces were at DEFCON 2, which was only a heartbeat away from launch.
It was better to die free than live in slavery, JFK wasn't bluffing and neither were the Russians now.
Add the license numbers of all vehicles you eliminate to it and June will update it tonight.
When we found the second vehicle, the Sheriff said, could be but, keep looking.
Sometimes, a CSI is able to find tracks where a vehicle turned and compute the wheelbase.
We kept looking and only found one more vehicle with the same tires, another Yukon.
We felt vindicated until the Sheriff told us that the owners of the vehicles had iron tight alibis.
Except, in this case the case wasn't cold, the vehicle owners, all 3 of them, had alibis, but indicated that their SUVs had been parked and could have been used by someone else.
The Kansas Bureau of Investigation was brought in and took impressions of the tires on all 3 vehicles and got a match to the car belonging to the wife of the GCPD officer.
The evidence was a small cut in the right rear tire and they had the vehicle but not the perpetrator.
All of the vehicles had been cleaned several times by the carwash to wash the salt off and clean the interior and KBI couldn't find any fingerprints, cigarette butts or even a gum wrapper.
We got the bourbon bottled and distributed and the new batch in the barrels.
All of the biodiesel tanks are full up and we're keeping 10,000 gallons of virgin oil in reserve.
Oh, by the way, when the Sheriff shows up for another case of bourbon, only charge him $25.
He hadn't cussed a lot, Rachel wouldn't allow it, but the same couldn't be said for our other Marine.
The older he got, the more Gunny cussed, almost as if the cussing made up for his advancing age.
Some of the muscle had turned to flab and his eyes lost their flexibility.
They posted a $25,000 reward for information leading to the arrest and conviction of the people responsible to killing Tom and Elle.
Ray need an air filter and blast valves but the internet address he had for Utah Shelter Systems didn't work.
Their waiting period for a complete shelter was now over a year but they'd ship parts right away.
Gunny and Marilyn finally had a shelter, they'd move all the supplies out of the shelter Paul had built and they only thing they lacked was the air filter.
At this point we didn't know if the United States would succumb to Russia's threat and it was better to be prepared than to wish you were.
The Japanese hadn't attacked and the United States wasn't at war with anyone.
They must have realized that it was just a matter of time, but in 1941, no one had nuclear weapons or airplanes that could reach the United States mainland.
Intercontinental missiles existed only in the mind of Wernher von Braun.
They didn't begin the A-4 rocket program until 1942 and Germany never succeeded in developing nuclear weapons although some claim the Japanese did.
Wolfgang Hirschfeld was radioman on U-109 under Korvettenkapitan Hans-Georg Fischer and then under Kapitanleutnant Heinrich Bleichrodt when they hunted in American waters during the late phases of Operation Paukenschlag, or Drumbeat.
At the end of the war, he was Oberfunkmeister aboard U-234, the converted Type X-B mine-layer on her way to Tokyo, and in her belly was a vast array of highly secret people and materiel.
Personnel aboard included a General der Luftwaffe , who was to take over the Luftwaffe liaison duties in Tokyo, a Naval Fleet Judge Advocate to try cases of German traitors in Japan, Dr.
Unknown to most, Japan test fired their first nuclear device a week before the Americans test fired theirs.
Japan merely lacked the fissionable material to make the bomb and U-234 was bringing it to the Empire.
Zippe invented the Zippe-Type centrifuge which has now become the easiest way to make fuel for reactors as well as weapons of terrifying power.
In his first ever broadcast interview he told BBC how he was kidnapped soon after the end of WWII and held prisoner in the Soviet Union where he was ordered to find an easy way of producing uranium's rare U-235 isotope.
Having done as he was asked he was freed by the Soviets only for the Americans to order him to repeat the process for their benefit.
Years later his plans were stolen by the Pakistani government who sold the secrets of the Zippe-Type on to North Korea and Iran allowing them to develop their nuclear industry.
Another German scientist sold his plans to Saddam Hussein who used them as the basis for his attempt to acquire the bomb.
Zippe remained philosophical about the chaos his invention had caused around the globe.
I overheard Jim and some of the others talking and they seem to think we have some of kind of manifest destiny.
Now, technically, Manifest Destiny is the belief that the United States had a mission to expand, spreading its form of democracy and freedom.
Originally a political catch phrase of the 19th century, Manifest Destiny eventually became a standard historical term, often used as a synonym for the territorial expansion of the United States across North America towards the Pacific Ocean.
That understanding of the term probably got us to the position we're in.
When I joined the Army, even before the turn of the century, it was the fulfillment of all of my boyish hopes and dreams.
And like the old soldier of that ballad, I now close my military career and just fade away, an old soldier who tried to do his duty as God gave him the light to see that duty.
No human being could fail to be deeply moved by such a tribute as this, coming from a profession I have served so long and a people I have loved so well.
But this award is not intended primarily for a personality, but to symbolize a great moral codethe code of conduct and chivalry of those who guard this beloved land of culture and ancient descent.
For all eyes and for all time, it is an expression of the ethics of the American soldier.
That I should be integrated in this way with so noble an ideal arouses a sense of pride and yet of humility which will be with me always.
They are your rallying point to build courage when courage seems to fail, to regain faith when there seems to be little cause for faith, to create hope when hope becomes forlorn.
Unhappily, I possess neither that eloquence of diction, that poetry of imagination, nor that brilliance of metaphor to tell you all that they mean.
The unbelievers will say they are but words, but a slogan, but a flamboyant phrase.
Every pedant, every demagogue, every cynic, every hypocrite, every troublemaker, and, I am sorry to say, some others of an entirely different character, will try to downgrade them even to the extent of mockery and ridicule.
They mold you for your future roles as the custodians of the nation's defense.
They make you strong enough to know when you are weak, and brave enough to face yourself when you are afraid.
They give you a temperate will, a quality of imagination, a vigor of the emotions, a freshness of the deep springs of life, a temperamental predominance of courage over timidity, an appetite for adventure over love of ease.
They create in your heart the sense of wonder, the unfailing hope of what next, and the joy and inspiration of life.
My estimate of him was formed on the battlefields many, many years ago, and has never changed.
I regarded him then, as I regard him now, as one of the world's noblest figures; not only as one of the finest military characters, but also as one of the most stainless.
In his youth and strength, his love and loyalty, he gave all that mortality can give.
He has written his own history and written it in red on his enemy's breast.
But when I think of his patience under adversity, of his courage under fire, and of his modesty in victory, I am filled with an emotion of admiration I cannot put into words.
He belongs to history as furnishing one of the greatest examples of successful patriotism.
He belongs to posterity as the instructor of future generations in the principles of liberty and freedom.
He belongs to the present, to us, by his virtues and by his achievements.
In twenty campaigns, on a hundred battlefields, around a thousand campfires, I have witnessed that enduring fortitude, that patriotic self-abnegation, and that invincible determination which have carved his statue in the hearts of his people.
From one end of the world to the other, he has drained deep the chalice of courage.
As I listened to those songs of the glee club, in memory's eye I could see those staggering columns of the First World War, bending under soggy packs on many a weary march, from dripping dusk to drizzling dawn, slogging ankle deep through mire of shell-pocked roads; to form grimly for the attack, blue-lipped, covered with sludge and mud, chilled by the wind and rain, driving home to their objective, and for many, to the judgment seat of God.
I do not know the dignity of their birth, but I do know the glory of their death.
They died unquestioning, uncomplaining, with faith in their hearts, and on their lips the hope that we would go on to victory.
Always their blood, and sweat, and tears, as they saw the way and the light.
And twenty years after, on the other side of the globe, against the filth of dirty foxholes, the stench of ghostly trenches, the slime of dripping dugouts, those boiling suns of the relentless heat, those torrential rains of devastating storms, the loneliness and utter desolation of jungle trails, the bitterness of long separation of those they loved and cherished, the deadly pestilence of tropic disease, the horror of stricken areas of war.
The code which those words perpetuate embraces the highest moral laws and will stand the test of any ethics or philosophies ever promulgated for the uplift of mankind.
Its requirements are for the things that are right, and its restraints are from the things that are wrong.
The soldier, above all other men, is required to practice the greatest act of religious training sacrifice.
In battle and in the face of danger and death, he discloses those divine attributes which his Maker gave when he created man in his own image.
No physical courage and no brute instinct can take the place of the Divine help which alone can sustain him.
However horrible the incidents of war may be, the soldier who is called upon to offer and to give his life for his Country, is the noblest development of mankind.
The thrust into outer space of the satellite, spheres and missiles marked the beginning of another epoch in the long story of mankind the chapter of the space age.
In the five or more billions of years the scientists tell us it has taken to form the earth, in the three or more billion years of development of the human race, there has never been a greater, a more abrupt or staggering evolution.
We deal now not with things of this world alone, but with the illimitable distances and as yet unfathomed mysteries of the universe.
And through all this welter of change and development your mission remains fixed, determined, inviolable.
Everything else in your professional career is but corollary to this vital dedication.
All other public purpose, all other public projects, all other public needs, great or small, will find others for their accomplishments; but you are the ones who are trained to fight.
Yours is the profession of arms, the will to win, the sure knowledge that in war there is no substitute for victory, that if you lose, the Nation will be destroyed, that the very obsession of your public service must be Duty, Honor, Country.
Others will debate the controversial issues, national and international, which divide men's minds.
For a century and a half you have defended, guarded and protected its hallowed traditions of liberty and freedom, of right and justice.
Let civilian voices argue the merits or demerits of our processes of government.
Whether our strength is being sapped by deficit financing indulged in too long, by federal paternalism grown too mighty, by power groups grown too arrogant, by politics grown too corrupt, by crime grown too rampant, by morals grown too low, by taxes grown too high, by extremists grown too violent; whether our personal liberties are as firm and complete as they should be.
These great national problems are not for your professional participation or military solution.
You are the leaven which binds together the entire fabric of our national system of defense.
From your ranks come the great captains who hold the Nation's destiny in their hands the moment the war tocsin sounds.
On the contrary, the soldier above all other people prays for peace, for he must suffer and bear the deepest wounds and scars of war.
Their memory is one of wondrous beauty, watered by tears and coaxed and caressed by the smiles of yesterday.
I listen then, but with thirsty ear, for the witching melody of faint bugles blowing reveille, of far drums beating the long roll.
In my dreams I hear again the crash of guns, the rattle of musketry, the strange, mournful mutter of the battlefield.
But I want you to know that when I cross the river, my last conscious thoughts will be of the Corps, and the Corps, and the Corps.
Patton deliberately cultivated a flashy, distinctive image in the belief that this would motivate his troops.
He was usually seen wearing a highly polished helmet, riding pants, revolver (a Colt .45 and later the addition of a .357 Smith and Wesson), and high cavalry boots.
American soldiers respected Patton as a general and as a soldier because he inspired patriotic feeling, and because the coarse toughness of his image and character appeared well-suited to the conditions of battle.
His theatrics were admired by many, so much so that upon his death upwards of 20,000 soldiers volunteered to be pall bearers at his funeral.
It didn't come to blows, for all of MacArthur's medals, Gunny was a Chesty Puller fan and I liked Patton.
The only thing wrong with the list is it omits names, like Leonidas I We can't include any heroes from the Trojan War, because it could just be a Myth.
Oh foreigner, give a message to the Lacedaemonians that here lie we, their words obeying.
I'm sure a few cases of some kind of 7.62x51 mm ammo and some .45ACP that fell off the truck.
The TOW 2 weapon system is composed of a reusable launcher, a missile guidance set, and sight system.
The base, under the oversight of the Commander Naval Air Reserve Forces, now hosts a variety of fighter/attack and airlift units from the reserve components of Navy, Marine Corps and Air Force.
Airfield operating procedures and equipment reflect a combination of service requirements, although as the operators of the local ATC system, DON imposes Navy procedures as the operations standard.
Careful monitoring of all patients regardless of the condition being treated is needed, they say.
We were waiting at the Lakin airport with a semi when the C-130J-30 landed.
It seemed like a lot of pallets for what Top described they had with them.
They began to restart the outboard engines on the Hercules and the moment Top cleared the ramp, it was being folded up into the tail of the plane.
The weapons came from the Army, my friend Tom had a few contacts in supply and we managed a pair of Mk-19's, several Ma Deuces and M240s.
We returned to the farm and Hank and Marilyn were there and introductions were made all around.
Cynthia, 'call me Cindy', was anxious to see their new home and lunch was a hurried affair.
Marilyn and June had apparently cleaned out Tom and Elle's personal things from the house and someone had restocked everything.
The girls started putting things away and we took Top on a tour of the farm.
He was generally impressed with our state of preparations, but pointed out that the fence wouldn't stop a determined opponent.
There is 7.62mm, 5.56mm, .45ACP, 9mm, and belted ammo for your machineguns in all 4 calibers, 40mm, .50 caliber, 7.62mm and 5.56mm.
They were supposed to go to Hawthorne to be dismantled but there was nothing wrong with them and I diverted a few.
There aren't enough Claymores to protect your entire perimeter, but there are a few of those.
Our electricity is provided by that big wind turbine, it has a 2mw capacity.
I was going to object when Dan and Gunny presented the Corporation with a bill for $2 million for additional arms until I found out what we got for the money.
TOW missiles cost the military about $8. million alone, not counting the 6 tripods.
Top explained how over a period of years things came up short in shipments, but strangely, never over.
He had a private storage bin in Barstow practically crammed to the roof with things he'd gathered.
He explained that when a friend would call him up and want something you could only get from the military, he could draw on his 'personal' inventory.
Around 1925, cumshaw became a navy term for a tip or gift used to obtain illegal imports and exports by unofficial or devious means.
In the military, cumshaw is still a slang term for materials that are misappropriated.
A ""cumshaw artist"" is a person who is adept at getting unauthorized projects done by bartering surplus items to obtain services or goods in short supply.
I was satisfied that we got our money's worth, about $10 million worth of government only goods for $2 million.
It might be wrong to do this, but I didn't much care for the government and its employees anyway.
Besides, if the Mexican Army made it to Kansas, it probably meant the government wasn't doing its job of providing for the common defense.
The TOW missiles were the latest design but had been manufactured before the war.
What am I saying if the ATF showed up now, we'd just plant them and see what they grew.
We had enough weapons we could even arm the horses, but that would require some sort of trigger adapter.
Reduced to fighting a conventional war against an enemy that was numerically superior, our whiz bang technical devices weren't any better than what the Chinese built for the Mexicans, probably using American technology.
Just when we thought we'd fought them to a draw, the Venezuelan Navy showed up.
Maybe Russia built the ships, but the Chinese equipped them and they were nearly equal to our Ticonderoga and Arleigh Burke classes.
When we brought in a CSG, a Kilo class submarine silently rose from the bottom and launched 6 torpedoes at the flattop.
The Venezuelans had as many submarines as we had flattops and a one for one exchange wasn't exactly even.
Then they'd approach the surface, extend their snorkels and refresh their air supply.
By the time one of our ASW units could show up, they'd swapped out the air, moved and set down on the bottom in a new position.
Their favorite place to hide was near our oil rigs in the Gulf; hence they didn't show up on our MAD detectors.
There were approximately 3,000 oil platforms under United States control in the Gulf of Mexico, giving the Kilos plenty of places to hide.
They didn't mean we couldn't set the tripods up in the back of a pickup, anchor it in place and carry reloads, so that's just exactly what we did.
The downside was it tied up 6 pickups and the upside was that we could move the TOWs wherever they were needed in just a few minutes.
They can trace their roots to Texas as far back as the Texas Revolution.
They wanted us to help them prevent the Mexicans from crossing the Rio Grande into Big Bend National Park.
Hank and Gunny have done most of the training so our forces are more Marines than Army Infantry.
Over the years we've had an incursion or two and it's sort of a requirement that they be able to protect themselves.
My two boys are Sheriff's Deputies and nearly every adult on the farm has a Reserve Deputy position.
If the Sheriff called us all up, the farm would basically be unprotected.
The C-130J modification includes a two-crew member flight station, upgraded Allison AE 2100D3 engines, enhanced performance, and improved reliability and maintainability.
The C-130J/J-30 integrated digital technology providing the capability to airdrop in instrument conditions without zone markers, as a baseline feature of the aircraft.
When the high resolution ground mapping capability of the APN-241 Low Power Color Radar is coupled with the dual INS/GPS and digital mapping systems, the C-130J/J-30 provides single-ship or formation all weather aerial delivery.
This means the entire J/J-30 fleet will be all weather airdrop capable.
C-130Js will be delivered as weather , electronic combat , and tanker configured aircraft.
With its 3,000 nautical mile range, increased speed, and air refueling capability, it complements the C-5/C-17 airlift team.
The J-30 can work in the strategic, as well as tactical or intratheater, environment.
No longer is it necessary to expend scarce heavy lift resources on strategic contingency requirements.
This situation could result in ZEBRA being set slower than had the ship been at material condition YOKE before the emergency.
Large ships should therefore consider this when changing material condition.
They commissioned the Gerald R Ford CVN78, John F Kennedy CVN79 and the Enterprise CVN80.
I checked what Top brought; we have explosives, detonators, and our choice of weapons.
That settled that, although I ended up sleeping in a guest bedroom for over a week.
I had no idea when Randy and I started this preparation business it would turn into what it had.
Our second husbands were career soldiers who didn't seem to realize their careers were over.
I told her I thought the American experiment was changing, if not coming to an end.
A submarine belonging to either Mexico or Venezuela had sunk one of our super carriers.
The spread of torpedoes had stitched a row of holes from the bow to the stern and the carrier didn't have a chance.
We could have nuked Mexico City and put an end to it, but the government in its infinite wisdom used tactical nukes and only directly on the Mexican forces across our border.
California had contained the Lassa fever and the CDC supplied vaccine in time to halt the epidemic, but only after tens of thousands had died.
After the war, they never rebuilt all of the factories that were destroyed.
They started to rebuild some but then Yellowstone erupted, diverting resources.
Medical supplies had become very difficult to find and if you could, they were impossibly expensive.
Kansas farmers had risen to the need, although Yellowstone put many of them out of business for good.
Almost none of the canned goods in the grocery stores were registered with the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture anymore.
Most of those were in canning jars that I had acquired early on until the supply dried up.
Ironically, everyone knew who made the bourbon by now and nobody cared, except the ATF and the Kansas Department of Revenue.
It was one thing to defend the home place, but a different matter to go on another adventure looking for trouble.
I let him have it with both barrels and from the phone call; Marilyn must have done the same to Gunny.
Maybe whoever killed them realized what they were up against when the Mk 19 started firing.
I didn't take being overruled badly, but June was really upset by the proposal that we go to Texas and fight.
I believe in my heart she got together with Marilyn and they staged a coup of sorts.
At our age, Gunny and I couldn't afford to start over, and when he caved in, I gave up.
It didn't seem to matter to her, she was angry and I spent a week in a spare bedroom.
The news on the TV wasn't good; inch by inch, the Mexican Army was seizing control of their former territories.
One commentator speculated they were using an old map and wouldn't stop until they'd reclaimed every square inch of Spanish soil.
The DOD released satellite photos to the media showing Russian Topol M missiles on mobile launch stands.
The media also was granted tours of Cheyenne Mountain and given access to our missile silos so they could verify we were ready to respond, if Russia launched.
Both Lakin and Garden City were north of the dry river bed, but it helped define their boundaries, especially Garden City.
At the very least, the 5 miles of land between the Arkansas River and the MPR Ranch would be overrun with military.
When they saw our military hardware, they might make assumptions that we couldn't live with.
We could prove we owned the HMMWVs, but not much of the rest of the military equipment.
Since its inception, the Naval War College has benefited from the contributions of officers from other services assigned to Newport as faculty members and students.
In 1886, our second class at the College included two Marine Corps officers among the twentyone students; and over the years, the Corps has sent many of its finest leaders to learn and to teach about naval warfare.
The Naval War College Review is the scholarly professional journal of all three sea services, so it is appropriate that this issue's cover features Charles Waterhouse's painting of a Marine on the black sand beach of Iwo Jima, and that several of its articles address Marine Corps topics.
The Marines have been our brothers-in-arms since the birth of our services more than two centuries ago.
I come from a big family that included one brother a year older than I and another a year younger.
But even though we spent a lot of energy trying to beat the tar out of each other, we always stood together against the kids up the block or any other outsiders.
That's a pretty good description of how the brotherhood of the Navy and the Marine Corps operates too.
Let me recount an incident with one of my ""brother officers"" just after I had been selected for flag rank but while I was still a captain.
I had to go to the FBI Academy at Quantico, Virginia, to hear a lecture, and I was late when I drove onto the Marine Corps base that surrounds Quantico.
Passing the rifle range, I got stuck behind a car poking along at twenty-five miles per hour even though the speed limit signs authorized thirty-five miles per hour.
At the first stretch of dashed road-stripes, I accelerated and passed that car.
He immediately hit me with his high-beam headlights, began honking his horn, and tailgated me all the way through the gate at the FBI Academy.
When I parked, his car whipped in next to me, and a very agitated Marine major jumped out, introduced himself, and got right up in my face, chewing me out for speeding.
I tried to point out that I had obeyed the posted signs, but he was hearing none of that.
What particularly galled him was that I had directly disobeyed the commanding general's written order that forbade driving faster than twenty-five miles per hour in the area of the rifle range.
Indeed, as you might imagine, the conversation quickly went downhill into an argument about my lack of leadership and his lack of a brain.
It occurred to me that my brother officer's actions might be understandable if I saw them from his background, which expects everyone to know and obey orders, rules, and instructions with no exceptions or excuses.
While I might disagree about whether my driving had broken any rule, I had to admire the major's tenacity and insistence on high standards by someone he thought had exceeded the speed limit by ten miles per hour.
I like the fact that Marines set high standards for themselves and those around them, and that they consider nothing less as acceptable.
I see this on base, where Marines insist on proper salutes and happily provide lessons if a subordinate needs them, and where Marines always have properly fitted uniforms that they wear with great pride.
Sailors don't march very well, but Marines do always because of how they are trained.
When Marines complete basic training at Quantico, Parris Island, or San Diego, they can march, they can shoot, and they have a pride in themselves and the Corps that is unsurpassed anywhere in the world.
They work hard at physical readiness, and if there are one or two Marines who are overweight, they have been well hidden.
Before meeting with any outsiders, the Marines always get together, decide what their position is going to be, and never break ranks in the bureaucratic battle.
Some people might portray this as intellectual rigidity, but I can attest to its effectiveness.
He said he was tired of studies, so where he could he gave the answer as to what should be done.
He also named who was responsible and stipulated the date for that person to report back on how the job would be done.
The V-22 Osprey program has had a stake driven through its heart more times than Bela Lugosi, yet it's rising out of the coffin.
They knew a long time ago that the press could be enormously useful in bringing their story to the American public, and that the enlisted troops are any service's greatest public relations asset.
So the Marines put their people out front with all the media, where the reporters and camera crews can see them in action and it pays off.
It is more than working hard and doing your job well all of the services do that.
It's a commitment to being the best, to dedicating yourself to the Corps and its ideals.
That's why there aren't any ex-Marines, and why First to Fight isn't a motto but a sacred pledge.
Whether afloat or ashore, on famous battlefields or unnamed skirmish grounds, in heat or cold, Marines have distinguished themselves by their bravery, tenacity, love of Country, and loyalty to one another.
Here at the Naval War College, Marines have made their mark in setting high standards and fighting for the truth as they have seen it.
They have been our brothers in the quest for intellectual excellence for more than a hundred years, and I am pleased to see their contributions acknowledged in this, their scholarly journal, as well.
Stark Rear Admiral, United States Navy President, Naval War College Right after Korea in 1953 the 1st Amphibious Reconnaissance Company, FMFPAC can be credited with the birth of ""OORAH"" in the Corps.
Specifically, where it came from was when Recon Marines were aboard the Submarine USS PERCH, ASSP-313.
The Perch was an old WWII diesel boat retrofitted to carry UDT and Amphib Recon Marines.
If you remember the old war movies, whenever the boat was to dive, you heard on the PA system, ""DIVE, DIVE"", and you heard the horn sound ""AARUGHA"", like an old Model ""A"" horn.
Sometime in 1953 or 1954, 1 st Amphib Recon Marines, while on a conditioning run on land singing chants, someone imitated the ""Dive"" horn sound ""AARUGHA"", and it naturally became a Recon Warrior chant or mantra while on runs.
It is sort of like the martial arts yell and adds a positive inference to the action.
The official Marine Corps Training Reference Manual on the history of Marine Recon is titled ""AARUGHA"", giving credence on the origination of the 'Positive Response' accenting anything that is meant to be good and uniquely Marine Corps.
Wolf ""Gunny, I didn't say Marines were afraid to fight, I just asked why you didn't want to go to Texas.
The First Sergeant and Sergeant Major ranks are command-oriented, with Marines of these ranks serving as the senior enlisted Marines in a unit, charged to assist the commanding officer in matter of discipline, administration and the morale and welfare of the unit.
It turns out we actually did become Platoons in the Kansas Defense Force, Seventh Infantry Battalion, Company B , 1st and 2nd Platoons.
Top and Gunny were made 1st Lieutenants, and Hank and I Master Sergeants.
The 3rd and 4th Platoons were made up of volunteers from Lakin and Deerfield.
Everyone age 18 and up was enlisted into one of the Platoons and each Platoon had one Medic, Gunny and I had June and Top and Hank had Jim.
As Company B of the Seventh Battalion we were responsible for the Kearny County first, the Southwestern District of Kansas, second, and the whole state, third.
Contrary to popular opinion, there is one instance where an officer salutes an enlisted man first.
It is bestowed for conspicuous gallantry and intrepidity at the risk of life, above and beyond the call of duty, in actual combat against an armed enemy force.
Not all the darkness of the land, can hide the lifted eye and hand; Nor need the clanging conflict cease, to make Thee hear our cries for peace. Henry Timrod For the first time since the Mexican American War, American soldiers were fighting foreign troops on American soil.
Revolutionary War, War of 1812, Mexican American War, Civil War, Spanish American War, WW I, WW II, Korean War, Vietnam War, Desert Storm, Enduring Freedom, Iraqi Freedom, WW III and this war, the 2nd Mexican American War, a continuation of the war Mexico started and we thought we had finished.
Grenada, Panama and Somalia are excluded as being operations rather than wars.
One couldn't fault the Corps, it was the second smallest branch of service and only the Coast Guard was smaller.
Since the founding of the United States of America, there has been a special operation's unit.
First, there were Rodger's Rangers who fought with the British during the Colonial period.
Next was Mosby's Rangers who fought for the South during the Civil War.
More than 50 years ago, the United States activated the Office of Strategic Services, which consisted of three of the military branches (Navy, Army, and Army Air Force) to help defend the Country.
USSOCOM's mission is to plan, direct and execute special operations in the conduct of the War on Terrorism in order to disrupt, defeat, and destroy terrorist networks that threaten the United States, its citizens and interests worldwide.
It also organizes, trains and equips Special Operation Forces provided to geographic combatant commanders, American ambassadors and their Country teams.
Since USSOCOM's creation in 1987, the Marine Corps has been an outside factor in helping it accomplish these missions.
Now having their own Special Forces component, Marines will directly support current SOF missions and begin new missions with different purposes.
According to the mission statement, MARSOC will train and provide a fully capable Marine Special Operation Force to USSOCOM for worldwide deployments to execute assigned missions.
The MARSOC units will be capable of task organizing as scalable, tailorable and responsive special operations units from sea based platforms as well as from United States locations.
The Foreign Military Training Unit will provide tailored military combat-skills training and advisor support for identified foreign forces as well as Marines and sailors and will assist friendly host-nation forces, including naval and maritime military and par717 amilitary forces, to enable them to support their governments' internal security and stability, counter subversion, and reduce the risk of violence from internal and external threats.
The Marine Special Operations Support Group will provide combined arms planning and coordination, K-9 support, special operations communications support, comb at service support including logistics, and all-source intelligence fusion capability.
Each MSOB will consist of several Marine Special Operations Companies and be taskorganized with personnel uniquely skilled in special equipment support, intelligence and fire-support.
Elements of different units, including 4th Marine Expeditionary Brigade , will transition into needed areas of MARSOC to give it a stronger foundation in its early years.
Maybe I should point out that Marines have another distinction, The First to Die.
The term The American Rifleman undoubtedly belongs to the United States Marine Corps.
According to Top, after the SCAR-H was issued to SOCOM, it next went to the Corps.
Back in the Vietnam era the USAF was the first branch of service to adopt the Ml 6, thanks to Curtis E LeMay.
That's the reason some schools of thinking don't rule out a destruction of the Chinese military potential before the situation grows worse than it is today.
I once asked Curtis LeMay if I could get in that room, and he just gave me holy hell.
If he was alive and we still had a Strategic Air Command, we wouldn't be sitting in Kansas worrying about the Mexican Army.
Frank Lovejoy did the best job of portraying him in the movies. ... believed that overtime the Soviet Union would mellow.
Even so, American forces not only had to be strong enough to deter Soviet aggression in Europe, or anywhere else of vital interest to the US; if deterrence failed, the United States had to be ready to destroy the Soviet Union.
He intended to do this not, after but before any attack on the United States could be launched.
This was the most important single element in Eisenhower's Cold War strategy; he was not going to base American security on a strike from beyond the grave.
Eisenhower explicitly ruled out a preventive war, but not a preemptive strike.
He began to create a strategic force capable of detecting any Soviet move toward a nuclear attack.
Once detected, it might only be possible to tell the Soviets to back down or else, but if a warning was tried and failed, or if there was not enough time to warn the Kremlin, he was going to beat the enemy to the punch.
Any serious move toward launching a surprise attack would be interpreted as a casus belli.
As the most obvious and banal, it was the dramatic device of a thousand westerns at the climax, all the bad guy has to do is reach for his gun to justify the good guy drawing quicker and shooting him dead.
Otherwise we would not be in a position to use the nuclear weapon and we have got to be in the position to use that weapon.
Eisenhower was repeatedly pressed to explain what ""massive retaliation"" means, but he invariably took refuge in ambiguity, giving many people the impression that he hadn't thought clearly about how nuclear weapons would be used.
By maintaining the largest deliverable stock of nuclear weapons think Ohio that are virtually impossible to destroy, the United States has the ultimate Doomsday Weapon.
And I'm equally as sure that all 14 of our Boomers are on patrol and at the first sign that the Russians are preparing to launch, we'll launch all of our warheads.
If you require transport of your order from the airfreight company to your location, there will be an additional cost.
All ANDAIR products are manufactured in Switzerland under the directives of the Swiss Federal Office of Civil Defense.
All ventilation systems have both hand crank and AC electrical function.
Gunny went nuts, he told the contractor to install a 4 tube setup, each culvert was 10'x50' and two had nothing but bunks.
One had a generator compartment, bathrooms and storage and the other kitchen and dining facilities.
The contractor told him to figure on a quarter million before it was done, but that included the 4 air filtration systems, etc.
I couldn't understand, the United States had announced that they would not use nuclear weapons.
When I challenged him on it, he said, ""Not until they set one foot beyond the original line, we won't.
Why would the government react it they took a little extra, they were a bunch of liberal, commie lovers, if you ask me.
They probably would have if Teddy and the Wicked Witch of the East were still alive.
Top and I stayed home and watched the contractor installing the new quadruple shelter Gunny was having built.
Top got the Sheriff to send his Deputies out and he ran a class on familiarizing them with the Ml 4 rifle, and refresher on the Ml 6/M203.
Both Randy and Ray's shelters could sleep up to 10 people and 3 more if cots were used.
If the small children could double up in bunks, that would further increase our sleeping capacity.
Unlike Sharon Packer and Paul Seyfried, we didn't rely on chemical toilets.
While GCK might be a target, 36K probably wouldn't be but even if it was, it was 31/2 miles from our closest shelter.
Theoretically, the United States could make a first strike on Russia, if and only if, 21 1,2mT nuclear weapons would be sufficient to eliminate the Russian C 3 I Therein lay the gamble.
B-2 Spirit bombers could, again theoretically, each drop 1 B83 set at a yield of 1.2mT simultaneously.
Each plane could carry 16 of those weapons and could strike other targets before we launched our 2,688 Trident warheads.
If that happened, one could assume a radiation level so high that... well it couldn't happen.
There were books about those you know; On the Beach and Down to a Sunless Sea.
Where Alph, the sacred river, ran Through caverns measureless to man Down to a sunless sea.
And there were gardens bright with sinuous rills, Where blossomed many an incense-bearing tree; And here were forests ancient as the hills, Enfolding sunny spots of greenery.
Amid whose swift half-intermitted burst Huge fragments vaulted like rebounding hail, Or chaffy grain beneath the thresher's flail: And 'mid these dancing rocks at once and ever It flung up momently the sacred river.
Apparently they didn't make a movie out of the book Down to a Sunless Sea written by David Graham in the 70s.
It is a book about a planeload of people during the ultimate worldwide disaster.
It explores the issues involved in a world without energy, gone mad, that crosses the line into nuclear holocaust.
The aircraft were last seen at Whitman AFB, yesterday afternoon, but were absent this morning.
The Department of Defense has declined comment other than to say that the aircraft were on a regularly scheduled training mission.
The B-2 Spirit, made by Northrop Grumman, is a multi-role stealth bomber able to drop conventional and nuclear weapons.
A dramatic leap forward in technology, the bomber was a milestone in the United States bomber modernization program.
Estimates for the costs per plane range from $1,157 billion to $2. billion.
Its stealth technology is intended to help it penetrate defenses previously impenetrable by combat aircraft.
Bush reduced the final buy quantity to the 21 already bought in his now famous ""New World Order"" State of the Union speech, January 1991.
Whiteman AFB in Missouri was the B-2's operational base until early 2003, when facilities for the B-2 were built on the joint US/UK military base on the British island of Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean, followed by deployment to Guam in 2005.
Facilities for the aircraft have also been built at RAF Fairford in Gloucestershire in the United Kingdom.
Weighing 71,668 kg, each B2 cost over $30/g which is just under double its weight in gold.
The plane can carry up to 16 Rotary Launcher Assembly mounted B61 or B83 nuclear weapons.
The B-2 Spirit is a multi-role bomber capable of delivering both conventional and nuclear munitions.
A dramatic leap forward in technology, the bomber represents a major milestone in the United States bomber modernization program.
The B-2 brings massive firepower to bear, in a short time, anywhere on the globe through previously impenetrable defenses.
Eighteen of the original 21 were equipped with the Rotary Launcher Assembly.
After the crash, a new Rotary Launcher was added to one of the two equipped without to maintain the status quo.
Along with the B-52 and B-1B, the B-2 provides the penetrating flexibility and effectiveness inherent in manned bombers.
Its low-observable, or ""stealth,"" characteristics give it the unique ability to penetrate an enemy's most sophisticated defenses and threaten its most valued, and heavily defended, targets.
Its capability to penetrate air defenses and threaten effective retaliation provide a strong, effective deterrent and combat force well into the 21st century.
The revolutionary blending of low-observable technologies with high aerodynamic efficiency and large payload gives the B-2 important advantages over existing bombers.
Its low-observability provides it greater freedom of action at high altitudes, thus increasing its range and a better field of view for the aircraft's sensors.
These signatures make it difficult for the sophisticated defensive systems to detect, track and engage the B-2.
The B-2 has a crew of two pilots, a pilot in the left seat and mission commander in the right, compared to the B-IB's crew of four and the B-52's crew of five.
The first B-2 was publicly displayed on Nov., 1988, when it was rolled out of its hangar at Air Force Plant 42, Palmdale, Calif.
The B-2 Combined Test Force, Air Force Flight Test Center, Edwards Air Force Base, Calif., is responsible for flight testing the engineering, manufacturing and development aircraft on the B-2.
Depot maintenance responsibility for the B-2 is performed by Air Force contractor support and is managed at the Oklahoma City Air Logistics Center at Tinker AFB, Okla.
The combat effectiveness of the B-2 was proved in Operation Allied Force, where it was responsible for destroying 33 percent of all Serbian targets in the first eight weeks, by flying nonstop to Kosovo from its home base in Missouri and back.
In support of Operation Enduring Freedom, the B-2 flew one of its longest missions to date from Whiteman to Afghanistan and back.
The B-2 completed its first-ever combat deployment in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, flying 22 sorties from a forward operating location as well as 27 sorties from Whiteman AFB and releasing more than 1. million pounds of munitions.
The B-2's proven combat performance led to declaration of full operational capability in December 2003.
Boeing Military Airplanes Co., Fiughes Radar Systems Group, General Electric Aircraft Engine Group and Vought Aircraft Industries, Inc., are key members of the aircraft contractor team.
The minute the first B83 hits, the boomers will start preparing to launch.
Those Russkies will have to know it was us; no one else has stealth bombers.
Their fly time is probably 30 minutes and they do have some solid fueled rockets.
In August 2002, the Strategic Missile Forces chief, Colonel General Nikolai Solovtsov, announced that the military will keep one division of the train-mounted missiles.
One division includes up to five trains, each carrying three missiles, and each missile carries 10 warheads.
Of course, we are an honorable people and would never think of doing some damned fool thing like converting those B-1 Bs back to where they could deliver a nuclear payload.
We had more B-1 Bs than B-52s and it might be a use it or lose it scenario.
Any aircraft that wasn't in the United States had a chance of surviving.
I can answer that because the closest warhead hit the Garden City Airport.
Because we bought those anti-radiation suits, we were able to get out and feed and water the livestock.
We ended up with extra guests, the Sheriff, his Deputies and all of their families.
We caught them by surprise and took out their C 3 I They had that thing they called Perimetr, which turned out to be a satellite based backup system for their C 3 I Bottom line was they were slowed some but not out of business.
We got off the first shots and they had their solid fueled missiles airborne before ours got them.
Their older liquid fueled missiles never got off the ground and they had scrapped all but one of their Typhoon missile subs.
The Russians wiped out everything we'd rebuilt and tried to eliminate every good runway we had.
They didn't know either and we got our planes back, most of them anyway.
Mexico recalled her troops and the Venezuelan Navy pulled back to their homeports.
Most of the livestock made it through and even after we were able to let them out, we keep the dairy cows on stored hay and feed.
We had shut down the big wind turbine as a precaution and it started right up after we released the brakes.
America was now a third world Country, little better than most of the nations around the world.
The good news, if you can call it that, was that there weren't many nuclear weapons left.
Most of the weapons that didn't get used were destroyed; Gunny had been pretty close, they dumped everything they had on us and us on them.
Nobody wins a war like that; you just survive, God willing, and move on from there.
Russia was the 2nd largest nuclear power on the face of the earth before and we the 1st, and after, we were even both 3rd world nations.
We tried to reach the state Defense Force headquarters to submit our resignations, but there was no Topeka.
According to the few surviving radio amateurs perhaps 20% of the population had survived the initial attack.
By the rivers of Babylon, there we sat down, we wept, when we remembered Zion.
For there they carried us away captive required of us a song; and they that wasted of us required mirth, saying, sing us one of the songs of Zion.
If I do not remember thee, let my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth; if I prefer not Jerusalem above my chief joy.
Remember O Lord, the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem; who said Rase it, rase it, even to the foundation thereof.
O daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; happy shall he be that rewardeth thee as thou hast served us.
Happy shall he be that taketh and dasheth thy little ones against the stones.
The north and the west and the south are good hunting ground, but it is forbidden to go east.
It is forbidden to cross the great river and look upon the place that was the Place of the Gods this is most strictly forbidden.
It is there that spirits live, and demons it is there that there are the ashes of the Great Burning.
These things are forbidden they have been forbidden since the beginning of time.
I have been in the Dead Places near us, with my father at first, I was afraid.
When my father went into the house to search for the metal, I stood by the door and my heart felt small and weak.
It did not have the smell of man, though there were old bones in a corner.
That was when I was very young nevertheless, my brothers would not have done it, though they are good hunters.
After that, they gave me the good piece of meat and the warm corner of the fire.
But when I boasted or wept without a reason, he punished me more strictly than my brothers.
After a time, I myself was allowed to go into the dead houses and search for metal.
So I learned the ways of those houses and if I saw bones, I was no longer afraid.
The bones are light and old sometimes they will fall into dust if you touch them.
I was taught the chants and the spells I was taught how to stop the running of blood from a wound and many secrets.
If the hunters think we do all things by chants and spells, they may believe so it does not hurt them.
I was taught how to read in the old books and how to make the old writings that was hard and took a long time.
Most of all, I liked to hear of the Old Days and the stories of the gods.
I asked myself many questions that I could not answer, but it was good to ask them.
At night, I would lie awake and listen to the wind it seemed to me that it was the voice of the gods as they flew through the air.
We are not ignorant like the Forest People our women spin wool on the wheel, our priests wear a white robe.
We do not eat grubs from the trees, we have not forgotten the old writings, although they are hard to understand.
Nevertheless, my knowledge and my lack of knowledge burned in me I wished to know more.
When I was a man at last, I came to my father and said, ""It is time for me to go on my journey.
That night, in the house of the priesthood, I asked for and received purification.
He bade me look into the smoke of the fire and see I saw and told what I saw.
It was what I have always seen a river, and, beyond it, a great Dead Place and in it the gods walking.
His eyes were stern when I told him he was no longer my father but a priest.
They were singing the Star song in the outer chamber and it was like the buzzing of bees in my head.
He asked me how the gods were dressed and I told him how they were dressed.
We know how they were dressed from the book, but I saw them as if they were before me.
When I had finished, he threw the sticks three times and studied them as they fell.
Then three deer passed in the valley going east they did not mind me or see me.
It is not easy to kill a panther with one arrow but the arrow went through his eye and into his brain.
It is eight suns' journey to the east and a man passes by many Dead Places.
Once I made my fire on the edge of a Dead Place at night and, next morning, in the dead house, I found a good knife, little rusted.
Always when I looked for game, it was in front of my arrow, and twice I passed hunting parties of the Forest People without their knowing.
So I knew my magic was strong and my journey clean, in spite of the law.
Toward the setting of the eighth sun, I came to the banks of the great river.
It was halfa-day's journey after I had left the god-roadwe do not use the god-roads now for they are falling apart into great blocks of stone, and the forest is safer going.
A long way off, I had seen the water through trees but the trees were thick.
Yet, all through the night, I knew that I should have to cross the river and walk in the places of the gods, although the gods ate me up.
My magic did not help me at all and yet there was a fire in my bowels, a fire in my mind.
If I went to the Place of the Gods, I would surely die, but, if I did not go, I could never be at peace with my spirit again.
It is better to lose one's life than one's spirit, if one is a priest and the son of a priest.
The Forest People could have killed me without fight, if they had come upon me then, but they did not come.
When the raft was made, I said the sayings for the dead and painted myself for death.
As I pushed the raft from the shore, I began my death song / had the right.
It is forbidden to go east, but I have gone, forbidden to go on the great river, but I am there.
All the same, when I came to the Place of the Gods, I was afraid, afraid.
The current of the great river is very strong it gripped my raft with its hands.
Never have I been so much alone I tried to think of my knowledge, but it was a squirrel's heap of winter nuts.
There was no strength in my knowledge any more and I felt small and naked as a new-hatched bird alone upon the great river, the servant of the gods.
I saw both banks of the river I saw that once there had been god-roads across it, though now they were broken and fallen like broken vines.
Very great they were, and wonderful and broken broken in the time of the Great Burning when the fire fell out of the sky.
And always the current took me nearer to the Place of the Gods, and the huge ruins rose before my eyes.
I thought the river meant to take me past the Place of the Gods and out into the Bitter Water of the legends.
The gods heard me they showed me how to paddle with the pole on one side of the raft.
There was a great spike of rusted metal sticking out into the river I hauled myself up upon it and sat there, panting.
I had saved my bow and two arrows and the knife I found in the Dead Place but that was all.
I looked after it, and thought if it had trod me under, at least I would be safely dead.
Nevertheless, when I had dried my bowstring and restrung it, I walked forward to the Place of the Gods.
It is not true what some of the tales say, that the ground there burns forever, for I have been there.
Here and there were the marks and stains of the Great Burning, on the ruins, that is true.
It is not true either, what some of our priests say, that it is an island covered with fogs and enchantments.
Everywhere in it there are god-roads, though most are cracked and broken.
There should have been the wailings of spirits and the shrieks of demons, but there were not.
It was very silent and sunny where I had landed the wind and the rain and the birds that drop seeds had done their work the grass grew in the cracks of the broken stone.
The towers are not all broken here and there one still stands, like a great tree in a forest, and the birds nest high.
I saw a little dance of white butterflies over a great heap of broken stones and columns.
I went there and looked about me there was a carved stone with cut letters, broken in half.
It had been made of white stone and he wore his hair tied back like a woman's.
There are many pigeons, nesting and dropping in the towers the gods must have loved them, or, perhaps, they used them for sacrifices.
There are wild cats that roam the god-roads, green-eyed, unafraid of man.
The wild dogs are more dangerous, for they hunt in a pack, but them I did not meet till later.
Everywhere there are the carved stones, carved with magical numbers or words.
When a god or a demon saw me, then I would die, but meanwhile I was no longer afraid.
My hunger for knowledge burned in me there was so much that I could not understand.
But my father found out and punished me for it strictly, for, often, that food is death.
Now, though, I had long gone past what was forbidden, and I entered the likeliest towers, looking for the food of the gods.
A mighty temple it must have been, for the roof was painted like the sky at night with its stars that much I could see, though the colors were faint and dim.
It went down into great caves and tunnels perhaps they kept their slaves there.
But when I started to climb down, I heard the squeaking of rats, so I did not go rats are unclean, and there must have been many tribes of them, from the squeaking.
But near there, I found food, in the heart of a ruin, behind a door that still opened.
There was drink, too, in bottles of glass the drink of the gods was strong and made my head swim.
After I had eaten and drunk, I slept on the top of a stone, my bow at my side.
His tongue was hanging out of his mouth; he looked as if he were laughing.
I sprang up and shouted at him but he did not move he just sat there as if he were laughing.
When I reached for a stone to throw, he moved swiftly out of the way of the stone.
No doubt I could have killed him with an arrow, but I did not know if there were others.
I looked about me not far away there was a great, broken god-road, leading north.
The towers were high enough, but not so high, and while many of the dead-houses were wrecked, there were some that stood.
I went toward this god-road, keeping to the heights of the ruins, while the dog followed.
When I had reached the god-road, I saw that there were others behind him.
If I had slept later, they would have come upon me asleep and torn out my throat.
When I went into the dead-house, they kept watch at the entrance doubtless they thought they would have a fine hunt.
But a dog cannot open a door and I knew, from the books, that the gods did not like to live on the ground but on high.
They were surprised when I shut the door in their faces it was a good door, of strong metal.
I could hear their foolish baying beyond it but I did not stop to answer them.
I was in a long small chamber on one side of it was a bronze door that could not be opened, for it had no handle.
The first room was a small ante-room I waited there for some time, telling the spirits of the place that I came in peace and not as a robber.
The great windows that looked over the city had not been broken at all though they were dusty and streaked with many years.
There were coverings on the floors, the colors not greatly faded, and the chairs were soft and deep.
There were pictures upon the walls, very strange, very wonderful I remember one of a bunch of flowers in a jarif you came close to it, you could see nothing but bits of color, but if you stood away from it, the flowers might have been picked yesterday.
It made my heart feel strange to look at this picture and to look at the figure of a bird, in some hard clay, on a table and see it so like our birds.
Everywhere there were books and writings, many in tongues that I could not read.
The god who lived there must have been a wise god and full of knowledge.
There was a cooking-place but no wood, and though there was a machine to cook food, there was no place to put fire in it.
Nor were there candles or lamps there were things that looked like lamps but they had neither oil nor wick.
All these things were magic, but I touched them and lived the magic had gone out of them.
In the washing-place, a thing said ""Hot"" but it was not hot to the touch another thing said ""Cold"" but it was not cold.
I have said the magic was gone but that is not true it had gone from the magic things but it had not gone from the place.
Nor had I ever slept in a Dead Place before and yet, tonight, I must sleep there.
When I thought of it, my tongue felt dry in my throat, in spite of my wish for knowledge.
When it fell, I went back to the big room looking over the city and made fire.
I wrapped myself in a floorcovering and slept in front of the fire I was very tired.
I could feel the spirits drawing my spirit out of my body as a fish is drawn on a line.
Everywhere there were lights lines of light circles and blurs of light ten thousand torches would not have been the same.
The sky itself was alight you could barely see the stars for the glow in the sky.
I knew that I was seeing the city as it had been when the gods were alive.
Everywhere went the gods, on foot and in chariots there were gods beyond number and counting and their chariots blocked the streets.
They had turned night to day for their pleasure-they did not sleep with the sun.
I looked out of another window the great vines of their bridges were mended and godroads went east and west.
With unbelievable tools they did giant works no part of the earth was safe from them, for, if they wished for a thing, they summoned it from the other side of the world.
And always, as they labored and rested, as they feasted and made love, there was a drum in their ears the pulse of the giant city, beating and beating like a man's heart.
As I looked upon them and their magic, I felt like a child but a little more, it seemed to me, and they would pull down the moon from the sky.
And yet not all they did was well done even I could see that and yet their wisdom could not but grow until all was peace.
Then I saw their fate come upon them and that was terrible past speech.
But, even after the city had become a Dead Place, for many years the poison was still in the ground.
When I woke in the morning, I was hungry, but I did not think first of my hunger for my heart was perplexed and confused.
I knew the reason for the Dead Places but I did not see why it had happened.
It seemed to me it should not have happened, with all the magic they had.
There was so much in the house I could not understand and yet I am a priest and the son of a priest.
He was sitting in his chair, by the window, in a room I had not entered before and, for the first moment, I thought that he was alive.
He was sitting looking out over the city he was dressed in the clothes of the gods.
He had sat at his window, watching his city die then he himself had died.
But it is better to lose one's life than one's spirit and you could see from the face that his spirit had not been lost.
I knew, that, if I touched him, he would fall into dust and yet, there was something unconquered in the face.
That is all of my story, for then I knew he was a man / knew then that they had been men, neither gods nor demons.
I had no fear after that I had no fear going home, though twice I fought off the dogs and once I was hunted for two days by the Forest People.
He said, ""The law is not always the same shape you have done what you have done.
After that, I wished to tell all the people but he showed me otherwise.
It is not for the metal alone we go to the Dead Places now there are the books and the writings.
We shall go to the Place of the Gods the place newyork not one man but a company.
We shall look for the images of the gods and find the god ASHING and the others the gods Lincoln and Biltmore and Moses.
The first controlled chain reaction occurred on December 2, 1942, in Chicago.
According to June, after WW III they scraped off the topsoil and after Yellowstone, we plowed in the volcanic ash wearing out a plow in the process.
I felt defeated, and quite frankly, couldn't see the use of doing it all over.
Not if we didn't want to end up like the priest in the short story we didn't.
The day might come, it was inevitable, when our last working rifle no longer functioned and we ran out of powder and primers.
Only then would we be forced to resort to bows and arrows, knives and tomahawks.
One day we could lose the capacity to produce electricity, nothing lasts forever.
