This allowed for Soviet ships to arrive safely to Cuba before the escalation and this represents weakness on Kennedy's part.
As it stands, Khrushchev reacted by stating ""the Soviet government cannot give instructions to the captains of Soviet vessels bound for Cuba to observe the instructions of the American navel forces.
Both leaders may have had many different advisors aiding their decisions, but what it really came down to was their leadership styles.
JFK and Khrushchev, a Relationship Through the withdrawal of the missiles, Kennedy achieved the hero status that allied to his youthful college boy looks and turned him into a legendary figure.
His charismatic image survives in American culture despite rumors of his womanizing, his commitment to Vietnam and other political shortcomings.
He displayed extraordinary skill playing a military game without striking.
Kennedy struggled with sparse communication from the Soviet leader Khrushchev.
Rather it is differences in culture or communication, the two men both remained true to their beliefs during the crisis.
Surprisingly, they both had much in common regarding leadership traits and backgrounds.
This type of leadership takes a display of curiosity and the guts to be daring.
Bennis reflects, there are two kinds of people ""those who are paralyzed by fear, and those who are afraid but go ahead away.
A healthy leadership inspires options and the innovations that grow out of creativity.
Such a leader will be able to communicate and create a repoire with their country.
Still as much as they performed poorly at crisis avoidance due to communication issues, it must be said that they fared much better at crisis management.
Their failure to understand each other during the crisis and this inability did not set the tone for their post crisis relationship.
They had every reason not to trust each other after all the behind your back type maneuvers.
Still the two men were able to put these transgressions aside and move forward toward peace.
Putting aside their differences and past hostilities, the peace process was on the road to reality for relations between the United States and the Soviet Union.
This would open up a whole new world for both countries as far as communication and strengthening the allied bond from before the Second World War.
It was a difficult road to face because of the constant competition that would remain in other areas such as the Space Race and other technologies.
Khrushchev not only became alarmed for the safety of his country after Kennedy's assassination but also grieved the loss of such a dynamic leader along with the world.
It was feared because of Oswald's ties to Marxism that there would be retaliation or backlash toward the Soviet Union.
Fursenko reflects, ""News of Kennedy's death shocked and alarmed Khrushchev.
Khrushchev rushed to establish communication with the new administration and assess the skills of the new president Johnson.
He expressed his condolences to a grieving nation and worried that Kennedy's death had happened at the worst time possible.
He worried that this event would impact not only relations with the United States but effect progress of peace.
He and his advisors scrambled to relieve their relationship with Castro for fear that this debate would be opened again.
This strategy, however, was only temporary in nature and maintained a level of damage control for the Soviet Union.
This paper included a brief look as the historical event for a frame of reference.
This paper looked at issues of foreign policy and strategies used to remedy this troubling event.
This paper displayed how these strategies only worsened the situation by causing diplomatic troubles between the United States and the Soviet Union.
The paragraphs above also examined the relationship between President Kennedy and Premier Khrushchev and how their leadership styles varied but also made strides toward a peaceful solution possible.
This paper discussed the nature of diplomatic problems and explored strategies.
Diplomatic problems found in American foreign policy never really find solutions.
Possibly for a moment or that particular country is no longer a threat, but America continues to dominate the global chessboard and sees itself as the peace provider.
The threat of an attack on United States soil was made clear to President Kennedy by his Joint Chiefs of Staff, who urged Kennedy to take aggressive counter-measures.
