Two ducks were tethered and members of the Guantanamo Bay Association held a brief memorial service for their deceased members at the finale of the tour.A controversial military detainee holding facility in Cuba conjures images of hooded men in shackles and has been a flashpoint for debate about the U.S.-led war on terror.
But nearly 50 veterans who were stationed at Naval Station Guantanamo Bay have different memories of their service there a half-century ago and of the historic Cold War happenings that unfolded all around them.
Much of the American public knows only about the detainee center or perhaps references to ""Gitmo,"" the station's nickname, from the 1992 film ""A Few Good Men"" starring Tom Cruise.
But members of the Guantanamo Bay Association, in Chattanooga for their annual reunion, considered their time on the United States military installation on the island of Cuba to have been some of their best in the service.
The place was isolated, and sailors and Marines were not allowed off site.
Though many people dreaded the assignment before arriving, that quickly changed once they got to the Caribbean post.
Walker and others also found themselves in the midst of tensions that played out after the Soviet Union placed nuclear warheads in Cuba -just 90 miles from the United States -and President John F Kennedy demanded their removal.
Shortly after arriving at work on Oct., 1962, her boss told her and the other civilian employees to go home, pack their bags and leave their keys in their car.
After some tense days and with United States warships arrayed off Cuba, Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev relented and removed the missiles.
Bill Sedlak, a New Jersey native, requested duty in the Pacific rather than go to Gitmo.
Sedlak worked on the FA-Crusader naval fighter jet and had to be on standby, ready to work in minutes if called.
When not on duty, the then-single Navy petty officer spent his time snorkeling and scuba diving off the facility's picturesque beaches.
He returned to the place in 1998, part of a trip for Gitmo veterans commemorating the Spanish-American War in 1898.
Sedlak has a photograph of the flight line in 1964, jammed full of jet planes and one in 1998, nearly empty.
Sedlak and other Gitmo veterans at the reunion said the public image of the site from the detainee dealings tarnishes the otherwise charming location.
Next Article Kimball, Tenn., eyes air ambulance insurance Previous Article Chattanooga's Dr.
This document may not be reprinted without the express written permission of Chattanooga Times Free Press, Inc.
Associated Press text, photo, graphic, audio and/or video material shall not be published, broadcast, rewritten for broadcast or publication or redistributed directly or indirectly in any medium.
Neither these AP materials nor any portion thereof may be stored in a computer except for personal and noncommercial use.
The AP will not be held liable for any delays, inaccuracies, errors or omissions therefrom or in the transmission or delivery of all or any part thereof or for any damages arising from any of the foregoing.
