The Second Set of Four Bond Novels Edited and annotated by Patrick Bruskiewich July, 2018 Volume Two: The Best of Ian Fleming The Best of Ian Fleming: The Second Set of Four Bond Novels Volume Two: The Best of Ian Fleming Series © Patrick Bruskiewich 2018, Obelisk Press Vancouver, BC, Canada All rights reserved.
This book or any part thereof must not be reproduced in any form without the written permission of the author.
The Second Set of Four This is the second volume in a series of books The Best of Ian Fleming meant to encourage the reading public to pick up the Ian Fleming novels and read them.
The Bond novels are a masterful undertaking of political and psychological warfare aimed at Soviet machination and propaganda in the West.
Ian Fleming and Smith and Wesson pistol circa 1960 In this volume, we shall look at the second set of four Bond Novels From Russia With Love, Dr.
Each of 4 these novels are different in character and in plot, although they share the Fleming writing panache and the fight between good and evil.
In my measure one of these four novels is one the iconic espionage novels of the 20 th century.
If you have read these four novels you would immediately know which one it is.
Let me give you a few clues the plot involves a honey trap, the purloining of an encryption machine , a life and death struggle on the Orient Express and the use of nerve agent that nearly kills the protagonist.
Bianchi and Connery From Russia with Love Film 5 The antagonist is SMERSH, a real Soviet espionage organization that was tasked with killing enemies of the Soviet Union.
As a matter of Soviet decree, SMERSH could only be tasked to execute Soviet citizens who had defected or were undertaking what the Soviet Politburo decreed were treasonous acts against the Soviet State.
In the 1950’s SMERSH was involved in the murder of a number of Soviet expatriates, many of them Ukrainian nationalist.
In the 1950’s Ian Fleming was working on the foreign news desk for the Sunday Times.
A story in Fleming’s Sunday Times clipping files was the case from 1950 of the death of the naval attache from the American Embassy in Bucharest, Eugene Karpe, murdered while he was fleeing Eastern Europe on the Orient Express from Budapest in Hungary fearing his imminent on capture by the KGB on charges of espionage.
AIDE MURDERED Interior Minister Holds Captain Karpe Met With Foul Play Autopsy Is Inconclusive 6 VIENNA, Austria, -February 25, 1950 Interior Minister Oskar Helmer said today that the death of Captain Eugene S Karpe, United States Naval Attache in Rumania, probably was murder.
The dead man as a close friend of Robert A Vogeler, United States businessman who was convicted as a spy in Hungary earlier this week.
Captain Karpe had just visited Mr Vogeler's family in Vienna and was en route to Paris when he plunged from the speeding Orient Express Thursday.
Sources here hinted that Captain Karpe’s death was linked with Mr Vogeler's trial.
Crawford, Captain Karpe's brother-in-law told the United Press in Delhi, Louisiana, that the Naval officer had said on his last visit home, ""I kind of hate to go back to Europe.
An unofficial report on the autopsy performed at an Army General Hospital in Munich, Germany, said that ""no positive proof of foul play can be ascertained"" because of the mutilated state of the body.
Herr Helmer recalled that Captain Karpe had been the second highranking American mysteriously killed in Austria since the war.
The first was Irving Ross, an official of the Economic Cooperation 7 Administration, who was found stabbed and beaten to death soon after having been seen in the company of four men wearing Russian uniforms.
United States Army investigators, who combed the rail tunnel where Captain Karpe's body was found for clues, said today that the Naval officer had clung frantically to a compartment doorway on the speeding train before having finally fallen under its wheels.
They said that close examination of the ground in the Hallein Tunnel showed that he had been dragged for some distance by the train before he lost his grip and was swept beneath the wheels.
Herr Helmer, chief of Austria's security forces, said that there was little likelihood that the death had been an accident.
Five government investigators boarded the Cunard White Star liner Queen Mary late yesterday when the ship arrived at quarantine and spent two hours questioning Milburn Richard McKichanm, 21 years old, regarding the mysterious death of Captain Eugene S Karpe, former United States Naval Attache in Rumania.
The agents, three of them from the Army and two from the Federal Bureau of Investigation, declined to comment on the results of the 9 questioning.
Mr McKichan, a biochemistry student whose home is in Forest Grove, Oregon, likewise refused to discuss the case.
The young man was reported to have had breakfast and lunch with Captain Karpe aboard the Orient Express last Thursday, before the Naval officer was thrown from the train in a tunnel sear Salzburg, Austria.
Captain Eugene Karpe was buried with full military honors KARPE BURIED IN ARLINGTON WASHINGTON, March 16, 1950 -Navy Captain Eugene S Karpe, 45, who fell or was pushed to his death from a train near Salzburg, Austria, February 23, was buried with full military honors today in Arlington National Cemetery.
Captain Karpe was a close friend of Robert A Yogeler, United States businessman, who was convicted of spying by a Hungarian court.
Vogeler was then a 39 year old executive for International Telephone and Telegraph Corp. stationed in Vienna and responsible for Eastern Europe when he was arrested, tortured, forced ""to confess"", tried before a ""kangaroo court"", and sentenced to 15 years imprisonment for spying.
He was tried by the same Judge who in 1949 convicted Cardinal Mindszenty, the most famous Communist prisoner, who was convicted by a ""people's court""of espionage and sentenced to life but actually served five years until released during the Hungarian uprising in 1956.
Vogeler became a valued speaker and expert on the newly forming bloc of totalitarian states which Winston Churchill had dubbed the Iron Curtain in a 1946 speech warning America that the Soviet Union was solidifying its control over war-torn Eastern Europe.
The communist tactics of trumped up arrests, show trials, suborned witnesses, nationalization of private industry, suppression and intimidation of opponents, systematic rape and robbery are described by Dr.
Vogeler in his book in harrowing detail based on his personal experiences and observations.
A recent expose of what was going on in post-war Vienna is rather interesting (from The Marshall Plan in Austria, G Bischof, A Pelinka and D Stiefel, Vol., Contemporary Austrian Studies, Transaction Publishers, London, UK, 2000) 12 the EC A, also in Austria, was used heavily as a new and convenient cover organization for CIA operators.
One of these operators almost certainly must have been Irving Ross who, as ECA trade negotiator with the Soviets, was murdered in the Russian zone in Vienna on the night of 30/31 October 1948.
He may have been lured there by a female Soviet double agent named Dana Superina with whom he had a romantic liaison and who had pretended to be a Croatian anti-communist agent.
Needless to say, all intelligence records pertaining to this case have remained tightly closed ever since.
Irving Ross was only one of several American victims of the bitter intelligence battle which was fought in Austria, foremost in Vienna and which had greatly escalated in 1948.
Ross was known to have smuggled people out of the Soviet sectors in Europe to the West.
That was the last I saw of Ross ... at a time when I was living like a lord in Lugano, Irving Ross was murdered in Vienna.
He had gone there with his girl friend in the same Cadillac in whose boot I had crossed the frontier so uncomfortably and they drove through the Russian sector.
Shortly 13 before they came to the South Railway Station the Cadillac was stopped by four men in Russian uniforms armed with sub-machine guns.
There was blood staining his shirt front and his eyes had been gouged out.
As recent as 2017 historians have been searching for the full story behind the Irving Ross murder.
They shared a letter Clara had from the woman Irving Ross was driving home the night he was killed.
One of the mysteries confronting Lindner that was resolved thanks to connecting with Lyla was the name of the woman.
Superina doesn't explain her connection with the General, but he obviously intervened on her behalf in a significant way.
Superina recounts for the general her recollection of the attack the night of Oct., 1948 that killed Mr Ross.
Earlier research by Lindner revealed that Ross had been driving Superina home after a party.
They were in the Soviet sector when the car was stopped and Ross was beaten and killed.
She tried to escape by jumping from the car, but the Russians put her back in the car until she jumped out a second time.
She was found later by Austrian police and was taken to the hospital with a skull fracture.
She doesn't offer details of the attack but writes a lot about her state of fear after the fact.
She wrote that when she realized she was being taken to a hospital in the Soviet zone she panicked.
Superina stated, ""My mind worked frantically, but there was no way out of it.
Her letter continues, noting she had been held in the hospital for 50 days, before stating the truth that she wanted known and had been fearful to share prior to writing the letter nearly four months after the attack.
Ross's death at the hands of Russian soldiers was communicated early on, but when Superina wrote the letter she knew she was the only eye witness to the murder and was afraid for her safety.
Lindner recently returned from the National Archives where he found a lot of new information, including a bit more detail on Superina.
At the time she was serving as a translator and had proximity to people within the United States State Department to include Mr Ross.
Lindner said Ross realized Superina was being threatened and tried to help her get to South Africa.
His wartime experience and his expertise in the newspaper world both lent credibility to the fiction in Fleming’s espionage novels and reflect the facts of the real world.
The other stories include the use of cyanide gas that was used to murder several Ukrainian nationalists (Lev Rebet in 1957 and Stefan Bandera in 1959) on the streets of Munich.
The autopsy reports for the men murdered by the cyanide gas claimed heart failure for their demise.
It was only in 1961 that the Soviet KGB agent Bohdan Mykolayovych Stashynsky, the man who killed these Ukrainian nationalists, defected and confessed to the murders.
There have more recently been the use of radioactive substances, dioxin and other more exotic poisons by agents of the Russian State Security 17 as they affect revenge of people they consider traitors or spies.
The most notorious is the 2006 murder of Russian expat Alexander Litvinenko in London using Polonium-210.
He himself also played a role in some still clandestine post-war and Cold War operations, including one that smuggled arms into a province in India and gold and jewelry out of India to England aboard converted Lancaster bombers just prior to Indian Independence from England.
Like many men of his ilk they stepped in from time to time to help out friends, if not out of friendship then in some accommodating fashion.
Let us not forget that Ian Fleming was also associated with a family Bank.
A book worth writing would be the secret lives of former British agents and their colleagues in the Special Air Service.
At the time it was reported that the murders of the Ukrainian nationalists Rebet and Bandera were sanctioned by Soviet General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev.
From Russia With Love, was published in 1957 and in the wake of Ian Fleming’s book in the early 1960’s Soviet General Secretary Nikita Khrushchev ordered the remnants of SMERSH be closed and disbanded.
This public disclosure of the organization, and closure and dismantling of SMERSH was one of the political coups that Fleming achieved in his life time.
If you have the time you might look beyond the KGB sponsored espionage to the rather extensive network of SMERSH agents the KGB and the Red Army ran in the period 1943 to 1946 during their ‘Great Patriotic War’ with Nazi Germany.
Some twenty years before the secrets of the Ultra Secret, Bletchley Park and the purloining of Enigma, The Nazi’s code machine by the Polish cryptographic service, Ian Fleming has fun with his British Espionage counterparts by writing about the purloining of an encryption machine quite similar in size and character to the Enigma.
Note the word official, for the whole matter was governed by The Official Secrets Act, and UK citizen who divulged such secrets unofficially ran the risk of prosecution and incarceration.
Winterbotham was in charge of the security and dissemination of the highly secret Enigma decrypts.
After months of intensive effort by a team of Britain’s top mathematicians and cryptanalysts, the supposedly unbreakable Enigma system was solved with the aid of another sophisticated machine, and the topgrade intercepted German 19 signals were available to the Allied commanders.
One of the three Polish cryptographers who cracked Enigma in the 1930’s, Marian Rejewski, who was still alive to help Josef Garlinski write his remarkable book.
The Enigma War shares many of the intricate details of the Enigma machine with the world for the first time.
It was perfected by the Wehrmacht in 1943, but never used for fear of reprisals.
In fact, it is a more effective instrument of destruction than the hydrogen bomb.
Its disadvantage lies in the difficulty of applying it to the populace.
The Russians captured the entire German stocks at Dyhernfurth on the Polish frontier.
Farben facility in Dyhernfeld, the nerve gases produced there and how this related to the allied decision to bomb the railway switching yard at Dresden, to destroy a large shipment of nerve gas the German high command was transporting west from Silesia.
Farben facility in Dyhernfeld and the large stockpiles of nerve gases that the Nazis were trying toe evacuate from Silesia.
I have included some excerpts from my novel Gotterdamerung in the Appendix to this book.
No was a first attempt by Ian Fleming at including technology and technological intelligence as the plot in a James Bond novel.
Much of the secret intelligence work undertaken by Ian Fleming and his colleagues during the Second World War centered on scientific and technological intelligence.
To reconnaissance pilots like Tony Hill: To radio observers like Eric Ackermann and Harold Jordan: and to men of the Bruneval raid.
No published in 1958 was timely in that the Cuban revolution would begin the following year and by 1960 Cuba would become a vassal state of the Soviet Union.
President Kennedy, a friend and fan of Ian Fleming, masterfully maneuvered his way through the pitfalls of the crisis.
No has at its heart the toppling of missile being tested by the United States military in a test range in the Caribbean.
These short vignettes are of a different character than the body of the three other books in the set, and reminds me of the writing styles of Fleming’s writer’s friend and wartime espionage colleague Roald Dahl.
Of these four novels, three were made into feature length films in the 1960’s starring Sean Connery as 007.
Most of the vignettes in the fourth novel, For Your Eyes Only were made into a feature length films beginning with the film For Your Eyes Only in the 1970’s starring Roger Moore as James Bond, followed by a 1980’s film A View to a Kill again starring Roger Moore as James Bond.
The story Quantum of Solace was used as a title only (the story has never been in film) made into a film with a very different plot line in the early years of the 21 st century starring Daniel Craig as 007.
The Best of Ian Fleming The Second Set of Four Novels is a further indepth study of Fleming’s writing and is meant to encourage you not only to read the novels but to research the hidden treasures found within the writing of Ian Fleming.
Patrick Bruskiewich Obelisk Press Vancouver, BC, Canada 23 From Russia With Love 24 Prologue to From Russia With Love First published in April 1957 in London, this espionage thriller featuring the fictitious British secret agent James Bond is one of over twenty Bond novels written by Ian Fleming in the period 1954 to his death in 1964.
From Russia With Love is a well researched and well written novel based on a factual world with a make-believe plot.
A mere six years after From Russia With Love was first published it was made into a film of the same name in 1963 with Sean Connery playing the role of James Bond.
The film From Russia with Love is considered one of the iconic spy films of the twentieth century, and is the most popular film of its genre from the past six decades.
Author’s Note Not that it matters, but a great deal of the background to this story is accurate.
SMERSH, a contraction of Smiert Spionam —Death to Spies—exists and remains today the most secret department of the Soviet government.
Today the headquarters of SMERSH are where, in Chapter 4, I have placed them—at No 13 Sretenka Ulitsa, Moscow.
The Conference Room is faithfully described and the Intelligence chiefs who meet round the table are real officials who are frequently summoned to that room for purposes similar to those I have recounted.
If you undertake your own research into SMERSH you will find that it had a much larger organization then in intimated in the Fleming novel.
Josef Stalin knew how Soviet agitators within the Russian Army took the Russia army out of the First World War and eventually overthrew the Czar.
At the darkest hours after the Nazi invasion of Soviet Russia SMERSH was established by Stalin to insure the loyalty of the Red Army to him, the supreme Soviet leader.
At one point over 1. million informants in the Red Army were on the SMERSH payroll, and over 200,000 enforcers were out in the field, pistol at hand sort of like inquisitors, judge, jury and executioner.
These SMERSH assassins reported directly to Beria, the head of the KGB, who reported directly to Stalin.
The SMERSH assassins in the field rarely needed a signature from Moscow.
If you have read the first book in The Best of Ian Fleming series you will appreciate that Ian Fleming knew first-hand about espionage having served as a Commander Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve and as deputy director of Naval Intelligence for the Royal Navy during the Second World War.
Ian Fleming, RNVR, 1939 One of his most successful wartime espionage operations was OPERATION MINCEMEAT, which involved false information planted off the coast of Spain on a cadaver dressed as a Royal Marine Officer.
The cadaver was delivered by submarine and fooled the Nazi high command into redeploying 27 troops from Sicily to Greece immediately prior to the Allied Invasion of the island of Sicily in July 1943.
Most of Fleming’s other clandestine operations still remain classified, although with the passage of time more and more of these stories are being told.
In a future book in this series I will write about Fleming undertook some of his training as a secret agent at Camp X in Ontario in 1942 to 1944.
A few years ago the BBC released a four episode series about Ian Fleming titled The Man Who Would Be Bond.
There is also a recent movie called Age of Heroes about his 30 Assault Unit and one of their clandestine operations to snatch and grab technical and scientific intelligence from a German Freya radar installation in Norway.
Ian Fleming also played a role in the Bruneval and Dieppe Raids, as well as in the prelude the deceptions of Operation Fortitude.
Fleming also played a crucial role in Operation Overlord the Normandy Invasion.
In and above his naval intelligence work, Fleming was given some additional Operational responsibilities in Norway, Spain and Gibraltar.
I will speak more about Fleming’s Operational responsibilities in Norway, Spain and Gibraltar in a subsequent book of The Best of Ian Fleming Series.
As you read them, you realize that the Fleming books are as much psychological thrillers as they are stories about the realities of clandestine operations and espionage.
For instance the plot to From Russia With Love reads like a mix of an Agatha Christie thriller and a Graham Greene spy novel, and is also based on real-life espionage from the 1950’s.
The Lektor is in fact a bomb meant to kill the best Western cryptanalysts.
While in Turkey Bond is involved in a number of adventures with the vibrant Karim Bey who is the Station Chief for MI6 in Turkey.
This story was written twenty years before Enigma and the Ultra Secret was made public in 1977.
Returning to London with the Lektor and the cipher clerk aboard the Orient Express James Bond encounters SMERSH’s chief assassin, Red Grant, pretending to be a fellow British secret agent.
James Bond fights then kills Grant in a remarkable battle in a train compartment in the middle of the night.
My favorite part of this book is Chapter 26 The Killing Bottle and the fight between Bond and Grant in the train compartment.
Bond kills Grant and then tracks down and confronts Colonel Klebb and is then nearly killed by Klebb, before he manages to capture her.
The ending of the story leaves you wondering whether Bond will survive.
In real life in the early 1930’s Fleming himself survived an attempted assassination in a manner not all that different to how Bond manages to survive his misfortune aboard the Orient Express.
At that time Ian Fleming, serving as a Reuter’s correspondent in Moscow, had filed a truthful story about a show trial in Moscow involving some British Nationals accused of sabotage.
The story had laid bare the truth about what was going on in Moscow and had embarrassed Josef Stalin.
He had to flee Moscow in the middle of the night hidden aboard a train bound for Warsaw.
He was found out and tossed from the train by the NKVD agents and shot.
What saved Fleming’s life in 1933 was his good luck ‘knight on a white horse’ keepsake which stopped a bullet meant for his heart.
White Russians Cossacks found him, barely alive, lying beside the train track and carried him unconscious to a hospital in Warsaw, Poland.
When Fleming returned to Fondon he soon left Reuters and became a bad-boy Bohemian in the heart of the British Empire.
If you want a taste of his bad30 boy Bohemian character you can watch the first episode of The Man Who Would Be Fleming.
As you read the Fleming novels you realize that there is something timeless about them.
In the 1990’s Skripal had been a MI6 secret agent under deep cover in Russia.
Skripal was caught by the Russians and jailed and later found his way to the United Kingdom after an exchange for some Russian spies that were caught in the West.
As we look back a half century at the Fleming phenomena we must not forget that for the first few years after their publication the Bond books were not all warmly received.
Some literary critics even described the first few Fleming novels as childish and sadomasochistic.
Fleming’s reputation as an author changed significantly when on 17 March 1961, a Life magazine article listed From Russia, with Love as one of United States President John F Kennedy's ten favourite books.
Kennedy and Fleming had 31 previously met in Washington and had struck up a friendship.
President Kennedy’s approval and the associated publicity led to a surge in the Bond book sales that made Ian Fleming the biggest-selling thriller writer in the United States in the 1960’s.
To accommodate his love of Fleming novels a special advanced showing of the film From Russia With Love was given at the White House a few days before President Kennedy left for his fateful visit to Dallas Texas.
It was reported in the press after his assassination that President Kennedy was reading the novel From Russia With Love on the eve of his assassination.
He had served as a ‘doorman’ at the Soviet Embassy in London under Litvinoff.
For five years he had been Military Attache under the brilliant Madame Kollontai in the Stockholm Embassy.
He had helped train Sorge, the Soviet master spy, before Sorge went to Tokyo.
During the war, he had been for a while Resident Director in Switzerland, or ‘Schmidtland’, as it had 32 been known in the spy-jargon, and there he had helped sow the seeds of the sensationally successful but tragically misused ‘Lucy’ network.
He had even gone several times into Germany as a courier to the ‘Rote Kapelle’, and had narrowly escaped being cleaned up with it.
And after the war, on transfer to the Foreign Ministry, he had been on the inside of the Burgess and Maclean operation and on countless other plots to penetrate the Foreign Ministries of the West.
He was a professional spy to his fingertips and he was perfectly prepared to put on record his opinions of the rivals with whom he had been crossing swords all his life.
In an appendix to this book I include information about the Lucy Ring from the public archives of the Central Intelligence Agency.
I also give a short excerpt from a book describing the execution of Sorge.
You might want to do a little research of your own about Sorge and the Tokyo Network.
Sorge was capture around the time that the Japanese Imperial Navy attacked Pearl Harbor.
I believe that From Russia With Love is indeed his best written novel and recommend this excellent and timeless Fleming novel to you wholeheartedly.
If there is only one of the Bond novels you will read I hope it is From Russia With Love.
It operates both at home and abroad and, in 1955, it employed a total of 40,000 men and women.
No sane member of the public would dream of allowing the word to pass his lips.
The headquarters of SMERSH is a very large and ugly modern building on the Sretenka Ulitsa.
It is No 13 on this wide, dull street, and pedestrians keep their eyes to the ground as they pass the two sentries with submachine guns who stand on either side of the broad steps leading up to the big iron double door.
If they remember in time, or can do so inconspicuously, they cross the street and pass by on the other side.
The most important room on the 2nd floor is a very large light room painted in the pale olive green that is the common denominator of government offices all over the world.
Opposite the sound-proofed door, two wide windows look over the courtyard at the back of the building.
The floor is close-fitted with a colourful Caucasian carpet of the finest quality.
The top of the desk is covered with red velvet under a thick sheet of plate glass.
From the centre of the desk, to form a T with it, a conference table stretches diagonally out across the room.
This table is also covered with red velvet, but without protective glass.
Ashtrays are on the table, and two heavy carafes of water with glasses.
In 1955, these were a portrait of Stalin over the door, one of Lenin between the two windows and, facing each other on the other two walls, portraits of Bulganin and, where until January 13th, 1954, a portrait of Beria had hung, a portrait of Army General Ivan Aleksandrovitch Serov, Chief of the Committee of State Security.
On the left-hand wall, under the portrait of Bulganin, stands a large televisor , or TV set, in a handsome polished oak cabinet.
Concealed in this is a taperecorder which can be switched on from the desk.
The microphone for the recorder stretches under the whole area of the conference table and its leads are concealed in the legs of the table.
Next to the televisor is a small door leading into a personal lavatory and washroom and into a small projection room for showing secret films.
Under the portrait of General Serov is a bookcase containing, on the top shelves, the works of Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin, and more accessibly, books in all languages on espionage, counter-espionage, police methods and 35 criminology.
Next to the bookcase, against the wall, stands a long narrow table on which are a dozen large leather-bound albums with dates stamped in gold on the covers.
About the time Grant was coming into land at Tushino Airport, just before 11.30 at night, a tough-looking, thick-set man of about fifty was standing at this table leafing through the volume for 1954.
The Head of SMERSH, Colonel General Grubozaboyschikov, known in the building as ‘G.’, was dressed in a neat khaki tunic with a high collar, and dark blue cavalry trousers with two thin red stripes down the sides.
The trousers ended in riding boots of soft, highly polished black leather.
On the breast of the tunic were three rows of medal ribbons—two Orders of Lenin, Order of Suvorov, Order of Alexander Nevsky, Order of the Red Banner, two Orders of the Red Star, the Twenty Years Service medal and medals for the Defence of Moscow and the Capture of Berlin.
At the tail of these came the rose-pink and grey ribbon of the British CBE, and the claret and white ribbon of the American Medal for Merit.
There were flabby pouches under the eyes, which were round and brown and protruded like polished marbles below thick black brows.
The skull was shaven clean and the tight white skin glittered in the light of the central chandelier.
The man walked with tight and precise steps to his tall chair behind the desk.
He sat down and picked up the receiver of the telephone marked in white with the letters VCh.
Only some fifty supreme officials are connected to the VCh switchboard, and all are Ministers of State or Heads of selected Departments.
It is served by a small exchange in the Kremlin operated by professional security officers.
Even they cannot overhear conversations on it, but every word spoken over its lines is automatically recorded.
After that, if action is agreed, I shall have a meeting with my Head of Operations and Head of Plans.
In case liquidation is decided upon, I have taken the precaution of bringing the necessary operative to Moscow.
In a few minutes six men, five of them in uniform, filed in through the door and, with hardly a glance at the man behind the desk, took their places at the conference table.
For his own protection, and for the reassurance of his department, he invariably takes a witness so that his department can have independent versions of what went on at the conference and, above all, of what was said on its behalf.
No notes are taken at the conference and decisions are passed back to departments by word of mouth.
On the far side of the table sat Lieutenant-General Slavin, head of the GRU, the intelligence department of the General Staff of the Army, with a full colonel beside him.
At the end of the table sat Lieutenant-General Vozdvishensky of RUMID, the Intelligence Department of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, with a middle-aged man in plain clothes.
With his back to 38 the door, sat Colonel of State Security Nikitin, Head of Intelligence for the MGB, the Soviet Secret Service, with a major at his side.
Each one knew, and thought he was the only one to know, that the room was wired for sound, and each one, without telling his ADC, had decided to utter the bare minimum of words consonant with good discipline and the needs of the State.
General G took out a packet of Moskwa-Volga cigarettes and lit one with an American Zippo lighter.
General G pinched the long cardboard tube of his cigarette so that it was almost flat and put it between his teeth on the right side of his mouth.
He stretched his lips back from his teeth and started talking in short clipped sentences that came out with something of a hiss from between the teeth and the uptilted cigarette.
General Serov, on behalf of the Praesidium, has ordered me to make known to you certain matters of State Policy.
We are then to confer and recommend a course of action which will be in line with this Policy and assist it.
One by one, he slowly examined the faces of the three senior officers at the table.
They were about to learn a State secret, the knowledge of which might one day have most dangerous consequences for them.
Sitting in the quiet room, they felt bathed in the dreadful incandescence that shines out from the centre of all power in the Soviet Union—the High Praesidium.
The final ash fell off the end of General G.’s cigarette on to his tunic.
He brushed it off and threw the cardboard butt into the basket for secret waste beside his desk.
Six pairs of expressionless eyes stared at the head of SMERSH, waiting.
Formerly, it was a “hard” policy—a policy [he allowed himself the joke of Stalin’s name] of steel.
This policy, effective as it was, built up tensions in the West, notably in America, which were becoming dangerous.
Certain powerful Americans, notably the Pentagon Group led by Admiral Radford, were helped in their firebrand schemes by the very successes of our “hard” policy.
So it was decided that the time had come to change our methods, while maintaining our aims.
We open our frontiers to a lot of newspaper men and actors and artists although we know many of them to be spies.
Comrades Bulganin and Khrushchev and Comrade General Serov [General G carefully included the names for the ears of the tape-recorder] visit India and the East and blackguard the English.
When they get back, they have friendly discussions with the British Ambassador about their forthcoming goodwill visit to London.
And so it goes on—the stick and then the carrot, the smile and then the frown.
The Intelligence services would also have to pull their weight in this great game that was being played on their behalf.
General G thought how well he was delivering the denunciation demanded by the Praesidium.
General G sought for a final phrase to convey the threat without defining it.
General G gave them a few minutes to lick their wounds and recover from the shock of the official lashing that had been meted out.
No one spoke up for his department or mentioned the countless victories of Soviet Intelligence that could be set against the few mistakes.
And no one questioned the right of the Head of SMERSH, who shared the guilt with them, to deliver this terrible denunciation.
The Word had gone out from the Throne, and General G had been chosen as the mouthpiece for the Word.
It was a great compliment to General G that he had been thus chosen, a sign of grace, a sign of coming preferment, and everyone present made a careful note of the fact that, in the Intelligence hierarchy, General G., with SMERSH behind him, had come to the top of the pile.
At the end of the table, the representative of the Foreign Ministry, Lieutenant-General Vozdvishensky of RUMID, watched the smoke curl up from the tip of his long Kazbek cigarette and remembered how Molotov had privately told him, when Beria was dead, that General G would go far.
There had been no great foresight in this prophecy, reflected Vozdvishensky.
Beria had disliked G and had constantly hindered his advancement, sidetracking him away from the main ladder of power into one of the minor departments of the then Ministry of State Security, which, on the death of 44 Stalin, Beria had quickly abolished as a Ministry.
When the post was abolished, he devoted his energies to plotting the downfall of Beria, working under the secret orders of the formidable General Serov, whose record put him out of even Beria’s reach.
Serov, a Hero of the Soviet Union and a veteran of the famous predecessors of the MGB—the Cheka, the Ogpu, the NKVD and the MVD—was in every respect a bigger man than Beria.
He had been directly behind the mass executions of the 1930s when a million died, he had been metteur en scene of most of the great Moscow show trials, he had organized the bloody genocide in the Central Caucasus in February 1944, and it was he who had inspired the mass deportations from the Baltic States and the kidnapping of the German atom and other scientists who had given Russia her great technical leap forward after the war.
And Beria and all his court had gone to the gallows, while General G had been given SMERSH as his reward.
As for Army General Ivan Serov, he, with Bulganin and Khrushchev, now ruled Russia.
But, guessed General Vozdvishensky, glancing up the table at the gleaming billiard-ball skull, probably with General G not far behind him.
The skull lifted and the hard bulging brown eyes looked straight down the table into the eyes of General Vozdvishensky.
General Vozdvishensky managed to look back calmly and even with a hint of appraisal.
We have never thought that our departments were so successful as to be beyond criticism.
What I have been instructed to say to you will not have come as a surprise to any of us.
Our operation must 46 be delicate, refined and aimed at the heart of the Intelligence apparat of the West.
It must do grave damage to the enemy apparat—hidden damage which the public will hear perhaps nothing of, but which will be the secret talk of government circles.
But it must also cause a public scandal so devastating that the world will lick its lips and sneer at the shame and stupidity of our enemies.
And the agents and spies of the West will know it, too, and they will marvel at our cleverness and they will tremble.
They will be encouraged to greater efforts by our display of strength and genius.
But of course we shall deny any knowledge of the deed, whatever it may be, and it is desirable that the common people of the Soviet Union should remain in complete ignorance of our complicity.
Comrade LieutenantGeneral Vozdvishensky, since you observe the foreign intelligence scene from a neutral standpoint [this was a jibe at the notorious jealousies that exist between the military intelligence of the GRU and the Secret Service of the MGB], perhaps you would survey the field for us.
We wish to have your opinion of the relative importance of the Western Intelligence Services.
He rested his elbows on the arms and supported his chin on the interlaced fingers of his joined hands, like a teacher preparing to listen to a long construe.
Lor five years he had been Military Attache under the brilliant Madame Kollontai in the Stockholm Embassy.
And after the war, on transfer to the Loreign Ministry, he had been on the inside of the Burgess and Maclean operation and on countless other plots to penetrate the Loreign Ministries of the West.
He was nervous at RUMID being pinned down in this way, and without a full departmental briefing.
Every country has good spies and it is not always the biggest countries that have the most or the best.
But Secret Services are expensive, and small countries cannot afford the co-ordinated effort which produces good intelligence—the forgery departments, the radio network, the record department, the digestive apparatus that evaluates and compares the reports of the agents.
There are individual agents serving Norway, Holland, Belgium and even Portugal who could be a great nuisance to us if these countries knew the value of their reports or made good use of them.
Instead of passing their information on to the larger powers, they prefer to sit on it and feel important.
So we need not worry with these smaller countries,’ he paused, ‘until we come to Sweden.
They have always had better information on the Baltic than even Finland or Germany.
But to mount an operation against them would probably cost us more men.
In France, 49 while we have penetrated most of their Services, the Deuxieme Bureau is still clever and dangerous.
I think we all have respect for her Intelligence Service,’ General Vozdvishensky looked round the table.
There were grudging nods from everyone present, including General G ‘Their Security Service is excellent.
England, being an island, has great security advantages and their so-called MI5 employs men with good education and good brains.
In certain types of operation, we are constantly finding that they have been there before us.
They pay them little money—only a thousand or two thousand rubles a month—but they serve with devotion.
Yet these agents have no special privileges in England, no relief from taxation and no special shops such as we have, from which they can buy cheap goods.
Their social standing abroad is not high, and their wives have to pass as the wives of secretaries.
General Vozdvishensky felt that his remarks might be taken as too laudatory.
General G wanted to put a stop to Vozdvishensky’s attempts to qualify his praise of British Intelligence.
Next, hoped General G., he will be saying that the Pentagon is stronger than the Kremlin.
Technically, in such matters as radio and weapons and equipment, they are the best.
They get enthusiastic about some Balkan spy who says he has a secret army in the Ukraine.
The head of RUMID sat back in his chair and stolidly took out his cigarette case.
General Slavin of the GRU had no intention of committing himself on behalf of the General Staff of the Army.
Colonel of State Security Nikitin of MGB felt it would do no great harm to show up the GRU as being too stupid to have any ideas at all, and at the same time to make a modest recommendation that would probably tally with the inner thoughts of those present—and that was certainly on the tip of General G.’s tongue.
Colonel Nikitin also knew that, given the proposition that had been posed by the Praesidium, the Soviet Secret Service would back him up.
General G was annoyed by the authority in the man’s voice, and by having his thunder stolen, for he also had intended to sum up in favour of an operation against the British.
I remember Comrade General Vozdvishensky saying something about a myth upon which much of the alleged strength of this Secret Service depends.
Colonel Nikitin decided that this was a question he could and perhaps should answer.
He is known by the letter M We have a zapiska on him, but it contains little.
So many names to remember, so many dossiers, so many operations going on every day all over the world.
There were the noises of the train—the soft iron stride, pounding out the kilometres, the quiet creak of the woodwork, a tinkle from the cupboard over the washbasin where a toothglass was loose in its holder.
The spectral eye of the nightlight cast its deep velvet sheen over the little room.
By the window, Captain Nash sat in his place, his book open on his lap, a flicker of moonlight from the edge of the blind showing white on the double page.
Perhaps it was madness in the room, and not danger, that Bond could smell.
It would be a question of somehow getting rid of him at the next station.
The book was still open on Nash’s lap, but now a thin wisp of smoke was coming out of the hole at the top of its spine and there was a faint smell of fireworks in the room.
He had even put wedges under the doors so that Nash would feel more secure.
There are ten bullets in it ... .25 dumdum, fired by an electric battery.
You must admit the Russians are wonderful chaps for dreaming these things up.
When there was so much to know, so much to think about, this was Bond’s first reaction to utter catastrophe.
It was the reaction of someone in a burning house who picks up the most trivial object to save from the flames.
It’ll give me an extra kick telling the famous Mister Bond of the Secret Service what a bloody fool he is.
You’re just a stuffed dummy and I’ve been given the job of letting the sawdust out of you.
The angry sneer in the man’s voice told Bond that he had touched a nerve.
Fed her a pinch of chloral hydrate when I poured her that glass of wine.
If I don’t like even the smell of a move, it’ll be just one bullet through the heart.
Well, SMERSH decided to kill you—at least I gather it was decided even higher up, right at the top.
Seems they want take one good hard poke at the Secret Service—bring them down a peg or two.
He said vanity would get you and greed and a bit of craziness in the plot.
Had theyl Bond remembered just how much the eccentric angles of the story had aroused their curiosity.
Yes, he had to admit that the idea of this Russian girl being in love with him had helped.
I’d say she’s killed more people than anyone in the world—or arranged for them to be killed.
She had always said she would tell him everything when she got to England.
But any hint would have been enough—would have saved the life of Kerim, for instance.
I suppose it was his gang that blew up our Centre in Istanbul yesterday afternoon.
The noise of the tunnel will help in case you’re a noisy dier—rattle and so 62 forth.
Then one in the back of the neck for her—with your gun—and out of the window she goes.
They’ll find the film in her bag, and in your pocket there’ll be a long love letter from her to you—a bit threatening.
It says that she’ll give the film to the newspapers unless you marry her.
When your cipher experts start fiddling with it, it’s going to blow them all to glory.
Handsome British spy with career ruined murders her and commits suicide.
The French papers would give it such a send-off there’d be no stopping it.
They wouldn’t mind how far they went with the pictures or anything else.
Bond’s eyes stared into the violet gloom, measuring the depth of the shadow in his corner under the roof of the top bunk, remembering exactly where his attache case stood on the floor, guessing what Nash would do after he had fired.
If anyone in your show noticed these things, noticed the pattern of them, like my show does, you’d realize that every January you lose one of your small chaps somewhere—maybe Tokyo, maybe Timbuktu.
But the main target was you, old man, and we certainly had you sewn up all right.
You were in the killing bottle from the minute you got off that plane in Turkey.
Bond’s mind raced round the details of his pitifully thin, pitifully desperate plan.
There were no formalities for the through carriages until they got to France, to the frontier, Vallorbes.
It was only people who got out at Brigue or Lausanne who had to go through customs in the stations.
He put his left hand casually over the book and the cigarette case as if to prevent them slipping off his lap.
But at least he had achieved his objective and hadn’t been shot in the process.
Bond described an airy circle with his cigarette to distract Nash’s attention.
His left hand slipped the flat cigarette case between the pages of 66 his book.
Anyway it’ll come out later when they dig the second bullet out of you and can’t find the second gun.
Come to think of it, old man,’ the flat voice showed emotion, became greedy, ‘I think she may have the Order of Lenin for me in her bag.
But conceit and curiosity and four days of love had sucked him along on the easy stream down which it had been planned that he should drift.
That was the damnable part of the whole business—the triumph for SMERSH, the one enemy he had always sworn to defeat wherever he met it.
And 67 all the time SMERSH had been watching, watching him go through his conceited paces, as it had been planned that he would, so that the smear could be built up—the smear on him, the smear on M who had sent him to Istanbul, the smear on the Service that lived on the myth of its name.
In a second the dark tunnel would switch out the moonlight on the pages and the blue tongue would lick out for him.
Bond pitched forward on to the floor and lay sprawled under the funereal violet light.
No was released and in the theaters of both Europe and the United States the film version of From Russia With Love was already being filmed in England.
From Russia With Love is the icon Bond film from the 1960’s and the most popular among admirers of Sean Connery and his portrayal of James Bond.
It is also considered by many film critics as the iconic espionage film of the 1960’s.
The film was released in 1963 and paid for out of the proceeds of the Dr.
Starting right from the very beginning of their franchise, the film company that has brought the Fleming novels to the big screen since the 1960’s have done a remarkable job to grow their organization using retained earnings.
This is one of the great secrets that have made the Bond films such a success, that and the fact that each and every film has been innovative in their own right.
The Bond film makers have built their success upon their previous successes.
This is an ‘old school’ business practice that few companies seem to follow in the modem world.
From Russia with Love was the second film made from the Fleming books the film Dr.
From Russia with Love is an excellent film produced jointly by Albert R Broccoli and Harry Saltzman, and directed by Terrence Young.
It is said that Peter Hunt’s editing brought the Bond films into the avant guard of film making.
The film From Russia With Love not only changed the espionage genre, it changed the whole of the 1960’s film industry.
This is understandable given the uncertainty of what the audience might accept in 1962.
No, the second Bond film overflowed with action the climax of the film is the suspenseful life and death, man-to-man fight in the train compartment between Bond and his would be assassin Grant.
In the film SPECTRE plays the British Secret Service off against the Soviet Secret Service.
Perhaps it was a political decision, or perhaps there was an ulterior motive.
The film From Russia With Love came out just before Nikita Khrushchev was ousted by Brezhnev in 1964.
No was filmed the previous year and the arch villain in that story worked for SPECTRE, and so to bring some semblance of continuity the two films were joined thematically in that Bond’s assassination was meant to be revenge for the loss by SPECTRE of their operative Dr.
It is believed that the KGB even planted spies within the film crew themselves to get an insider’s view of the Bond films, their plots and even their gadgets.
In both films he is debonair, unflappable and in every way a gentleman spy.
In some sense Bond follows in the footsteps of Cary Grant and his role in the masterful 1959 Alfred Hitchcock film North by Northwest.
Cary Grant was in fact a friend of Albert ‘Chubby’ Broccoli, and was in fact his best man when he married his wife Dana Wilson Broccoli on June 21 st , 1959.
Connery also follows in the footsteps of both Ian Fleming and ‘Chubby’ Broccoli in that they both had to prime or educator him for his role.
Connery was a determined young actor in the 1960’s who had been bom and raised on the wrong side of the tracks.
In From Russia with Love Sean Connery plays his role superbly, bring sophistication and wit to even the most awkward or action pact parts of the film.
If you have seen the film The Battle of Britain later produced by Harry Saltzman in the late 1960’s you will see Robert Shaw in a lead role in that film.
In terms of film presence Robert Shaw is in every way an equal to Sean Connery in From Russia with Love and this lends a degree of verisimilitude to the inevitable life and death struggle between the two adversaries.
It is the first time that edge of the seat action is used as a psychological device at the beginning of a Bond film to get the viewer’s adrenaline pumping.
That and the fact that the opening credits have a lovely set of dancing belly dancing figures that lead the way to eventual figurative silhouettes and nude images to be found in the beginnings of many of the later Bond films.
He was on set during the filming of From Russia with Love to enjoy the belly dancing.
The role of Tatiana Romanova is played by the Italian model Daniela Bianchi.
As far as I know, apart from Dietrich’s portrayal of Mata Hari, there was no other film before From Russia with Love that used sex in this way.
Daniela Bianchi in Bed Wearing Nothing but her Black Ribbon There is a short few seconds where, seen through a screen we see the naked backside of Bianchi wearing nothing more than her black ribbon getting under the covers of the bed in James Bond’s room.
In terms of the United States film market, this was a bit edgy for the time, but not for the UK film market.
In the early 1960’s in the UK there occurred the Profumo Affair which involved the Minister of State for War in the Harold MacMillan Government, John Profumo, and his love affair with a 19 year old demimonde type Christine Keeler.
It was the fact that Christine Keeler was also romantically involved at the time with the naval attache in the Soviet Embassy in London, Yevgeny Ivanov.
The question was whether there had been a breech of National Security in the United Kingdom.
Around the same time rumors would begin to come from Washington swirling about the libido and amorous appetites of the President of the 76 United States John F Kennedy.
There are some who have even tried to link the President to some of the players in the Profumo Affair, Yevgeny Ivanov, naval attache in the Soviet Embassy in London In the film From Russia with Love the female arch villan Rosa Klebb is played by German actress Lotte Lenya.
Bond’s Turkish colleague, the head of Station T, Kerim Bey is played by Pedro Armendariz.
Connery and Armendariz appeared to thoroughly enjoy 77 working together on the film.
From time to time they share witticisms that are humorous even today, over a half-century after the film’s release.
In From Russia with Love we are introduced to Q or the Quartermaster for the first time played by the experienced British actor Desmond Llewelyn.
He had previously appeared in a war film by ‘Chubby’ Broccoli from the 1950’s titled They Were Not Divided about the Welsh Guards.
Sean Connery and Pedro Armendariz, in Kerim Bey’s office In From Russia with Love the head of MI-6, M is played by the experienced British actor Bernard Lee.
Bernard Lee fits the role perfectly, having served with the Royal Sussex Regiment during the Second World War.
The Third Man is one of my favorite films because of its avant garde style and the credibility of the plot.
The Third Man, 1949 I also recall seeing Bernard Lee in the 1956 film The Battle of the River Plate playing the role of the Master of the Africa Shell, Captain Patrick Dove.
MC who headed the British Secret 79 Intelligence Service beginning in September 1939 and during the Second World War, and until his retirement in 1952.
In a subsequent book in The Best of Ian Fleming series I may elaborate on who Major General Menzies was and the role he played in both the Ultra Secret and with the secret operations that MI-6 undertook from 1939 to 1952.
From Russia with Love has M’s secretary Moneypenny played by the Canadian actress Lois Maxwell.
She of course pines for James Bond but they both know it won’t go past flirting.
The film is very much based on the book, with a few venues and scenes added or revised, including the excellent beginning which I have hinted to.
The script to the film is available online if you are interested in reading it.
The camera work on From Russia with Love draws on some of Alfred Hitchcock’s best film work, as well as from those of the director and producers.
The film also benefits from having Ian Fleming himself working alongside the crew as they filmed in and around Istanbul, a part of the world he knew intimately and enjoyed for its many pleasures, not the least of which was belly dancing, which Fleming admired he enjoyed.
From Russia with Love had its world premier on the 10 th of October, 1963 at the London Pavilion.
Ian Fleming provides an explicit presentation of this in From Russia With Love.
If you want to learn more about the Profumo Affair, watch the 1989 film Scandal.
The final comment is about the mock killing of James Bond and the training center that is depicted near the beginning of the film.
This short vignette in the film is a tribute of sorts to the war time special operations training 81 facility Camp X in Ontario Canada where the British sent many of their SOE agents to be trained, and the Americans sent some of the early OSS recruits to receive training, and where Ian Fleming received some of his training in clandestine operations.
If you watch the BBC series The Man Who Would Be Bond, you will come across Camp X in one of the episodes.
In a subsequent book to The Best of Ian Fleming series I will provide more background information about Camp X There is something significant in the film From Russia With Love and it is the boat chase scene where Romanova and Bond are trying to make it to Venice up the Adriatic in a small high powered boat.
Throughout the Second World War the Royal Navy ran clandestine small boat operations off Norway, off the European continent and in the Mediterranean.
These operations were used to run agents, arms and material into and out of occupied Europe.
These actions became known as E-Boat runs, for the Germans would try to intercept the RN ships using Eboats or Shnell Boats and there would be gun battles the likes of which was featured in From Russia With Love.
For example, in one operation a group of Swedish vessels were bought up by Intrepid, filled full of speciality Swedish metals and ball bearings, then sailed down the Baltic, through the Skagerrak, and into the North Sea to Britain, the Germans none the wiser that they had been duper.
One of the great tragedies of the Second World War was the Telavag Tragedy in the spring of 1942 when the Gestapo swooped down on the little Norwegian town of Telavag and in retribution for its role in the Shetland run and as an revenge for the killing of two Gestapo agents the town was razed to the ground, the livestock killed, the men of the town either killed or sent to concentration camps and the women and children sent into internment.
The Telavag Tragedy ranks with the Lidice Massacre and the Oradour-sur Glane Massacre as one of the terrible war crimes inflicted on noncombatants by the Nazis in occupied Europe during the Second World War.
In a subsequent book to The Best of Ian Fleming series I will provide more background information about Ian Fleming’s role in some of the clandestine operations involved Royal Navy ships.
No, the book and the film differ somewhat and the film is a better rendition than the book.
The book is a hard read in that the action is slow to develop and climaxes rather quickly.
The beginning of the book introduces a little about the radio routine used by the British during the S.O.E. days, in particular the radio contact procedures and security.
Commander John Strangways, RN , Regional Control Officer for the Caribbean and the local representative of the British Secret Service of MI6 Station J in Kingston, Jamaica, and his secretary are both quietly murdered and their bodies disposed of.
Bond discovers that his old friend Commander Strangways had been investigating the activities of a reclusive Chinese-German who lives on Crab Key and who runs a guano mine named Dr.
He finds out that investigators sent to the island before have mean suspicious deaths.
Bond suspects a connection between the disappearances of Strangways and his secretary and, with the assistance of his old friend Quarrel, undertakes a clandestine visit to Crab Key.
There Bond encounters a beautiful young 85 woman named Honeychile Rider naked on the beach who has been sneaking to Crab Key to collect rare and expensive sea shells.
How Fleming introduces Honeychile Rider is marvelous and I think is the best writing in the book.
His heart missed a beat and then began pounding so that he had to breathe deeply to quieten it.
She wore a broad leather belt round her waist with a hunting knife in a leather sheath at her right hip.
She stood not more than five yards away on the tideline looking down at something in her hand.
She stood in the classical relaxed pose of the nude, all the weight on the right leg and the left knee bent and turning slightly inwards, the head to one side as she examined the things in her hand.
The skin was a very light uniform cafe au lait with the sheen of dull satin.
The gentle curve of the backbone was deeply indented, suggesting more powerful muscles than is usual in a woman, and the behind was almost as firm and rounded as a boy’s.
The legs were straight and beautiful and no pinkness showed under the slightly lifted left heel.
It was cut to the shoulders and hung there and along the side of her bent cheek in thick wet strands.
A green diving mask was pushed back above her forehead, and the green rubber thong bound her hair at the back.
The whole scene, the empty beach, the green and blue sea, the naked girl with the strands of fair hair, reminded Bond of something.
No’s people give chase to the three of them and Quarrel is killed in a gun fight with Dr.
In a strange twist the two captives are invited to dine with their captor.
He tells him that the Americans do not suspect what he is doing and he might end his sabotage one day by sending a missile crashing into a major American city.
Others who have seen the complete abandonment of one series, the MASTODON, because of its recurring navigational errors, its failure to obey the radio directions from Turks Island.
Two of those men are on watch at this moment, watching the radio frequencies, the beams on which these weapons travel.
There is a million dollars’ worth of equipment up above us in the rock galleries, Mister Bond, sending fingers up into the Heavyside Layer, waiting for the signals, jamming them, countering beams with other beams.
And from time to time a rocket soars up on its way a hundred, five hundred miles into the Atlantic.
And we track it, as accurately as they are tracking it in the Operations Room on Turks Island.
Then, suddenly, our pulses go out to the rocket, its brain is confused, it goes mad, it plunges into the sea, it destroys itself, it roars off at a tangent.
Something else must be tried, different frequencies, different metals, a different radio brain.
We track many practice shoots without being able to get through to the brain of the new rocket.
Yes, they have even given us a cipher machine with our own frequencies and routines.
And then, one day, Mister Bond, it is like catching the attention of a man in a crowd.
No condemns Bond and Honey chile Rider to be gotten rid of Honeychile to be tied down and eaten by the infamous giant crabs of Crab Key.
Bond has to navigate through a brutal obstacle course meant to kill him in a most cruel fashion.
Unbeknownst to his captors, Bond survives the ordeal and goes back to kill an unsuspecting Dr.
Implied in the story is that she had once been accosted by a man but is inexperience in the way of love ... well you can imagine the rest The novel Dr.
No is not one of my favorite Bond books, but the film more than makes up for my disappointment.
No} The Electric clock in the cool dark room in the heart of the mountain showed four-thirty.
Outside the mountain, Crab Key had sweltered and stunk its way through another day.
At the eastern end of the island, the mass of birds, Louisiana herons, pelicans, avocets, sandpipers, egrets, flamingoes and the few roseate spoonbills, went on with building their nests or fished in the shallow waters of the lake.
Most of the birds had been disturbed so often that year that they had given up any idea of building.
In the past few months they had been raided at regular intervals by the monster that came at night and burned down their roosting places and the beginnings of their nests.
There would be vague movements to migrate and many would die of the nervous hysteria that seizes bird colonies when they no longer have peace and privacy.
At the other end of the island, on the guanera that gave the mountain its snow-covered look, the vast swarm of cormorants had passed their usual day of gorging themselves with fish and paying back the ounce of precious manure to their owner and protector.
Now they were noisily fiddling with the untidy piles of sticks that would be their nests—each pile at exactly sixty centimetres from the next, for the guanay is a quarrelsome bird and this sixty-centimetre ring represents their sparring space.
Soon the females would be laying the three 91 eggs from which their master’s flock would be increased by an average of two young cormorants.
Below the peak, where the diggings began, the hundred or so Negro men and women who were the labour force were coming to the end of the day’s shift.
Another fifty cubic yards of guano had been dug out of the mountainside and another twenty yards of terrace had been added to the working level.
Below, the mountainside looked like terraced vineyards in Upper Italy, except that here there were no vines, only deep barren shelves cut in the mountainside.
And here, instead of the stink of marsh gas on the rest of the island, there was a strong ammoniac smell, and the ugly hot wind that kept the diggings dry blew the freshly turned whitish-brown dust into the eyes and ears and noses of the diggers.
But the workers were used to the smell and the dust, and it was easy, healthy work.
The last iron truck of the day started off on the Decauville Track that snaked down the mountainside to the crusher and separator.
A whistle blew and the workers shouldered their clumsy picks and moved lazily down towards the high-wired group of Quonset huts that was their compound.
Tomorrow, on the other side of the mountain, the monthly ship would be coming in to the deep-water quay they had helped to build ten years before, but which, since then, they had never seen.
That would mean fresh stores and fresh goods and cheap jewellery at the canteen.
Life was good, too, for the senior outside staff—all Chinese Negroes like the men who had hunted Bond and Quarrel and the girl.
They also stopped work 92 in the garage and the machine shops and at the guard posts and filtered off to the ‘officers” quarters.
Apart from watch and loading duties, tomorrow would also be a holiday for most of them.
Some ‘marriages’ from the last lot would continue for further months or weeks according to the taste of the ‘husband’, but for the others there would be a fresh choice.
There would be some of the older girls who had had their babies in the creche and were coming back for a fresh spell of duty ‘outside’, and there would be a sprinkling of young ones who had come of age and would be ‘coming out’ for the first time.
There would be fights over these and blood would be shed, but in the end the officers’ quarters would settle down for another month of communal life, each officer with his woman to look after his needs.
Deep down in the cool heart of the mountain, far below this well-disciplined surface life, Bond awoke in his comfortable bed.
He swung his feet to the ground and, avoiding the fragments of glass from the broken lamp, walked softly over to the clothes cupboard and put on the first kimono that came to his hand.
The girl had a pile of kimonos out on the bed and was trying them on in front of the wall mirror.
At the back of Bond’s mind was the urgent necessity to get his hands on some kind of weapon—a pair of scissors would be better than nothing.
Someone had come while they were asleep and taken away the breakfast things.
Propped among the bottles were two menus, huge double-folio pages covered with print.
They might have been from the Savoy Grill, or the ‘21’, or the Tour d’Argent.
In between was every dish whose constituents would not be ruined by a deep freeze.
Bond brushed aside their amiabilities, ordered tea and buttered toast for Honeychile and told them to look after her hair and nails.
Then he went into the bathroom and had a couple of Aspirins and a cold shower.
He put on his kimono again, reflected that he looked idiotic in it, and went back into the room.
A beaming May asked if he would be good enough to select what he and Mrs Bryce could care to have for dinner.
Without enthusiasm, Bond ordered caviar, grilled lamb cutlets and salad, and angels on horseback for himself.
When Honeychile refused to make any suggestions, he chose melon, roast chicken a l’Anglaise and vanilla ice cream with hot chocolate sauce for her.
Bond walked over to where Honeychile was being ministered to at the dressing table.
He watched the busy delicate fingers at work on her hair and her nails.
He said gruffly, “Don’t let them make too much of a monkey out of you,” and went to the drink tray.
He poured himself out a stiff Bourbon and soda and took it into his own room.
The scissors and files and probes were attached to the manicurist’s waist by a chain.
Bond sat down on his rumpled bed and lost himself in drink and gloomy reflections.
When he didn’t lift his head she went back into her room and left him alone.
He glanced at the clock on the wall and went back and drank his drink and put on another of the idiotic kimonos, a plain black one.
In due course there came the soft knock on the door and the two of them went silently out of the room and along the empty, gracious corridor.
He didn’t want to tell her that all this luxury play-acting was getting him down, that he hadn’t the smallest idea what it was all about, that he knew it was bad news, and that he hadn’t an inkling of a plan of how to get them out of whatever situation they were in.
There was nothing that depressed Bond’s spirit so much as the knowledge that he hadn’t one line of either attack or defence.
The automatic doors hissed back and Bond and the girl stepped out into a large room.
It was a high-ceilinged room about sixty feet long, lined on three sides with books to the ceiling.
At first glance, the fourth wall seemed to be made of solid blue-black glass.
There was a big paper-strewn desk in one corner and a central table with periodicals and newspapers.
Comfortable club chairs, upholstered in red leather, were dotted about.
The carpet was dark green, and the lighting, from standard lamps, was subdued.
The only odd feature was that the drink tray and sideboard were up against the middle of the long glass wall, and chairs and occasional tables with ashtrays were arranged in a semicircle round it so that the room was centered in front of the empty wall.
A silvery spray of small fish with a bigger fish in pursuit fled across the dark blue.
Above the waves was a strip of greyer blue-black, dotted with sparks of light.
They were under the sea, looking straight into its heart, twenty feet down.
A golden sheen of head and deep flank showed for an instant and was gone.
The twenty-foot tendrils of a Portuguese man-o’-war drifted slowly across the window, glinting violet as they caught the light.
Up above there was the dark mass of its underbelly and the outline of its inflated bladder, steering with the breeze.
Bond walked along the wall, fascinated by the idea of living with this slow, endlessly changing moving picture.
A big tulip shell was progressing slowly up the window from the floor level, a frisk of demoiselles and angel fish and a ruby-red moonlight snapper were nudging and rubbing themselves against a corner of the glass and a sea centipede quested along, nibbling at the minute algae that must grow every day on the outside of the window.
A long dark shadow paused in the centre of the window and then moved slowly away.
Obediently, two great shafts of light, from off the ‘screen’, lanced out into the water.
Then they converged on the departing shadow and the dull grey torpedo of a twelve-foot shark showed up in all its detail.
Bond could even see the piglike pink eyes roll inquisitively in the light and the slow pulse of the slanting gill-rakers.
For an instant the shark turned straight into the converged beam and the white halfmoon mouth showed below the reptile’s flat head.
It stood poised for a 98 second and then, with an elegant, disdainful swirl, the great swept-back tail came round and with a lightning quiver the shark had gone.
It looked static and lifeless compared with the pulsing mysteries outside the window.
What must it be like in a storm when the waves crashed noiselessly against the glass, delving almost to the floor and then sweeping up and out of sight.
He must have built the glass wall deep inside the cliff and then delicately removed layer after layer of the outside rock until the divers could prise off the last skin of coral.
My guests usually think about the material side after about fifteen minutes.
Still smiling , Doctor No came slowly out from behind the desk and moved towards them.
His knees did not dent the matt, gunmetal sheen of his kimono and no shoes showed below the sweeping hem.
Doctor No was at least six inches taller than Bond, but the straight immovable poise of his body made him seem still taller.
The head also was elongated and tapered from a round, completely bald skull down to a sharp chin so that the impression was of a reversed raindrop—or rather oildrop, for the skin was of a deep almost translucent yellow.
It was odd to see a forehead as smooth as the top of the polished skull.
Even the cavernous indrawn cheeks below the prominent cheekbones looked as smooth as fine ivory.
There was something Dali-esque about the eyebrows, which were fine and black and sharply upswept as if they had been painted on as makeup for a conjurer.
They looked like the mouths of two small revolvers, direct and unblinking and totally devoid of expression.
The thin fine nose ended very close above a wide compressed wound of a mouth which, despite its almost permanent sketch of a smile, showed only cruelty and authority.
Later Bond was to notice that it rarely moved more than slightly away from centre, giving the impression that the head and the vertebra were in one piece.
The bizarre, gliding figure looked like a giant venomous worm wrapped in grey tin-foil, and Bond would not have been surprised to see the rest of it trailing slimily along the carpet behind.
The two pairs of steel pincers came out on their gleaming stalks and were held up for inspection like the hands of a praying mantis.
Doctor No moved to a high leather chair and folded himself down on to the seat.
A short man, a Chinese Negro, with the build of a wrestler, stood at the drink tray.
Black almond eyes in a wide moon face met his and slid incuriously away.
I always carry what is known as a walkie-talkie here,” he inclined his chin towards the bosom of his kimono.
Bond said, “And I would like a medium Vodka dry Martini— with a slice of lemon peel.
Sam-sam, put the shaker beside the man and another bottle of Coca-Cola beside the girl.
Then Doctor No said, “And now Mister James Bond of the Secret Service, let us tell each other our secrets.
Doctor No brought the steel claw delicately in front of each eye and tapped the centre of each eyeball.
His story of representing the Audubon Society was anyway a thin one which could be punctured by anyone who knew about birds.
I have recorded the fact and it will be divulged in certain circumstances”—Doctor No’s expression showed no interest—“as will other facts.
But, if we are to have a talk, let us have it without any more stage effects.
But it is not necessary to make yourself more interesting than you are.
But, Doctor No, you are still a man who sleeps and eats and defecates like the rest of us.
I have no doubt developed annoying mannerisms from living too long in the company of apes.
However,” Doctor No raised his joined sleeves an inch and let them fall back in his lap, “let us proceed with our talk.
It is a rare pleasure to have an intelligent listener and I shall enjoy telling you the story of one of the most remarkable men in the world.
There had been little doubt in Bond’s mind ever since the Spandau had opened up on them, and since, even before then, in Jamaica, where the attempts on him had not been half-hearted.
Bond had assumed from the first that this man was a killer, that it would be a duel to the death.
He had had his usual blind faith that he would win the duel—all the way until the moment when the flame-thrower had pointed at him.
There was no anger in it, no obstinacy—nothing but a supreme indifference.
It was as if her lover had threatened to send her out of the cinema and now had relented.
Doctor No said, in the same soft resonant voice, “You are right, Mister Bond.
They are possessed by a mania which drives them forward towards their goal.
The great scientists, the philosophers, the religious leaders—all maniacs.
I am, as you correctly say, a maniac—a maniac, Mister Bond, with a mania for power.
It’s the old business of thinking you’re the King of England, or the President of the United States, or God.
The only difference is that instead of being shut up, you’ve built your own asylum and shut yourself up in it.
Any man with a loaded revolver has the power of life and death over his neighbour.
A greater power than they possess is exerted upon them by the community.
I know philosophy, I know ethics, and I know logic—better than you do, I daresay.
Let us return to where I began, with my mania for power, or, if you wish it, for the illusion of power.
And please, Mister Bond,” again the extra crease in the fixed smile, “please do not imagine that half an hour’s conversation with you will alter the pattern of my life.
He wondered when it would amuse Doctor No to crack her pose of indifference.
He fixed his eye on the elegant tulip shell that had now wandered half way up the outside of the dark window.
Even the drama of it, the danger, were fragile things compared with the progress of the tulip shell up the glass outside.
Supposing the stresses had been badly calculated, the workmanship faulty.
Supposing the sea decided to lean a little more heavily against the window.
Doctor No said, “I was the only son of a German Methodist missionary and a Chinese girl of good family.
I enjoyed the conspiracies, the burglaries, the murders, the arson of insured properties.
I became adept in the technique of criminality—if you wish to call it that.
I had been given a letter of introduction, in code, to one of the two most powerful Tongs in America—the Hip Sings.
I never knew what the letter said, but they took me on at once as a confidential clerk.
In due course, at the age of thirty, I was made the equivalent of treasurer.
Over the weeks hundreds on both sides were killed and their houses and properties burned to the ground.
The two underground armies were prised apart and the headquarters of the two Tongs were raided and the ringleaders sent to jail.
A few hours before it was due, I got to the safe and rifled the million dollars in gold and disappeared into Harlem and went to ground.
Even from the condemned cells in Sing Sing the heads of my Tong reached out for me.
Then, when they could not break me, they cut off my hands to show that the corpse was that of a thief, and they shot me through the heart and went away.
I am the one man in a million who has his heart on the right side of his body.
By sheer willpower I survived the operation and the months in hospital.
I bought an envelope, just one envelope, full of the rarest postage stamps in the world.
I had all my hair taken out by the roots, my thick nose made thin, my mouth widened, my lips sliced.
I changed my name to Julius No—the Julius after my father and the No for my rejection of him and of all authority.
I threw away my spectacles and wore contact lenses—one of the first pairs ever built.
Then I went to Milwaukee, where there are no Chinamen, and enrolled myself in the faculty of medicine.
I hid myself in the academic world, the world of libraries and laboratories and classrooms and campuses.
And there, Mister Bond, I lost myself in the study of the human body and the human mind.
I had to learn what my tools were before I put them to use on my next goal—total security from physical weaknesses, from material dangers and from the hazards of living.
She seemed composed and indifferent—as if her mind was on other things.
In due course, I completed my studies and I left America and went by easy stages round the world.
I called myself ‘doctor’ because doctors receive confidences and they can ask questions without arousing suspicion.
It had to be safe from the coming war, it had to be an island, it had to be entirely private, and it had to be capable of industrial development.
They have been secure and fruitful years, without a cloud on the horizon.
I was entertained by the idea of converting bird dung into gold, and I attacked the problem with passion.
The digging of the guano is only a question of not spoiling the crop by digging too much.
I tempted a hundred of them over to the island by paying them twelve shillings a week.
Harsh methods have had to be used from time to time, but the result is that my men are content with their wages because they are the highest wages they have ever known.
I brought in a dozen Chinese Negroes with their families to act as overseers.
They lived inside the mountain until their work was done and then left by ship.
And gradually, methodically, my fortress was built while the birds defecated on top of it.
He lifted his arms an inch and dropped them again resignedly in his lap.
The two wardens, miles away in the middle of the lake, were provisioned by launch from Cuba.
Occasionally, ornithologists from America came by the launch and spent some days at the camp.
From the first I made it clear to the Audubon Society that I would not meet their representatives.
The roseate spoonbills have become one of the bird wonders of the world.
The Society gives me formal notification that they intend to build a hotel on their leasehold, near the river up which you came.
Crab Key, they told me in their flattering, persuasive letter, would become famous.
I sent to Florida for a marsh buggy—the vehicle that is used for oil prospecting, that will cover any kind of terrain.
It smashed the camp, both wardens were reported killed—though one, it turned out, escaped to die in Jamaica—it burned the nesting places, it spread terror among the birds.
A lorry goes out of control down the airstrip as the plane is coming in.
My men suggest that the wardens went mad with loneliness and fought each other.
He looked from Bond to the girl and back again, “And that, my friends, is my story—or rather the first chapter of what I am confident will be a long and interesting tale.
No doubt the Audubon Society will decide to accept my offer for the rest of their lease.
If they start their puny operations again, other misfortunes will befall them.
I have established a watch on the intelligence services in Jamaica and Cuba.
He wondered if it was worth while even trying to make a dent in this impregnable man.
My thoughts on this case, the evidence of the poisoned fruit and the centipede and the crashed motor car, are on record.
He said softly, “But because of the girl, and only because of her, Doctor No, I will strike a bargain.
In exchange for our safe return to Jamaica, you may have a week’s start.
It is kind of you both to have listened to me with such exemplary patience.
Bond and the girl followed Doctor No through into a small octagonal mahogany paneled room lit by a central chandelier in silver with storm glasses round the candles.
Doctor No took the centre high-backed chair and bowed the girl into the chair on his right.
He slowly ate through three bowls of different soup, feeding himself with a spoon with a short handle that fitted neatly between the pincers.
He talked cheerfully to the girl about Jamaica—about the birds and the animals and the flowers which were an easy topic for her.
Bond thought they were putting on an excellent imitation of an engaged couple being given dinner by a detested uncle.
Perhaps there were other people in the world with their private kingdoms—away from the beaten track, where there were no witnesses, where they could do what they liked.
Doctor No would shrug his shoulders over the disappearance of Bond and Quarrel.
In Morgan’s Harbour they would think she had been drowned on one of her expeditions.
It was hard to see what could interfere with Doctor No—with the second chapter of his life, whatever it was.
When the cutlets came, perfectly cooked, Bond fiddled indecisively with the knives and chose the bread knife to eat them with.
While he ate and talked, he edged the big steel meat knife towards him.
An expansive gesture of his right hand knocked over his glass of champagne and in the split second of the crash his left hand flicked the knife into the deep sleeve of his kimono.
In the midst of Bond’s apologies and the confusion as he and the bodyguard mopped up the spilled champagne, Bond raised his left arm and felt the knife slip back to below his armpit and then fall inside the kimono against his ribs.
When he had finished his cutlets he tightened the silk belt round his waist, shifting the knife across his stomach.
The knife nestled comfortingly against his skin and gradually the steel grew warm.
The two guards came and stood close behind Bond’s chair and the girl’s.
They stood with their arms crossed on their chests, impassive, motionless, like executioners.
Bond smoked busily, agitating his hands and forearms to create an atmosphere of movement.
The monthly ship is putting in tomorrow and I have the loading to supervise.
The deep quiet authoritative voice came to him as if it was coming down from the night sky.
This was a big game, a game that explained everything, a game that was certainly, in the international espionage market, well worth the candle.
For this it was certainly worth scaring away a few birds and wiping out a few people.
So far, the signals from Moscow have been innocent of any sign of conspiracy.
I accept the dangers and, so far as I can, I have equipped myself against them.
You see, Mister Bond,” the deep voice held a hint of greed, “I am on the edge of still greater things.
The Chapter Two to which I referred holds the promise of prizes which no one but a fool would throw away because he was afraid.
I have told you that I can bend the beams on which these rockets fly, Mister Bond.
If I could bring them down into the sea near this island and salvage the secrets of their construction.
At present American destroyers, far out in the South Atlantic, salvage these missiles when they come to the end of their fuel and parachute down into the sea.
No one on Turks Island would be surprised if every now and then the prototype of a new series broke off its flight and came down near Crab Key.
Later, perhaps, they would discover that other radio signals besides theirs were guiding their rockets.
Directly I found they were looking for me, I would have one last fling.
Even without warheads, Mister Bond, five tons of metal arriving at a thousand miles an hour can cause plenty of damage in a crowded town.
Now he was going to be politely shown the way to his grave, taking the secrets with him and the waif he had picked up and dragged along with him on his lunatic adventure.
The bitterness inside Bond came up into his mouth so that for a moment he thought he was going to retch.
I am also interested in finding out how much the human body can endure.
From time to time I make experiments on those of my people who have to be punished.
The German experiments on live humans during the war were of great benefit to science.
It is a year since I put a girl to death in the fashion I have chosen for you, woman.
She stared back at him, half hypnotized, like a bush mouse in front of a rattlesnake.
At this time of year they come up in thousands from their holes near the shore and climb up towards the mountain.
There, in the coral uplands, they go to ground again in holes in the rock and spawn their broods.
They are coming up the mountainside in their tens of thousands, great red and orange and black waves of them, scuttling and hurrying and scraping against the rock above us at this moment.
He waited for his voice to steady, then he said, with all the venom he could put into the words, “You bastard.
The guard behind the girl’s chair leant forward and plucked her bodily out of the chair as if she had been a child and slung the inert body over his shoulder.
The guard went to the door and opened it and went out, closing it noiselessly behind him.
Bond thought only of the knife against his skin and of the lighter under his armpit.
Doctor No said quietly, “You said that power was an illusion, Mister Bond.
My power to select this particular death for the girl is surely not an illusion.
You see, Mister Bond, I am interested in the anatomy of courage—in the power of the human body to endure.
I have given much thought to the problem, and I believe I have solved it.
It is, of course, only a rough and ready method, and I shall learn by experience as more and more subjects are put to the test.
I gave you a sedative so that your body should be rested and I have fed you well so that you may be at full strength.
I will say no more about it because the element of surprise is one of the constituents of fear.
It is the unknown dangers that are the worst, that bear most heavily on the reserves of courage.
And I flatter myself that the gauntlet you will run contains a rich assortment of the unexpected.
It will be particularly interesting, Mister Bond, that a man of your physical qualities is to be my first competitor.
It will be most interesting to observe how far you get down the course I have devised.
You should go far, but when, as is inevitable, you have finally failed at an obstacle, your body will be recovered and I shall most meticulously examine the physical state of your remains.
Silently Bond gathered his reserves of courage, steeling his mind against the fear of the unknown that already had him by the throat, focusing his whole will on survival.
Doctor No turned away and the door closed softly behind the long thin gunmetal back.
No The film is more exciting than the book, which is a rarity as far as the Fleming novels are concerned.
The first lines spoken by Sean Connery ... the name’s Bond, James Bond ... is one of the iconic moments of 20 th century films and is repeated a number of times in the way of introduction, in subsequent Bond films.
This scene had to be repeated a number of times until the right tone and delivery had been achieved.
She turns up at his residence unexpectedly reminiscent of a wartime incident with the woman who would eventually become his wife he arrived home from an operation to find her in his bath and well ... watch the BBC series The Man Who Would Be Bond.
I wonder if Sylvia Trench is perhaps patterned after Fleming’s real world wife.
Ursula Andress in her iconic white bikini The bikini was custom made late the night before by a local actress turned dress maker Marie Therese Prendergast custom made to fit Ursula Andress’ athletic physique.
On the first scene filmed between Andress and Connery on the beach, she managed to slip and cut her leg.
No has a nuclear reactor to power his island hide out and is trying to topple a rocket set to send a space probe to the Moon.
The script is no longer about the missile race, but about the Space Race and the prestige that the United States had invested in the effort.
The reason for including the character Felix Leiter and the Central Intelligence Agency might be to provide some continuity to future scripts as well as to give United States theater goers some American content.
M If you carry a double-0 number, it means you’re licensed to kill, not get killed.
You’ll carry the Walther from now on ... unless you want to go back to standard intelligence work.
There is a great deal of true to life espionage trade craft to the film.
The film’s action is well paced and the climax is indeed a one-on-one fight between good and evil ... between Bond and Dr.
No ... as Bond pushes the atomic reactor past its safe operating limits, defeating Dr.
The arch villain dies a quick and painful death either being boiled alive or fried by the gamma radiation and neutrons.
No As a nuclear astrophysicist I can tell you that, in real life, under such unsafe reactor conditions that James Bond would also irradiated himself with enough gamma radiation and neutrons to die of radiation poisoning long before the next film, From Russia With Love, found its ways to the theaters.
I am also unsure how one can extract electrical power from a water pool reactor, apart from thermionic means, which has a very low conversion efficiency.
The delayed release was due to trepidation that United States theater goers would not relate to a debonair British secret agent.
A decision was made to let the press build up good standing for the film in the UK before being released elsewhere.
The Bond phenomena, along with the Beatles, took many media watchers by surprise.
No exceeded $ 60 million, despite the delayed release to the United States and international markets.
Sometimes late at night, after a long hard day at work when I just want to relax, I pop my Dr.
No film into the DVD and enjoy the well paced action of the film and the rather remarkable story that it depicts.
Every time I watch this film I can see how James Bond became an instant hit in the 1960’s.
Good fights evil and wins the fight, but goodness wins because of a good fight.
It is not that the end justifies the means ... the ends and the means are one and the same.
You can see him and his film making colleagues at their finest in every second of the beauty and professionalism of this wonderful film.
As a banker and someone who was knowledgeable about gold, the novel is an excellent look at the smuggling world.
There are many inklings that Ian Fleming drew from real life for detailed aspects of this novel.
The British gold reserves, the solvency of the pound sterling and the balance of trade were major concerns for the UK Government from at least August 1939 until well into the 1970’s.
The savings transferred from the old world to the new world constituted over three hundred years of earnest effort by the People of Britain.
The answer that President Roosevelt received from the French Government in 1940 did not endear the French to the American President.
In 1940, prior to sending their plea to the US, France had already decided not to share their wealth with the United States, burying part of their gold deposits in North Africa, and storing some of their gold in the hold of a French aircraft carrier in one of the French islands in the Gulf of St.
Great Britain, on the other hand did not expect a free ride from the United States and did their earnest effort to fight the war against Germany and fulfill their financial obligations to their American allies.
In the space of three years the entire wealth of Great Britain found its way into American coffers, making the United States not just the Arsenal of Democracy, but the wealthiest people in the history of the English speaking world.
That injection of wealth into American life lasted perhaps from 1941 to 1981 ... then the whole thing went bust.
The financial tug of war between the United States and the rest of the world continues to this day.
A sideline to this is how a similar but smaller financial drama played out from 1935 to 1975 in Sweden.
I will give you a hint... he was a Canadian and was known as the man called Intrepid.
When these reserves ran out the United States implemented the policy of Lend Lease.
The Operation to Transfer the wealth of Great Britain to the new world was known as OPERATION FISH and it would be remiss of me if I did not say not a single penny of this transfer was lost on the high seas to U-Boats, and on land due to graft or theft.
The orders for the first shipment of gold bars under OPERATION FISH aboard the RN light cruiser HMS Emerald undertaken in early October 1939 read the following.
Two million Pounds Sterling in gold bars is to be embarked in each ship to Halifax.
A railway truck is expected to be placed alongside each ship about 01.00 October 7.
The UK£ 2,000,000 sterling in this single shipment alone is equivalent to an estimated UK£ 100,000,000 in 2018.
But this is a story for a future book in The Best of Ian Fleming series.
Smuggling and black marketeering of illicit goods and services in Great Britain is an interesting story, including the smuggling of precious metals and luxury items.
The plot and characters in Goldfinger draw directly from all that I have just recounted.
Right off the top, the arch villain Auric Goldfinger was named after British architect Emo Goldfinger, whose London architecture Ian Fleming abhorred.
Goldfinger tried to sue Fleming for the commandeering of his surname as an arch villain in his book, but lost the suit.
The Swiss angle in the Goldfinger novel is an obvious tie to the role the Swiss played as a purported ‘neutral country ’ during the Second World War.
The coffers of Swiss banks swelled during the Second World War as citizens of the axis powers squirreled away ill gotten wealth in Swiss banks.
This wealth remained locked tight from foreign scrutiny until well into the 1990’s.
There has still to be a full accounting of where all the gold taken off the cadavers of concentration camp victims ended up.
Plomer was a South African and British author, as well as a literary editor to Faber and Faber and a literary advisor to the publisher of the Bond novels Jonathan Cape.
Plomer worked closely with Ian Fleming edited a number of the Bond novels.
On his way back to London he makes a detour to help an acquaintance of his a Mr Dupont.
The opening of the main plot begins with the matter of a crooked card game that Auric Goldfinger is involved in.
He is using a spotter to read his opponent’s cards, sending the information to Goldfinger by radio.
The spotter is a demi-monde type and is a sort of ‘girl friend’ paid to be seen with Goldfinger.
Bond thwarts the card racket, then steals away the pretty young woman and has a fling with her.
In the process of tailing Goldfinger using a radio tracker Bond finds out how Goldfinger is financing SMERSH’s western networks with smuggled gold.
Bond then reconnoiters Goldfinger’s Swiss operation only to be foisted by an encounter with the sister of the dead woman he had a fling with.
The Second phase is to explode a small gamma ray producing nuclear weapon in the United States gold reserves at Fort Knox, rendering the reserve radioactive and therefore non-negotiable.
Later, when they had got to the problem of transporting the tons of gold out of the town, Bond had had one last try.
Nobody's going to get their hundred tons of gold out of the place—let alone five hundred.
Initially by train and then by transporter convoy, my gold will arrive on board the cruiser by midnight on D-Day.
Everything has been carefully planned, every possible hitch has been foreseen.
Such small debris as remains of my former life can go to the scavengers who will shortly be sniffing on my trail.
I shall have emigrated and, Mr Bond, I shall have taken the golden heart of America with me.
In a clever way Bond manages to alert the United States authorities through his friend, Felix Leiter, and the plot is foiled.
Incidentally, the small nuclear weapon is from the Corporal Intermediate Range Guided Missile is a W7 with a variable dial-a-yield of between 2 kt to 60 kt.
The W7 was also used in ten different delivery system, from the MGM-5 Corporal Intermediate Range Guided Missile mentioned in Goldfinger, to the MGR-2 Honest John missiles, to nuclear depth charges (the Mark 90 Betty) to gravity bombs for tactical fighters like the Super Sabre.
Between 1952 and 1967 some 1,800 W7 warheads were produced in the United States and deployed with the armed forces of a number of NATO countries.
The book Goldfinger is the first time a form of nuclear extortion had been written into a novel in the English speaking world, even a Bond novel.
The nuclear side to the Goldfinger plot is also the first inkling of what would become the core of the plot to the book Thunderball.
Incidentally, the effort was underway to film the book Thunderball before either Dr.
No and Goldfinger, but that effort got tied up in a legal battle that I will describe when we get to the book Thunderball.
The book Thunderball would be filmed a year after the release of Goldfinger to American theaters.
Under his feet glittered the brilliant golden patterns of the Boris Anrep mosaics; beyond, through twenty-foot-high arched windows, green grass and geraniums blazed in the central courtyard.
Over all hung the neutral smell of air-conditioned air and the heavy, grave atmosphere of immense riches.
One of the athletic-looking, pink frock-coated commissionaires came up to him.
The commissionaire knocked at the last of several finely carved oak doors that were just so much taller and more elegant than ordinary doors.
She smiled with a hint of conspiracy, picked up a telephone and dialed a number.
She crossed the room to a door covered with green baize and held it open for Bond to go through.
Colonel Smithers looked exactly like someone who would be called Colonel Smithers.
He had obviously been a colonel, probably on the staff, and he had the smooth, polished, basically serious mien that fitted his name.
But for his horn-rimmed glasses, he might have been an efficient, not very wellfed courtier in a royal household.
He looked up, saw that he had put his foot in it, and tried to make amends.
Bond said, 'We all think our own secrets are the only ones that matter.
You can go to any town in the world, almost to any village, and hand over a piece of gold and get goods or services in exchange.
He was prepared to listen to anyone who was master of his subject, any subject.
If gold bars have Mint marks stamped on them the marks can be shaved off or the bar can be melted down and made into a new bar.
We can only tell what the true strength of the pound is, and other countries can only tell it, by knowing the amount of valuta we have behind our currency.
And my main job, Mr Bond' Colonel Smithers's bland eyes had become unexpectedly sharp 'is to watch for any leakage of gold out of England—out of anywhere in the sterling area.
Gold Squad on to the fugitive gold and try to get it back into our vaults, plug the leak and arrest the people responsible.
And the trouble is, Mr Bond' Colonel Smithers gave a forlorn shrug of the shoulders 'that gold attracts the biggest, the most ingenious criminals.
The population of the world is increasing at the rate of five thousand four hundred every hour of the day.
A small percentage of those people become gold hoarders, people who are frightened of currencies, who like to bury some sovereigns in the garden or under the bed.
All these new people will be taking tons of gold off the market every year.
Gold has extraordinary properties which are being put to new uses every day.
It is brilliant, malleable, ductile, almost unalterable and more dense than any of the common metals except platinum.
It wears out quickly, leaves itself on the linings of our pockets and in the sweat of our skins.
Fear, Mr Bond, takes gold out of circulation and hoards it against the evil day.
In the days when Bond had been after the diamond smugglers he had had first to educate himself in the fascination, the myth of the stones.
Well, you were suggesting that gold production was so vast nowadays that it ought to take care of all these various consumers.
You may think that large areas of the world have still to be explored for gold.
Broadly speaking, there only remains the land under the sea and the sea itself, which has a notable gold content.
People have been scratching the surface of the world for gold for thousands of years.
There were the great gold treasures of Egypt and Mycenae, Montezuma and the Incas.
Europe was worked for it—the valleys of the Rhine and the Po, Malaga and the plains of Granada.
Ants coming up from under the earth carrying grains of gold led the Indians to their alluvial fields.
These were followed by the opening up of the Gold Coast, then called Negro-land, and after that came the Americas.
The famous gold rushes of the Yukon and Eldorado, and the rich strikes at Eureka sounded off the first modern Gold Age.
Meanwhile, in Australia, Bendigo and Ballarat had come into production, and the Russian deposits at Lena and in the Urals were making Russia the largest gold producer in the world in the middle of the nineteenth century.
Then came the second modern Gold Age—the discoveries on the Witwatersrand.
These were helped by the new method of cyaniding instead of separation of the gold from the rock by mercury.
Just to show you, from 1500 to 1900, when approximate figures were kept, the whole world produced bout eighteen thousand tons of gold.
Bond, smothered by this cataract of gold history, found no difficulty in looking as grave as Colonel Smithers.
Sports and welfare are becoming almost too much of a fetish at the Bank.
However ' Colonel Smithers waved these minor irritations aside the 'as you say, time to get on to the smuggling.
Well, to begin with, and taking only England and the sterling area, it's a very big business indeed.
We employ three thousand staff at the Bank, Mr Bond, and of those no less than one thousand work in the exchange control department.
Bond measured it against the Secret Service which had a total force of two thousand.
Colonel Smithers now talked in the soft, tired voice of an overworked man in the service of his Government.
It was the voice of the specialist in a particular line of law enforcement.
It said that he knew most things connected with that line and that he could make a good guess at all the rest.
Supposing you have a bar of gold in your pocket about the size of a couple of packets of Players.
Never mind for the moment where you got it from stole it or inherited it or something.
Now, the law says you have to sell that to the Bank of England at the controlled price of twelve pounds ten per ounce.
All you have to do is cut your bar into thin sheets or plates you'd soon find someone to do this for you and sew the plates they'd be smaller than playing cards into a cotton belt, and pay your friend a commission to wear it.
Your friend flies off to Bombay and goes to the first bullion dealer in the bazaar.
He will be given one thousand seven hundred pounds for your five-pound bar and you're a richer man than you might have been.
Mark you,' Colonel Smithers waved his pipe airily, 'that's only seventy per cent profit.
To give you an idea, the Indian Intelligence Bureau and their Customs captured forty-three thousand ounces in 1955.
He was only twenty when he arrived, but he must have been a bright lad because he smelled that the Russians would be swallowing his country pretty soon.
He was a jeweler and goldsmith by trade, like his father and grandfather who had refined gold for Faberge.
He had a little money and probably one of those belts of gold I was telling you about.
Well, soon after he'd been naturalized he was a harmless sort of chap and in a useful trade and he had no difficulty in getting his papers he started buying up small pawnbrokers all over the country.
Always chose good sites, just on the dividing line between the well-to-do streets and the lower-middle.
He lived in London and toured his shops once a month and collected all the old gold.
So they are, but they mount up if you've got twenty little shops, each one buying perhaps half a dozen bits and pieces every week.
Well, the war came and Goldfinger, like all other jewelers, had to declare his stock of gold.
It was fifty ounces for the whole chain! just enough of a working stock to keep his shops supplied with ring settings and so forth, what they call jewelers' findings in the rade.
He tucked himself away in a machine-tool firm in Wales during the war well out of the firing line but kept as many of his shops operating as he could.
Must have done well out of the G.I.s who generally travel with a Gold Eagle or a Mexican fifty-dollar piece as a last reserve.
He bought himself a house, pretentious sort of place, at Reculver, at the mouth of the Thames.
He also invested in a well-found Brixham trawler and an old Silver Ghost Rolls Royce armoured car, built for some South American president who was killed before he could take delivery.
He set up a little factory called ""Thanet Alloy Research"" in the grounds of his house and staffed it with a German metallurgist, a prisoner of war who didn't want to go back to Germany, and half a dozen Korean stevedores he picked up in Liverpool.
They didn't know a word of any civilized language so they weren't any security risk.
Then, for ten years, all we know is that he made one trip a year to India in his trawler and a few trips in his car very year to Switzerland.
I do want you to get the picture of the sort of man this is quiet, careful, law-abiding and with the sort of drive and single-mindedness we all admire.
In the summer of 1954, his trawler, homeward bound from India, went ashore on the Goodwins and he sold the wreck for a song to the Dover Salvage Company.
When this company started breaking the ship up and got as far as the hold they found the timbers impregnated with a sort of brown powder which they couldn't put a name to.
I won't bother you with the formula, but you see gold can be made to dissolve in a mixture of hydrochloric and nitric acids, and reducing agents the sulphur dioxide or oxalic acid precipitate the metal as a brown powder.
This powder can be reconstituted into gold ingots by melting at around a thousand degrees Centigrade.
Goldfinger had been refining down his old gold, precipitating it into this brown powder and shipping it to India as fertilizer.
We dressed a couple of the Gold Squad up and sent them down to knock on the door of Mr Goldfinger's factory at Reculver.
Mark you, he may have been tipped off by his bank manager or someone, but that factory was entirely devoted to designing a cheap alloy for jewelers' findings—trying out unusual metals like aluminum and tin instead of the usual copper and nickel and palladium that are used in gold alloys.
There were traces of gold about, of course, and furnaces to heat up to two thousand degrees and so forth, but after all Goldfinger was a jeweler and a smelter in a small way, and all this was perfectly above-board.
The rumble of the City came through the halfopen window high up in the wall behind his chair.
I flew to Nassau and had a look at the five million pounds' worth or so he holds there in the vaults of the Royal Bank of Canada.
Oddly enough, like all artists, he couldn't refrain from signing his handiwork.
It needs a microscope to see it, but somewhere, on each Goldfinger bar, a minute letter Z has been scratched in the metal.
The Bank can do nothing about it, so we are asking you to bring Mr Goldfinger to book, Mr Bond, and get that gold back.
While they waited for it, Bond glanced out of the tall window at the end of the passage.
He was looking down into the deep well of the back courtyard of the Bank.
A trim chocolate-brown lorry with no owner's name had come into the courtyard through the triple steel gates.
Trouble was that those Reichsbank forgeries during the war were a darn sight too good.
When the Russians captured Berlin, amongst the loot they got hold of the plates.
At any moment, if Moscow had been inclined, they could have started a major raid on our currency.
He had never thought very much about the Bank of England, but now that he had been inside the place he decided that the Old Lady of Threadneedle Street might be old but she still had some teeth left in her head.
When Bond went in and took the chair across he desk, he noticed the conscious effort M made to clear his mind, cope with the new problem the day was to fling at him.
When he had finished, M said thoughtfully, 'Suppose we've got to take it on.
Don't understand a thing about the pound and bank rate and all that but everyone seems to be taking it damned seriously.
Personally I should have thought the strength of the pound depended on how hard we all worked rather than how much gold we’d got.
However, that's probably too easy an answer for the politicians or more likely too difficult.
I should say he's the sort of man who only respects people who are tougher or smarter than he is.
I’ve given him one beating and the only message I got from him was that he'd like me to play golf with him.
It just happens that I also know what Mr Goldfinger's gold bars look like.
It had come in with that haul we made last week when the Redland Resident Director's office ""caught fire"" in Tangier.
James Bond flung the D.B.III through the last mile of straight and did a racing change down into third and then into second for the short hill before the inevitable traffic crawl through Rochester.
Leashed in by the velvet claw of the front discs, the engine muttered its protest with a mild back-popple from the twin exhausts.
Bond went up into third again, beat the lights at the bottom of the hill and slid resignedly up to the back of the queue that would crawl on for a quarter of an hour if he was lucky through the sprawl of Rochester and Chatham.
He reached for the wide gunmetal case of Morland cigarettes on the neighbouring bucket seat, fumbled for one and lit it from the dashboard.
He had chosen the A2 in preference to the A20 to Sandwich because he wanted to take a quick look at Goldfinger-land Reculver and those melancholy forsaken reaches of the Thames which Goldfinger had chosen for his parish.
He would then cross the Isle of Thanet to Ramsgate and leave his bag at the Channel Packet, have an early lunch and be off to Sandwich.
But the D.B.III had the advantage of an up-todate triptyque, an inconspicuous colour battleship grey and certain extras which might or might not come in handy.
These included switches to alter the type and colour of Bond's front and rear lights if he was following or being followed at night, reinforced steel bumpers, fore and aft, in case he needed to ram, a long-barrelled Colt .45 in a trick compartment under the driver's seat, a radio pick-up tuned to receive an apparatus called the Homer, and plenty of concealed space that would fox most Customs men.
Bond saw a chance and picked up fifty yards, sliding into a ten-yard gap left by a family saloon of slow reactions.
The man at the wheel, who wore that infallible badge of the bad driver, a hat clamped firmly on the exact centre of his head, hooted angrily.
Bond reached out of the window and raised an enigmatically clenched fist.
Their centres were always running out of funds—their men complaining to Moscow that they couldn't afford a square meal.
Perhaps SMERSH couldn't get the valuta out of the Ministry of Home Security.
Or perhaps the Ministry of Home Security couldn't get the money out of the Ministry of Finance.
But it had always been the same—endless money troubles that resulted in missed chances, broken promises and waste of dangerous radio time.
On the side, Goldfinger was appreciably damaging the currency base of an enemy country.
If all this was correct, it was typical of SMERSH a brilliant scheme, faultlessly operated by an outstanding man.
And that, reflected Bond as he roared up the hill into Chatham, putting half a dozen cars behind him, would partly explain Goldfinger's greed for more and still more money.
Devotion to the cause, to SMERSH, and perhaps the dangled prize of an Order of Lenin, would be the spur to pick up even ten or twenty thousand dollars when the odds were right or could be favorably adjusted.
The funds for Red Revolution, for the discipline by fear that was the particular specialty of SMERSH, could never be big enough.
The minor risk of being found out, as he had been by Bond, was nothing.
Bond started motoring again, but easily now, not hurrying, following his thoughts as the hands and feet went through their automatic responses.
So, in 'thirty-seven, SMERSH must have sent Goldfinger out with the belt of gold round his young waist.
He had shown his special aptitudes, his acquisitive bent, during his training in the spy school in Leningrad.
He would have been told there would be a war, that he must dig himself in and start quietly accumulating.
Goldfinger must never dirty his hands, never meet an agent, never receive or pass a message.
Always an advertisement that would not attract attention or correspondence.
And, obediently, Goldfinger would leave the two thousand pounds or the five thousand pounds gold bar at one of a long, a very long series of post-boxes that had been arranged in Moscow before he left.
A particular bridge, a hollow tree, under a rock in a stream somewhere, anywhere in England.
Later, after the war, when Goldfinger was blossoming out, when he had become a big man, the post-boxes would no longer be bridges and trees.
But still there would be the rule that Goldfinger must never revisit the scene, never endanger himself.
Perhaps he would only get his instructions once a year, at a casual meeting in some park, in a letter slipped into his pocket on a train journey.
But always it would be bars of gold, anonymous, untraceable if captured—except for the tiny Z that his vanity had scratched on his handiwork and that a dull dog at the Bank of England called Colonel Smithers had happened upon in the course of his duties.
Now Bond was running through the endless orchards of the Faversham growers.
There was traffic on the river long, glistening tankers, stubby merchantmen, antediluvian Dutch Schuyts.
Bond left the Canterbury road and switched on to the incongruously rich highway that runs through the cheap bungaloid world of the holiday lands Whitstable, Herne Bay, Birchington, Margate.
And, Bond reflected, while Goldfinger was pumping a million, two million pounds a year into the bloody maw of SMERSH, he was pyramiding his reserves, working on them, making them work for him whenever the odds were right, piling up the surplus for the day when the trumpets would sound in the Kremlin and every golden sinew would be mobilized.
And no one outside Moscow had been watching the process, no one suspected that Goldfinger the jeweler, the metallurgist, the resident of Reculver and Nassau, the respected member of Blades, of the Royal St.
Marks at Sandwich was one of the greatest conspirators of all time, that he had financed the murder of hundreds, perhaps thousands of victims of SMERSH all over the world.
And here was Bond, launched against this man by a series of flukes, a train of coincidence that had been started by a plane breaking down on the other side of the world.
How often in his profession had it been the same the tiny acorn of coincidence that soared into the mighty oak whose branches darkened the sky.
And now, once again, he was setting out to bring the dreadful growth down.
A repainted sky-blue Ford Popular with large yellow ears was scurrying along the crown of the road ahead.
The usual tense figure, hands held too high up on the wheel, and the inevitable hat, this time a particularly hideous black bowler, square on a large bullet head.
He changed down and contemptuously slammed the D.B.III past on the inside.
Another five miles and Bond was through the dainty teleworld of Herne Bay.
They skimmed below his right-hand horizon as if they were diving into the earth.
With half his mind, Bond heard the roar of their jets catch up with them as they landed and taxied in to the hangars.
The shoreline was too exposed for a trawler to do anything but beach or anchor.
Customs and police who were probably only on the look-out for brandy coming over from France.
There was a thick clump of trees between the road and the shore, a glimpse of roofs and of a mediumsized factory chimney with a thin plume of light smoke or steam.
He took the next righthand turn across the Manston plateau to Ramsgate.
Bond inspected his room, a double with bathroom, on the top floor of the Channel Packet, unpacked his few belongings and went down to the snack bar where he had one vodka and tonic and two rounds of excellent ham sandwiches with plenty of mustard.
Then he got back into his car and drove slowly over to the Royal St Marks at Sandwich.
Bond carried his clubs to the professional's shop and through to the workroom.
Someone was telling me only the other day that you’re in the diplomatic or something.
There had been a time in his teens when he had played two rounds a day every day of the week at St.
It's all there except for that flat swing and wanting to hit the ball out of sight when there's no point in it.
But something had told Bond that there wasn't going to be a great deal of golf in his life and if he liked the game he'd better forget about lessons and just play as much of it as he could.
Yes, it would be about twenty years since he had played his last round on St.
He'd never been Back even when there had been that bloody affair of the Moonraker at Kingsdown, ten miles down the coast.
Since St Marks, Bond had got in a good deal of weekend golf when he was at headquarters.
But always on the courses round London Huntercombe, Swinley, Sunningdale, the Berkshire.
But he was a real nine—had to be with the games he chose to play, the tenpound Nassaus with the tough cheery men who were always so anxious to stand you a couple of double kummels after lunch.
The professional glanced through his back window at the parking space round the tall flag-pole.
And the trouble is that Cecil’s gone over to Princes to get in some practice for the championship.
Alfred obviously found it difficult to believe that anyone knew Mr Goldfinger.
It meant that Blacking had an unfavourable view of a particular member but that he was too good a servant of the club to pass it on.
The professional took the driver he was holding, took up a stance, gazed towards an imaginary hole and banged the head of the club up and down on the floor as if addressing an imaginary ball.
But for the last few years he's only been coming to England for a few weeks at a time.
Rings up and asks if anyone's wanting a game and when there isn't anyone he books Cecil or me.
I'll stay in the shop so it'll give him a chance to take his choice without offending me.
Half a mile away, a bright yellow car was turning off the road and coming up the private drive.
The sun glittered off the silver radiator and off the engine-turned aluminum shield below the high perpendicular glass cliff of the windscreen.
The luggage rail on the roof of the heavy coach-built limousine body so ugly twenty years ago, so strangely beautiful today was polished brass, as were the two Lucas 'King of the Road’ headlamps that stared so haughtily down the road ahead, and the wide mouth of the old boaconstrictor bulb horn.
The whole car, except for a black roof and black carrosserie lines and curved panels below the windows, was primrose yellow.
It crossed Bond's mind that the South American president might have had it copied from the famous yellow fleet in which Lord Lonsdale had driven to the Derby and Ascot.
In the driver's seat sat a figure in a cafe-au-lait dust coat and cap, his big round face obscured by black-rimmed driving goggles.
Beside him was a squat figure in black with a bowler hat placed firmly on the middle of his head.
The two figures stared straight in front of them with a curious immobility.
The six pairs of eyes—the eyes of the two men and the great twin orbs of the car seemed to be looking straight through the little window and into Bond's eyes.
Instinctively, Bond took a few paces back into the dark recesses of the workroom.
He picked up somebody's putter and bent down and thoughtfully addressed a knot in the wooden floor.
He had scrawled plusses against all the names except Ring and Helmut Springer.
He had come to his conclusions by watching eyes, mouths, hands, but nothing had been betrayed by The Grinner's unwavering false smile.
The wink in his right eye had been as steady on the pulse-beat as a metronome and he had kept his hands below the table.
Now Billy Ring brought his hands up from below the table and formed a cat's cradle with them on the green baize in front of him.
For a moment he watched the two thumbs twirling, then he raised his nightmare face to Goldfinger's.
Mister--' he found difficulty with his b's, m's and p's and produced them by bringing his upper lip down over his teeth like a horse does when it takes sugar out of your hand—'long time now my friends and I been back in legal.
Me and my associates, we do all right with the girls, the hemp, and the racetrack, and when we're short there’s our good friends the Unions to slip us the odd fin.
Ya see, mister The Grinner opened his hands and then put them back into the cradle—'we figger the old days are gone.
Well, siree, in those days, people were shooting at each other so fast you'd often need a programme to tell the act from the spectators.
So all right, people got tired of it those that hadn't already got tired to death, if you get my meaning and when the 'fifties come along and I take over the team, it's unanimous that we get out of the fireworks business.
Goldfinger said cordially, 'Thank you for your most interesting statement, Mr Ring.
Mr Solo leant his head back and began running the machine thoughtfully up the right side of his face while his uptilted eyes sought decision in the ceiling.
Suddenly he switched the razor off, put it down on the table in front of him and jerked his head down and forward like a snake striking.
The black gun-muzzles of his eyes pointed threateningly across the table at Goldfinger and moved slowly from feature to feature of the big moon-face.
The other half was dark with the Italian swarthiness that comes from an uncontrollable beard growth.
Last man I knew was so much relaxed he got himself totally relaxed by a quick burst of the chopper.
But mister—’ there was a pause for emphasis—'either we get that billion or you get dead.
He said pompously, 'I am still giving the matter my full consideration.
He said smoothly, ’Mister, I figure you know the odds and you surely pay the best since one of our machines at Vegas got the trots and gave continuous jackpots.
His eyes, now frightening again, turned, with Goldfinger’s, to Miss Pussy Galore.
Miss Galore veiled her violet eyes so as not to have to look at either of them.
She tapped with long, silver-painted finger-nails on the gold bar before her.
Slowly his head moved from side to side as if he was trying to exercise fibrositis in his neck muscles.
In the chilly silence, Mr Springer tucked his handkerchief carefully into the left-hand cuff of his immaculate pin-stripe, turned and walked softly to the door and let himself out.
He got close to Bond and said earnestly, 'Mister, if that's your doll, you better watch her.
Bond was having a quiet square meal off caviar and champagne and thinking how well Goldfinger had handled the meeting when the door at the end of the room opened and one of the Koreans hurried in and went up to Goldfinger.
When Bond at last got to bed that night, he couldn't wipe the word out of his mind.
Oddjob had got the signal, a double ring, and Springer and his guard had got hit.
When the meeting of paramount hoods had broken up to go about their various duties, Goldfinger had dismissed the girl and kept Bond in the room.
He told Bond to take notes and then for more than two hours went over the operation down to the smallest detail.
When they came to the doping of the two reservoirs (Bond had to work out an exact timetable to ensure that the people of Fort Knox would all be 'under' in good time) Bond had asked for details of the drug and its speed of action.
From now, Oddjob will not be more than a yard from your side and his orders will be strict and exact.
So I can tell you that the entire population of Fort Knox will be dead or incapacitated by midnight on D-l.
The Russians captured the entire German stocks at Dyhemfurth on the Polish frontier.
You'll find yourself tearing down the Dixie Highway in a truck with a few gold bars loaded with gamma rays and the American Army on your tail.
Naturally’ Goldfinger was indulgent—'this unique performance will not be immaculate.
I need these clumsy gangsters with their guns and their men, but I could not bring them into the plan until the last moment.
These men are amateurs who were needed, so to speak, for the crowd scenes.
What happens to them after the play is of no interest to me whatsoever.
So in fact, reflected Bond feverishly, this was not only a Goldfinger operation with SMERSH in the background.
To them Goldfinger was just another of them, another gangster, slightly larger than life-size.
There was no difference except that the weapons and the techniques had been brought up to date.
Every half-hour a note would come in from Goldfinger's operations room asking for schedules of this, copies of that, estimates, timetables, lists of stores.
Another typewriter was brought in, maps, reference books anything that Bond requisitioned.
But not once did Oddjob relax the extreme care with which he opened the door to Bond's knock, not once did his watchful eyes wander from Bond's eyes, hands, feet when he came into the room to bring meals or notes or supplies.
She worked like a machine quick, willing, accurate, but uncommunicative.
She responded with cool politeness to Bond's early attempts to make friends, share his thoughts with her.
Her hobby had been indoor pistol and rifle shooting and she had belonged to two marksman clubs.
Bond came to the conclusion that Tilly Masterton was one of those girls whose hormones had got mixed up.
As a result of fifty years of emancipation, feminine qualities were dying out or being transferred to the males.
Pansies of both sexes were everywhere, not yet completely homosexual, but confused, not knowing what they were.
The result was a herd of unhappy sexual misfits barren and full of frustrations, the women wanting to dominate and the men to be nannied.
Bond smiled sourly to himself as he remembered his fantasies about this girl as they sped along the valley of the Loire.
Fie worked for an hour, typing, single-spaced, on both sides of the sheet, exact details of the operation.
He folded the sheet, rolled it to a small cylinder about the size of his little finger and sealed it carefully with gum.
Bond rolled this message round the cylinder, wrote $5000 REWARD in red ink on the outside, and stuck the little package down the centre of three inches of Scotch tape.
Then he sat down again on the edge of the bed and carefully strapped the free ends of the Scotch tape down the inside of his thigh.
Its release on the 17 th of September 1964 occurred during a year with a number of earth shattering events that scarred the psyche of people throughout the English Speaking World.
First and foremost was the assassination of President John F Kennedy in November, 1963.
Then there was the Bay of Tomkin incident that saw the Johnson Administration deciding to ramp up United States involvement in Vietnam.
Kim Philby defected to the Soviet Union, and it became evident he was the Third Man in the Cambridge spy ring, after Burgess and Maclean.
On August 8 th , 1964 twelve bandits robbed a train of over £ 2. million in cash and jewelry.
But the saddest event of them all for James Bond fans was the sudden death of Ian Fleming of heart failure on August 12 th , 1964.
His life style caught up with him the Turkish cigarettes, the dry vodka martinis, the half-pounds of beluga caviar.
While Fleming played a role in the filming of Goldfinger, he did not live long enough to see the film premier.
The film follows much of the plot outlined in the novel, but has added components to it.
He then infiltrates the secret drug production facility of the Mexican cartel and destroys it using the plastic explosives C-4.
The secret drug production facility is blown to bits, then the demi-monde tarantella dancer is almost Bond’s undoing ... then the film begins in earnest.
It is another ten minutes of adrenaline to start the audience onto the main plot of the film.
There is also the homer used to track Goldfinger’s Rolls Royce, with a cathode ray television display.
The question from that point of the film onwards then becomes, how will Bond escape his captivity and how will Goldfinger be defeated we know that in the fight of good with evil in a Fleming novel, good must prevail.
The plot of the film is simple Goldfinger, with the help of Red China, plans to detonate a ‘dirty’ atom bomb inside the gold vaults at Fort Knox, irradiating the United States Gold Reserve, causing chaos and upheaval to the economies of the United States and its allies, while increasing many times over the value of Goldfinger’s own gold holdings.
Perhaps it was because 1964 was the year that the Peoples Republic of China exploded their first atomic bomb.
The role of the henchman Oddjob is played by the Japanese Wrestler Harold Sakata.
Bond seduces Pussy Galore and gets her to contact the CIA who foils the plot to bomb Fort Knox with an atom bomb.
Then in a twist of fate on his flight to the White House to be thanked by the President, Bond is recaptured and ends up defeating Goldfinger a second time, this time fatally.
In the film Goldfinger there is less murder and intrigue than in From Russia With Love, but the audience loved the movie nonetheless.
Incidentally, the name Pussy Galore caused quite a stir in the UK when it was announced that the Goldfinger movie was being filmed.
Blackman was announced as the Pussy Galore actress on January 8 th , 1964.
No, From Russia With Love and Goldfinger in both countries there began a flood of other espionage films and television series ... some fifty projects in all, helping to define the 1960’s as the decade of the spy.
I bet you can name of few of these 1960’s espionage films and television series.
It is the short story Risco, which ends up as the central plot of the film For Your Eyes Only which came out in 1981.
From the short story A View to a Kill Bond investigates the murder of a motorcycle dispatch-rider and the theft of his top-secret documents by a motorcycle-riding assassin.
I do not believe this short story has been used yet in any way, shape, or form in any of the Bond films.
In the short story For Your Eyes Only Bond avenges the murder of M's closest friends, the Havelocks, by a group of Cubans.
Their death is also avenged by the Havelock daughter, as well as by James Bond who happens upon the Havelock girl just as Bond is about to terminate the conspirators to the Havelock murders.
She ends up killing her parent’s Cuban murderer in a very medieval fashion, while Bond takes out the gang’s leader and other gunmen.
This short story is used, with significant modification, as a subplot in the 1981 film For Your Eyes Only.
In the story Quantum of Solace Bond is told a story of a failed marriage with an emotive twist.
Again, I do not believe this short story has been used yet in any way shape or form in any of the Bond films.
The title, Quantum of Solace, on the other hand, is used in a Bond film starring Daniel Craig.
In the short story Risico Bond investigates a drug-smuggling operation run in the Mediterranean with ties in Italy and Great Britain, with ties to the Soviets.
In the short story The Hildebrand Rarity Bond helps find a rare and very deadly fish for an obnoxious millionaire who is subsequently murdered by someone who uses the deadly fish.
There is something rather wonderful hidden away in the heart of the book For You Eyes Only and it is in both the mention of the Greek Island of Corfu and the Albanian angle to both the novel and the film.
The Corfu Albanian theme was drawn from Fleming’s newspaper clipping files and an international incident that occurred in 1946 known as the Corfu Channel Incident.
The Corfu Channel Incident involved three separate incidents in the channel between Italy and Albania in 1946.
The UK government lodged an official protest and asked for an immediate and full apology from the Albanian Government.
No apology was forthcoming, the Albanians claiming that the RN ships had sailed through their territorial waters.
The Corfu Channel between the Island of Corfu and Albania The second incident occurred on October 22 nd , 1946 when a RN flotilla led by the cruisers HMS Mauritius and HMS Leander along with destroyers HMS Saumarez and HMS Volage proceeded north bound in the Corfu Channel to exercise the right to innocent passage.
Naval Mines had been set in the channel by the Albanians and both destroyers struck mines.
In the case of HMS Volage had her bow completely blown away by the naval mines.
HMS Saumarez bow down under tow by HMS Volage after striking a mine There were fatalities and injuries in the second incident.
Forty five men died and forty two men were injured aboard the two RN destroyers as a result of the Albanian naval mines.
Along with clearing the mines, OPERATION RETAIL had the additional purpose of collecting mines as evidence and using the evidence (as corpora delicti) to prove that a crime had occurred and that the British were acting in self-defense by attempting innocent passage and by attempting to clear hazards to navigation.
HMS Volage with its bow blown off During OPERATION RETAIL the aircraft carrier HMS commanded by Captain, later Admiral of the Fleet, Sir Caspar John), cruisers and other smaller warships provided cover.
Minesweepers discovered twenty-two contact mines were discovered, and cut-away from their undersea moorings.
Two of the cut mines were sent to the RN base on Malta for further examination.
It was then discovered that the mines were of German origin but they were free of rust and marine growth.
They were also freshly painted and their mooring cables were recently lubricated.
They were not mines left over in the ocean from the Second World War but of more recent placement.
Recovery of a mine from the Corfu Channel by RN clearance divers A Court of Inquiry concluded that the minefield in the Corfu Channel was laid shortly before the incident involving HMS Saumarez and HMS Volage.
Mine fragment analysis taken from HMS Volage confirmed the mine they struck was similar to the recovered mines at Malta.
The Film For Your Eyes Only begins with the Royal Navy losing a spy ship the St.
The film makers included this scene to tie the Bond story to the Corfu Channel Incident.
When the film came out the matter of innocent passage and naval mines were a contemporary issue.
There was a war going on between Iran and Iraq and naval mines were being sown throughout the Persian Gulf.
Innocent passage of oil bearing tankers through the Strait of Hormuz was being threatened.
The shallow bottom of the Strait of Hormoz made it an easy region for moored contact mines, as well as bottom mines using magnetic or pressure fuses.
This period of the Iran-Iraq war was known as the Tanker War, since many of the ships struck by the mines were tankers.
I have included an article about the Tanker War as an Appendix in this book.
The Battle of the Atlantic was not merely a battle of battleships and U-boats it was a war that included naval technology like naval mines.
The story as to how the German naval mines were defeated by the Royal Navy and its allies has been told in a number of books and films.
You the reader should be mindful that as deputy director of naval intelligence for the Royal Navy, the naval technology war with Germany was one of the many things that directly involved Ian Fleming and his colleagues, whether that naval technology war was over coded messages, radar, submarine design and capability, acoustical torpedoes or magnetic mines.
The Germans dropped magnetic mines by aircraft into the Thames estuary on the first day of the war and one of the first maritime casualties was a ship proceeding to London up the Thames.
One of these mines was discovered in the mud and was defused and studied.
It took the Royal Navy a great deal of courage and ingenuity to defeat the Germans at their mine technology.
One of Ian Fleming’s most clandestine operations of the Second World War was to send naval clearance divers by X submarines to the beaches of Normandy prior to OPERATION OVERLORD to check for mines and special hazards.
Several naval clearance divers had in fact died in the spring of 1944 trying to recover one of these mines for study back at their naval base.
Supposedly the mines in question were made out of glass and had a chemical fuse.
They had read of this in one of the secret messages sent from Berlin to Tokyo by Ambassador Oshima.
The decryption of this secret message was done at Bletchley Park and Arlington Hall off messages taken out of the air by intercept operators at Station Point Grey in Vancouver.
Perhaps I will write something about this remarkable clandestine operation to the Normandy beaches, as well as Station Point Grey, in a future book in The Best of Ian Fleming series.
The cock bird is about nine inches long, but seven inches of it are tail—two long black feathers that curve and cross each other and whose inner edges are in a form of scalloped design.
The head and crest are black, the wings dark green, the long bill is scarlet, and the eyes, bright and confiding, are black.
The body is emerald green, so dazzling that when the sun is on the breast you see the brightest green thing in nature.
Trochilus polytmus is called ‘doctor bird’ because his two black streamers remind people of the black tail-coat of the old-time physician.
Havelock was particularly devoted to two families of these birds because she had been watching them sipping honey, fighting, nesting and making love since she married, and came to Content.
She was now over fifty, so many generations of these two families had come and gone since the original two pairs had been nicknamed Pyramus and Thisbe and Daphnis and Chloe by her mother-in-law.
Havelock now sat at her elegant tea service on the broad cool veranda and watched Pyramus, with a fierce ‘tee-tee-tee’, dive-bomb Daphnis who had finished up the honey on his own huge bush of Japanese Hat and had sneaked in among the neighbouring Monkeyfiddle that was Pyramus’s preserve.
Chap at Barclay’s told me this morning that there’s a lot of funk money coming over here already.
But I can’t say I like the idea of the whole island being bought up by these Cubans.
Jamaica’s as good as anywhere else now we’ve got this convertibility with the dollar.
Apparently the man who bought Belair just shovelled the money on to the floor of Aschenheim’s office out of a suitcase.
I suppose he’ll keep the place for a year or two, and when the trouble’s blown over or when Castro’s got in and finished cleaning up he’ll put it on the market again, take a reasonable loss and move off somewhere else.
Havelock said ‘Yes, dear’ calmingly and pinged the bell for the teathings to be cleared away.
Agatha, a huge blue-black Negress wearing the old-fashioned white head-cloth that has gone out in Jamaica except in the hinterland, came out through the white and rose drawing-room followed by Fayprince, a pretty young quadroon from Port Maria whom she was training as second housemaid.
Havelock had not lived most of her life in Jamaica without learning that a mash is a mash and that one would not get anywhere hunting for a culprit.
Havelock picked up a piece of petit-point and began stitching, her fingers moving automatically.
The sun was low on the horizon and every now and then there was a flash of almost piercingly beautiful green.
A mocking-bird, on the topmost branch of a frangipani, started on its evening repertoire.
The tinkle of an early tree-frog announced the beginning of the short violet dusk.
Unlike so many other settlers of those and later times the Havelocks had maintained the plantation through three centuries, through earthquakes and hurricanes and through the boom and bust of cocoa, sugar, citrus and copra.
Now it was in bananas and cattle, and it was one of the richest and best run of all the private estates in the island.
The house, patched up or rebuilt after earthquake or hurricane, was a hybrid—a mahogany-pillared, two-storeyed central block on the old stone foundations flanked by two single-storeyed wings with widely overhung, flat-pitched Jamaican roofs of silver cedar shingles.
The Havelocks were now sitting on the deep veranda of the central block facing the gently sloping garden beyond which a vast tumbling jungle vista stretched away twenty miles to the sea.
He was still wearing his hat, a panama with a short very up-curled brim.
The rays of the sun glittered on hair-grease and on a mouthful of smiling white teeth.
He went up to Colonel Havelock, his outstretched hand held straight in front of him.
He looked over the Major’s shoulder at the other two men who had stationed themselves on either side of the door.
They were both carrying that new holdall of the tropics—a Pan American overnight bag.
Now the two men bent down together and placed them beside their yellowish shoes.
They wore flat white caps with transparent green visors that cast green shadows down to their cheekbones.
Through the green shadows their intelligent animal eyes fixed themselves on the Major, reading his behaviour.
His direct blue eyes took in the sharp clothes, the natty shoes, the glistening finger-nails of the Major and the blue jeans and calypso shirts of the other two.
He wondered how he could get these men into his study and near the revolver in the top drawer of his desk.
As he lit his pipe he watched the Major’s eyes and mouth through the smoke.
I represent a certain gentleman in Havana’—he made a throw-away gesture with his right hand.
He asked me to present his compliments and to inquire the price of your property.
Havelock, who had been watching the scene with a polite half-smile on her lips, moved to stand beside her husband.
Your friend really should have written first, or asked anyone in Kingston or at Government House.
I wonder where your important friend can possibly have got the idea from.
He shook his head as if he was explaining something to a rather dense child.
There was perhaps one less tooth in Major Gonzales’s smile and his eyes had become watchful.
Both the Havelocks noticed the jolly mask slip with the few sharp words through the teeth.
The two men picked up their blue Pan American bags and stepped forward.
Major Gonzales reached for the zipper on each of them in turn and pulled.
That is, in your money, let us say, one hundred and eighty thousand pounds.
And perhaps my gentleman would add a further twenty thousand pounds to make the round sum.
Colonel Havelock laid his cold pipe on the table as if he was preparing to roll up his sleeves.
My gentleman has instructed me to say that if you will not accept his most generous terms we must proceed to other measures.
The pink tip of Major Gonzales’s tongue came out and slowly licked along his lips.
All the light had gone out of his face and it had become taut and hard.
His right hand went behind his back and he clicked his fingers softly, once.
Behind him the gun-hands of the two men slid through the opening of their gay shirts above the waistbands.
The ugly sausage-shaped hunks of metal spat and thudded—again and again, even when the two bodies were on their way to the ground.
Then the three small men walked quickly back through the rose and white drawingroom and across the dark carved mahogany hall and out through the elegant front door.
They climbed unhurriedly into a black Ford Consul Sedan with Jamaican number plates and, with Major Gonzales driving and the two gunmen sitting upright in the back seat, they drove off at an easy pace down the long avenue of Royal Palms.
At the junction of the drive and the road to Port Antonio the cut telephone wires hung down through the trees like bright lianas.
Major Gonzales slalomed the car carefully and expertly down the rough parochial road until he was on the metalled strip near the coast.
Twenty minutes after the killing he came to the outer sprawl of the little banana port.
There he ran the stolen car on to the grass verge beside the road and the three men got out and walked the quarter of a mile through the sparsely lit main street to the banana wharves.
The three men got in and the boat zoomed off across the still waters of what an American poetess has called the most beautiful harbour in the world.
The anchor chain was already half up on the glittering fifty-ton Chriscraft.
The two graceful antennae of the deep-sea rods explained that these were tourists—from Kingston, perhaps, or from Montego Bay.
Major Gonzales tossed a fifty-cent piece to each of them and the stripped men dived.
The twin diesels awoke to a stuttering roar and the Chriscraft settled her stern down a fraction and made for the deep channel below the Titchfield hotel.
Up on the broad veranda of Content the last rays of the sun glittered on the red stains.
One of the doctor birds whirred over the balustrade and hovered close above Mrs.
There came the sound of someone in a small sports car making a racing change at the bend of the drive.
In London, October had begun with a week of brilliant Indian summer, and the noise of the mowers came up from Regent’s Park and in through the wide open windows of M’s office.
They were motormowers and James Bond reflected that one of the most beautiful noises of summer, the drowsy iron song of the old machines, was going for ever from the world.
Perhaps today children felt the same about the puff and chatter of the little two-stroke engines.
Bond had time for these reflections because M seemed to be having difficulty in coming to the point.
He was mildly intrigued because M had addressed him as James and not by his number—007.
It sounded as if there might be some personal angle to this assignment—as if it might be put to him more as a request than as an order.
And it seemed to Bond that there was an extra small cleft of worry between the frosty, damnably clear, grey eyes.
And three minutes was certainly too long to spend getting a pipe going.
Bond fielded it and skidded it politely back to the middle of the desk.
If you send a havering signal to the Admiralty you deserve to be put on the beach.
He had not got a wife or children—had never suffered the tragedy of a personal loss.
He had absolutely no idea how he would face these things that needed so much more toughness than he had ever had to show.
I mean’—he did not like using such words—‘if the cause is—er— sort of just, sir.
M put his pipe back in his mouth and drew on it deeply to relieve his feelings.
If M could get the odds more or less right he would risk anything, anywhere in the world.
M did not give a damn for the susceptibilities of any Ministry and thought nothing of going behind their backs to get a personal ruling from the Prime Minister.
M looked briefly, thoughtfully at Bond, and then swivelled his chair so that he could look out of the window at the high summery clouds.
They didn’t get anywhere with the Batista people, but we’ve got a good man with the other side—with this chap Castro.
And Castro’s Intelligence people seem to have the Government pretty well penetrated.
It boils down to the fact that a man called Hammerstein, or von Hammerstein, had the couple killed.
He cut one of his officers in on his loot, a man called Gonzales, and this man travelled around the Caribbean with a couple of gunmen to protect him and began salting away Hammerstein’s money outside Cuba—put it in real estate and suchlike under nominees.
When money didn’t work he’d use force— kidnap a child, bum down a few acres, anything to make the owner see reason.
Well, this man Hammerstein heard of the Havelocks’ property, one of the best in Jamaica, and he told Gonzales to go and get it.
I suppose his orders were to kill the Havelocks if they wouldn’t sell and then put pressure on the daughter.
But, anyway, Hammerstein cleared out and took his little team of three with him.
He’s certainly chosen himself somewhere where he won’t be troubled with visitors.
And he’s been interested in Havana ever since the big American gangster money started following the casinos there.
He said that Hammerstein and his party had come into the States on six months visitors’ visas.
I talked it over here with the Attorney General and he said there wasn’t a hope unless we could get the witnesses from Havana.
It was only through Castro’s Intelligence that we even know as much as we do.
Next Hoover offered to have their visas revoked and get them on the move again.
He strayed one of his frontier patrol planes over the border and took a full aerial survey of this Echo Lake place.
Now Bond realized why M was troubled, why he wanted someone else to make the decision.
Because these had been friends of M Because a personal element was involved, M had worked on the case by himself.
And now it had come to the point when justice ought to be done and these people brought to book.
No judge would take a murder case in which he had personally known the murdered person.
Hammerstein had operated the law of the jungle on two defenceless old people.
Since no other law was available, the law of the jungle should be visited upon Hammerstein.
If foreign gangsters find they can get away with this kind of thing they’ll decide the English are as soft as some other people seem to think we are.
M opened the pad, tamped the rubber stamp on it and then carefully, so that it was properly aligned with the top right-hand corner of the docket, pressed it down on the grey cover.
M replaced the stamp and the ink pad in the drawer and closed the drawer.
He turned the docket round and pushed it gently across the desk to Bond.
He regretted the days of the old Stratocruiser —that fine lumbering old plane that took ten hours to cross the Atlantic.
The stewards had to serve everything almost at the double, and then one had a bare two hours snooze before the hundred-milelong descent from forty thousand feet.
Only eight hours after leaving London, Bond was driving a Hertz U-drive Plymouth saloon along the broad Route 17 from Montreal to Ottawa and trying to remember to keep on the right of the road.
The Headquarters of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police are in the Department of Justice alongside Parliament Buildings in Ottawa.
Like most Canadian public buildings, the Department of Justice is a massive block of grey masonry built to look stodgily important and to withstand long and hard winters.
He did so, and a young fresh-faced R.C.M.P. corporal, who looked as if he did not like being kept indoors on a warm sunny day, took him up in the lift to the third floor and handed him over to a sergeant in a large tidy office which contained two girl secretaries and a lot of heavy furniture.
The sergeant spoke on an intercom and there was a ten minutes delay during which Bond smoked and read a recruiting pamphlet which made the Mounties sound like a mixture between a dude ranch, Dick Tracy and Rose Marie.
When he was shown in through the connecting door a tall youngish man in a dark blue suit, white shirt and black tie turned away from the window and came towards him.
I’ve been on one or two hunting-trips myself and the Commissioner fixed on me to handle this little holiday of yours,’ the Colonel paused, ‘on me only.
The Commissioner was glad to help but he was going to handle this with kid gloves.
My friends in London didn’t want the Commissioner to bother himself personally with any of this.
And I haven’t seen the Commissioner or been anywhere near his headquarters.
You understand, Commander, that you and I are about to connive at various felonies, starting with obtaining a Canadian huntinglicence under false pretences and being an accessory to a breach of the frontier laws, and going on down from there to more serious things.
It wouldn’t do anyone one bit of good to have any ricochets from this little lot.
When I go out of here, we’ll forget each other, and if I end up in Sing-Sing that’s my worry.
He ran his eye over Bond’s old black and white hound’s-tooth tweed suit and white shirt and thin black tie.
Nothing fancy, nothing conspicuous—khaki shirt, dark brown jeans, good climbing-boots or shoes.
There are plenty of browns in the hills at this time and you won’t want to be wearing parachute cloth or anything that smells of camouflage.
If you’re picked up, you’re an Englishman on a hunting-trip in Canada who’s lost his way and got across the border by mistake.
Went down myself and put it in the boot of your Plymouth while you were waiting.
One of the new Savage 99Fs, Weatherby 6 x 62 ‘scope, five-shot repeater with twenty rounds of high-velocity -250-3,000.
Glad to have it back one day, but he won’t miss it if it doesn’t turn up.
Gun license,’ Colonel Johns slid it over, ‘issued here in the city in your real name as that fits with your passport.
Hunting-license ditto, but small game only, vermin, as it isn’t quite the deer season yet, also driving-license to replace the provisional one I had waiting for you with the Hertz people.
Colonel Johns got up and walked round with the map to Bond and spread it out.
Turn right in Stanbridge for Frelighsburg and leave the car in a garage there.
Colonel Johns went back to his chair and took two more pieces of paper off the file.
The first was a scrap of penciled map, the other a section of aerial photograph.
This,’ he pushed the paper over, ‘is a rough sketch of an old smuggling-route from Prohibition days.
This route was used for runners between Franklin, just over the Derby Line, and Frelighsburg.
You follow this path through the foothills, and you detour Franklin and get into the start of the Green Mountains.
There it’s all Vermont spruce and pine with a bit of maple, and you can stay inside that stuff for months and not see a soul.
You get across country here, over a couple of highways, and you leave Enosburg Falls to the West.
Then you’re over a steep range and down into the top of the valley you want.
The cross is Echo Lake and, judging from the photographs, I’d be inclined to come down on top of it from the east.
The roofs were of slate, and there was a glimpse of graceful bow windows and a covered patio.
A dust road ran past the front door and on this side were garages and what appeared to be kennels.
On the garden side was a stone flagged terrace with a flowered border, and beyond this two or three acres of trim lawn stretched down to the edge of the small lake.
The lake appeared to have been artificially created with a deep stone dam.
There were no people in the photograph, but on the stone flags in front of the patio was a quantity of expensive-looking aluminum garden furniture and a central glass table with drinks.
Bond remembered that the larger photograph had shown a tennis court in the garden and on the other side of the road the trim white fences and grazing horses of a stud farm.
Echo Lake looked what it was—the luxurious retreat, in deep country, well away from atom bomb targets, of a millionaire who liked privacy and could probably offset a lot of his running expenses against the stud farm and an occasional good let.
It would be an admirable refuge for a man who had had ten steamy years of Caribbean politics and who needed a rest to recharge his batteries.
Talking about all this has reminded me of one or two sniping jobs at the end of the War.
It was much the same sort of country as you’ll be using, only different trees.
He passed the day looking to his equipment and wearing in the soft ripple rubber climbingboots he had bought in Ottawa.
He bought glucose tablets and some smoked ham and bread from which he made himself sandwiches.
He also bought a large aluminum flask and filled this with three-quarters Bourbon and a quarter coffee.
When darkness came he had dinner and a short sleep and then diluted the walnut stain and washed himself all over with the stuff even to the roots of his hair.
Just before midnight he quietly opened the side door into the automobile bay, got into the Plymouth and drove off on the last lap south to Frelighsburg.
Bond said indifferently ‘That so?’, paid for two nights and walked out of the garage.
He had stopped on the far side of the town, and now he only had to follow the highway for a hundred yards before he found the dirt track running off into the woods on his right.
A chained dog set up a frenzied barking, but no light showed in the farmhouse and Bond skirted it and at once found the path by the stream.
When the barking stopped there was silence, the deep velvet silence of woods on a still night.
It was a warm night with a full yellow moon that threw enough light down through the thick spruce for Bond to follow the path without difficulty.
The springy, cushioned soles of the climbing-boots were wonderful to walk on, and Bond got his second wind and knew he was making good time.
Fie crossed a secondary, tarred road, and now there was a wider track through more woods and on his right the pale glitter of a lake.
On the latter was a sign saying ENOSBURG FALLS 1 ML Now he was on the last lap—a small huntingtrail that climbed steeply.
Well away from the highway, he stopped and shifted his rifle and knapsack round, had a cigarette and burned the sketchmap.
Already there was a faint paling in the sky and small noises in the forest—the harsh, melancholy cry of a bird he did not know and the rustlings of small animals.
Bond visualized the house deep down in the little valley on the other side of the mountain ahead of him.
He saw the blank curtained windows, the crumpled sleeping faces of the four men, the dew on the lawn and the widening rings of the early rise on the gunmetal surface of the lake.
And here, on the other side of the mountain, was the executioner coming up through the trees.
Bond closed his mind to the picture, trod the remains of his cigarette into the ground and got going.
When you sit on top of a mountain and watch the sun go down behind the mountain opposite, the darkness rises up to you out of the valley.
It must be centuries since man has killed a small bird for food in these woods, yet they are still afraid.
With these and other random thoughts Bond steadily climbed upwards and obstinately pushed away from him the thought of the four faces asleep on the white pillows.
The round peak was below the tree-line and Bond could see nothing of the valley below.
He rested and then chose an oak tree, and climbed up and out along a thick bough.
Now he could see everything—the endless vista of the Green Mountains stretching in every direction as far as he could see, away to the east the golden ball of the sun just coming up in glory, and below, two thousand feet down a long easy slope of tree-tops broken once by a wide band of meadow, through a thin veil of mist, the lake, the lawns and the house.
Bond lay along the branch and watched the band of pale early morning sunshine creeping down into the valley.
It took a quarter of an hour to reach the lake, and then seemed to flood at once over the glittering lawn and over the wet slate tiles of the roofs.
Then the mist went quickly from the lake and the target area, washed and bright and new, lay waiting like an empty stage.
Bond slipped the telescopic sight out of his pocket and went over the scene inch by inch.
If by the end of it they had not come down to the lake, he would just have to take his chance at the patio and five hundred yards.
It was a wide meadow, perhaps five hundred yards of going without cover.
As if to answer him, a white blind rolled up in one of the smaller windows to the left of the main block.
The sounds in the valley would bounce upwards off the surface of the water.
A thin column of smoke began to trickle up straight into the air from one of the left-hand chimneys.
He would have something to eat, smoke his last safe cigarette and get on down to the firing-point.
The skin dented, broke and then closed up again leaving a small hole with bruised edges.
The bullet ploughed on, unhurriedly, towards the pulsing heart—the tissues, the blood-vessels, parting obediently to let it through.
He crooked it slowly, feeling in his imagination the cool curve of metal.
He put the top back on the flask and waited for the warmth of the whisky to reach his stomach.
Then he got slowly to his feet, stretched and yawned deeply and picked up the rifle and slung it over his shoulder.
He looked round carefully to mark the place when he came back up the hill and started slowly off down through the trees.
Now there was no trail and he had to pick his way slowly, watching the ground for dead branches.
Among the spruce and silver birch there was an occasional oak and beech and sycamore and, here and there, the blazing Bengal fire of a maple in autumn dress.
Under the trees was a sparse undergrowth of their saplings and much dead wood from old hurricanes.
Bond went carefully down, his feet making little sound among the leaves and moss-covered rocks, but soon the forest was aware of him and began to pass on the news.
A large doe, with two Bambi-like young, saw him first and galloped off with an appalling clatter.
Bond willed them to have no fear, that the gun he carried was not meant for them, but with each alarm he wondered if, when he got to the edge of the meadow, he would see down on the lawn a man with glasses who had been watching the frightened birds fleeing the tree-tops.
But when he stopped behind a last broad oak and looked down across the long meadow to the final belt of trees and the lake and the house, nothing had changed.
All the other blinds were still down and the only movement was the thin plume of smoke.
Bond gazed down across the meadow to the trees, looking for one which would suit his purpose.
This would be right for his clothes, its trunk was thick enough and it stood slightly back from the wall of spruce.
From there, standing, he would be able to see all he needed of the lake and the house.
Bond stood for a while, plotting his route down through the thick grass and golden-rod of the meadow.
Somewhere not far off, up to the left on the edge of the trees, a branch snapped.
He stayed like that for a full ten minutes, a motionless brown shadow against the wide trunk of the oak.
Birds never alight on twigs that will break under them, and even a large animal like a deer with antlers and four hooves to manipulate moves quite silently in a forest unless he is in flight.
Gently Bond eased the rifle off his shoulder and put his thumb on the safe.
Perhaps, if the people were still sleeping, a single shot, from high up in the woods, would pass for a hunter or a poacher.
But then, between him and approximately where the twig had snapped, two deer broke cover and cantered unhurriedly across the meadow to the left.
It was true that they stopped twice to look back, but each time they cropped a few mouthfuls of grass before moving on and into the distant fringe of the lower woods.
A five-hundred-yard crawl through tall concealing grass is a long and wearisome business.
It is hard on knees and hands and elbows, there is a vista of nothing but grass and flower-stalks, and the dust and small insects get into your eyes and nose and down your neck.
Bond focused on placing his hands right and maintaining a slow, even speed.
The breeze had kept up and his wake through the grass would certainly not be noticeable from the house.
From above, it looked as if a big ground animal—a beaver perhaps, or a woodchuck—was on its way down the meadow.
It looked as if whatever it was would slowly catch up on Bond and that the two wakes would converge just at the next tree-line.
Bond crawled and slithered steadily on, stopping only to wipe the sweat and dust off his face and, from time to time, to make sure that he was on-course for the maple.
But when he was close enough for the tree-line to hide him from the house, perhaps twenty feet from the maple, he stopped and lay for a while, massaging his knees and loosening his wrists for the last lap.
He had heard nothing to warn him, and when the soft threatening whisper came from only feet away in the thick grass on his left, his head swiveled so sharply that the vertebrae of his neck made a cracking sound.
It had been a girl’s voice, but a voice that fiercely meant what it said.
Bond, his heart thumping, stared up the shaft of the steel arrow whose bluetempered triangular tip parted the grass stalks perhaps eighteen inches from his head.
The knuckles of the brown fingers that held the binding of the bow below the arrow-tip were white.
Bond gathered saliva back into his dry mouth and began slowly to edge his right hand, his out-of-sight hand, round and up towards his waistband and his gun.
The tension in the voice had slackened, but it was still hard, suspicious.
Without waiting, Bond rose on hands and knees and started to crawl again.
Whoever this damned girl was, she would have to be disposed of quickly and discreetly before the shootingmatch began.
He got carefully to his feet and took a quick look through the blazing leaves.
Two slow-moving coloured maids were laying a large breakfast table on the patio.
The field of vision over the tops of the trees that now fell sharply to the lake was perfect.
Bond unslung his rifle and knapsack and sat down with his back against the trunk of the tree.
The girl came out of the edge of the grass and stood up under the maple.
The girl looked like a beautiful unkempt dryad in ragged shirt and trousers.
The shirt and trousers were olive green, crumpled and splashed with mud and stains and torn in places, and she had bound her pale blonde hair with golden-rod to conceal its brightness for her crawl through the meadow.
The beauty of her face was wild and rather animal, with a wide sensuous mouth, high cheek-bones and silvery grey, disdainful eyes.
There was the blood of scratches on her forearms and down one cheek, and a bruise had puffed and slightly blackened the same cheek-bone.
The metal feathers of a quiver full of arrows showed above her left shoulder.
Apart from the bow, she carried nothing but a hunting-knife at her belt and, at her other hip, a small brown canvas bag that presumably carried her food.
She looked like a beautiful, dangerous customer who knew wild country and forests and was not afraid of them.
She would walk alone through life and have little use for civilization.
She sat like a Red Indian, her knees splayed wide and her ankles tucked up high under her thighs.
She said ‘Thanks’ grudgingly, and took her arrow and thrust it over her back to join the others in the quiver.
Without protest she took out from one of them the white paper and handed it over.
Judy Havelock had given her age as twenty-five and her place of birth as Jamaica.
There was only one way out of this mess and that was to join forces with the girl.
I’ve been sent out from London by, er, Scotland Yard, I know all about your troubles and I’ve come out here to pay off some of the score and see you’re not bothered by these people.
I was to put a notice in the paper, in the personal column, on a particular day.
I pretended I was out for thrills—that I wanted to see the underworld and some real gangsters, and so on.
The voice was as casual as if she had said she was going to pick a wild flower.
There was talk and laughter as they pulled out chairs and sat down at the table.
One place was left empty at the head of the table between the two girls.
One of them, who smiled all the time and whose clothes looked the cleanest and smartest, would be Gonzales.
They sat together at the foot of the oblong table and took no part in the talk.
They wore bright bathing-dresses and a lot of gold jewelry, and laughed and chattered like pretty monkeys.
The voices were almost clear enough to understand, but they were talking Spanish.
She took a quick look through the glass and handed it back without comment.
Bond wondered if she realized that she had been looking at the murderers of her father and mother.
The two girls had turned and were looking towards the door into the house.
A mat of black hair covered his breasts and shoulder-blades, and his arms and legs were thick with it.
By contrast, there was not a hair on his face or head and his skull was a glittering whitish yellow with a deep dent at the back that might have been a wound or the scar of a trepanning.
The bone-structure of the face was that of the conventional Prussian officer—square, hard and thrusting—but the eyes under the naked brows were close-set and piggish, and the large mouth had hideous lips—thick and wet and crimson.
He wore nothing but a strip of black material, hardly larger than an athletic supportbelt, round his stomach, and a large gold wrist-watch on a gold bracelet.
Von Hammerstein looked just about as unpleasant as M’s dossier said he was.
The mouth looked grim, almost cruel, as she looked down on the man she had come to kill.
She might even interfere with his own plans and insist on playing some silly role with her bow and arrow.
One short tap at the base of the skull and he would gag her and tie her up until it was all over.
Just as nonchalantly she bent down, put the glass on the ground and picked up her bow.
I haven’t come all the way here to be knocked on the head by a flat-footed London bobby.
I can’t miss with this at fifty yards, and I’ve killed birds on the wing at a hundred.
This was good hard English stock spiced with the hot peppers of a tropical childhood.
He was quite certain that she would think nothing of putting him out of action.
I was ordered to do it—by a close friend of your family, if you want to know.
I know the moment to get von Hammerstein and I’ll be well away from the lake before they take in what’s happened.
She gave Bond the brief, pitying, self-congratulatory smile of the woman who has had the last word, and turned and made off down through the trees.
Bond watched the lithe dark green figure until it had vanished among the tree-trunks, then he impatiently picked up the glass and went back to his vantage-point.
It was time to clear the silly bitch out of his mind and concentrate on the job.
But if he fired first there was no knowing what the hot-headed bitch would do.
Bond’s mind luxuriated briefly in the thought of what he would do to the girl once all this was over.
Then there was movement in front of the house, and he put the exciting thoughts aside and lifted his glass.
Von Hammerstein was lying back among the cushions of an outdoor couch reading a newspaper and occasionally commenting to Major Gonzales, who sat astride an iron garden chair near his feet.
Gonzales was smoking a cigar and from time to time he delicately raised a hand in front of his mouth, leant sideways and spat a bit of leaf out on the ground.
Since the scene seemed to be static, Bond sat down with his back to the tree and went over the Savage with minute care.
At the same time he thought of what would shortly have to be done with it.
Bond did not like what he was going to do, and all the way from England he had had to keep on reminding himself what sort of men these were.
Von Hammerstein and his gunmen were particularly dreadful men whom many people around the world would probably be very glad to destroy, as this girl proposed to do, out of private revenge.
This was merely his job—as it was the job of a pest control officer to kill rats.
He was the public executioner appointed by M to represent the community.
In a way, Bond argued to himself, these men were as much enemies of his country as were the agents of SMERSH or of other enemy Secret Services.
They had declared and waged war against British people on British soil and they were currently planning another attack.
They had killed the girl’s pony and her dog with two casual sideswipes of the hand as if they had been flies.
The kingfisher, a handful of tattered blue and grey feathers, thudded to the lawn and lay fluttering.
He took his heel away and wiped it on the grass beside the heap of feathers.
He handed the gun to one of the gunmen and wiped his hands down his fat backsides.
He gave a sharp order to the two girls, who ran off into the house, then, with the others following, he turned and ambled down the sloping lawn towards the lake.
He clipped the telescopic sight on to the barrel of the Savage and took his stance against the trunk of the tree.
He found a bump in the wood as a rest for his left hand, put his sights at 300, and took broad aim at the group of people by the lake.
Then, holding the rifle loosely, he leaned against the trunk and watched the scene.
It was going to be some kind of a shooting contest between the two gunmen.
They snapped fresh magazines on to their guns and at Gonzales’s orders stationed themselves on the flat stone wall of the dam some twenty feet apart on either side of the diving-board.
Von Hammerstein took up his place on the grass verge, a champagne bottle swinging in each hand.
Through the telescopic sight their faces looked sharp with concentration.
With the ‘tres’ he hurled the champagne bottles high into the air over the lake.
The thunder of the guns split the peaceful scene and racketed up from the water.
Birds fled away from the trees screeching and some small branches cut by the bullets pattered down into the lake.
The left-hand bottle disintegrated into dust, the right-hand one, hit by only a single bullet, split in two a fraction of a second later.
The fragments of glass made small splashes over the middle of the lake.
The smoke-clouds over the two of them joined and drifted away over the lawn.
The two gunmen walked along the wall to the grass, the rear one looking sullen, the leading one with a sly grin on his face.
Hammerstein reached out and patted the girl on the rump as if she had been a cow.
The prize girl took a quick run and dived into the lake, perhaps to get away from the man who had won her favours, and the other girl followed her.
Major Gonzales took off his coat and laid it on the grass and sat down on it.
He was wearing a shoulder holster which showed the butt of a medium-calibre automatic.
He watched von Hammerstein take off his watch and walk along the dam wall to the diving-board.
The gunmen stood back from the lake and also watched von Hammerstein and the two girls, who were now out in the middle of the little lake and were making for the far shore.
The gunmen stood with their guns cradled in their arms and occasionally one of them would glance round the garden or towards the house.
Bond thought there was every reason why von Hammerstein had managed to stay alive so long.
Through the telescopic sight Bond could see the thick hair over his shoulder-blades tremble in a breeze that came to give a quick shiver to the surface of the lake.
Now his arms were coming forward and there was a fraction of a second when his feet had left the board and he was still almost upright.
In that fraction of a second there was a flash of silver against his back and then von Hammerstein’s body hit the water in a neat dive.
Gonzales was on his feet, looking uncertainly at the turbulence caused by the dive.
They crouched, looking from Gonzales to the trees behind the dam, waiting for an order.
A foot or so of steel shaft stuck up from below the left shoulder-blade and the sun winked on the aluminum feathers.
Major Gonzales yelled an order and the two tommy-guns roared and flamed.
The Savage shuddered against his shoulder and the right-hand man fell slowly forward on his face.
Now the other man was running for the lake, his gun still firing from the hip in short bursts.
The clenched finger went on firing the gun aimlessly up towards the blue sky until the water throttled the mechanism.
The seconds wasted on the extra shot had given Major Gonzales a chance.
He had got behind the body of the first gunman and now he opened up on Bond with the tommy-gun.
Whether he had seen Bond or was only firing at the flashes from the Savage he was doing well.
Bullets zwipped into the maple and slivers of wood spattered into Bond’s face.
He shook it free, but now Gonzales was up and running forward to the group of garden furniture.
He hurled the iron table on its side and got behind it as two snap shots from Bond kicked chunks out of the lawn at his heels.
With this solid cover his shooting became more accurate, and burst after burst, now from the right of the table and now from the left, crashed into the maple tree while Bond’s single shots clanged against the white iron or whined off across the lawn.
It was not easy to traverse the telescopic sight quickly from one side of the table to the other and Gonzales was cunning with his changes.
Again and again his bullets thudded into the trunk beside and above Bond.
He would fire, standing, from the open meadow and catch Gonzales off-guard.
He was running for the dam to get across and into the woods and come up after Bond.
He raised his arms and, with his gun still pumping bullets into the sky, dived clumsily face forward into the water.
Slowly he lowered his rifle and wiped the back of his arm across his face.
The echoes, the echoes of much death, rolled to and fro across the valley.
Away to the right, in the trees beyond the lake, he caught a glimpse of the two girls running up towards the house.
Blood was running down the right arm and dripping to the ground, and there was a black stain high up on the sleeve of the dark green shirt.
Bond reached for the hunting-knife at her belt and cut off her shirt-sleeve at the shoulder.
Bond took out his own khaki handkerchief, cut it into three lengths and joined them together.
He washed the wound clean with the coffee and whisky, and then took a thick slice of bread from his haversack and bound it over the wound.
He cut her shirt-sleeve into a sling and reached behind her neck to tie the knot.
He kissed her again at each corner of the mouth and the mouth slowly smiled.
He softly picked up her right hand and slipped the wrist into the sling.
But first we’ve got to get over into Canada, and I’ll talk to a friend in Ottawa and get your passport straightened out.
Bond bent down and picked up his rifle and knapsack and slung them over one shoulder.
Then he hung her bow and quiver over the other, and turned and started up through the meadow.
The hard black eyes moved slowly over Bond’s face and down to Bond’s hands which were carefully shredding a paper match on which was printed Albergo Colombo d’Oro.
The same surreptitious examination had been going on since he had met the man two hours before at the rendezvous in the Excelsior bar.
Bond had been told to look for a man with a heavy moustache who would be sitting by himself drinking an Alexandra.
The creamy, feminine drink was so much cleverer than the folded newspaper, the flower in the buttonhole, the yellow gloves that were the hoary, slipshod call-signs between agents.
It had also the great merit of being able to operate alone, without its owner.
When Bond had come into the bar and looked round there had been perhaps twenty people in the room.
But on a corner table at the far side of the tall, discreet room, flanked by a saucer of olives and another of cashew nuts, stood the tall-stemmed glass of cream and vodka.
The big hairy hand picked up the small chair as if it had been as light as a match-box and swept it under the heavy hips.
The two men sat back comfortably, each one satisfied that he had to do with a man in the same league.
So many times, before one had even started on a tandem assignment like this, one had lost confidence in the outcome.
There was so often, at least in Bond’s imagination, a faint smell of burning in the air at such a rendezvous.
In due course the smouldering fabric would burst into flames and he would be brule.
Then the game would be up and he would have to decide whether to pull out or wait and get shot at by someone.
Later that evening, at the little restaurant off the Piazza di Spagna called the Colomba d’Oro, Bond was amused to find that he was still on probation.
Kristatos was still watching and weighing him, wondering if he could be trusted.
This remark about the risky business was as near as Kristatos had so far got to admitting that there existed any business between the two of them.
But surely all these precautions could only mean that M’s intuition had paid off—that Kristatos knew something big.
The business which brings us together pays up to one thousand per cent and is conducted almost exclusively at night.
M picked up a bundle of dark red files tied together with tape and slid them so sharply across the desk that Bond had to catch them.
Wads from the Home Office and the Ministry of Health, and some nice thick reports from the International Opium Control people in Geneva.
There was nothing that made him more angry than having to divert his staff from their primary duty.
Anything else was a misuse of the Service and of Secret Funds which, God knows, were meagre enough.
The jaw seemed to tell Bond to pick up the files and get the hell out of the office and let M move on to something important.
There were queen bees, like the misuse of the Service, and the search for true as distinct from wishful intelligence, and there were worker bees.
These included such idiosyncrasies as not employing men with beards, or those who were completely bilingual, instantly dismissing men who tried to bring pressure to bear on him through family relationships with members of the Cabinet, mistrusting men or women who were too ‘dressy’, and those who called him ‘sir’ off-duty; and having an exaggerated faith in Scotsmen.
But M was ironically conscious of his obsessions, as, thought Bond, a Churchill or a Montgomery were about theirs.
He never minded his bluff, as it partly was, being called on any of them.
Moreover, he would never have dreamed of sending Bond out on an assignment without proper briefing.
He swiveled his chair sideways so that he could watch the high, scudding October clouds through the broad window.
He reached out for his pipe, blew through it sharply, and then, as if this action had let off the small head of steam, replaced it gently on the desk.
Earlier this year I had to take you off other duties for a fortnight so that you could go to Mexico and chase off that Mexican grower.
Ronnie Vallance went behind my back to the Home Office and the Ministry of Health.
Took the line that heroin, in the quantities that have been coming in, is an instrument of psychological warfare—that it saps a country’s strength.
Apparently his narcotics people have been having the devil of a time with the traffic—trying to stop it getting a hold on the teenagers as it has in America.
Vallance’s Ghost Squad have managed to penetrate back up the line to one of the middle-men, and there’s no doubt it’s all coming from Italy, hidden in Italian tourists’ cars.
Vallance has done what he can through the Italian police and Interpol, and got nowhere.
They get so far back up the pipeline, arrest a few little people, and then, when they seem to be getting near the centre, there’s a blank wall.
And you’ll have to watch out for that too, but my impression is that the Montesi case resulted in a pretty extensive clean-up.
Anyway, when the P.M. gave me the order to get on with it, it occurred to me to have a talk with Washington.
They’re nothing to do with C.I.A.—run by the American Treasury Department, of all people.
The American Treasury control a socalled Secret Service that looks after drug smuggling and counterfeiting.
He linked his hands behind his head and leaned back, looking across the desk at Bond.
And C.I.A.—Alan Dulles himself, as a matter of fact—gave me the name of the top narcotics agent used by the Bureau.
Dulles said that of course he couldn’t involve his people in any way and he was pretty certain the Treasury Department wouldn’t welcome their Rome Bureau playing too closely with us.
But he said that, if I wished, he would get word to this Kristatos that one of our, er, best men would like to make contact with a view to doing business.
Bond was thinking that the whole affair sounded unpleasant, probably dangerous and certainly dirty.
Bond ordered Tagliatelli Verdi with a Genoese sauce which Kristatos said was improbably concocted of basil, garlic and fir-cones.
When the waiter had gone, Kristatos sat and chewed silently on a wooden toothpick.
His face gradually became dark and glum as if bad weather had come to his mind.
The black, hard eyes that glanced restlessly at everything in the restaurant except Bond, glittered.
Bond guessed that Kristatos was wondering whether or not to betray somebody.
He broke a roll and began eating, smothering each mouthful with deep yellow butter.
He wondered why rolls and butter are delicious only in France and Italy.
That is why I chose him as the permanent tail for that bastard Kristatos.
The man took out of his pocket one of those cheap tin snappers that are sometimes given out, with paper hats and whistles, on carnival nights.
The maitre d’hotel, on the far side of the room, stopped whatever he was doing and hurried over.
He nodded briefly, walked over to a door near the kitchens marked UFFICIO, and went in and closed the door behind him.
Phase by phase, in a series of minute moves, an exercise that had long been perfected was then smoothly put into effect.
He followed the maitre d’hotel over to a space adjoining Bond’s table, clicked his fingers for help, borrowed a chair from one table, a chair from another table and, with a bow and an apology, the spare chair from Bond’s table.
The fourth chair was being carried over from the direction of the door marked UFFICIO by the maitre d’hotel.
He placed it square with the others, a table was lowered into the middle and glass and cutlery were deftly laid.
He casually took the chair he had himself brought to the table and switched it to Bond’s table.
He gave a wave of the hand to dismiss his helpers and everyone dispersed about their business.
The innocent little flurry of restaurant movement had taken about a minute.
The maitre d’hotel greeted them personally and bowed them to the new table, and the gambit was completed.
Kristatos returned from whatever business he had been about, their food came and they got on with the meal.
While they ate they talked about nothing—the election chances in Italy, the latest Alfa Romeo, Italian shoes compared with English.
He spoke his own kind of English with an occasional phrase borrowed from other languages.
Bond was not surprised that the American Intelligence people found him good value.
Kristatos lit a thin black cigar and talked through it, the cigar jumping up and down between the thin straight lips.
Now, before I give you the informations, like good commercials we make the terms.
When you have destroyed the machina I wish for a further twenty thousand.
He gazed quizzically at the other man who now leaned slightly forward over the table, waiting.
And he was not paying the gunman, the gunman was paying him for the privilege of disposing of an enemy.
The fixer was certainly working on a big fix this time—using the Secret Service to pay off his private scores.
If his success benefited others, nobody, least of all M, could care less.
If this unnamed man was the machine, it would be merely carrying out orders to destroy the man.
Signor Kristatos took a toothpick out of the holder, stripped off the paper and set about cleaning his finger-nails.
This time I will do so because it is you who are paying me, and not me you.
He never hesitated for a fact and he did not waste time on irrelevant detail.
There were two thousand American gangsters in the country—Italian-Americans who had been convicted and expelled from the United States.
They were on the blackest of all police lists and, because of their records, their own people were wary of employing them.
A further large section acted as couriers, and the bosses had acquired, through nominees, a small and respectable pharmaceutical business in Milan.
They used small craft across the Mediterranean, a group of stewards in an Italian charter airline and, as a regular weekly source of supply, the through carriage of the Orient Express in which whole sections of bogus upholstery were fitted by bribed members of the train cleaners in Istanbul.
The Milan firm—Pharmacia Colomba S.A.—acted as a clearinghouse and as a convenient centre for breaking down the raw opium into heroin.
Thence the couriers, using innocent motor-cars of various makes, ran a delivery service to the middle-men in England.
If they are convicted, they receive ten thousand dollars for each year spent in prison.
She had the gay, bold, forthcoming looks the Viennese are supposed to have and seldom do.
There was a vivacity and a charm about her that lit up her corner of the room.
She had the wildest possible urchin cut in ash-blonde, a pert nose, a wide laughing mouth and a black ribbon round her throat.
James Bond knew that her eyes had been on him at intervals throughout the evening.
Her companion had seemed just the type of rich, cheerful, good-living man she would be glad to have as her lover for a while.
Since he, Bond, could not have the girl, it was at least something that she was in good hands.
Fler eyes swept past him, but there was a half smile, as if for herself, on her lips, and when she took a cigarette out of her case and lit it and blew the smoke straight up towards the ceiling there was an offering of the throat and the profile that Bond knew were for him.
The maitre d’hotel was supervising the clearing of the unoccupied tables and the setting up of new ones.
There was the usual bustle and slapping of napkins across chair-seats and tinkle of glass and cutlery being laid.
Vaguely Bond noticed the spare chair at his table being whisked away to help build up a near-by table for six.
He began asking Kristatos specific questions—the personal habits of Enrico Colombo, where he lived, the address of his firm in Milan, what other business interests he had.
Then he went to the chair and lifted off the squab cushion and put it on his desk.
Then he sat down at his desk and lit a cigarette and listened, occasionally making further adjustments and occasionally repeating passages.
He looked back once more at the Grundig, said ‘Son-a-beech’ again with more emphasis and went out and back to his table.
Just because you give me dinner in your lousy restaurant you think you have the right to insult me with your filthy propositions’—the girl’s voice had got louder.
She stood beside the table directly in the line of Bond’s approach on his way to the exit.
She reached for a half-full glass of wine and hurled it accurately in the man’s face.
When he came at her it was easy for her to back the few steps into Bond who was standing with Kristatos politely waiting to get by.
Enrico Colombo stood panting, wiping the wine off his face with a napkin.
There was a buzz in the restaurant and a renewed clatter of knives and forks.
I meant the sort of high-level gossip that’s probably pretty near the truth.
The commissionaire opened the door and the light from the street turned her eyes into stars.
I bathe at the Bagni Alberoni, where the English poet Byron used to ride his horse.
You will find me there the day after tomorrow—at three in the afternoon.
Bond looked after her thoughtfully, and then turned and got back into the taxi and told the man to take him to the Nazionale.
Bond, after a morning that was chiefly occupied with difficult talks with his London Headquarters on Station I’s scrambler, caught it by the skin of his teeth.
The Laguna is a smart, streamlined affair that looks and sounds more luxurious than it is.
The seats are made for small Italians and the restaurant car staff suffer from the disease that afflicts their brethren in the great trains all over the world—a genuine loathing for the modem traveler and particularly for the foreigner.
If the seven heavens had been flowing by outside the window he would not have cared.
He kept his eyes inside the train, read a jerking book, spilled Chianti over the table-cloth and shifted his long, aching legs and cursed the Ferrovie Italiane dello Stato.
Then came the unfailing shock of the beauty that never betrays and the soft swaying progress down the Grand Canal into a blood-red sunset, and the extreme pleasure—so it seemed—of the Gritti Palace that Bond should have ordered the best double room on the first floor.
That evening, scattering thousand-lira notes like leaves in Vallombrosa, James Bond sought, at Harry’s Bar, at Florian’s, and finally upstairs in the admirable Quadri, to establish to anyone who might be interested that he was what he had wished to appear to the girl—a prosperous writer who lived high and well.
Then, in the temporary state of euphoria that a first night in Venice engenders, however high and serious the purpose of the visitor, James Bond walked back to the Gritti and had eight hours dreamless sleep.
The glittering scene is kinder to the eyes and there is a freshness in the air that helps one to hammer out those long miles of stone and terrazza and marble that are intolerable to the feet in summer.
Although Venice is the one town in the world that can swallow up a hundred thousand tourists as easily as it can a thousand— hiding them down its side-streets, using them for crowd scenes on the piazzas, stuffing them into the vaporetti—it is still better to share Venice with the minimum number of packaged tours and Lederhosen.
He visited a couple of churches—not to admire their interiors but to discover if anyone came in after him through the main entrance before he left by the side door.
Bond went to Florian’s and had an Americano and listened to a couple of French culture-snobs discussing the imbalance of the containing facade of St Mark’s Square.
On an impulse, he bought a postcard and sent it off to his secretary who had once been with the Georgian Group to Italy and had never allowed Bond to forget it.
To the Municipal Waterworks this afternoon and then an old Brigitte Bardot at the Scala Cinema.
Pleased with his inspiration, Bond had an early luncheon and went back to his hotel.
He put up the safe and practised one or two quick draws and put the gun back in the holster.
He went along to the landing-stage and boarded the twelve-forty vaporetto to Alberoni, out of sight across the mirrored lagoons.
Then he settled down in a seat in the bows and wondered what was going to happen to him.
A mile down the thin neck of land the luxury real estate development has petered out in a scattering of cracked stucco villas and bankrupt housing projects, and here there is nothing but the tiny fishing village of Alberoni, a sanatorium for students, a derelict experimental station belonging to the Italian Navy and some massive weed-choked gun emplacements from the last war.
In the no man’s land in the centre of this thin tongue of land is the Golf du Lido, whose brownish undulating fairways meander around the ruins of ancient fortifications.
Not many people come to Venice to play golf, and the project is kept alive for its snob appeal by the grand hotels of the Lido.
The golf-course is surrounded by a high wire fence hung at intervals, as if it protected something of great value or secrecy, with threatening Vietatos and Prohibitos.
The whole area is strange and melancholy and in extraordinary contrast to the gay carnival world of Venice less than an hour away across the lagoons.
Bond was sweating slightly by the time he had walked the half-mile across the peninsula to the plage, and he stood for a moment under the last of the acacia trees that had bordered the dusty road to cool off while he got his bearings.
In front of him was a rickety wooden archway whose central span said BAGNI ALBERONI in faded blue paint.
Beyond were the lines of equally dilapidated wooden cabins, and then a hundred yards of sand and then the quiet blue glass of the sea.
There were no bathers and the place seemed to be closed, but when he walked through the archway he heard the tinny sound of a radio playing Neapolitan music.
Deckchairs were stacked against its walls and there were two pedallos and a child’s halfinflated sea-horse.
The whole establishment looked so derelict that Bond could not imagine it doing business even at the height of the summer season.
He stepped off the narrow duck-boards into the soft, burned sand and moved round behind the huts to the beach.
To the left, until it disappeared in the autumn heat haze, the wide empty sand swept away in a slight curve towards the Lido proper.
To the right was half a mile of beach terminating in the sea-wall at the tip of the peninsula.
The seawall stretched like a finger out into the silent mirrored sea, and at intervals along its top were the flimsy derricks of the octopus fishermen.
Behind the beach were the sand-hills and a section of the wire fence surrounding the golf-course.
On the edge of the sand-hills, perhaps five hundred yards away, there was a speck of bright yellow.
The rest of her—a burned cream body in a black bikini on a black and white striped bath-towel—lay offered to the sun.
Flirtation had gone out of her eyes and they had become attentive, and perhaps a little careful.
I would not be surprised’—Bond caught her quick glance at his watch—‘if it had crossed his mind to have me followed here.
He moved his head so that he could look behind the umbrella and back down the beach.
Far down by the bathing-huts, their outlines dancing slightly in the heat haze, were three men in dark clothes.
They were walking purposefully up the beach, their feet keeping step as if they were a squad.
From there he could double back down the other shore to the village and the safety of people.
She raised hers in answer and then lay down on the sand and turned over—perhaps so that her back could now get its toasting, or perhaps because she did not want to watch the man-hunt.
At the tip of the peninsula, Bond clambered up on to the sea-wall and looked back.
The men had hardly gained, but now two of them were fanning out to cut round the edge of the golf-course boundary.
They did not seem to mind the danger notices with the skulls and cross-bones.
Bond, running fast down the wide sea-wall, measured angles and distances.
At intervals along the seawall the breeches of antique cannon had been sunk in the concrete.
They would be mooring-posts for the fishing-fleets sheltering in the protection of the lagoons before taking to the Adriatic.
Now even his suit was soaked with sweat and the cloth of his trousers was chafing his legs.
To his right, dodging among the sand-dunes and converging fast, were the other two.
To his left was a twenty-foot slope of masonry to the green tide ripping out into the Adriatic.
Bond was planning to slow down to a walk and keep enough breath to try and shoot it out with the three men, when two things happened in quick succession.
There were about half a dozen of them, some in the water and some sunning themselves on the sea-wall.
Earth and scrub and what might have been bits of a man fountained briefly into the air, and a small shock-wave hit him.
Suddenly he collapsed on the ground with his arms wrapped round his head.
He would not move again until someone came and carried him away from there.
Odd, but despite the witnessing spear-fishers, the man was still coming on.
In the centre was a big man with a tiny red bathing-slip hanging beneath his stomach.
Automatically his sweaty hand felt under his coat for the gun and drew it out.
The man in the centre of the arc of pointing harpoons was Enrico Colombo.
Colombo smiled and nodded, and the man who had been coming softly up behind Bond hit him once hard in the base of the skull with the butt of his Luger.
Even in his wretchedness Bond was aware of two sensations—he was in a ship at sea, and someone, a man, was wiping his forehead with a cool wet towel and murmuring encouragement in bad English.
It was a comfortable small cabin with a feminine smell and dainty curtains and colours.
A sailor in a tattered vest and trousers—Bond thought he recognized him as one of the spearfishermen—was bending over him.
Bond said ‘Si’ again and the sailor went out of the cabin and closed the door without locking it.
On top of the chest of drawers was a neat pile of his personal belongings.
Bond stowed the things away in his pockets, and sat down again on the bunk and smoked and thought.
He was being taken for a ride, or rather a sail, but from the behaviour of the sailor it did not seem that he was regarded as an enemy.
Yet a great deal of trouble had been taken to make him prisoner and one of Colombo’s men had even, though inadvertently, died in the process.
Perhaps this soft treatment was the preliminary to trying to make a deal with him.
At nine o’clock the same sailor came for Bond and led him down a short passage to a small, blowzy saloon, and left him.
There was a table and two chairs in the middle of the room, and beside the table a nickel-plated trolley laden with food and drinks.
There was just enough light to see that the ship was about two hundred tons and might once have been a large fishing-vessel.
I warned my chief that something like this might happen—the way the girl picked me up in your restaurant was too childish for words.
I had sent them to fetch you and bring you to my ship, and it would all have been much more friendly.
Now I have lost a good man and you might easily have had your skull broken.
I like to be friends with everyone, and now I have made two enemies in one afternoon.
He cut a thick slice of sausage, impatiently tore the rind off it with his teeth and began to eat.
While his mouth was still full he took a glass of champagne and washed the sausage down with it.
Colombo threw the remains of the roll on the table and got to his feet, holding Bond’s eyes locked in his.
He walked sideways, still gazing fixedly at Bond, to a chest of drawers, felt for the knob of the top drawer, opened it, groped and lifted out what Bond recognized as a tape-recorder playback machine.
Still looking accusingly at Bond, he brought the machine over to the table.
All I can say is that if the man tries to destroy me, I will destroy him.
He put his hand in his pocket and threw the silver Freedom medal with the red, white and blue striped ribbon on to the table.
He reached for the whisky bottle and walked round and poured four fingers into Bond’s glass.
He went back to his chair and sat down and put the champagne bottle on the table in front of him.
Even if you or someone else had not found reason to kill me, there would have been scandal, ruin.
Instead I decided to show you the truth—the truth you were sent to Italy to find out.
Half the American cigarettes in Italy are brought in by me from Tangier.
I have my own purveyor in Beirut with direct lines to Sierra Leone and South Africa.
In the old days, when these things were scarce, I also handled aureomycin and penicillin and such medicines.
He even felt a curious liking for this greedy, boisterous pirate who had so nearly been put on the spot by Kristatos.
To keep it up—to keep the protection of American Intelligence and their Narcotics people—he must now and then throw them a victim—some small man on the fringe of the big game.
And it is true that if you had been vigorous in your investigations and had spent enough hard currency on buying information, you might have discovered the story of my operations.
But each trail towards _me_ would have led you further away from the truth.
In the end, for I do not underestimate your Service, I would have gone to prison.
In the fraternity of smugglers, we occasionally stumble on a corner of the next man’s business.
Not long ago, in this ship, I had a running fight with a small gunboat from Albania.
I learnt much, but like a fool I took a chance with the minefields and set him ashore on the coast north of Tirana.
Fortunately,’ Colombo grinned wolfishly, ‘I have one piece of information he does not know of.
And we have a rendezvous with this piece of information at first light tomorrow—at a small fishing-port just north of Ancona, Santa Maria.
But I shall need your promise that what I have told you this evening is between you and me and, if necessary, your Chief in London.
He said awkwardly ‘All right, Colombo,’ and went out of the saloon and along to his cabin.
They talked softly among themselves as the mugs of hot coffee and rum were dished out by Colombo in the saloon.
A storm lantern was the only light—the ship had been darkened—and Bond smiled to himself at the Treasure Island atmosphere of excitement and conspiracy.
They all had Lugers, carried under the jersey inside the trouser-band, and flick-knives in the pocket.
It struck Bond that Colombo had made a good life for himself—a life of adventure and thrill and risk.
It was a criminal life—a running fight with the currency laws, the State tobacco monopoly, the Customs, the police—but there was a whiff of adolescent rascality in the air which somehow changed the colour of the crime from black to white—or at least to grey.
He dowsed the lantern and, in the oyster light of dawn, Bond followed him up to the bridge.
He found the ship was close to a black, rocky shore which they were following at reduced speed.
Round the headland, we will put on full speed and come alongside this ship and board her.
As Bond said the words, there came a ting on the engine-room telegraph and the deck began to tremble under his feet.
Making ten knots, the small ship rounded the headland into the harbour.
From her stern a ramp of wooden planks sloped down towards the dark mouth of a ramshackle corrugated iron warehouse, inside which burned feeble electric lights.
The ship carried a deck cargo of what appeared to be rolls of newsprint, and these were being hoisted one by one on to the ramp whence they rolled down under their own momentum through the mouth of the warehouse.
Now Colombo’s craft was fifty yards away from the other ship, and one or two of the men had stopped working and were looking in their direction.
At the first hard contact, grappling-irons were tossed over the Albanian’s rail fore and aft, and Colombo’s men swarmed over the side with Colombo in the lead.
As soon as his feet landed on the enemy deck, he ran straight across the ship, climbed the far rail and jumped.
It was about twelve feet to the jetty and he landed like a cat, on his hands and toes, and stayed for a moment, crouching, planning his next move.
An early shot killed the searchlight and now there was only the grey, luminous light of dawn.
A body, one of the enemy, crunched to the stone in front of him and lay spread-eagled, motionless.
At the same time, from the mouth of the warehouse, a light machine-gun started up, firing short bursts with a highly professional touch.
The bullets zipped round Bond, clanged against the iron hull of the ship and whined off into the night.
Bond got to the cover of the sloping ramp of boards and dived forward on his stomach.
When he had got as close as he could, he would have a choice of breaking cover either to right or left of the boards.
One of Colombo’s men must have cut the ropes and sent the whole pile of newsprint rolls down the ramp.
If the machinegunner was waiting for him, he would expect Bond to come out firing on the right.
The machine-gunner was there, crouching up against the wall of the warehouse.
Bond fired twice in the split second before the bright muzzle of the enemy weapon had swung through its small arc.
Bond was running forward towards the warehouse door when he slipped and fell headlong.
He cursed and got to his hands and knees and made a dash for cover behind a jumble of the big newsprint rolls that had crashed into the wall of the warehouse.
One of them, sliced by a burst from the machine-gun, was leaking black treacle.
Bond gave his gun-hand a last wipe on the seat of his trousers and leapt for the warehouse door.
He was surprised not to be shot at from the interior as soon as he was silhouetted against the entrance.
The lights had been turned out, but it was now getting brighter outside.
The pale newsprint rolls were stacked in orderly ranks with a space to make a passage-way down the centre.
Colombo came running swiftly towards him, his feet close to the ground as fat men run.
Without waiting for an answer he sprinted round the corner of the building and down along its side.
He flattened himself against the corrugated iron wall and took a swift look round.
In his hand was a plunger from which wires ran under the bottom of the door.
A car, a black Lancia Granturismo convertible with the hood down, stood beside him, its engine ticking over softly.
He held his gun in both hands for steadiness, inched swiftly round the corner of the building and fired one shot at the man’s feet.
Almost as he saw the dust kick up inches off the target, there was the rumbling crack of an explosion and the tin wall hit him and sent him flying.
It was already twenty yards away, dust fountaining up from the traction on the rear wheels.
At the last shot, at fifty yards, the figure crouched over the wheel jerked backwards.
The right hand remained sticking out as if the dead man was signaling a right-hand turn.
It hurried on along the flat road across the bumed-up plain and the cloud of white dust blew gaily up behind.
At any moment Bond expected it to veer off the road, but it did not, and Bond stood and saw it out of sight into the early morning mist that promised a beautiful day.
Bond put his gun on safe and tucked it away in the belt of his trousers.
He came up with Bond and, to Bond’s horror, threw open his arms, clutched Bond to him and kissed him on both cheeks.
But me,’ he hit himself in the chest, ‘me, Enrico Colombo, loves this man and he is not ashamed to say so.
If you had not got the machine-gunner, not one of us would have survived.
But only half a dozen Albanians remain on their feet and they have escaped into the village.
Flames were beginning to lick out of the shattered warehouse, and there was billowing smoke that smelled of sweet vegetables.
They waded across her and climbed on board the Colombina, where Bond had to go through some more handshaking and backslapping.
There was a small group of fishermen standing by their boats that lay drawn up on the beach below a huddle of stone cottages.
They made a surly impression, but when Colombo waved and shouted something in Italian most of them raised a hand in farewell, and one of them called back something that made the crew of the Colombina laugh.
He went below and borrowed a razor and a clean shirt from one of the crew, and stripped in his cabin and cleaned himself.
When he took out his gun and threw it on the bunk he caught a whiff of cordite from the barrel.
A sudden delicious scent of frying bacon came down-wind from the galley.
Abruptly Bond pulled the porthole to and dressed and went along to the saloon.
Over a mound of fried eggs and bacon washed down with hot sweet coffee laced with rum, Colombo dotted the i’s and crossed the t’s.
It is true that I have such a business in Milan and that it is a convenient depot for some of my wares.
For all that part of Kristatos’s story, read Kristatos instead of Colombo.
It is he who breaks the stuff down into heroin and it is he who employs the couriers to take it to London.
That huge shipment was worth perhaps a million pounds to Kristatos and his men.
The gift of a massive and deadly projectile to be fired into the bowels of England.
The Russians can supply unlimited quantities of the charge for the projectile.
It comes from their poppy-fields in the Caucasus, and Albania is a convenient entrepot.
The man Kristatos created the necessary apparatus, and it is he, on behalf of his masters in Russia, who pulls the trigger.
Today, between us, we have destroyed, in half an hour, the entire conspiracy.
You can now go back and tell your people in England that the traffic will cease.
You can also tell them the truth—that Italy was not the origin of this terrible underground weapon of war.
Perhaps, my dear James,’ Colombo smiled encouragingly, ‘they will send you to Moscow to find out.
You will be spending a few more days in Italy writing your report, and no doubt,’ he chuckled, ‘checking on some of the things I have told you.
Perhaps you will also have an enjoyable half an hour explaining the facts of life to your colleagues in American Intelligence.
In between these duties you will need companionship—someone to show you the beauties of my beloved homeland.
In uncivilized countries, it is the polite custom to offer one of your wives to a man whom you love and wish to honour.
Colombo fished in his trousers pocket and tossed something down with a clang on the table in front of Bond.
Colombo put his hand to his heart and looked seriously into Bond’s eyes.
Prior to taking up this role, Sir Roger Moore played Simon Templar in the British Television series The Saint.
I rather like the old black and white The Saint series and sometimes I download an episode or two and watch it at night.
The film For Your Eyes Only is a well written story made up of a number of vignettes written by Fleming.
Several stories from the original novel are incorporated in the film script, with some modifications and a few vignettes from other Fleming novels find their way into the film as well.
The two vignettes For Your Eyes Only and Risico are used as the main story lines in the film.
If you recall, in the short story For Your Eyes Only Bond avenges the murder of M's closest friends, the Flavelocks, by a group of Cubans.
Their death is also avenged by the Flavelock daughter, as well as by James Bond who happens upon the Havelock girl just as Bond is about to kill her parent’s Cuban assassin using a cross bow.
In short story there is mention of Greek islands, smugglers and Albanians.
The film in fact begins with a naval mine sinking of a Royal Navy intelligence gathering ship the St.
Such a story is reminiscent of many clandestine operations in both the First and Second World War involving the recovery from the ocean floor of top secret materials, including encryption machines and war material. qwert For instance, in the First World War these was the recovery of the German Imperial Navy’s code books from the ship the SMS Magdeburg after an engagement with Russian cruisers off the entrance to the Gulf of Finland on August 26 th , 1914.
Three entire sets of naval codes were captured off the SMS Magdeburg by the Russian Imperial navy and one set shared with the Royal Navy.
The secret would get out when Winston Churchill wrote about it in his history of the First World War.
The body of a drowned German under-officer was picked up by the Russians a few hours later, and clasped in his bosom by arms rigid in death, were the cypher and signal books of the German Navy and the minutely squared maps of the North Sea and Heligoland Bight.
The Russians felt that as the leading naval Power, the British Admiralty ought to have these books and charts.
If we would send a vessel to Alexandrov, the Russian officers in charge of the books would bring them to England.
The story as to how these documents were used by the Royal Navy in the First World War has been told elsewhere.
During the First World War the RN also sent divers to U-boat wrecks in the English Channel and around the UK to try to recover the U-boat ciphers.
In the Second World War there were greater successes in lifting secret materials from naval wrecks.
It is still governed by the Official Secrets Act but I can tell you that the Australian Navy managed to dive on a Japanese submarine early in the war and recover the Imperial Japanese Navy’s JN25 code materials, which they shared with the British and the Americans.
In the film For Your Eyes Only there is the use of diving equipment and mini-submarines to effect the salvage from the wreck of the St.
I will provide more background about Ian Fleming’s role in this clandestine war in the next book in The Best of Ian Fleming series when we look at the novel Thinderball.
Ian Fleming was involved in a number of clandestine operations to acquire, by hook or by crook, the code and cipher materials of Germany and their Axis allies in Europe , similar materials from the French Armed Forces as well as the code and cipher materials of Axis sympathisers like the Spaniards and Several south American countries.
For instance there was an operation organized by him to seize a German Navy weather ship in the North Sea, a successful operation that gave the allies a three month peek into German Naval messages and allowed the allies to begin to turn back the tide in the battle of the Atlantic.
In one of the yet secret histories of the Second World War, the Spaniards ran a spy ring for their German and Japanese allies in North America and in Great Britain during the war.
One of Ian Fleming’s area of expertise was in Spain and his OPERATION GOFDENEYE was to keep a close watch on the Spaniards and to keep them out of the war and out of Gibraltar.
This clandestine operation became public in the middle 1950’s and it has become one of the classic stories of wartime espionage.
Of course ... it goes without saying who the idea for OPERATION MINCEMEAT came from.
I will provide more background to this operation in a subsequent book of The Best of Ian Fleming series.
In the film For Your Eyes Only a vignette from a previous Fleming novel is used when Bond and the heroine are to be towed behind a yacht, drowned and fed to the sharks.
If you have read the previous Bond novels you will recognize the vignette from the final part of the novel Live and Let Die.
The film For Your Eyes Only was released in June, 1981 with an international cast including Roger Moore as 007, Carole Bouquet as Melina Havelock , Julian Glover as the arch villain Kristatos, Topol as Columbo , as well as a string of minor actors.
Being a reserve Royal Canadian Naval Officer at the time I rather enjoyed the naval character to the film For Your Eyes Only.
It was one of the retired naval officers I met at a naval mess dinner who told me about the Corfu Channel incident and this being the pre-internet era I had to do a little historical detective work to find the particulars of the 1946 incident.
As it would happen, when I tried to buy my ticket the lovely young lady in the ticket kiosk smiled and gave me a pass into the theater, on the proviso we met for coffee after the show.
We met for coffee and well we enjoyed some summer pleasure walking together and picnicking at Beaconsfield Park in Victoria.
In terms of the Bond films that came out in the 1980’s For Your Eyes Only was one of the Bond films I saw for the first time in the theaters.
Although it is not considered one of the classic Bond films, I have a certain fondness for For Your Eyes Only.
Getting Behind the 'Lucy' Myth CIA HISTORICAL REVIEW PROGRAM RELEASE IN FULL 22 SEPT 93 SECRET By Mark A Tittenhofer The reasons for re-examining the 25 years old matter of the Rote Drei and Rudolph Roessler—the ""Lucy"" of the Soviet espionage operation in Switzerland during World War 11—are not simple.
Concern for historical rectitude alone, however, would not justify the expenditure of our time and effort.
The profession of intelligence may owe some duty to Clio, but it cannot be said to be the general one of cleansing all confusions and deliberate disinformation from the public record about intelligence matters.
Apart from the possible substantive benefits of clearing up the story of the Red Three and its members, however, there are certain concrete circumstances surrounding it that ought to attract our notice.
The first is that it continues to be treated as a matter of some contemporary concern in certain interesting quarters.
Moreover, for different reasons the Rote Drei is, as we shall see, regarded with considerable sensitivity elsewhere on the Continent, particularly in Switzerland.
Readers of Studies in Intelligence will recall Louis Thomas' recent essay on the career of the Hungarian collector of cartographic intelligence, Alexander Rado, 1 in which we were reminded that Rado was resident director of the Soviet apparatus in Switzerland while the Rote Drei was operating.
Rado has publicly indicated the intention to publish a personal memoir that will lay to rest the ""stab in the back"" theory of the Nazi debacle.
Thomas correctly infers that this curious announcement must have had some direct relationship to thinking in Moscow.
We are therefore surely right to believe that we are to hear more about the Rote Drei, and that we would be wise to equip ourselves in advance with the appropriate intellectual baggage.
Whatever Rado places on the record is likely to be elaborately confusing.
The Radio Messages Examined Any useful, accurate account of the Rote Drei must start with the radio traffic exchanged between the Center in Moscow and the network in Switzerland.
A comparison of these with those in other holdings has shown that 40 appear elsewhere and 89 are unique.
The 40 matching messages were all transmitted between 3 September and 5 October 1943.
There have been a number of claims that the Red Three network was functioning before the war, and that Lucy, as Rudolf Roessler was called, gave Moscow advance warning of Hitler's attack.
The traffic proves, however, that Sissy did not establish a clandestine association with Taylor and Lucy until the late summer of 1942.
Our best estimate of the life-span of the Rote Drei operation—that is, the period during which the Swiss net exchanged W/T communications with Moscow—is 33 months, from August 1941 to May 1944.
This collection, unfortunately, contains only 8 per cent of the presumed total.
Lor this reason we are obliged to be circumspect when drawing from the traffic any quantitative conclusions.
What is more important, the riddles resolved by the 8 per cent are cause to believe that the remaining mysteries, or most of them, could be solved with the aid of the missing 92 per cent.
Supplementary research in classified files has yielded additional information.
Although there are still gaps in our knowledge, we can at least present the first account of the Red Three that is not based chiefly on speculation, fantasy, and falsification.
Of these 55 we can identify 15 with certainty and make educated guesses about 16 more.
We also know the identities of some persons associated with the Rote Drei who do not appear in the traffic.
Digging out the facts and telling the story would have been decidedly easier if so much misinformation about the subject had not been published in the past.
Even the name ""The Red Three,"" a German appellation based on the number of transmitters or operators serving the network, is misleading, because at times there were four and even five.
Vera and the Beginnings of the Red Three The story of the Rote Drei begins with Maria Josefovna Poliakova, a highly intelligent Russian Jewess and a dedicated Communist, born about 1910.
When she was 21, she was a very active member of the central committee of the Komsomol.
She was recruited at that time by the IVth Department of the Soviet General Staff.
In 1936-1937 she headed the Soviet military intelligence network in Switzerland.
She made a quick trip back in 1941, when she ordered certain changes in the command structure of the Rote Drei.
But mostly she spend the war years in Moscow, where she specialized on the Rote Drei operation.
All of the messages from Moscow to Switzerland were signed ""Director,"" an indicator showing that they came from the Center.
It is probable that Poliakova was the originator of many of these; her informal, fervent, Marxian style is distinctive.
At the end of 1944, when the Swiss operation had ended, Poliakova, then a major, became chief of the GRU's Spanish section.
She also had a brother, Professor Juergin Kuczynski, who introduced Klaus Fuchs to Soviet intelligence officers.
Ursula and Rudolf Hamburger were Red Army espionage agents in Shanghai in 1930-1935.
In 1939 her position was jeopardized by the arrest of Franz Obermanns, a German Communist with false Finnish documents and a transmitter.
Beurton, a veteran of the Spanish Civil War, was recruited for Soviet espionage by Brigette Lewis, who turned him over to her sister Ursula on 13 February 1939.
The marriage to Beurton gave Ursula British citizenship, and she left Switzerland for England in December 1940.
Her husband remained in Switzerland, where he trained Edmond Hamel in operating a W/T set.
In July 1942, provided with a British passport in the name of Miller and the blessings of the Red Army Staff, Beurton went via Portugal to England and his Ursula.
Sissy and Paul A third person of importance in the swaddling days of the Red Three was also a woman, Rachel Duebendorfer.
Born on 18 July 1901 in Danzig, she became an active Soviet agent in 1920.
Soon thereafter she married one Curt Caspari, and on 8 July 1922 she gave birth to a daughter, Tamara, who eventually married a Frenchman and who helped her mother with the housework, as did her husband, by serving as a Rote Drei courier.
In the late 1930's Rachel contracted a marriage of convenience with a Swiss citizen named Duebendorfer.
She took up residence in Bern, where she lived as the common-law wife of a German Communist named Paul Boettcher, alias Paul, alias Hans Saalbach.
Escaping to Switzerland from Germany after the Nazis came to power, he was twice expelled from Swiss territory, in 1941 and 1944, but managed to survive.
Sissy not only took him into her flat but also gave him the papers of her Swiss husband, whose identity Boettcher assumed.
Boettcher, Duebendorfer, Tamara Vigier , Roessler, o and Christian Schneider were all arrested in May 1944.
Boettcher went back to Saxony and in 1947 became editor of the Leipziger Volkszeitung.
In our collection of W/T messages Sissy appears 28 times between 8 October 1942 and 28 November 1943.
The first is that Sissy is the only one of Rado's sources to whom the Center directed messages by name and through Rado.
The second important element in this message is its reference to Taylor as a new source.
As we shall see, Taylor was first recruited by Sissy in the summer of 1942.
Because Lucy reported only through Taylor, this fact means that Moscow received no messages from Lucy and his sub-sources until that time.
The Director instructed Dora to have Sissy determine and report the identities of the sources in the Lucy-Taylor group.
Before this date Sissy had sent her first message in her own code, because the Center answered, ""We greet your first telegram.
But on 23 April 1943 Moscow sent its second message in Sissy's code, this one addressed to her and to Paul.
Dear friends, since the summer of 1942 you have worked with the Taylor-Lucy group, which has provided us with a great deal of varied material, some of it valuable.
We send you the title of a new book for your code; buy it; we shall give you instructions about how to work according to the book.
Gisela was one of three code names for Maria Josefovna Poliakova, the other two being Vera and Mildred.
It has been suggested that ""Maurice"" was Maurice Emile Aenis-Haenslin, born 20 September 1893 in St.
It is therefore concluded that the Maurice who knew Sissy and whom the Germans arrested in France may have been someone other than Aenis-Haenslin, who was released from a German concentration camp in Brandenburg in response to a Swiss demand.
At any rate, the traffic continued to mention Maurice and to reveal conflicting views about his arrest.
On 8 July 1943 Poliakova repeated to Sissy, in the latter's code, some of the instructions radioed to Dora four days earlier.
She directed Sissy to leave Bern and go to Tessin or a spa for two or three months.
They believe that the man who asked about them came from the Center and just handled himself clumsily.
You, however, deny this possibility and interpret it as an attempt to take the Taylor group away from you.
You must understand, inasmuch as you assume this position, that you know nothing of the danger which threatens you and Taylor's people, especially those in Germany.
We demand that you recognize the seriousness of the situation and place full confidence in our statements.
I am myself convinced that much more could be gotten out of the Lucy group.
However, I have no direct contact with this group, as you know, and every time that I try to intensify the group's activity I encounter in Sissy and her man 13 a resistance that I do not understand.
Sissy and her man ... say that they cannot transmit criticisms to Taylor and Lucy because both would consider it an insult and would stop working.
In accordance with your advice, I wrote Lucy a very friendly letter, but Sissy declared that Taylor could not pass it on because Lucy, beyond doubt, is already doing everything that he can.
One report identifies Pierre as Roger Vauthey of Lausanne, supposedly a courier or cut-out between Rado and ""Mario"" in France.
Foote, however, in a private interview held in 1953, said that Pierre and Vita were Pierre Nicole and his wife.
Our own view is that Pierre was indeed Pierre Nicole but that Vita was Tamara Vigier.
The head of this party was Pierre's father, Leon, born in 1897 in Montcherend, Vaud.
He could have been Leon Nicole or any one of several other Swiss Communists.
By 5 November 1943 the danger signs had multiplied, and Moscow feared that Rado might be arrested, leaving the Center cut off from Lucy's information.
It therefore repeated the proposal that Sissy and Jim be placed in direct contact, so that if anything happened to Dora, Jim could still maintain the flow of intelligence.
On 28 November 1943 the Director instructed Dora to tell Sissy and Pakbo to work independently for a time.
What Moscow obviously did not know was that Jim had been arrested eight days earlier.
Dora The fourth key personality in the Red Three was Alexander Rado, the Hungarian cartographer who took over the direction of the net from Maria Poliakova and who assumed contact with Ursula Hamburger's sources after she left Switzerland for England at the end of 1940.
Rado's story is wellknown and is retold here only in the barest outline.
It is almost certain that he was already working for Soviet military intelligence when he left Paris for Geneva in 1936.
When the Germans occupied France, Moscow ordered Hamburger to make contact with Rado and place the transmitter of her new husband, Leon Charles Beurton, at Rado's disposal.
Hamburger had trained both Foote and Beurton in operating a transmitter, and they in turn trained the Hamels and Margarete Bolli.
In 1941 Moscow resolved a struggle for power by subordinating Duebendorfer to Rado.
But Rado's authority was not absolute, and the fact that the Center gave Duebendorfer a code of her own and sometimes by-passed Rado when communicating with Sissy shows that the Soviets did not intend to let Rado consolidate his position completely.
Dora, a simple anagram for Rado, is the sender or recipient of almost all the Rote Drei messages.
The only exceptions are those sent or received directly by Sissy and those sent by Albert or by the Center but mentioning Albert in the text.
There is no doubt that Albert, like Dora, is Rado; but efforts to find a pattern or significance in Rado's choice of cover name for a particular message have not been successful.
The shift in names does not indicate a parallel shift in transmitters, because both ""Dora"" and ""Albert"" messages were found at their flat when the Hamels were arrested.
The possibility that ""Dora"" is Rado as chief of the Rote Drei and ""Albert"" is Rado as an individual disintegrates when checked against the traffic.
Flicke postulated a secretary who as Albert signed messages for Rado when be was away; but no one else ever heard of such a secretary, and Dora and Albert messages were sometimes transmitted on the same day.
Dora had two other key sources who, like Sissy, provided him with intelligence from sub-sources.
The cut-out between Lucy and Sissy was Taylor, whose true name was Christian Schneider.
Lucy and Taylor The Center thought highly of Taylor, chiefly because Moscow misunderstood his role.
The first reference to him in our holdings is in a message sent by the Director to Dora on 8 October 1942.
The message terms him a new source, although in fact he was merely a go-between.
On 20 October 1942 the Director told Dora to identify Taylor's sources, not knowing that the sources ""belonged"" to Lucy, not Taylor.
A week later Moscow again asked for the identities of Taylor's sources.
In December 1942 and January 1943 the Center began to speak of Taylor and Lucy jointly.
By February 1943 the Center's follow-up questions were directed to Lucy, with scant mention of Taylor.
That the Soviets continued to overestimate Taylor's importance is nevertheless evident in a Director-to-Dora message of 6 October 1943 which suggested that the work of the Lucy-Taylor group might be continued after the war ended and which promised Taylor an income for life if he agreed.
Perhaps Sissy misrepresented to Moscow the insignificant role that Taylor actually had, perhaps she merely kept stubbornly silent about such facts, or perhaps she misunderstood the true situation because she was in touch only with Taylor and not with Lucy.
If Rudolf Roessler had not been living in Switzerland during the second world war, his sources in Germany might have found it troublesome or even impossible to get their reports into Soviet hands.
In fact, they might not have cared much one way or the other about Soviet reception of their material, as long as it went to the Western allies.
But as was pointed out in the recent review of Accoce and Quet, 16 the widely accepted story that Lucy was a master spy is nothing but a myth.
As we have seen, the Center tried to eliminate Sissy and put Dora in direct contact with Taylor and Lucy.
If this maneuver had succeeded, it is probable that Dora would have been instructed to pressure Lucy to divulge his sources, whose identities Moscow had already requested again and again.
These four were probably not the only sources reporting to Lucy; Lucy was not the only source reporting to Sissy; and Sissy was not the only principal agent funneling reports from a network to Rado.
Yet these four persons produced 421/2 percent of the total traffic from Switzerland to Moscow.
We can, however, dismiss the theory of Foote and some later writers that these cover names merely referred to the source's access rather than his identity, so that Werther stood for Wehrmacht, Olga for Oberkommando der Luftwaffe, Anna for the Auswertige Amt , etc.
There is nothing in the traffic to support this theory, which seems to be based on speculation only.
All Rote Drei code names for which true identities have been established were designators of individuals per se, not of types of cover or access.
Despite the printed assertions to the contrary, Rudolf Roessler did divulge the identity of his sources, or at least of some of them.
General Hans Oster Lucy's confidant garbled the first identification and may have done the same with the fourth.
But Hans Oster was a major in the Abwehr at that time, and he remained in the service, in which he served as the chief of staff and also as the heart of the 20th of July group which conspired to overthrow and assassinate Hitler.
Hans Bernd Gisevius 19 said that he first met Oster sometime between August 1933 and April 1934.
Sas, the Dutch military attache in Berlin, that Germany intended to invade Norway.
Abshagen 22 reported that Oster gave Sas this warning on 3 April 1940 for relay to Norway and also told Sas of the invasion of Holland before the event.
In fact, Oster had begun to send specific, factual warnings to the West as early as 1938.
The man who had become a major in 1929, a lieutenant colonel in 1935, a colonel in 1939, and a major general in 1942 was unswerving in his detestation of German fascism and in his conviction that morality necessitated action.
As time passed and Hitler's power grew, Oster became convinced that the plots to eradicate the Nazis through the internal intervention of German armed forces would fail because of the waverings of the German generals.
He warned the West because he recognized that Hitler could not be brought down inside the Reich until he had been defeated on the battlefields.
And Oster was on intimate conspiratorial terms with such persons as General Ludwig Beck (who, with Oster, sent Dr.
Josef Mueller to the Vatican for peace negotiations with the British, negotiations at which the Pope presided); General Georg Thomas, head of the Economics and Armaments Branch of the OKW; Generals Fritz Thiele and Erich Fellgiebel, respectively chiefs of communications for the Army and the OKW; and General Friedrich Olbricht, chief of the Allgemeine Heeresamt and permanent deputy to the commander-in-chief of the Home Army.
These men, and others like them, were active members of the conspiracy; most of them were executed by the Nazis.
And they were in a position to have direct access to precisely the kind of information reported by Lucy's sources.
He was standing at his desk looking down pensively at the four or five telephones whose secret circuits connected him with the most diverse authorities.
As was noted earlier in this study, the timing of Rote Drei messages would have permitted sending almost all of the traffic through Abwehr courier channels from Germany to Switzerland.
We know that Gisevius had access at least twice and sometimes three times a week to a courier pouch from the Foreign Office in Berlin to the German Embassy in Bern.
At least every other day Gisevius was also served by an OKW courier as the result of a procedure instituted by Oster.
And for urgent messages Oster or a cohort could safely use an Abwehr telephone.
In brief, even if Lucy had not listed ""Canaris' predecessor,"" Gisevius, and Carl Goerdeler, all key figures in the 20th of July group, as having been among his sources, the characteristics of the Lucy messages and of their transmission from Germany to Switzerland suggest that Werther and the others probably had Abwehr communications channels at their disposal.
Hans Bernd Gisevius Gisevius has told much of his own story in To the Bitter End, but like other Germans he stresses the resistance activity of the underground and says little about espionage.
Speaking of the 20th of July conspiracy, Gisevius says, ""We had our spies everywhere—in the war ministry, the police headquarters, the ministry of the interior, and especially in the foreign office.
Gisevius entered the Abwehr in 1939 or 1940; and when Paris fell, Canaris and Oster sent him to Zurich with the cover of a vice-consul.
But even before the war started, Gisevius had started to make trips to Switzerland to meet with representatives of the Western Allies.
I was glad of the opportunity to complete my notes on the French crisis.
Ex-Chancellor Josef Wirth o 1 Gerhard Ritter tells of another, similar meeting which occurred some months later, in February 1940.
He says that the ex-Chancellor of Germany, Josef Wirth, had emigrated to Switzerland and had offered to act as an intermediary between the British and the German anti-Fascists.
The other man could have been Michel, Freiherr von Godin, or Lucy himself, or any of several other Germans who, like Wirth, were living in Lucerne.
Long absolutely must report clearly about the intent of Rot's group to orient itself toward the Soviet Union.
Six days later the Director asked some questions about the intentions of the OKW, the German High Command.
Moscow directed that the requirements be levied upon Lucy's group and added, "" ... if feasible, Long should try to get relevant information from the Wirth group.
Bendlerstrasse ""a) The first fixed day for the German attack on the East Front is 14 June.
Only operations of modest proportions are planned. ""b) The General Staff expects the event by the end of April at the earliest; it could snowball.
The so-called second echelon of generals [literally, generals in second-best uniforms] who already wanted to take action against Hitler in January, has now decided to liquidate Hitler and also his supporters.
Wirth rejects the German Liberation Committee [the reference is to the ""National Committee of Free Germany,"" created by the Russians] in Moscow because it hinders instead of hastening the disintegration of the Nazi regime.
Those who feel partially responsible for the establishment of that regime will cooperate more closely with the Nazi leaders.
Bourgeois German Democrats are prepared to collaborate with German Communists but not under Soviet guidance.
According to Wirth the German Embassy in Bern is extremely interested in Sokolin.
On the basis of these messages and of the scanty information about the movements and activities of Gisevius in Switzerland, it is suggested that Gisevius may have been Rot.
Gisevius also knew Wirth, whose link to the 20th of July group had been sanctioned by Generals Oster and Beck.
He obviously knew Carl Goerdeler, one of the most important of the conspirators.
Gisevius was sympathetic toward the Soviet cause, a fact which became more apparent after the war than it was during it.
He was thoroughly trained in clandestinity as a result of his role in the 20th of July group, his three and a half years as an agent of British intelligence, and his work for OSS in Switzerland.
It seems probable that people like Goerdeler and Beck, who themselves favored the Western solution—i.e., a post-war Germany oriented toward the United States and the UK—believed that Gisevius felt as they did and that those members of the 20th of July who favored the Eastern solution, people like Count Klaus Philip Schenk von Stauffenberg and Adam von Trott zu Solz, thought that Gisevius shared their views.
But there may be no real contradiction here; Gisevius could have been in clandestine contact with both Roessler and Blun, just as he was in clandestine contact with many other people.
Because Lucy and Sissy succeeded in concealing the identities of the Lucy group from the Russians, the dual role of Gisevius in the Rote Drei, if he did in fact play such a role, would not have come to light.
A conservative visionary, a Protestant monarchist, a headstrong philosopher, Goerdeler remained a civilian all his life.
All of the information provided to Moscow by Lucy could have been obtained more readily, more securely, in greater detail, and at a higher level from leading military figures in the resistance than from Carl Goerdeler.
It seems probable that Roessler named him just because he knew him personally, as he knew Gisevius.
Whatever information Goerdeler provided, he must have obtained it from fellow conspirators, not from direct access.
It is therefore not possible to draw any logical inferences about which cover name, if any, referred to Goerdeler.
Unfortunately, no record of a general named Boelitz has been discovered.
Otto Boelitz, born a pastor's son in Wesel in 1876, who became the Prussian Minister of Art, Science, and Education.
In 1934 he was a Kulturrat and a member of the German Foreign Institute.
He was also the first director of the Ibero-American Institute in Berlin.
Boelitz fell into the bad graces of the Nazis and was replaced as head of the Ibero-American Institute by a general named Faupel.
Thereafter, one report suggests, the institute was used by the Nazis in support of espionage and subversion in Fatin America.
A Colonel Friedrich Boetzel was head of the Germany military intercept office in Munich before 1933.
Thereafter he was commanding officer of the intelligence evaluation office of the Southeast Army Group, Athens, where he remained until 1944.
And a German first lieutenant of the signal corps, interrogated in April 1945, described Colonel Boetzel as an anti-Nazi.
We have Oster, Gisevius, Goerdeler, and Boelitz, identified by Roessler as having been among his sources during World War Two.
We have no basis for matching true and cover names, although Oster seems the likeliest candidate for Werther.
To continue, the contacts of ""Sissy""—Rachel Duebendorfer—fell into three categories.
By far the most important group was Luey's quartet of Werther, Teddy, Olga, and Anna, all in Germany.
Sissy resisted strenuously every effort of Moscow and Rado to determine the identities of the members of the Taylor-Lucy team, and it is fair to conjecture that a major reason for her resistance was that had she lost this remarkable asset, she'd have had little enough left.
For the second group was composed of peripheral people probably turned over to Sissy by Vera Poliakova before the War.
And the third element was made up of Sissy's own family; the man with whom she was living, Paul Goettcher; her daughter and the daughter's husband; and a cousin.
One of them, Georges Blun, code-named Long, was a French journalist whose subsources could not match the production of Lucy's group in quality or quantity, but who was nevertheless a valuable asset for the Soviets.
The sources who had aliases and who are known to have been members of Long's group were Agnes, Kurz, Grau, Rot, Fanny, and possibly Feld.
With the exception of the last-named, a courier, the members of the group have a certain homogeneous quality.
They were not military professionals like Werther, Teddy, and the rest.
Their political views and their motivation often seem ambiguous and devious, if not opportunistic.
The first of Long's sub-sources, Agnes, was a journalist named Ernst Lemmer.
Some information about him is included here not because his WW Two career as a spy was of any particular moment, but because his work for Lucy spanned a long period, including the second, post-war phase of Lucy's career in espionage.
Lemmer represented a Zurich newspaper in Berlin and travelled to Switzerland repeatedly.
He first appears in our holdings in a message of 22 October 1941, Dora to Director.
Long is listed as the source and Lemmer, who is said to have obtained the information from the Foreign Ministry, as the sub-source.
The dates are 13 August and 18 September 1943, and the messages are merely reports of the lack of morale at the German home front.
In 1924 he was elected as a DDP representative to the Reichstag and thus became the youngest member of that body.
He lost these posts when the Nazis seized power, and he was forbidden to write for any newspaper published in Germany.
He became the Berlin correspondent for the Pester Lloyd of Budapest and the Neue Zuercher Zeitungs well as a reporter in Occupied Belgium for the Brussels Soir.
After the war Lemmer was accused in West Germany of having collaborated with the Nazis.
He settled immediately after the war in the Berlin suburb of Klein-Machnow, in the Soviet sector, where he owned a house.
On 20 December 1947, however, the Soviet authorities removed Lemmer from the vice-chairmanship of the CDU, ostensibly because of policy conflicts.
He moved to West Berlin in 1949 and became editor of the anti-Communist Berlin Kurier.
In 1950 he was elected to the five-man executive of the CDU in West Berlin.
In November 1956 he was appointed Minister of Postal and Telecommunications.
In 1966 Lemmer was a special representative of Chancellor Erhard in Berlin.
He is currently listed as a retired Cabinet Minister who last held public office in 1965.
The same source who repeated the identities of the four World War II sources whom Lucy had named to him also said that Lemmer was a source for Lucy during the 1947-1953 period when Lucy and Xaver Schnieper worked for Czech intelligence.
The post-war charges of collaboration with the Nazis, which Lemmer denied and outrode, seem to have been true.
Pakbo was of less value to Rado and the Soviets than was Long, just as Long and his group did not measure up to Sissy and her sources.
He was in contact with the Swiss military intelligence service, which used him as a channel to pass to the Soviets selected items of intelligence.
Dallin has devoted an entire chapter to Puenter, but much of what appears therein is false.
He said that information about the German General Staff which he obtained during World War II came from General Alfred Jodi.
He asserted that he kept in a monastery in Switzerland the entire plan for the German attack upon Stalingrad in October 1942, which he himself encoded before passing it to Rado.
He wove a complex and fascinating tale about a young Austrian radio operator who came from Dombim, near the Austro-Swiss border.
He had promised the home folks that he would transmit his location every night, just so that they would know where he was.
He chanced to be assigned to Hitler's headquarters, with the result that Pakbo always knew the Fuehrer's whereabouts.
The implausibility of this fable is, however, no greater than that inherent in his explanation of his cover name.
He claimed that he had teams of agents in Pontrezina, Aarau, Kreuzlingen, Bern, and Orselina— hence, Pakbo.
Actually, it is unlikely that he had teams of agents anywhere, and certainly improbable that they would be located at the unimportant places named.
By his own account, one of his teams was at Feldkich/Dombim, but his cover name contains neither an F nor a D As a matter of fact, most of his contacts lived in Bern and Geneva.
The Gaullist said he was looking for a contact with Moscow to pass on the information.
Pakbo went to Rado to deliver the story—i.e., the attack was scheduled for 15 June 1941.
Rado then decided to get in direct contact with Roessler, and that connection continued thenceforth.
In 1941 neither Lucy nor Pakbo himself had any connection with the Rote Drei.
Secondly, Puenter has said in writing that he had never been in contact with Roessler and did not know his true name.
Thirdly, Lucy did not meet Rado through Puenter for the simple reason that he never met Rado at all, as the traffic shows.
Apart from a challenge on 7 October 1942, the Soviets seem to have accepted Pakbo's reports as valid and to have found them useful.
Perhaps Pakbo, like Jim, merely tried to exaggerate the importance of his role after the war had ended.
Pakbo appears in 22 known messages, but only 6 of these contain any substantive information.
Apparently he learned something about the Rote Kapelle arrests in Germany and reported accordingly, because on 5 October 1942 the Director asked for more information.
And he also reported the arrest of Paul Boettcher, because on 8 January 1944 Moscow said, ""As far as we know, Pakbo has never heard of Paul.
His chief sub-source was Salter, whose identity has not been firmly established 37 but who may have been Louis Suss, bom 6 October 1890 in Beblenbeim, Alsace-Lorraine.
As of May 1968 his widow Friedel, nee Kirschbaum, lived in CbeneBourg, Geneva.
She was observed in 1955 at a meeting with a Soviet representative to the UN who is also a suspected intelligence operative.
He was in contact with former chancellor Josef Wirth and with British intelligence.
He also knew Long and Kurz; in fact, compartmentation was often breached in the Rote Drei network.
Marc Oltramare, both passed intelligence to Puenter during the war and that he relayed their information to the Soviets.
Among his associates in 1942 were Jean Vincent, Max Horngacher, and Maurice Ducommun, all of whom were suspected of being Soviet agents.
One Mario Bodenmann, a Swiss Socialist and journalist, has also been reported as a sub-source for Pakbo.
A probable Pakbo source was ""Bruder,"" who appears in only two messages, both from Dora to Director, dated 27 January and 10 May 1943.
Both messages provide information about the production at the Oerlikon arms factory in Switzerland.
The president of Werkzeugmaschinenfabrik Oerlikon, Buehrle and Co., was Emil Georg Buehrle.
In middle and late 1943, as Foote has also related, the network was extremely short of funds.
Pakbo and others solicited funds from Swiss businessmen, promising profitable post-war commercial orders from the USSR in exchange.
Pakbo approached Buehrle, who did business with the USSR, on this basis; and Buebrle contributed 80,000 francs.
After the war the Soviets refused to honor the obligations incurred on behalf of the Rote Drei.
Most of the businessmen complained bitterly, and Pakbo has alleged that he made some effort to repay the loans that he had personally solicited.
Despite published claims to the contrary, there is no reason to believe that a source called ""Lily of the Vatican"" ever existed.
The truth, however, is that Foote, like Puenter, grossly exaggerated his wartime importance.
The traffic does not bear out Foote's claim that he had sub-sources of his own.
On the contrary, Moscow clearly regarded him primarily as a W/T operator, although the most senior member in that category, and secondarily as a support man expected to give Rado help in problems of funding.
Foote, whose cover name was Jim, appears 20 times in the messages in our possession.
These messages contain no new information, but they are of value in reducing Jim's self-portrait to its true, minor dimensions.
The Structure of the Rote Drei Now that part of the Rote Drei structure has been partially excavated and cleansed of distortions, the outline of the whole can be delineated.
Alexander Rado is at the apex of the network, having inherited the leader's role from Maria Poliakova and Ursula Beurton.
Rachel Duebendorfer, Georges Blun, and Otto Puenter, listed in order of decreasing importance.
Others of Sissy's known contacts, by code name, were Paul, Pierre, Vita, and Mario.
Among his sub-sources Roessler listed, by name or description, General Hans Oster, Hans Bernd Gisevius, Carl Goerdeler, and an unknown man named Boelitz.
The second principal agent, Georges Blun, alias Long, directed a network which consisted chiefly of Agnes, Kurz, Grau, Rot, Fanny, and perhaps Feld.
The third principal agent, Otto Puenter, alias Pakbo, headed a net that included Salter and Bruder, as well as others whose cover names are not known.
Alexander Foote, alias Jim, was the most important of the radio operators.
The others were Edmond and Olga Hamel , Margarete Bolli hater Bolli-Schatz, cover name Rosa), probably Harry and Roger, and possibly others.
The Role of Karel Sedlacek To this point we have viewed the Red Three network chiefly as an apparatus which produced intelligence for the Soviet military service.
But Lucy's information, some or all of Longs, and probably Pakbo s also went to the West.
The vital product, Lucy's, reached the Allies through a Czech colonel whose true name was Karel Sedlacek and whose alias was Uncle Tom.
We have his story from General Frantisek Moravec, who as Sedlacek's superior had sent him to Switzerland in the first place.
His talents and skill caught Moravec's eye, and Sedlacek was sent to Prague for a year's training in operating a WJT set, secret writing, and encoding and decoding.
In June 1937, his training completed and his cover prepared, Sedlacek left Czechoslovakia as Karl Seltzinger, a correspondent of the Prague newspaper Narodni Listy.
For more than a year he built his cover in Zurich; then, by the fall of 1938, his first reports, military and political, arrived in Prague.
By the spring of 1939 Sedlacek had begun to feel uneasy in Zurich, which was swarming with German agents.
Beginning in September of 1939, Sedlacek was reporting by W/T to the London Czechs on German OB, movements, weapons, etc.
His information came from Hausamann, who got it from Lucy, who in turn decided what information would go to which recipients.
From 19 May to 6 September 1944 Lucy was under arrest, charged with passing intelligence to the Soviet and British services.
From the date of his arrest, the flow of Lucy's information from Sedlacek to London stopped completely and finally.
Sedlacek did continue to transmit other information to London until the war ended, but after Lucy's arrest Sedlacek's reporting deteriorated rapidly in both quality and quantity.
How he was instrumental in launching Roessler upon the second phase of his career in espionage is reported below.
The remark appears in a context chiefly concerned with the Free Germany Committee, conceived in and directed from Moscow.
Vladimir Sokolin Vladimir Sokolin may have been the alias of one Vladimir Shapiro or Schapiro.
The records which concern him are extensive but have not been summarized here because all available information indicates that he was not a part of the Rote Drei.
Born in Geneva of Jewish parents, the father a White Russian and the mother Scottish, Sokolin became in 1937 the Under Secretary of the USSR's Permanent Delegation to the International Labor Office, League of Nations, Geneva, as well as the Assistant Secretary General of the League of Nations.
There was a seeming break with Moscow after the USSR was dropped from the League of Nations in December 1939 as a result of the invasion of Finland.
It was also reported that through one of these contacts he asked Rado if he could be of service and that Rado relayed the suggestion to Moscow, where it was rejected.
There are clear indications that Sokolin was engaged in economic espionage for the USSR after the war ended.
It appears, then, that in this instance as in others, Soviet intelligence tried not to mix their networks, the security of which required separation.
Lucy's Post-War Operation Here our account would have ended if Karel Sedlacek had not known Xaver Franz Josef Schnieper, a Swiss citizen bom on 6 January 1910 in Emman, Lucerne Canton.
He had attended the Universities of Koenigsberg, Berlin, and Vienna, majoring in drama and intending to direct plays, an ambition which he had to abandon when the Nazis seized power.
He first met Rudolf Roessler, who was equally interested in drama, in Berlin in 1933.
By the beginning of the following year he had persuaded Roessler and his wife to move to Lucerne.
Schnieper also went back to Switzerland and found employment in Lucerne as a librarian.
He also knew that by the time the war ended, both Schnieper and Roessler were plagued by financial problems.
The successor, in turn, introduced Schnieper to Captain Rudolf Wolf of Czech intelligence.
In the summer of 1947 Wolf asked Schnieper to ask Roessler whether he was willing to resume intelligence work.
With Schnieper serving as intermediary, Roessler supplied the Czechs and thus the Soviets— with information, mostly military, on the forces, dispositions, weapons, etc., of the US, England, and France in West Germany, as well as the budding West German military force.
They were sentenced by a Swiss court on 5 November 1953 to a year and nine months respectively; but the time already spent in detention, nine months for each, was counted.
Lucy's first phase lasted for only a little more than two years, his second for six.
The second phase lacks the high drama of the first, but the fact remains that Roessler and Schnieper delivered valuable classified information to the Soviets, via the Czechs, in the post-war period as well.
Lucy obviously had human sources for his 1947-1953 reporting, even though his defense heavily stressed the amount of information that he had gleaned from the newspapers.
If we can unearth some of these people, we can expect to find links to the sources of 1941-1944.
Theresa Hildebrand of the staff of a Chicago magazine called Common Cause.
Roessler asked the Czechs if they wanted to add 1,500 francs monthly to his pay so that he could extend his coverage to the USA through Mrs.
The indictment of Roessler said, however, that he had merely copied the names of Mrs.
Hildebrand and others from Common Cause and that they were not implicated.
A professional source who examined some of the microfilmed reports prepared by Roessler and Schnieper for passage to Prague concluded that part of these had come not only from the Blank office but specifically from the office of Joachim Oster, the son of General Hans Oster.
Joachim Oster, usually called Achim, was born on 20 February 1914 in Dresden.
He entered the army in 1933 as an officer candidate with the Second Artillery Regiment.
He was promoted to first lieutenant in 1938, to captain in 1941, to major in 1943.
Josef Mueller, who was a friend of his father and a member of the 20th of July group.
During this period Mueller reportedly headed a group which worked for a neutralist, pro-USSR Germany.
Other members of the group, besides Mueller and Oster, included Otto John and Georges Blun, whom we have already mentioned as ""Long"" of the Rote Drei.
He served as chief of the security section of Amt Blank and in this capacity conducted liaison with the British, Americans, and French, as well as with other Germans.
In January 1956 he was transferred to other, presumably less sensitive, duties in the Ministry of Defense.
About September of 1958 he was posted to Madrid as the military attache.
There he reportedly established contact with the old Spanish Loyalist, Gil Robles.
The Return of Agnes The unidentified contact of Roessler who reported in 1955 that Goerdeler, Gisevius, ""General Boelitz,"" and ""the predecessor of Canaris"" were World War II sources of Lucy, also said that as of the reporting date Roessler was still in contact with one Lemmer, who was either in the Blank Office or who had a contact therein.
He was born in Germany, acquired Austrian citizenship through naturalization, but until 1933 remained mainly in Germany, where he was chief editor of the weekly Deutsche Republik and the Rhein-Mainische Volkszeitung.
Josef Wirth as his secretary, probably during Wirth's 1921-1922 period.
After the Nazis' seizure of power he moved to Paris, and from September 1939 to May 1940 he was an editor and speaker on the German Freedom Station there.
Professor Max Horkheimer ""Borchheimer"" appears to be a garble for Professor Max Horkheimer, born 14 February 1895 in Stuttgart.
There are reports that he is or was a fellow-traveller, once closely associated with the Lenin Institute of Moscow; that he has or has had Soviet intelligence ties; and that be had been considered for the position of psychological advisor to the West German Defense Ministry although he was an opponent of the Bonn government.
It is noted, however, that one Emile Siegmund Grunberg was the son of Karl Grunberg, the first director of the Institute for Social Research.
He and his brother Karl were translators for the International Labor Organization in Geneva.
Emile and his wife knew Alexander Abramson, alias ""Isaac""; Rachel Duebendorfer, alias ""Sissy""; Paul Boettcher; and probably other members of the Rote Drei network.
There is, however, a difficulty, a blur in the logic, inherent in the assumption that Josef Wirth, Joachim Oster, possibly Josef Mueller, Ernst Lemmer, Werner Thormann, and Max Horkheimer were Lucy's sources, or among those sources, during the period of 1947-1953.
During this period the Soviets could have established contact with any of them much more simply and directly than through a procedure whereby they met with Roessler in Germany or Switzerland, Roessler passed reports to Schnieper and thus the Czechs, and the Czech service gave the product to the Soviets.
Lemmer, in particular, was far better placed than Roessler to serve as the central collection point.
The question may be partly resolved by one of Roessler's major courtroom arguments in his defense.
He maintained that almost everything that he sold to the Czechs was compiled from overt sources, chiefly newspapers, and that the information given to him by his German friends was much less important.
The claim may be true, for people who knew Lucy considered him a truthful man.
For these men, Lucy included, were great equivocators, adept, as the German phrase has it, at carrying water on both shoulders.
Lucy the Mercenary There can be no doubt that Lucy himself was motivated chiefly, if not entirely, by mercenary considerations.
Please tell Lucy in our name that ... his group will surely be paid according to his demands.
During the post-war phase Lucy submitted somewhat more than one hundred reports.
He and Scbnieper were paid a total sum of between 33,000 and 48,000 Swiss francs.
His record suggests that he became a Soviet agent of influence in the early 1920’s.
A year or two after the signing of the Treaty of Rapallo he made the first of several trips to the USSR, where he conducted financial negotiations involving forestry rights and the construction of a railroad.
He was pleased that German men and officers were being trained on Russian soil, in evasion of the Versailles Treaty, even though his own regime was called the ""government of fulfillment"" because it was supposedly carrying out all of its obligations under that treaty.
Yet he was also in contact with Walter Schellenberg, through Richard Grossmann and perhaps in other ways as well.
The answer to the first part of this question is probably yes, but the same cannot be said about the second, at least not with much assurance.
There are clear indications in the record that he envisaged himself as Hitler's successor.
He once told Canaris that he knew perfectly well the identities of all the anti-Hitler plotters.
In short, if Wirth and others were betraying the conspiracy to Schellenberg, they were also being double-crossed by Himmler who hoped that the plan to assassinate the Fuehrer would succeed.
Wirth's major Rote Drei contact appears to have been the French journalist, Georges Blun.
In 1940 he made a trip to Paris in order to inform the French government personally of the military situation in Germany after the invasion of Norway.
And there was some contact, on the record unproductive, with the OSS during the war.
Hans Bernd Gisevius joined the Nazis, worked in the German police and the Ministry of the Interior, yet joined the 20th of July plotters.
He supplied the British with intelligence for three and a half years before the war and during its initial phase.
There are only uncertain indications that he was linked to the Rote Drei.
His ties to the courier Karl Forstmann have been noted earlier in this account.
We know that Gisevius had intelligence contacts with the Western Allies.
There are indications that he knew some members of the Rote Drei net and may himself have been alias ""Rot"" of that group.
Some post-war interrogations of German intelligence officers include their comments that Ernst Kaltenbrunner, RSHA chief and Schellenberg's superior, received reports from Gisevius as late as April 1945.
The record contains other references to links between Gisevius and Heydrich, as well as Gisevius and Schellenberg.
When Gisevius went to the Nuremberg War Crimes Trials in 1946 as a witness for Hjalmar Schacht, he became also a highly effective witness for the prosecution, hence doubly unpopular in post-war Germany.
That some denunciations were inspired by rancour therefore seems highly probable.
At first blush it appears odd that he was allowed to remain as a German intelligence officer in Switzerland after the RSHA assimilated the Abwehr, despite the fact that the Gestapo issued an arrest order for him in August 1944.
On balance, then, it is considered that Gisevius had intelligence contacts with the Americans, the British, the Swiss, and perhaps the Soviets, but not with Nazi Germany, except for his major role in the resistance.
The Stage and the Actors This account has said next to nothing about the Swiss role in the drama of the Rote Drei.
The fact is that certain Swiss officers were very directly a part of the activity of the Rote Drei.
Understandably, this involvement remains a source of some concern to the Swiss, even today, because it is at odds with that strict neutrality which Switzerland has proclaimed for centuries as buckler and breast-plate.
The traffic, however—that obdurate record on which we have tried to base as much of this account as possible—plainly reveals Swiss involvement.
When arrests were made, Moscow asked why Rote Drei members in contact with the Swiss authorities—Lucy, Pakbo, Long—did not get more information from them.
The Swiss General Staff was a sufficiently valuable source to have been given the Rote Drei cover name of Luise.
Lucy's contacts with Swiss military intelligence preceded his work in the Rote Drei, and the same is very likely true of Pakbo and certain others.
The first is Brigadier Colonel Roger Masson, now dead, who was the chief of Swiss wartime intelligence.
Before World War II began, Hausamann had recognized that Switzerland, already teeming with the spies of other nations, was itself sadly lacking in military intelligence and in sources to provide it.
Gallen, be established an unofficial intelligence center, funded actually or nominally by himself and certain friends.
When war came, this office, known as the ""Bureau Ha,"" was linked to the official Swiss Army intelligence structure.
Quite deliberately, however, the Swiss chieftains did not incorporate the office into the army but left it largely autonomous.
It is reasonable to conjecture that this preservation of unofficial or only semi-official status resulted chiefly from the significant fact that a Bureau Ha outside the official framework could be far freer of the shackles imposed by neutrality than any part of the government could be.
Only the Swiss know today whether the vital information coming from Germany went first to Lucy and then, via Hausamann, to Masson, or whether the Swiss received the bulk of the information from their sources in Germany and passed it to Sedlacek for relay to the British and to Lucy for relay to the Russians.
What we can be sure of is that Switzerland was not just part of the World War II scenery; it had a piece of the action.
The story of the Rote Drei in essence, is the tale of two firm camps, between which shuttled ambiguous and uncommitted men.
There was an East-West schism in their ranks, but they were united and unwavering in their resolve to rid Germany and the world of Hitler.
On the other were the Soviet armed forces and intelligence services, also committed to Hitler's destruction but only as a step toward the same domination of the earth that Hitler had longed for.
Both groups, the tiny and the vast, were made up for the most part of dedicated activists.
Wirth, Mueller, Lemmer, Gisevius, Horkheimer, probably Thormann, perhaps Joachim Oster.
These are a different breed from such 20th of July figures as Hans Oster, Goerdeler, and Beck.
These were the men who posed as arbiters, as intellectuals who had preserved their integrity by being above it all.
Roessler, Blun, Lemmer, and the rest could have been replaced by any others willing and able to live well in wartime Switzerland; their roles were essential, though not very important, but they themselves, as individuals, were not of consequence.
General Ludwig Beck, suicide; Lawyer Hans von Dohnanyi, hanged; General Erich Fellgiebel, hanged; Dr.
Carl Friedrich Goerdeler, hanged; Reichskriminal-direktor Arthur Nebe, hanged; General Friedrich Olbricht, hanged; Major General Hans Oster, hanged; General Fritz Thiele, hanged; Field Marshall Erwin von Wilzleben, hanged.
Only the books and other publications consulted directly during the preparation of this article have been listed in this bibliography.
Gert Buchheit, Der Deutsche Geheimdienst, Geschichte der Militaerischen Abwehr, List Verlag, Munich, 1966.
Wilhelm F Flicke, Agenten Funken Nach Moskau, Verlag Welsermuehl, Wels-Muenchen, 1957.
Alexander Foote, Handbook for Spies, Museum Press Ltd., London, second edition, 1964.
Rudolf Pechel, Deutsche r Wider stand , Eugen Rentsch Verlag, Erlenback-Zuerich, 1947.
Gerhard Ritter, The German Resistance, George Allen and Unwin Ltd., London, 1958.
Wilhelm Ritter von Schramm, Verrat im Zweiten Weltkrieg, Econ Verlag, Dusseldorf Vienna, 1967.
Anonymous, ""Hans Oster:' from International Biographical Archiv , 8 December 1962, 1128.
Anonymous, ""Joachim Oster,"" from International Biographical Archiv , 10 June 1967, Lieferung 23/67.
Anonymous text, Tass, International Service in English, 20 February 1968, citing Komsomolskaya Pravda.
Malcolm Muggeridge, ""The Lucy Mystery,"" The Observer Review, London, 8 January 1967.
Rudolf Strobinger, ""The Man Whom No One Knows,"" Testimony of the Intelligence Service Worker, Prague, Lidova Demokracie, 24 September 1967.
The portions omitted in this version mainly concern biographical and other details relating to the sources and sub-sources of the principals in the organization.
An analysis of all traffic presently available has suggested that about two-fifths originated in Moscow.
It is suspected that the remaining 6 messages are spurious, the creations of Flicke or someone else.
These messages differ from those known to be authentic in certain minor ways but consistently.
All of these messages, if they were genuine, would have been transmitted before the sending date of the earliest authenticated message.
One of them is the early warning of Hitler's attack, a message that later commentators accepted as genuine.
Although Foote says of Boettcher, ""I cannot speak for the British, but be certainly was not connected with our network"" , he is as wrong here as at many other points.
On 6 December 1943 a message from Dora informed Moscow that Foote had been arrested.
It has also been suggested, however, that Marius was Marius Mouttet, a Frenchman and former Socialist Minister.
None of them appear often in the traffic; none reported high-level information.
But a number of reliable sources have reported that on this date, when Hans von Dohnanyi, Josef Mueller, and Dietrich Bonhoeffer were arrested, Oster merely came under initial suspicion.
He was transferred to a reserve status on 19 June 1943 but was not placed under surveillance until March of the following year.
The last known message from Dora which cites Werther or any other possible source of Lucy as the source of the message is dated October 1943.
It is more than possible that the Swiss General Staff was well-informed about the Rote Drei but did not share its insight with the police, for reasons of security.
Because this was no usual morning, he rose early and groomed himself with painstaking care.
Yuda wondered why her husband had donned his best formal morning clothes instead of the depressing national uniform, a khaki-colored fiber suit that Japanese civilians wore during the war years, she gave no sign.
A high Tokyo official never discussed his work with anyone, not even his wife perhaps least of all his wife.
At about eight, he stubbed out his precious rationed cigarette and stepped outside.
The morning sun beamed down with the soft glow of autumn, and the air was as tartly sweet as the taste of apples.
From Yuda’s broad, businesslike face peered the eyes of a surgeon searching, diagnostic.
He looked more serious than usual as he strode through the garden to the street.
No late bloom lifted its head, for the Yudas had long since sacrificed the cherished flower beds to the family’s need for vegetables.
The task before him filled the mind, a task he hated, Yuda was on his way to watch two men die.
The Tokko always selected for this duty an officer not directly connected with the case in question.
It so happened that at the top of the list of those eligible to witness the double execution of Sorge and Ozaki stood the name of Tamon Yuda.
The coming New Year’s Day would see Yuda’s forty-sixth birthday, and he was no stranger to unnatural death.
In the course of his police duties and through the circumstances of war he had seen death in its most gruesome form.
But something about the deliberate taking of a man’s life by the process of law set such a death apart from the commons fate of humankind.
He opposed the death penalty both on principle and because the sigh revolted him.
He had to remember to watch the crowd at Shinjuka Station and not miss his assistant, Kikiuyasa Akiyama, who would join him there and ride with him the rest of the way to Sugamo Prison.
Once aboard the train the two men settled down for the long ride to Sugamo.
The prison governor, Ichijima, looked forward to the grim events of the day even less than Yuda, if that was possible.
Yuda witnessed the occasional execution; Ichijima had to witness them all.
He endured the ordeal of an execution by doing all possible to convince himself that the victim was an enemy of humankind who had forfeited his right to live.
Ichijima’s task being to supervise the prison, he had no connection with the investigation of any case and knew nothing about the prisoners committed to Sugamo until the reports came to his office.
Inasmuch as these numbered in the hundreds, he could give each record only a quick reading, unless for some reason it called for special attention.
On that lovely November morning he spent an hour of so refreshing his memory about the activities of the two condemned men.
He also attempted to compose himself by withdrawing in solitude to meditate and empty his mind of troubling thoughts.
Most of the prisoners were strangers to him, but he had come to know Ozaki quite well and Sorge slightly.
Ichijima kept up the pretense that she did not know an execution was scheduled.
Ichijima strictly isolated his home life from the distasteful details of his position.
He even kept his full-dress uniform in his office so that his wife would never know when some official occasion was at hand.
Since his home lay just outside the prison walls, Ichijima walked to his office.
Ordinarily the execution of Sorge and Ozaki would have place on the morrow.
Once signed, the order had to be carried out within five days, so technically Ichijima had until midnight of the eighth to comply.
In ordinary times he would have held off until the last minute, but these were not ordinary times.
Because of the astounding success at Pearl Harbor on December 8, 1941 , the eighth of every month carried a special significance, never more than now when Japan had few occasions for celebration.
All over the nation dreary little ceremonies harking back to Japan’s hour of greatest glory would be taking place.
Still another reason entered into the selection of the seventh as a suitable day to send Sorge and Ozaki to their ancestors.
For November 7 was the Soviet Union’s national holiday, the anniversary of the Bolshevik takeover of Russia in 1917.
The selection of that particular date has led to some peculiar speculations.
One Karl Kindermann, a wartime interpreter in Japan, used this as a factor to bolster his thesis that the Japanese did not execute Sorge.
Hotsuki Ozaki, while accepting that both his half brother and Sorge were executed on November 7, produced an equally strange explanation.
The Japanese government at the time was negotiating for peace through the Soviet Union and offered Sorge as condition.
I heard that he was executed on the anniversary of the Soviet Revolution as retaliation for failure of the peace negotiations.
The actual reason was far less outre but, being typically Japanese, might be difficult for a Westerner to understand and appreciate.
Perhaps no other people on earth would have taken such a consideration into account.
The Japanese kept anniversaries reverently and in that spirit chose November 7 to honour the doomed men for their dedication to Russia.
In his office Ichijima changed into full dress a plain dark uniform with epaulets and brass buttons buckled on his police sword, and laid ready his white gloves and ceremonial hat.
He wore this costume with a somewhat deprecating air, as if more at home with civilian clothes.
One by one the official party gathered, all in full morning dress except for the prison chaplain, Kato Sensho, in Buddhist robes.
The Japanese considered no criminal so depraved that his spirit should not be dispatched with all due courtesy.
So Ichijima and the others dressed as carefully for Sorge and Ozaki as they would for an imperial reception.
In addition to Ichijima, Yda, Akiyama, and the Chaplain Sensho, the group included Shoichiro Omata, the prison doctor; Otsubo, Ichijima’s assistant; and his secretary.
Beyond polite salutations and a few murmured generalities there was no conversation, for these men had not met for a social occasion.
He rose as usual, washed, and breakfasted on the Spartan prison fare of rice, bean soup and pickles.
The note, full of concern for Eiko’s aged father, conveyed no hint of any suspicion that this morning would be different from any other since Ozaki’s conviction.
At exactly nine, just as he finished the postcard, a key rattled in the lock of his cell.
Ozaki received the notification of his imminent execution with calm dignity.
With his wish granted, he stripped off his clothes and put on clean undergarments.
Then he pulled over his feet a pair of black tabi instead of the customary white ones to symbolize the dark ideal ahead.
Anything ropelike was strictly prohibited to a prisoner, but from somewhere, perhaps a sympathetic guard, Ozaki procured a sash and tied it about his waist, Then he said he was ready.
As the three men crossed the prison courtyard, for a fleeting moment the sun caught Ozaki in its golden rays.
Presently they reached the death house, which high walls concealed from the rest of the prison.
In the centre of the room stood a small table and a chair, to which his guards escorted him.
The witnesses who had foregathered in Ichijima’s office were in place, seated about the room so that, along with the prisoner in his chair, they formed a hollow square, Opposite Ozaki glowed the altar.
Not only did he thus uphold Japanese decorum, but also the prisoner gained strength and courage by having a program to follow, by the sight of officialdom clad in its best to honor their common humanity, and by the comfort of his faith.
Sensho asked Ozaki whether he had a will, what dispositions he wanted made of his effects, what he desired done with his body, and if he had any final statement to make.
Ozaki answered all these questions politely, specifying that he wanted his lawyer to receive his remains.
These details completed, Sensho offered Ozaki ceremonial tea and cakes.
Ozaki extended his hand as if to accept, then hesitated and refused the refreshment.
The two guards moved into place to guide Ozaki into the execution chamber.
The witnesses seated themselves in a single row facing the death trap, the prison personnel on the extreme left, the Ichijima, Yuda, Akiyama and the doctor.
The last room he entered was not, as morbid imagination might picture, small and dark but fairly large, with plain wooden walls.
Ozaki took his place approximately in the centre of the room directly under the rope that would strangle his last breath.
This was part of the usual procedure, to ensure that no unseemly struggle marred the occasion, to create the image of disorder or sordidness.
Yuda watched Ozaki’s hands small, articulate hands, hands that had written brilliantly about China, hands now motionless in final resignation.
Four of five executioners stood ready to spring the trap simultaneously, so that no one person should have the death of a fellowman on his conscience.
Yuda could not take his eyes from Ozaki’s hands, which shook as the breath of life struggled out of him.
Normally a hanged person required twelve minutes to die, but Ozaki looked as though life had left him.
The unruffled composure with which Ozaki went to his death sincerely moved Ichijima and the others in attendance.
As soon as his body had been removed from the execution chamber, the witnesses returned to the anteroom and took their seats as before.
Yuda watched with interest this man of whom he had heard so much but never seen.
His rugged features “looked very calm” and showed no fear or apprehension as he took the seat Ozaki had vacated so recently.
Then Ichijima advised him that in accordance with the orders of the minister of justice, he would be executed on this day.
Sorge’s expressive brows lifted, and his eyes sprang open like an animal’s, but his voice held no tension.
Once more Sensho asked the questions concerning the prisoner’s final requests.
Sorge hastily scribbled his wishes in a will, which he entrusted to the Procurator’s office.
He also requested that a letter be sent to his mother and sister through the German Embassy.
He presented those concerned in his execution with his dictionaries and his Leica camera as as tokens of thanks for their consideration.
Sorge being a European and an atheist, the chaplain had closed the door of the golden shrine before Sorge entered the antechamber, but now Sensho offered him tea and cakes and the opportunity to pray if he wished.
Ichijima was a compassionate man who had come to like and respect Sorge.
It was too flippant; it smacked of bravado; it jarred in this awesome hour.
With sincerity he thank Ichijima and the other prison officials for all they had done for him.
Then with composure he walked into the bare, sunlit room that had already claimed Ozaki.
Once again the functionaries left the anteroom and took their places in the death chamber.
The attendants bound his arms and legs, then melted into the background.
Let him deny there is a God, and he will invest with divinity some force within his understanding.
So Sorge had set up his own trinity and called upon it in his last hour.
Thus Sorges’s last words did not well up spontaneously; he had carefully selected them.
He had to be sure that his audience understood, that they would report it correctly, so that all would know he had died in the faith.
The words,the dedication with which Sorge uttered them, his whole attitude impressed Yuda to his very soul.
Instinctively recognizing the sure moment, the executioner sprang the trap.
Yuda’s eyes moved irresistibly to Sorge’s hands much bigger than Ozaki’s, hands that quivered in the death struggle.
Sorge’s body had always kept his spirit earthbound; now it clung fiercely to life.
Well, Paris is too big, Istanbul is too Asiatic, and Venice is a cliche.
It had crossed my mind to write a joke essay on Venice and discuss the town without ever mentioning the canals, the gondolas, the churches or the piazzas.
With a straight face, I would concentrate on the artistic purity of the railway station, the workings of the stock exchange, the intricacies of Venetian municipal finance, the history of the municipal waterworks and power station.
But apart from perpetrating what, at the best, would have been a pretty damp squib, there is absolutely nothing to say about Venice.
It is there, and all that one can tell people is that they should go and see it for themselves.
Instead I chose Geneva, clean, tidy and God-fearing, a model city devoted to good causes—the city of Calvin, of the Red Cross, and of the United Nations.
For to me Geneva, and indeed the whole of Switzerland, has a Georges Simenon quality—the quality that makes a thriller-writer want to take a tinopener and find out what goes on behind the fagade, behind the great families who keep the banner of Calvin flying behind the lace curtains in their fortresses in the rue des Granges, the secrets behind the bronze grilles of the great Swiss banking corporations, the hidden turmoil behind the beautiful, bland face of the country.
In Austria and Bavaria, yodelling is light and airy and gay and mixed up with romance.
In Switzerland, the yodel has deep undertones of melancholy that sometimes descend into an almost primeval ululation akin to the braying moan of the Alpenhorn—an echoing plaint against the straitjacket of Swiss morals, respectability and symmetry.
For the solidity of Switzerland is based on a giant conspiracy to keep chaos at bay and, where it blows in from neighbouring countries, or pollinates within the frontiers, to sweep it tidily under the carpet.
Switzerland is one great 'Mon Repos' and, to keep this European pension spick and span so that, apart from other considerations, the rates at the lodging-house can remain high, the Swiss Government—which is more of a management than a government—and all the Swiss people labour constantly to keep up a front of cleanliness, order and impeccable financial standing.
This cultivated innocence seems, to the traveler arriving from happy-golucky Austria, to verge almost into infantilism in the Swiss-German cantons where the linguistic use of the diminutive rings almost like baby-talk.
The diminutive suffix 'li' is everywhere, from the Biirli, Madli and, of course, Kiihli to the famous Miisli, the nature food with which Dr Bircher-Brenner endeavoured to save the life of Sir Stafford Cripps.
In many other respects it is a great refreshment to arrive in Switzerland from any other country in Europe.
Here at last you do not have to lock your car when you leave it on the street.
The lavatories are spotless and the waiters and shopkeepers have that desire to please that is only genuine in a really thrifty nation.
In exchange for this cleanliness and orderliness, you yourself must, of course, conform by also being clean and orderly.
Swiss management and officialdom are extremely managerial and officious, and to slip up chaotically by parking your car in the wrong place, leaving the smallest scrap of litter, or failing to have the right kind of ticket on a train may lead to positively magisterial retribution.
For the thwarted or affronted Swiss readily goes, as the psychologists say, 'into paroxysm', as any member of the British Ski Club who has offended the guard on a Swiss train will agree.
These states of paroxysm—the reaction of the symmetrist to chaos—are signs of the deep psychosis that results from restraint.
In the latter connection, a friend of mine who lives in the old town of Zurich tells me that, on Saturday nights, when the suburbanites and the neighbouring peasants forgather for the weekly lifting of the pressure-cooker lid, the night is made hideous by revelers who do not just fall down when they are drunk but stand outside in the streets and bay at the moon with terrible cries from deep down within their frustrated libidos.
But these tragic manifestations are hushed up (you may not mention suicide as a cause of death in a Swiss newspaper) for the sake of 'Mon Repos', and other human frailties are kept tidy.
Extra-marital love, for instance, though it may end in the divorce court, is usually managed with great decorum.
It is an understood thing that the Swiss businessman has a mistress, but it is also understood that the mistress shall not be kept in the home town but established in a neighbouring city which the businessman has reason to visit at frequent intervals.
The Zurich businessman expects his loved one in Berne to earn money in a respectable job, keep their love-nest spick and span, and prepare dainty meals for him when he comes over for the night.
Lurther, to tidy up the whole picture, abortion is legal in most cantons, though here again the process is respectably formalized.
The G.P. will then recommend her to a gynaecologist who, in turn, will recommend her to a clinic, thus spreading the risk and the responsibility—and, incidentally, the financial reward which, through this triangular co-operative, mounts to between £80 and £100.
The Swiss are not great gamblers (though I believe it was a Swiss who invented the football pool system) except on the Stock and Bullion Exchanges, but casinos have recently been permitted to operate in most of the large cities on condition that boule only is played and the maximum stake shall be five Swiss francs—two conditions that effectively neutralize the vice.
Having thus fragrantized most of the common human weaknesses, there remain money crimes, and these the Swiss have not wished to push under the carpet.
Instead they have elevated the crime against the holy franc to be the most heinous in their whole society.
A friend of mine who has to listen to the Swiss radio at frequent intervals tells me that there is no bulletin in which francs or Franken do not feature.
Since the greatest crime in Switzerland is to do something wrong with money, the smallest burglary is pursued relentlessly by the police, and the value of money is one of the prime pillars of a child's education.
If you see a small crowd in the street, it will not be in front of a shop window, but at the window of a bank, all of which give Wall Street prices half an hour after the opening and every hour thereafter.
The Genevese, Henri Dunant, invented the Red Cross, but, in the process of promoting his humanitarian ideas, he let the family business—textile mills in Algeria—go to pot, with the result that he committed the gravest sin that Geneva can conceive of—he squandered capital.
Years later, living a pauper's life in the canton of Appenzell, he was awarded the first Nobel Peace Prize.
Immediately, though his bankruptcy was thirty years old, his creditors attempted to have the prize seized in settlement of his debt.
Dunant managed to stave them off, and when he died in 1910 he left the prize money to charities rather than let a penny go to his family.
The thirst for money is, of course, the chief economic strength of a country that is poor in natural resources and that has, broadly speaking, only services to sell.
Originally the Swiss, who had as ferocious a record for fighting as the Scots, hired out their various cantonal armies as mercenaries (the Swiss Guards at the Vatican are the survivors), but in this century they have turned their attention to hotels and sanatoria (with the defeat of tuberculosis they are cannily switching to the modern managerial diseases resulting from stress and tension), and to the creation of the solidest banking system in the world.
The great virtue of Swiss banks is that they are not only solid but secret, and, in the vaults of Zurich, Basle and Geneva lie buried clandestine fortunes worth billions upon billions of pounds.
In a Swiss bank you may have an account or a safe deposit known only by a number, and this number will be known only by you and by one single director of the bank who may not disclose your identity even to his fellow directors.
If, for instance, I Fleming had such an account and a friend were to send £100,000 to my Swiss bank for the credit of I Fleming, the bank would deny all knowledge of me and return the money.
To reinforce this device, heavy federal penalties were imposed by the law of November 8th, 1934 (just in time, be it noted, to welcome the flood of Jewish and German funds fleeing from Hitler), on any breach of banking security.
Whosoever intentionally as organ, official, employee of a bank, as accountant or accountant's assistant, as member of the banking Commission, clerk or employee of its secretariat, violates the duty of absolute silence or the professional secret, whosoever seduces or attempts to seduce others to do so, will be punished with a fine of up to 20,000 Swiss francs or with imprisonment up to six months.
The hidden riches of Switzerland cannot be estimated in millions or billions, but Pick's World Currency Report gave a clue in a recent examination of the average per capita gold holding in all countries.
Not only is the government most generous in charitable donations abroad, but the International Committee of the Red Cross and the League of the Red Cross Societies, as well as the Swiss Red Cross, are heavily subsidized by Switzerland.
It is not surprising that the protection and further accumulation of this national fortune is an obsession with Switzerland, and the emphasis on privacy and security in the country is perhaps as much to attract money, for ever on the hunt for 'Mon Repos', as for the peace and protection of the citizens.
The atmosphere of a well-guarded bank-vault is strengthened by the continued maintenance of war-time tank traps, camouflaged redoubts, and demolition chambers, not only all along the frontiers but on many bridges and other strategic points throughout the country.
Military service is compulsory for all between the ages of twenty and sixty, and every soldier-citizen has to keep his rifle with forty rounds at home so as to be ready to go out and fight in the streets at a moment's notice.
Preparations for emergency go to the point where every housewife is required to keep in the larder iron rations, consisting basically of one litre of cooking oil, two kilos of rice and two kilos of sugar per head of the household, and to consume and replace these at regular intervals to keep them fresh.
These measures, combined with a powerful, though not very bright, police force, create a glowing picture of law, order and security in a turbulent world.
Combined with the honesty, industry and cleanliness of the Swiss, the impression on the foreigner and on foreign capital is little short of paradisal.
Traditionally a haven for refugees from turmoil and persecution, modern Switzerland has gathered to its bosom a new kind of refugee—the fugitive from punitive taxation.
The political refugee still exists in the form of fugitive royal families, Italian, Rumanian, Spanish and Egyptian, together with a handful of sheikhs.
These sad orphans of the world's storm, evicted from their palaces, have found shelter in the Palace Hotels along the shores of Lac Leman, and there hold strictly mediatized tea and bridge parties and are courted by the local snobs.
There are many cranks attached to this fusty world of ex-kings and queens, including, in Lausanne, one bizarre sect, about thirty strong, that worships our queen.
This world rule will have its headquarters in Lausanne where the sect has set up a 'temple' over a garage and decorated it with bright rainbow coloured draperies and a large red-leather armchair which is to be her throne.
Members of the sect take it in turns to fast for twenty-four hours at a time while awaiting Her Majesty's arrival.
The leader, a certain Frederick Bussy, is a bearded gentleman in his late forties who wears white robes embroidered with the British royal coat of arms, and records the prophecies of the sect on a dictaphone for typing and posting to world leaders.
Monsieur Bussy is particularly proud that Her Majesty appears to take note of his requests.
A host of British and American actors and writers are the Voltaires, Rousseaus and Mesdames de Stael of today— Charlie Chaplin, Noel Coward, Ingrid Bergman, Richard Burton, Peter Ustinov, Yul Brynner, William Holden, Georges Simenon, Mel Ferrer and Audrey Hepburn among them.
Noel Coward is, besides being a friend, one of my heroes, and I was disgusted by the hullabaloo in the press —but not, I think, among his public—when some years ago, instead of allowing him to go slowly bankrupt, his lawyer persuaded him to reside outside England and stay alive.
I will not weary my readers with the details of his case, but I have a basic alteration to propose in our tax laws which I will call, so that it looks properly portentous on the statute books, the Quantum of Solace Clause.
Most beneficiaries will, of course, come from the creative arts— acting, writing, painting, music, etc—but they will also come from sport, politics and medicine.
Noel Coward arranged a dinner party for us with his neighbour, Charlie Chaplin, and it was a dazzling experience to spend a whole evening with the two people who have made me laugh most of all in my life.
There is no pretension anywhere except perhaps in the glasses at dinner.
Much of the success of the evening was due to Oona, his beautiful young wife, the daughter of Eugene O'Neill.
She has borne him seven children in the seventeen years of their marriage.
It is wonderful to see two people bask unaffectedly in each other's love, and the relationship lit up the evening.
After dangerously skirting politics over the matter of Caryl Chessman's execution (though he was disgusted with it, Chaplin said that, by his death, Chessman had achieved more for mankind than any other man since the war), we got on to Ben Hur, which Chaplin, who practically never goes to films or theatres and does not own a television set, had not seen.
He was going to make a really great film, it would be a mixture of half a dozen spectaculars —Ben Hur, Anna Karenina, South Pacific and others.
As the villain came alongside, the hero would nonchalantly hold out a side of ham which the knives on the chariot wheels would cut into thin slices which the hero would eat and gain strength so that he would win the race.
My wife suggested that the theme should be 'the little man who had never had it so good’, and Chaplin seized the idea and tucked it away.
He next enlivened us with a graphic account of being invited by the Duke of Westminster to a boar hunt in France, of the clothes he had had to borrow and how his horse had run away with him.
He works every day from eleven to five and has finished nine hundred pages.
He complained of being bedevilled by his Swiss secretary who constantly tried to improve his English.
He said he was not surprised, as he had taught himself the language and suspected that his secretary knew it far better than he did, but, even so, he liked his own version and hoped that some of what he had actually written would survive the process of editing by his publishers.
We all, of course urged him to reject any kind of editorial censorship or correction, but his modesty will, one fears, allow Big Brother's blue pencil to wreak its havoc.
It is wonderful when one's heroes in the flesh are even better than in the imagination.
It was the time of the Narcissus Festival, and the fields around Noel Coward's house were thick with the flowers that were to line my route round Europe—tulips in Holland, lilac in Vienna, narcissi in Switzerland and, later, bougainvillaea and hibiscus in Naples.
Today, its economy bulging with the wealth of countless international organizations and of big foreign businesses attracted by tax advantages, such as Chrysler and Dupont, with a quarter of its residents foreigners and well over a million tourists every year, the town is bursting at the seams, and the small population of true Genevese—about fifty thousand—have a hard time trying to avoid being overlaid by the giant golden calf for whom, originally with enthusiasm but now with very mixed feelings, they provide pasture.
Hunting round and round like a mouse in a trap, it crossed my mind that, for the motorist, ’P' has become the most desirable letter of the alphabet.
So far as Geneva is concerned, the only hope is for them to build vast parking places out over the famous lake.
This beautiful lake, plus the highest fountain in the world and the Rhone that thunders so majestically through the town—all this and Mont Blanc too, do not make Geneva a happy town.
The spirit of Calvin, expressed in the ugly and uncompromising cathedral that dominates the city, seems to brood like a thunderous conscience over the inhabitants.
The international set— the delegates, staffs of the various organizations and staffs of foreign businesses—do not penetrate even the fringes of Genevese society.
The lack of adjustment between the resident Americans, for instance, and Geneva life is such that a booklet—an excellent common-sense one, by the way— has been prepared at the behest of the President of the American Women's Club of Geneva and the Chief of the Mental Health Section of the World Health Organization, to prepare Americans coming to work in Geneva for what is described as 'Culture Shock'—the impact of the European way of life on an American.
The chief trouble is the language problem, closely followed by the business of bringing up children.
In Geneva, as in the rest of Switzerland, Swiss children have butter or jam for tea.
Swiss children are not allowed to go to most films until they are eighteen, and even the harmless Danny Kaye is forbidden to children until they are sixteen, to be proved by the presentation of identity cards.
The Swiss mother finds it difficult to make adult conversation to a foreign mother because only in 1960, and by a very narrow majority, did Swiss women obtain the vote, and then only in a minority of the cantons.
Finally, the general values and moral judgments of the Swiss have hardly developed since 1914, whereas the foreigners' have been turned inside out by two world wars.
It was this reserve, this holier thanthou attitude, that Voltaire endeavoured to dynamite in his constant forays against Calvinism.
Fortunately, from time to time, the Lord who, I have always believed, has little sympathy for Calvinism, visits just such a scandal upon Calvin's present-day disciples.
His wife, on returning from a church meeting that night, was shot at and wounded by the murderer whom she described as a tall, dark man wearing a dark suit who had dashed out of the house and made his escape on a black bicycle.
It was a headline story, but no headlines were black enough for the sensational arrest of Maitre Pierre Jaccoud a month later on the charge of murder.
It was revealed that, shortly after the murder, Jaccoud had gone to Stockholm and had his hair bleached, that he had tried to take poison during the police investigation, and that he had had a mistress, Linda Baud, a secretary at Radio Geneva.
His wife knew all about it but did nothing for fear of offending the conventions, and, when it ended, Madame Jaccoud, worn down by those 'meals heavy with silence', took him back and the marriage was mended.
Unfortunately, in the summer of 1957, Linda Baud took another lover, a young technician from Radio Geneva called Andre Zumbach, to whom, out of jealousy, Jaccoud wrote anonymous letters.
I have heard that you are a friend of Linda Baud and feel you should be informed of what is going on.
After having been the mistress of a barkeeper, then of one of the employees of your organization, not to mention a number of other adventures, she has been the mistress of a married man for several years.
I saw them together on the 17th August and found by chance a most edifying photograph of the way they spend their time.
The photograph was one of Linda Baud naked which, she claimed, Jaccoud had taken of her at pistol point one evening in the grimy little room they had used for their affair.
Surprised by the father, Jaccoud had shot him and, panicking, had also shot the mother.
The trial, in March 1960, lasted three weeks and was enlivened by the production of five hundred love-letters from Jaccoud to Linda Baud, the discovery of a Moroccan dagger, showing traces of blood and liver cells, at Jaccoud's home, and of a button, found on the scene of the crime, of an English raincoat parceled up in Jaccoud's apartment to be sent to the Red Cross.
To heighten the drama, the Public Prosecutor was a great friend of Jaccoud and they broke out into ’tu’ in the court—the court where Jaccoud himself had so often pleaded.
The judge also knew the accused, and the defence lawyers were old friends.
The Public Prosecutor himself admitted acquaintance with Linda Baud, and the drama was intensified by the appearance of a famous Paris lawyer, Rene Floriot, for the defence, who spread mud still more widely over Geneva, to the fury of the inhabitants.
Finally, with the natural respect of the Genevese for authority, titles and high society torn to shreds, Jaccoud was convicted and sentenced to seven years, subsequently reduced to three.
Such cases—the Dubois espionage affair of 1957 was another one—burst upon the Swiss scene with all the greater impact because, though sordid crimes occur in every other country of the world, they really should not disturb a society that has 'Mon Repos' as its motto.
Much, far too much, I fear, of what I have written will seem critical of the Swiss and of their surpassingly beautiful country.
Yet it is not my wish to be critical, but merely to examine, to look beneath the surface of a country that holds so much more mystery than those that wear their hearts and psychoses on their sleeve.
I am devoted to the country and to its people and I would not have them different in any detail.
But, as I said at the beginning, Switzerland has a Simenon quality, an atmosphere of still-water-running-deep, which is a great temptation to the writer of thrillers.
If I have revealed a wart here and a wen there and poked mild fun at the reserved, rather prim face Switzerland presents to the world, this is because the mystery writer enjoys seeing the play from back-stage rather than from out front, in the stalls.
Swiss cheese has holes in it because, in the process of making Gruyere and Emmental, carbon dioxide is formed and, as the cheese solidifies, the bubbles remain.
This applies even to winter-time and even to conferences no one has ever heard of.
Luxury hotels are growing like mushrooms, but the Richmond and the Hotel des Bergues are particularly favoured by visiting high society and statesmen, while the newer Hotel du Rhone is more frequently chosen by business magnates and sheikhs.
The Clos de Sadex is run by English-speaking Mr and Mrs L de Tscherner who have transformed their own home into a first-class residential hotel and who loan their own motor boat for lake excursions.
A picturesque but not inexpensive retreat in Geneva itself is the Hotel Lamartine.
This is an 'authentic' chalet in its own garden at Champel, chemin des Clochettes; it is mentioned in the Guide Michelin and caters mainly for bed-and breakfast customers.
A limited number of rooms and the inconvenience of Sunday of lunchers who come inter alia for perches du lac, a fresh-water fish speciality.
Restaurants The gastronomic delights of Geneva are slightly overshadowed by the vicinity—within fifty kilometres—of Le Pere Bise, one of France's three best restaurants, at Talloires, just after Annecy.
Inside Geneva the Beam, quai de la Poste, is the uncrowned king of local restaurants.
After that the choice is vast and interesting, and advice will be tendered from every side.
For fondue bourguignonne, a local speciality, Le Chandelier, 23 Grande Rue, in the old city, ranks high.
This fondue consists of portions of cut-up raw steak which you impale on a stick and cook yourself in boiling oil and butter at the table.
Cheese fondue is rarely served in summer and it tastes better in any brasserie than in a restaurant.
You are automatically served with a fresh portion on the same easily identified plate until you beg for mercy.
In Geneva the Cafe du Midi, round the corner from the Hotel des Bergues, has a cellar, or camotzet, which specializes in raclette— if you can stand the heat.
It is cooler, less picturesque, and the raclette or fondue is just as good when served in a cafe called Le Bagnard, place du Marche, Carouge.
The word Bagnard comes from Bagne cheese and not from a convict past in the cafe ownership.
At the other extreme, as a preliminary to night-clubbing, the only place where it is possible to dine to music and dance is the Gentilhomme, which belongs to the Richmond.
Night-clubs are numerous, cheaper than in England and as naughty as those in Paris, hope the Genevese.
The floor show here is one reason why German Swiss, less privileged at home, find business visits to Geneva quite essential.
Otherwise a whisky or a shared bottle of vin blanc can last you till 2m. at a cost of about 10s. per person.
It was probably no bigger than a pin-prick but they sure felt its effect.
Almost immediately Herr Doktor Schrader and his two laboratory technicians began to have trouble standing and even greater difficulty breathing.
In that split second, the professor of organic chemistry had the good sense to run to the door and punch the red emergency button, setting the deafening klaxon blaring.
The Herr Doctor was the furthest from the spill, and the most experienced as far as the dangers of the toxin was concerned.
He had reluctantly accepted the young man as a favour to a family friend, but he had never expected to be forced to employ him in the lab, and so he had given him the menial task of cleaning and washing the glassware.
All you could think about at that specific moment was never again will he do a favour for a family friend.
But then again, the whole matter might be a moot point in a mere few minutes.
The second technician, the senior of the two, knew to put as much distance between the spill and the first technician when the first man began to cough, fight for his next breadth and begin the quick paralysis that would kill him.
The second technician knew not to rush across the room and lend assistance.
When he realized what was happening to himself he had started to stagger towards the two of them, screaming madly.
The Herr Doktor and the other technician had both yelled at the boy, “stay where you are”, in the process emptying their lungs of their precious breadth.
And now together, the men were equal, all three trapped in a paroxysm of death.
They fell like paper dolls onto the floor, then half folded into the fetal position, an involuntary act as the muscle spasms began to take hold.
The glare of the clinical fluorescent lamps overhead made the whole scene surreal in its reality.
Farben chemistry lab was an unwelcome stage for the death throes of the men.
He had inadvertently poisoned himself a year back while working on an earlier version of the organophosphate molecule that was mortally toxic to the human nervous system.
It was a derivative of an insecticide he had developed and perfected in 1937.
After seven long years of development the human version was nearly perfected.
It would be ironic if its inventor turned out to be one of its first victims.
There was nothing left for the Herr Doktor to do except turn his dispassionate scientific mind to the problem at hand and count the minutes down.
The first man was foaming at the mouth and asphyxiating in a mixture or paralysis and vomit.
The second technician was breathing heavily, the very worst thing to do since the ingested neural toxin was accumulative and triggered by the metabolites of respiration.
His heavy breathing would not buy him the time he would need before help arrived.
Imagine you were deep under water, drowning and knowing that if you opened your mouth all that would flood in was the thing that would drown you.
In a perverse way this accident, if it didn’t kill him out right, will let him test his theory of diminished toxicity.
As he let the carbon dioxide build in his blood his perception of reality began to alter radically, as did his perception of the passage of time.
Between the hypoxia and the paralysis, Schrader knew that time was quickly running out for him.
The second hand of the clock over the door began to slow almost to a stop and a constricting tunnel vision began to form, as wild, psychedelic patterns began to dance on the periphery of his field of view.
Another thirty seconds perhaps, but another minute for sure, he would be dead.
Hurry ... he heard himself yell, emptying his lungs of their precious air in a garbled spitting of words and froth.
Schrader fought to grab another life giving breath, but he could manage not much more than a small gulp of air, which set him into uncontrollable convulsions.
They looked like giant insects, clad in their protective gear, with two round bug eyes small goggles to see what they were doing and shiny stainless steel re-breathers hanging on belts strapped to their hips.
The three bug like figures quickly made their way over to the Herr Doktor, ignoring the two laboratory technicians altogether.
They first placed an oxygen mask over his face and then jabbed a syringe in his arm.
Almost immediately the shot of atropine they injected into his arm began to counter the paralysis.
It was only after the passage of four or five seconds that his diaphragm began to move and much needed oxygen began to flood his starving lungs.
The other two were men long dead, to be added to the growing number of test subjects that had been used to perfect the neural toxin.
The other hundred or so test subjects had been inmates from several different concentration camp, mostly woman and children, of different ages, weights, heights and cultural heritage and far from in good health.
They rounded out their study in death to include the four corners of Europe.
He was fully conscious as they opened all the lab windows and let in the frigid winter air.
The combined shock of the cold water and cold air was almost as potent as the atropine and oxygen.
They wrapped him in a clean white dressing gown and lifted him on a gurney that had mysteriously appeared.
Then they wheeled him away, out of the lab, down the corridor past the concerned expressions of his colleagues who were close enough to watch his passage but not close enough to risk their lives and safety.
He was being wheeled up to the I.G. hospital and the heavenly felt care of Germany’s best doctors and nurses.
Good riddance he thought as the smaller of the two body bags was carted past him to the service elevator at the end of the hall.
By the time the hour is out they will have been carved up in the name of medical science.
As he wheeled him into the ward, he knew the routine, for Herr Doktor Schrader had written the book on the deadly organophosphate nerve gases and their toxicology, and by now he knew all the doctors and nurses by their first name.
Farben’s facility at Dyhemfurth, was informed that Professor Schrader had been nearly killed in an accident in his research laboratory, the director immediately telephoned his personal physician to inform him that he had made arrangements for the doctor to fly down in his own private Junkers-52 to personally attend to the professor’s recovery.
As he sat in his office in the ground floor of his old family home in Potsdam, the old physician stared at his reflection off the desktop.
So nice of you to ask me, the old man thought, looking at his aged and wrinkled face.
That left him in 1941 when he lost his son in the first days of Operation Barbarossa.
Gone was his smile, when he lost his wife in 1943 when a British bomb exploded in Berlin where his wife was visiting her sister who had just lost her husband in North Africa.
And gone was his sense of humor as his old and dear secretary had packed her bags and went back home in the summer of 1944 when her husband was killed at the battle for the Falaise gap when the allies broke out of Normandy.
But as the number of his older and more distinguished patients began to die or drift away from Potsdam it was only a matter of time before he would be forced to close this down and fade away himself.
The old physician hated the war, but he didn’t hate the British and the Americans.
He knew them, having fought against them in France in the previous war.
What he hated was the upstart corporal and his thugs, and what they had done to his Germany.
His Germany was gone, shattered into a million broken bits of memory and tradition.
The old man, though, was too proud to admit he was scared of heights and even more scared of flying.
There is a plane waiting for you at Templehoff which will leave within the hour.
The tone and temper of their dialogue was not sitting well with the Director, so he ordered the old goat, and you used those exact words over the phone, to either to do what he was told or he would find a new private physician.
The Director would have perhaps been more severe and fired him on the spot but had it been for the fact that the physician was an old family friend that had brought the director into the world some five decades earlier.
It had been the old physician that had been there for the boy, when he had the influenza in 1918 that nearly killed him, had been there as he grew nursed him back to health and he grew into a man, then an accomplished chemist, then an industrialist and now a director of the biggest chemistry company in Germany.
So the old doctor packed his travel bag, and stood waiting for the car as it drove up a good ten minutes later than he had been told.
Then he set off for Templehoff airport, in the centre of bombed out Berlin, where the Ju-52 waited to fly him south.
Many of the familiar landmarks from his younger days were either damaged or destroyed by the war.
He was born the year that Napoleon the third had made war with the Germanic provinces.
He had gone to medical school when Bismarck reigned over a stable and familiar Germany.
As he drove through the streets of Berlin, past the piles of debris and toppling walls, he did not recognize the city.
It was the grey hollowness in the faces of the people, mostly woman, children and old men that were shuffling in the streets.
When the car arrived at the side gate of Templehoff airport they was ushered through the gates by the guards who were evidentally expecting them and driven immediately to the foot of the stairs leading up to the tri-engine passenger plane.
As he stepped out of the car, one by one and the chauffeur retrieved his bag from the boot, the three motors of the Ju-52 sprang to life.
This was his last chance to turn back, but waiting at the top of the stairs for him was a fine-looking flight attendant who held her jacket closed against the cold as she waved and ushered him onto the plane.
A cold rush of air from the prop wash was pushing him over and he was finding it harder and harder to climb the stairs.
The young lady hurried down the stairs and took his air, shielding him from the prop wash.
Then in a blur they were both in the plane and he was sitting in his seat.
She strapped him in and had just enough time to strap herself into the seat next to him.
He closed his eyes tight and before he knew it the plane started to move and pick up speed.
When they were airborne, it was then that he felt the girls’ hand on his arm.
She got up and went to the front of the airplane, returning in a moment with a sniffer of Schnapps and a hot water bottle and blanket.
She gave him the Schnapps, placed the hot water bottle on his lap and then covered him in the blanket.
The old doctor’s blood began to warm, but he didn’t know whether it was the Schnapps, the hot water bottle the blanket or the attractive young woman that was warming his heart.
She was pleasant and accommodating and sat next to him in the cold and empty airplane as they flew south.
They chatted about life before the war and what life might be like after the war was over.
Together this made the flight pass quickly and then they were landing and had to make their goodbyes she smiled and said she would be there to take him safely back home when it was time for him to return home.
Unlike Berlin that lay in ruins, this little picture postcard Bavarian town was all but untouched by the war, save for the crimson red and black banners.
No matter where they went in Germany, it was not possible to escape this madness.
After the exchange of a few pleasantries the chief doctor escorted the old physician up to the patient’s room.
When they entered the patient’s room Schrader was sitting in a big plush chair next to the window covered in a layer of several white blanket.
His eyes were closed and an intravenous drip was hanging from a pedestal and was feeding into his right arm.
The old physician nodded and took the patients wrist into his hand to take his pulse.
Under the watchful eye of the chief doctor the old physician did a thorough physical examination of his special patient.
He asked a constant stream of questions, some he could answer and others he could not.
But he did his duty and soldiered on, like he had done in the last war.
The patient’s liver was fine to the touch but his kidneys were not sensitive.
The younger doctor stood back and tolerated the older physician, merely because the director had told him to do so.
The chief doctor knew Schrader well, having treated him last year for a similar accidental release of the neural toxin.
The patient just sat and cooperated as best as he could, answering those questions he could without revealing too much While Herr Doktor Schrader appreciated the director’s kind gesture, even in his weakened state the Professor could see that the old and haughty physician just did not fit in well with the young and energetic chief doctor.
Near the end of his physical examination, the old doctor wanted to take blood samples, but the young physician intervened and said that they were handling the matter.
He announced that it wasn’t influenza, for the old doctor knew all about the signs of influenza.
Then the old physician insisted that he wanted to see Schrader’s medical files.
But the chief doctor emphatically said he couldn’t because Schrader’s condition was due to special research and both the research and his medical files were Streng Geheim top secret.
The two doctors realized it was best they continue their consultation outside step out into the hallway.
So things went back and forth and continued like this for several days between the old doctor and the hospital staff.
It was only because the Director had granted his visitation rights that the old man was allowed into the ward.
And it took all the hospital staffs patience to tolerate his antiquated and old school ways.
He had seen this all before when he had treated gas victims during the last war.
And, having guessed what had happened, it took all the old physician patience not to read them the Hippocratic oath.
Years before he had treated the soldiers from both sides and had watched helplessly as they drowned in their own bodily fluids, their lungs scared beyond repair, the men drowning as sure as if they were sinking in some body of water, except they were sinking in their own bodies of water.
It disgusted him, and it took all his reserve to not turn and yelled this at them.
He prescribed fresh vegetables, vitamin C, chicken soup and an electrolyte concoction that stank up the place.
They would not let him administer oral medication or injections of any sort.
So he brew a very strong poppy seed, chamomile and fennel tea and got the patient to drink the mix once an hour, on the hour.
The hospital staff, in turn, treated the patient with atropine and a cornucopia of other drugs, whether intravenous and oral.
It did not take the old doctor much to understand why the Director had sent for him.
The symptoms were similar to the influenza of 1918, but it was not caused by a virus.
So he treated him and shared his medical experience in the treatment of pulmonary deficiencies with Schrader and the chief doctor.
Then when things had settled down and the night staff were occupied elsewhere, the old physician snuck back to talk with Schrader in the middle of the night.
The old physician gruffly told him to stop what he was doing before it was too late.
Schrader thanked him for his kindness but told the old man that it was none of his business.
Although he wasn’t prone to violence, he very much wanted to punch the professor and knock some sense into him.
The old physician started out of the room and grabbed the door handle will all his force.
Without turning back snarled “You first ...” and stormed out of Schrader’s room in revulsion.
As he stepped into the hallway the old physician knew not to slam the door, but closed it gently.
After three days and four nights in Bavaria, the Director’s private physician knew it was time to return to Potsdam.
She opened the drawer in front of her but could not find an envelope, so she stood up and turned her back to him as she walked to the back of the long and narrow room in search for an envelope.
It was when her back was turned that the old physician noticed on the counter next to his left elbow was a small white enamel hospital tray with several small test tubes full of blood samples.
Before he could stop himself, the old physician grabbed the test tube and put it in his jacket pocket.
In a fluid motion he removed his pen from the same jacket pocket and unscrewed the top.
He signed the note, folded it in two and tucked it into the envelope and sealed the envelope.
The same pretty flight attendant was there for his return flight to Berlin.
For the first few minutes in the air he had merely stared out the window.
For him to sit and look out the window, it had to be something more distressing.
To unburden his old and troubled conscience, he told her what had happened.
She listened compassionately as he told her that while it was his Hippocratic duty to save the patient, what he was doing was monstrous, and he could not be party to such an atrocity.
The director had been both right and wrong to send him to attend to Professor Schrader right to have asked him to save the man’s life, but wrong at the same time to have asked him to save his life.
As she listened to him speak of his morals and this dilemma, her face softened and her eyes moistened.
By the time they were on their final approach to Berlin she had realized here was a Prometheus, a tall and wise man amongst midgets.
By the time they were on their final approach to Berlin he had gathered enough courage to offer her a place as his private secretary.
His offer was genuine and so she accepted his unsolicited offer on the spot.
Sure, she was young enough to be his granddaughter, but he was a doctor for god sakes, and one with a fine reputation.
They both had no family left, and were both worried about their uncertain future and what lay ahead.
The director can go to hell with his minion Schrader to show him the way.
They were all responsible for their actions and he being a moral man was not going to help them one any more.
He was a good man and when this war was finally over they would need good men.
The old physician might be an old goat, but he knew the old adage that you don’t butt heads with an old mountain goat.
Otherwise you end up being pushed off the mountain, and after an awkward tumble down the hill you’ll end up with nothing more than some bumps on the head and a terrible headache.
He placed his hand onto the small test tube in his jacket pocket and resolved there and then that he would set things right.
As they made their way to the terminal building a Ford Tri-motor bearing Swedish colours and a red cross was making its final approach for landing.
With his private secretary at hand he might enjoy an extended visit to his old student.
He would talk with the Dean, and the Dean would in turn know who to pass the information along to.
Besides the Swedish embassy was just a few blocks over from his mansion in diplomatic row, and the Swedish Ambassador and his wife was one of his patients.
The night after next the Ambassador and his were hosting a Christmas reception and they had sent him an invitation.
The Obama administration publicly dismissed the threat as “saber rattling,” but also privately informed Tehran that attempting to close the strait would trigger a United States military response.
Mark Fox, commander of the United States Navy’s Fifth Fleet, said in a Feb. interview.
We always have the right and obligation of self-defense and this falls in self-defense.
Whether an “act of war” or not (the international rules — admittedly more honored in their breach than observation— do allow for peacetime mining of high-seas areas under certain strict conditions.
Iranian officials have threatened to close the Strait of Hormuz in response to United States and international sanctions over its nuclear program.
Reuters reported on 15 July the Iranian Parliament considered a bill demanding the strait be closed.
But the ultimate impact of such an escalation— if only in rhetoric — is unclear.
According to a Jan. report by the Congressional Research Service “... as in the past, the prospect of a major disruption of maritime traffic in the Strait risks damaging Iranian interests.
Such international straits, which are completely enclosed by the 12-mile territorial seas of the littoral states and connect two high-seas areas, have special protections under the UNCLOS regime.
Since the end of World War II, mines have seriously damaged or sunk four times more United States Navy ships than all other means of attack combined.
And that doesn’t include many more ships sunk or damaged by mines, from the Corfu Channel crisis of 1946 to the Arabian Gulf Tanker War of the 1980s to the Tamil Sea Tigers sinking of the MV Invincible in 2008.
During the Tanker War in the Arabian Gulf, Iraq and Iran indiscriminately deployed several types of mines, including variants of the 1908 Russian design contact mine that nearly sank the frigate USS Samuel B Roberts in April 1988.
Almost immediately, the United States Navy surface warships fell in line abaft Bridgeton, giving lie to the adage that every ship can be a minesweeper... once.
In 1990 and 1991, Iraq deployed more than 1,300 mines in the northern gulf — including a weapon never before seen in the West.
In the early morning of 18 February 1991, the USS Tripoli , which had embarked airborne mine-countermeasure helicopters, struck an Iraqi contact mine; four hours later, the Aegis cruiser Princeton fell victim to a Manta mine, a “mission-kill” that took the cruiser out of the war and cost about $100 million to bring her back on line.
More to the point of the impact of a possible Iranian mining campaign in 2012, it took the multinational Coalition forces more than two years of intensive mine-countermeasure operations to declare the northern gulf mine free.
This underscores the reality of the mine threat and the adage that the best MCM ops are those that prevent mines from being laid in the first place.
Once in the water, mines are extremely difficult to detect, identify and destroy — or render safe for forensic and intelligence functions.
It also brings into question the optimism of United States officials that “reopening the strait could take the Navy and its allies five to 10 days,” according to an 11 July Los Angeles Times article.
Fox’s estimate — “a long and difficult process to clear them” — seems more likely.
The Chinese navy was estimated to have about 100,000 mines, including a rising mine that could be deployed in waters deeper than 6,000 feet.
All three sell weapons to virtually any navy or terrorist group, anywhere, any time, as do another 17 or so countries.
Iran has acquired a stockpile of 3,000 to 6,000 mines, mostly of Soviet/Russian, Chinese or North Korean origin.
Most are unsophisticated but still dangerous bottom-moored buoyant contact mines, like those that damaged Roberts and Tripoli.
Other mines, such as the Manta that struck Princeton, are bottom mines that come to rest on the bottom and wait for a target to satisfy various parameters.
These influence mines fire when increasingly sophisticated target detection devices sense magnetic, acoustic, seismic, water pressure, electric-potential signatures of their victims.
To mine the entirety of the Strait of Hormuz effectively would take thousands of mines and several weeks if not longer.
But a larger operation would have to involve small craft and possibly commercial vessels, as well.
In the strait itself, depths can reach 1,000 feet and currents make deploying bottom mines an uncertain tactic.
If deployed in deep water, even large-warhead bottom mines would have limited effect on surface traffic.
Libya’s mining of the Red Sea in the summer of 1984 used East Germanexport multiple-influence bottom mines completely unknown in the West.
Ships that detonated mines in deeper water had much less damage than those in shallower water.
Not that bottom mines wouldn’t be employed where it made operational sense, but Iran would likely rely on bottom-moored, buoyant contact mines that lurk close to the surface but still remain difficult to detect and defeat.
Mines are only one element of Iranian anti-access/area-denial weapons, which include speedboats armed with guns and missiles, small and mini443 submarines armed with torpedoes, shore-based antiship missiles, and aircraft.
General James Mattis, Commander United States Central Command, in February for more MCM capabilities in the region, the Navy deployed four additional Avenger-class MCM ships, for a total of eight Avengers, as well as two more MH-53E airborne MCM helicopters added to the two already in-theater.
Jonathan Greenert told the Senate Armed Services Committee during a Navy budget hearing earlier this year.
The Navy also quickly refurbished, refitted and deployed in June the USS Ponce to support naval forces in the region — an interim Afloat Forward Staging Base , focused on the MCM mission.
This, too, has been done before, with the conversion in the mid-1990s of the USS Inchon (LPH/MCS12) as an MCM command-and-control ship.
The Navy intends to acquire two new-design purpose-built AFSBs, at a cost of approximately $1. billion each.
One element of the 2012 United States MCM response is the deployment of the German-built SeaFox remotely operated vehicle , also in service with ten other navies, including the Royal Navy.
The SeaFox ROV can conduct mine-sweeping ops to depths approaching 1,000 feet.
In addition, the Persian Gulf MCM “order of battle” includes several Royal Navy MCM vessels and Royal Australian Navy assets, as well as MCM capabilities of America’s regional maritime partners.
Wayne Liebold, the skipper of the USS Gladiator , one of the Bahrain-based Avenger MCM vessels, told The Huffington Post.
Though easily detectable, the laying of several hundred mines in a matter of days could have a significant, albeit only temporary, effect on commercial and naval mobility.
More broadly, however, the impact on world petroleum markets is unclear.
During the Red Sea/Gulf of Suez mine crisis of 1984, commercial and naval traffic continued unabated, despite reports of underwater explosions that did cause a fluctuation in insurance rates, and world petroleum prices were virtually unaffected.
Rodney A Mills wrote in a 2008 Naval War College study, “but the ‘Tanker Wars’ between Iran and Iraq in 1980s show a different behavior by the shipping industry.
However, after an initial 25 percent drop, the shipping industry adjusted to the risk and the flow of commerce resumed.
Thus, predictions that even temporary disruptions of tanker traffic could “cause global oil prices to soar and spark widespread economic turmoil” look to be overblown.
Still, while Iran’s mines might not be show-stoppers, they certainly can be speed-bumps that attack strategies, plans and timelines, in addition to ships and submarines.
