Today, Commander in Chief Fidel Castro welcomed the participants to the October Crisis tripartite conference and expressed Cuba's commitment to adhering strictly to the facts.
As the first speaker at the opening of the symposium, the president of the Councils of State and Ministers affirmed that everything Cubans might say during the meeting will be free of animosity and ill will.
Fidel pointed out the recent efforts of individuals and academic and political historians to increase the knowledge of the events that precipitated the October Crisis.
Fidel said many documents have been published regarding the events that put the world on the brink of a nuclear hecatomb.
While participating in the tripartite meeting, Commander in Chief Fidel Castro said that 85 pages of letters between John F Kennedy and Nikita Khrushchev were recently made public.
He mentioned the long hours spent the last few nights in reviewing the letters and documents, which he considers important, before expressing any definite opinions.
Among the files reviewed, he mentioned the 85 pages of this significant correspondence.
Fidel commented that he would not express his point of view because he preferred to listen to the opinions expressed in the next few days, answer questions, and later on speak at length.
He pointed out that much is known about the crisis, and Cuba declassified five letters between Khrushchev and Fidel to dispel rumors that Cuban authorities had suggested a preemptive attack.
Fidel mentioned that a rectification was made by including Cuba in the analysis of the crisis, because originally the Soviets and the American had planned to conduct the analysis leaving out one of the main protagonists.
He pointed out that Cuba can contribute to explaining the events in a truly objective and unprejudiced manner and therefore continue the effort to completely explain all the facts related to the crisis.
Fidel mentioned the letters between Khrushchev and Kennedy, some of which Khrushchev had read to him during his trip to Moscow, and expressed his belief that this material should also be declassified to further clarify the events.
The sessions of the tripartite meeting on the 1962 missile crisis will end on the 12th.
