Your relationship to Thompson and his to Kennedy When John F Kennedy was elected president in 1960, one of the reasons he ran was because at the height of the Cold War he was fearful that the Eisenhower/Dulles foreign policy of massive retaliation might only lead to nuclear war.
Your father, Llewellyn Thompson, who had been United States ambassador in Moscow during those late 50’s years was I’m quite certain a career a foreign service officer who was appointed I’m not sure what his title was counselor or maybe Ambassador at Large in the State Department.
Life at the Edge of History) on Oct. the first of 13 memorable days of 1962.
Historians still call them the 13 most dangerous days in the history of mankind.
Because a misstep a wrong move could have started a war which would have turned very quickly into a nuclear exchange.
But fortunately, Kennedy, on that first day, October 16 decided not to convene the National Security Council whose members are designated by statute and included some people whom he didn’t think could keep a secret, or were all that valuable in their advice anyway.
He called together about a dozen or so men and one of them was Llewellyn Thompson.
And the path chosen by Kennedy ultimately was the prudent path of a blockade around Cuba, which we called a quarantine, because a blockade can be an act of war itself, and we were quarantining out, we said, not food or medicine or gasoline -we weren’t trying to destroy the Cuban economy.
We were quarantining out military equipment, offensive weapons and so-on.
Some communications and some attempt by the secretary general of the UN to get the two sides to stand still.
And ultimately on Friday evening Oct 26, a long, somewhat rambling letter came in from Khrushchev. yes, that is the Trollope ploy of the next day because a second letter came in which was much tougher more direct that sounded like it had been written by the Central Committee instead of the 1st one that sounded like it had been written by Khrushchev himself.
There were some glimmers of hope in that 1st letter, but they were pretty much dashed by the second.
Robert Kennedy, the Attorney General and I immediately said that we thought that was a good idea the best way to do it, and the President directed us [Sorensen and RFK] to draft that letter and we did and ignored the second letter except to say that once this crisis was settled, disarmament and other peace moves can be discussed.
The next day, for a variety of reasons, Khrushchev decided to pull out the missiles under UN inspection.
And the crisis ended, and I think your father deserves a great deal of the credit for that.
I remember him very well, a very wise, prudent man, just like the President of the United states was a wise prudent man who recognized it in others, and had it not been for that peaceful resolution that your father made possible, as I say, maybe none of us would be here today.
I am told that today, the cabinet room has a reinforced concrete shelter, it wasn’t then, and if the soviets had so called smart missiles that were as smart as our smart missiles now, well they knew our address.
You mention in your book that there was more than one blockade, or version of the blockade proposed.
I think we misunderstand each other; I don’t think I said there were different blockades.
I mean different scenarios proposed before deciding which ones to have.
The initial scenario was a bombing attack by the United States on the missiles.
And in time during that first week, as other options and pros and cons were brought forth, we divided into two groups.
One was the group that stuck with the original, harsh response, which would have been to bomb the missile sites.
And we now know, which we didn’t at the time, that the Soviets had tactical nuclear weapons on the island and if there had been any military attack by the United States from land, sea or air they would have responded by using those nuclear weapons.
Khrushchev had even given them authority to use them on their own, in the event of an attack.
So armed to the thing all this because the second group favored the blockade which evolved into the quarantine.
The first group favored the air strike which was to be followed by an invasion.
To the extent that we divided into two groups Tommy Thompson was clearly in the blockade/quarantine group, not in the strike group, not in the air strike group.
In your book you talk about how you were developing the two different speeches, or asked to develop… Oh yes, that’s a different question.
In the movie they asked me about the second speech and I said I couldn’t write that one.
Did the ExComm members also make requirements that they wanted included in it.
I went back and the blockade group convened again, and I asked those questions and they were answered.
I apologize that I don’t remember specific questions or specific answers from members of our group.
But I’m sure that Ambassador Thompson was one of the most helpful at that session also.
What I did try to write earlier in the week was a message to Khrushchev to be delivered by a high level emissary, warning him that we were going to bomb the missile sites and that was a very difficult note to write.
And somebody took that note and converted it into a second speech just in case Kennedy in the key decision making meeting of Saturday October 20 if he decided on the airstrike approach he’d need a speech, so they converted my note into a speech.
At one point in the decision making in the WH and also through the Hawk’s Cay Conference several people and I think you were quoted as saying that Sovietologists were convinced that the Soviets would not put missiles outside of the Soviet Union.
But the Soviets had never previously put nuclear weapons outside their own borders.
They were very dangerous, so no one thought they ever would put missiles outside their borders and certainly not put them on Cuba which was defiantly close to the United States and run by a man who was to say the least, unpredictable.
No one thought everyone was astonished and the secret was pretty well kept by Khrushchev and his people.
You mention that Thompson was present in Oval office meeting before Bobby Kennedy went to see Dobrynin.
That’s very, very important because after the letter had been finished and approved.
I remember that both the President and Secretary of State Rusk and Secretary of Defense McNamara were in that meeting, so were Bundy and I I’d forgotten Thompson was in that meeting.
Essentially Bobby was being told to be one hand to be flexible about the fact that our missiles in Turkey would not be there much longer for the reasons I’ve explained.
They were still there in October ’62 only because President Kennedy’s decision a year earlier that they come out had been ignored by the defense department or maybe resistance by NATO or the Turk.
And he was also urged to be very direct and everybody thought that Dobrynin would convey a message to Khrushchev which we hoped he would take seriously, but also some face saving in that kind of resolution and that’s where the wisdom of Ambassador Thompson who knew Khrushchev and what was important to him would favorably respond.
And it struck us trying to understand the Cold War, as much as anyone can and we kept running into this theme … Currents of obstruction.
At that time I knew less about those obstructionists than I subsequently learned.
Hope you’ve looked at the book called the White House Tapes by May and Zelikow.
That was where for the first time I saw the transcript of the meeting with the Joint Chiefs and that’s where you get a taste in that meeting of how bitterly opposed general LeMay and others were to any kind of peaceful resolution and even some of the leaders of congress whom Kennedy convened in that same meeting room just before he went on the air on the evening of October 22.
And many leaders of both parties thought that the blockade was too soft a response and that we ought to as one leader of Congress said, go in there and hit them with everything we had.
In the Kennedy tapes, in that book actually, we came upon a meeting Kennedy had with Thompson where he asked him to come in and asked about the fallout from the U-2 affair and the failed Paris summit, Kennedy was wondering if the summit had been intentionally torpedoed.
It happens to be a section we are currently working on and we are curious if you ever hear JFK speculate on what had gone wrong there.
I don’t remember that I ever did but you’re going to have a fascinating book.
They want me to speak and they also want me to write an essay with my recollections of the summit.
And I am just in the process of finishing that essay now, and I have done zero additional research, just drawing on my own memory and books.
Thompson said not in his oral history… I’m certainly glad to hear that because that’s what I’m saying in my essay.
I’m pointing out that others say that Kennedy was, humiliated, and bullied and that I actually read the transcript.
And just between you and me, I took out the quotation marks because I didn’t think I’d get away with it.
The Kennedy Library A probably has the transcript and B surely would make it available to the daughters of one of the key participants and tell them I said that.
But he had been very well briefed on Berlin because he did know in advance that that was at the top of Khrushchev’s agenda.
And I’m willing to bet you that in the archives somewhere there in are one or more cables from Moscow United States Embassy to Kennedy at the White house where Thompson gave his advice on what Kennedy might expect.
You might also want to check out how to see if he was involved in the proposed debate between Kennedy and Khrushchev they had in mind for world Television.
Pierre Salinger was one of our negotiators in that and might in his memoirs very well talk about it and if you father participated in that.
I think that it was an idea that was probably floating around but I think that given the Cold War attitudes on both sides at that time, neither the west nor the Soviets would have trusted such a solution.
Adenauer who was then the Chancellor of West Germany would have been outraged denounced the United States for being unwilling to stand up for freedom.
So probably the probably the honest answer is that it was not seriously considered.
Oh, OK and that Kennedy said he received a cable from embassy Moscow saying that soviets were likely to be impressed by substantial quiet moves that didn’t panic the allies.
Therefore, if in fact that advice came from Moscow, I think that was Thompson.
In Thompson’s oral history, interviewer mentions that Thompson went to Hyannis port in ’63 when Maxwell Taylor also happened to be there and Thompson was asked if this was just a social call or was he doing anything else.
Thompson who never would talk about anything he didn’t think should be talked about said that they were just discussing the budget and he wasn’t involved.
And of course Kennedy had to figure out how to get the Joint Chiefs to testify in favor of it and before the Senate armed services committee and a few internal legislative political moves like that and that may very well have been one of the subjects.
Although I think the budge may also have been a subject of that meeting at Hyannis port.
None at all Carl Kaysen who was deputy national security advisor was there as the White House representative and I know that Kennedy added a couple of Republican Senators to increase the bipartisan credibility of the delegation.
Don’t quote me, not for attribution) you would have thought that the Secretary of State would have had the final decision on who represented the State Department at that meeting and I don’t know what the relationship was between the secretary and Thompson.
I’m sure that Thompson met with Rusk and demonstrates Thompson was loyal bureaucrat and went through proper channels.
But I’ll also be frank to say that Thompson was a lot more valuable in the ExCom meetings than Rusk.
Also you’ll notice in one or more of my books, when Kennedy absented himself for a day on Wednesday, the 18th to make a campaign appearance.
When he came back I said to him that I thought many of the participants in the Excomm were better and franker in their advice which might differ from their senior secretary’s advice when the President wasn’t there.
I’m sure Thompson was one of those I had in mind when I told the president that and for that reason he absented himself deliberately from some of our planning meetings during that first week.
One is that my first draft of speech, I ran by national security advisor McGeorge Bundy and he brought a couple of other people in to review it.
But after I flew it out to Hawaii and President reviewed it on the long trip back from Hawaii.
And knowing Kennedy’s high regard he had for Thompson he might very well have said except Thompson because he knew he the one person in town who would agree with it.
But I don’t recall talking to him while it was in preparation and certainly had to time when we got back.
Yes, he didn’t make it sound as though it was in progress and how much he would have agreed with it.
I’m sure that he had at least an indirect influence on me and the President in the thinking about that speech.
Not to be immodest but I was on my own when the president was on his trip to Hawaii. and that speech more than any other reflects my thinking and where we were at the time.
Those are good questions and you ladies are on a very important project for history.
If you think of anything else we should include… My two books I do mention other subjects I had less involvement in and don’t know how much Thompson had to do with them.
One is the Hot Line and the other is an agreement probably at the United Nations to keep WMDs out of outer space.
Another which I did have some involvement in which was the sale of American wheat to Russia.
These are all ’63 and another was a Kennedy speech to the General Assembly in September of ’63 in which he in which he listed a number of areas in which he thought there were possible cooperation between the United State and the soviet union.
