However, a critical analysis of Kent’s ‘positivist’ epistemology is necessary to under­ stand some major intelligence failures made by the CIA during the Cold War.
Introduction Hermeneutics is a branch of knowledge that deals with interpretative inquiry.
Broadly defined, it aims to understand the meaning of people’s intentions and actions from the analysis of a limited collection of clues and evidence.
Historian Alain Dewerpe has demonstrated that intelligence analysis, along with police investigations, is a form of cryptic hermeneutics.
In both cases, hermeneutics not only refers to the recollection of meaning, but also to the systematic practice of suspicion.
According to analysts, no discourse can ever be taken for granted, because ‘real’ political decisions are taken on the ‘backstage’3 of international relations.
Yet, intelligence analysis, defined as the way of collecting, cross-checking, and interpreting evidence, has rarely been theorized in the past via a rigorous methodology.
Analysts used to interpret the forms, ways, and means of secret wars by solely relying on their own experience, intuitions, and mindsets.
As an example, long ago, in Western depictions of espionage, a secret agent was presumed to possess a ‘sixth sense’ so as to distinguish real from fake threats, lies from genuine truths, and conspiracies within conspiracies.
United States intelligence agencies were the first to take the initiative to elaborate an epistemological framework for intelligence analysis.
The theorization of analysis commenced at the beginning of the Cold War.
In this respect, neither the USSR, nor the United Kingdom, nor France, nor Japan, established at that moment the methodological foundations of intelligence analysis as an enhanced form of cryptic hermeneutics.
The study of ‘national styles’6 in foreign policy helps us to understand this singularity,e., the pervasive inclination of the ‘American mind’ to rely on the ‘ready-made recipes’7 of theory rather than on Classical Humanities for interpreting intelligence.
This element of culture and history can be a plausible explanation for the United States intelligence community running the risk of confining itself within an ethnocentric conception of epistemology, which can be too formalistic and out of touch with reality.
This formalistic approach can be a significant obstacle to the understanding of foreign countries’ policymaking.
Two historical episodes mark a major turning point in the scientific theorization of analysis in the United States.
This topic has already been studied in depth from the perspective of historical sociology, even if this investigation did not focus on the practical value of the methodology of analysis.
In fact, intelligence analysis only publicly acquired its autonomy and its own methodological canons as a discipline starting from the beginning of the Cold War.
Therefore, the study of Sherman Kent’s doctrine of analysis provides substantial material to explore the public ‘birth’ of intelligence’s epistemology.
The existing literature on this crucial moment in the history of United States intelligence is amply documented.
Kent is known to be the main ‘founding father’ of intelligence analysis.
He was the chief of the CIA Office of National estimates from 1952 to 1967.
Former analysts and historians have exposed the main principles of Kent’s methodology of analysis.
However, few studies have attempted to deconstruct the epistemological value of Kent’s hermeneutical approach.
Yet, ‘Kent’s influence on the analytical practices of the intelligence community is both profound and ongoing’.17 I would like to demonstrate why the study of Kent’s hermeneutics is necessary to understand some major intelligence failures made by the CIA during the Cold War.
For this purpose, I will draw on a critical discourse analysis approach.
According to Gunilla Eriksson, this framework ‘underlines the need to embrace a more hermeneutic and inter­ pretative approach when analysing knowledge within policy and the policy process’.18 In other words, the critical discourse analysis methodology aims to ‘reveal the underlying assumptions and presuppositions within the knowledge produced’19 by unmasking the ideological dimension of discursive practices.
More specifically, this approach assumes that people neglect the extent to which their ways of thinking are socially and politically determined and then tries to identify the specific origins of these determinations.
Showing the epistemological value of discourse analysis for analysts and scholars makes a case for introducing Critical Studies into the study and practice of intelligence on the basis of an eclectic view of intelligence methodology.
In this regard, intelligence analysis should not be limited to a unique methodological framework, but must instead embrace all social sciences practices that could provide more epistemic accuracy and efficiency to the process of investigation.
More specifically, we must insist on the epistemo­ logical value of evidence-based reasoning for intelligence analysis.
This model of inquiry assumes that establishing ‘the relevance, credibility, and inferential force of evidence is just as important in intelligence analysis as it is in law’.24 Indeed, recent intelligence failures show that many analysts still ignore the added value of evidence-based techniques of inquiry used by police officers.
In particular, recent methodological advances in the field of criminal investigation have been accomplished thanks to pragmatist epistemology.
Philosopher Charles Sander Peirce defines pragmatism as a method of inquiry, based on the interpretation of evidence and the critical examination of competing explanatory hypotheses.
In a nutshell, pragmatism underlines the practical dimension of every investigative procedure.
It notably focuses on the cost of being wrong about concrete issues and the question of knowing ‘how strong the need is to come to a conclusion at all, especially considering the possibility of seeking further evidence before deciding’.28 For these reasons, this essay first presents Kent’s hermeneutical epistemology and its short­ comings.
Finally, the article concludes by arguing that contemporary cryptic hermeneutics in intelligence studies , which mainly derives from Kent’s ‘positivist’ presuppositions, could be enhanced thanks to the evidence-based reasoning methodol­ ogy of pragmatist epistemology.
Kent’s historical contribution to the theorization of intelligence analysis Kent is known for having laid the ‘scientific’ foundations of intelligence analysis.
The historiography of intelligence has highlighted the unprecedented scope of this theoretical shift, by not only showing how intelligence analysis was inseparable from strategic thinking, but also by establishing to what extent strategic intelligence had to overcome the ‘outdated’ practice of military analysis.
Firstly, no strategic action can be based on arbitrary factual assumptions.
Every analyst must cross-check ‘raw’ intelligence and must detect deception operations.
Secondly, only social sciences can collect and verify facts, which constitutes their raison d’être.
Although they do not have the same predictive power as the so-called ‘natural’ sciences, they do have a rigorous method.
Finally, social sciences can inform a critical analysis of several dynamics of major socio-political phenomena affecting the international order.
Kent intends to rely as much on political science, economics, military strategy, as on psychology, anthropology, and of course history, with the purpose to dispel the ‘puzzles’ and ‘mysteries’ inherent to the ‘science’ of spying.
This set of axioms is justified by the fact that the scientific approach is the only intellectual ‘weapon’ through which Western societies can separate true from false propositions.
But we insist, and have insisted for generations, that truth is to be approached, if not attained, through research guided by a systematic method.
When the findings of the intelligence arm are regularly ignored by the consumer and this because of consumer intuition, he should recognize that he is turning his back on the two instruments by which western man has, since Aristotle, steadily enlarged his horizon of knowledge – the instrument of reason and scientific method.
The problem is that Kent never gave formal criteria to detect these kinds of conspiratorial operations.
Moscow communism represents a bid for a total monopoly of world power and . . . it can be met only by a willingness on the part of this country to abandon its passive and defensive posture in international affairs and to proceed fearlessly to the creation of a closer association of free nations, undeterred by the redoubled charges of ‘imperialism’ which will undoubtedly be leveled against it.
In this respect, the collection and analysis of a few political signs is not sufficient to prove the existence of a deception.
Even if we can warrant some claim that a conspiracy exists, it does not necessarily follow that it is part of the best explanation of some event.
Warranting a claim that a conspiracy exists only means that the evidence shows there is a conspiracy in existence.
It does not follow that the conspiracy is the salient cause of some event.
In order to show this, we need to demonstrate that there is a tight link between the conspiratorial activity and the event in question.
Reading this extract, we can immediately perceive the risk for intelligence analysts to reverse the burden of proof.
In many cases, when disturbing facts are collected and interpreted in favor of a hypothesis, analysts don’t look for evidence that could undermine their own preconceptions.
On the contrary, the apparent lack of evidence against a claim seems to be a sufficient reason for that claim.
At the height of the Cold War, there was misunderstanding in the West about the role of the secret services, especially the KGB, in Soviet policymaking.
Allied fears of Soviet subversion fed this tendency to exaggerate the power of the KGB.39 Secondly, in addition to being bounded by confidentiality, the specificity of intelligence analysis rests on the goal of ‘decoding’ the ‘raw’ facts that have been collected from the available sources provided by intelligence agencies.
According to this approach, Kent’s cryptic hermeneutics presupposes a ‘positivist’ historical hermeneutics.
This is the only way to give meaning to all the data that have been collected.
Even Kent, who has been depicted as a ‘naïve positivist’, agreed with this assumption.
The reason is that Kent himself borrowed Ernest Bernheim’s concept of hermeneutics.
While Kent recognized the need to analyze facts by an interpretive approach, he immediately inferred from this idea that only a single interpretation can be correct at the end of the process.
For that reason, despite all of Kent’s attempts to describe a system of intelligence analysis, what he advocates relies almost entirely upon a self-defining and self-policing elite that, because it engaged in the selfless struggle to draw ever nearer to truth, is not to be second-guessed by politicians or anyone else.
It seems obvious that all thinking involves notions of how and why things happen.
Even the “practical” man who despises theory has a number of assumptions and expectations which lead him to believe that when certain things are done, certain results follow.
It is this “theory” that helps a problem-solver to select from the mass of facts surrounding him those which he hopes are relevant.
This reasoning implies not only that a set of facts contains a self-evident answer (and that every problem does, in fact, have an answer), but also that it contains only one true answer.
It also implies that facts admit of only one interpretation and that any reasonable man cannot help seeing this single meaning if he is forced to look at all the facts.
Third, Kent’s hermeneutics of strategic behavior ignores rival interpretations.
The other man will act as diagnosed because he is in his right mind or at least he is not demonstrably unhinged; he cannot capriciously make the decision by himself – at a minimum it will have to be discussed with advisers, and in nondictatorial governments it will have to stand the test of governmental and popular scrutiny; he is aware of the power of traditional forces in his country, the generally accepted notions of its broad national interests and objectives, and the broad lines of policy which are calculated to protect the one and forward the other; he is well informed.
To the extent that the “other man’s” diplomatic missions and intelligence service can observe and report the things he must know prior to his decision, they have done so.
These and other phenomena very considerably narrow the area of a foreign statesman’s choice, and once thus narrowed it is susceptible to fairly sure-footed analysis by studious intelligence types.
As long as all the discernible constants in the equation are operative the estimator can be fairly confident of making a sound judgment.
Nevertheless, the main shortcoming of this view is that no analyst is able to understand the true political behavior of foreign decision makers from the moment his strategy does not fit Kent’s conception of rationality.
A more complex model of practical reasoning called practical reasoning with several alternative actions may be useful here.
This more complex model of practical reasoning requires specification or development of criteria by which the alternative means can be compared.
Fourth, Kent’s historical hermeneutics hinges on an argument from sign.
Abductive reasoning explains observed facts by the most probable cause that might have produced these facts.
Argument from sign is the particular formulation of abductive reasoning.
It occurs when we infer the most likely causes of an event from a set of indicators which derive from it.
For instance, bear tracks on the snow are good indicators of the probable presence of a bear just near the camp.
The Germans were using wartime security measures to keep the development of the oil field a secret.
The way it happened was that the Germans had an official freight rate for crude oil.
I think it was the RAF who flew the photographic reconnaissance mission, and sure enough when their air pictures were developed, there was an oil field.
However, Kent never provided clear and sufficient criteria in order to decide which among explana­ tory hypotheses in competition should be considered as the best one.
In doing so, Kent did not explore sufficiently the epistemological principles of abductive reasoning.
Nonetheless, when used properly, abductive reasoning can deepen the contribution of hermeneu­ tical techniques in the field of intelligence analysis.
Indeed, this framework provides precise and rigorous criteria to eliminate the least convincing competing hypotheses by a falsifiable process.
The hypothesis that the defendant could have committed the murder is not ruled out, because he has no alibi.
And there is plausible evidence that he had the means, motive, and opportunity.
Suppose there is no other nearly so plausible hypothesis that has been investigated and that suggests some other individual was the perpetrator.
In such a case the conclusion will seem to follow that the defendant is guilty as the best explanation of all the facts that have been collected.
To take the above communist example, intelligence analysts must try to prove the hypothesis that a deception is convincing not only because it is corroborated by evidence, but also because all rival explanations are either incredible or disproved.
Reconsidering Kent’s analysis failure regarding Guatemala This essay aims now to exemplify the limits of Kent’s epistemology by analyzing two important mistakes he made.
The first mistake relates to the analysis of Guatemalan President Jacobo Arbenz’s putative communist ideology and strategy, which leads the CIA to contribute to overthrowing his regime.
Indeed, a ‘Cold War ethos’ drove many CIA operators and analysts to overestimate the Communist influence in Guatemala at the beginning of the 1950s.
In this respect, Kent thought that Arbenz, who was not initially a Communist, was then forced to become a simple ‘pawn’ in Moscow’s Great Game.
Although probably not himself a Communist, he has found Communist leaders among his ardent and useful supporters and values accordingly his political alliance with them.
Inasmuch as Arbenz has thus far kept personal control of the considerable powers of the Guatemalan Presidency, it is still possible for him to break with the Communists and to moderate the policies of his Administration.
As the situation in Guatemala develops the political alternatives open to him are steadily reduced.
The Communists have strengthened their control of the pro-Arbenz political parties.
President Arbenz still exercises personal control of the Administration and of the Army and the Police.
It is still possible for him to break his ties with the Communists and to moderate the policies of his Administration, but it is highly unlikely that he will do so.
This conclusion remains valid, but the likelihood of a break between Arbenz and the Communists is even more remote then it was a year ago.
He is too deeply committed, emotionally and politically, to extract himself.
Sometime, in the early 1950’s, there had been a revolution in Guatemala in which the Communist-leaning President, a man named Arbenz, had been overthrown and replaced by a « right-thinking » Guatemalan named Castillo Armas.
For Kent, and for the majority of Washington policymakers, there was no doubt that the Guatemalan President, who had been democratically elected on a political program of land reform and nationaliza­ tion, was very close –e., too close – to Soviet services.
That opinion, which we know today to be erroneous, was shared by many intelligence and political analysts, even among liberals and moderate members of the defense establishment.
Since the presence of Soviets ‘advisers’ was attested in Guatemala, and due to the fact that Arbenz deployed a virulent antiAmerican rhetoric, Moscow was definitely going to take control of the Guatemalan state apparatus.
Many times it is impossible to prove legally that a certain individual is a communist; but for cases of this sort I recommend a practical method of detection – the « duck test.
Well, by this time you have probably reached the conclusion that the bird is a duck, whether he’s wearing a label or not.
The pragmatist analysis of Kent’s reasoning helps to understand his mistake, which can be described within the terms of an argument from ignorance.
Given that Arbenz conveyed anti-American rhetoric and seemed politically ‘too close’ to communist forces, for Kent, no further proof was needed to demonstrate that the Guatemalan President was about to either become a Communist too, or to become a passive asset of Soviet foreign policy.
In this view, the burden of providing evidence belonged to Kent’s putative contradictors and not to himself.
They had to establish that Arbenz was not the ‘puppet’ of the Kominform and that there was a better alternative explanation of his political behavior.
Yet, Kent did not notice that such a hypothesis was conceivable and had to be tested before drawing any conclusion.
Actually, there was the possibility that Arbenz was only ‘doing politics’, by using communist support to strengthen national self-governance.
But it seems that Kent ignored this explanation by employing a tacit argument from ignorance.
It has been known for some time that arguments from ignorance represent an argumentation scheme, but one that is closely tied in with shifts in burden of proof.
It is very hard for someone accused of being a spy to prove he is not a spy, because any evidence concerning such an allegation is secretive.
Indeed, analysts have a strong tendency to infer from an isolated fact a much larger reality upon the basis of tacit preconceptions and prejudices.
A significant literature has been produced about the reasons why CIA analysts missed the secret deployment of nuclear missiles in Cuba.
Former analysts and scholars have notably pointed out Kent’s role in this failure.
His responsibility derives from his refusal to recognize that the Soviets were deploying such strategic missiles, in opposition to DCI John McCone’s analysis.
Kent’s analytical errors can be attributed to his own methodology and accordingly to his own epistemological presuppositions.
Indeed, the estimation process revealed decisive shortcomings that could probably have been avoided at that time.
In other words, Kent made a mistake by accepting some preconceived premises without proceed­ ing to their critical examination.
Indeed, he took for granted that the implementation of strategic weapons in Cuba was impossible in view of the logics of Soviet foreign policy.
And he saw no reason why this situation might evolve in the near future.
In doing so, he wrongly presupposed that the Soviets had never deployed missiles of this type outside their borders, nor even in one of their satellite countries.
He also assumed that Cuba was comparable to other territories that were controlled by the Soviets.
From these premises, he reached the conclusion that the Soviet aid, supplied to Cuba, had to be similar to that delivered to other allies.
However, no ‘scientific law’ can prove the validity of historical analogy for either explanatory or predictive reasoning.
The fact that Stalin would have probably refused to behave in a provocative way near to the American coast did not imply that Khrushchev would have acted in the same manner.
Although inductive reasoning allows for exploring new possibilities of investigation, it cannot decide in favor of one hypothesis against another.
Isaac Ben-Israel’s developments shed an edifying light on Kent’s mistake.
We usually accept generalizations as true when they are supported by wide enough statistical samples.
What seemed to be imprudent risk-taking behavior from his point of view could in fact conceal a daring, bluffing technique.
To put it differently, Kent projected on to his adversaries his own turn of mind.
No estimating process can be expected to divine exactly when the enemy is about to make a dramatically wrong decision.
The fact that he did suggests that he might do so again, and this in turn suggests that perhaps we do not know some things about Soviet foreign policy decision-making that we should.
Even though Kent tried to apply the principle of interpretative charity to Khrushchev’s behavior, his methodological concept of interpretation had not been sufficiently defined.
In the summer of 1962, after United States intelligence had received numerous reports that the Soviet Union was installing offensive missiles in Cuba, the National Security Council requested a National Intelligence Estimate on the subject.
The estimate stated that it was highly unlikely that the Soviet Union would pursue a policy of such high risk as the placement of offensive missiles in Cuba.
The discourse analysis methodology not only shows to which extent intelligence analysis failures derive from methodological bias, but also highlights to which extent these biases come from epistemological preconceptions that are not challenged within intelligence services.
Cryptic hermeneutics enhanced by pragmatist epistemology By deconstructing Kent’s hermeneutics, this article has exposed how critical discourse analysis approach can shed light on tacit presuppositions that shape and distort the process of intelligence analysis.
In particular, a critical discourse analysis approach helps to detect and to overcome ethno­ centric and methodological biases that undermine the interpretation of evidence.
Kent’s hermeneu­ tics, whose epistemological presuppositions seem to be today the prevailing ‘positivist’ framework for Western analysts and intelligence scholars, might finally be improved by introducing an evidential reasoning approach within intelligence analysis.
In this view, pragmatist inquiry techniques chal­ lenge Kent’s ‘naïve’ hermeneutics by refining the process of interpreting evidence and testing competing hypotheses regarding the understanding of foreign strategic behaviors.
A research pro­ gram might be opened on this point by enhancing structured analytic techniques and Analysis of Competing Hypotheses , thanks to the pragmatist theory of inquiry and analysis of evidence.
While theories are explicit, mindsets are unconscious and thus more difficult to detect for analysts.
Collected Essays; Davis, “Sherman Kent and the Profession of Intelligence Analysis”; Andrew, For the President’s Eyes Only : Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency from Washington to Bush; and Soutou, Forcade, and Frémeaux, eds.
See also Jones, and Silberzahn, Constructing Cassandra, Reframing Intelligence Failure at the CIA, 1947–2001.
Bex, Arguments, Stories and Criminal Evidence; and Walton, Argument Evaluation and Evidence.
Old and New Challenges”; and Vaïsse and Forcade, eds., Le Renseignement au début de la Guerre froide.
The United States Invasion of Iraq, Free Markets, and the Twilight of Democracy.
Kent ignored the strong criticism made by the French ‘founding father’ of modern medicine, Claude Bernard, about Bacon’s epistemology.
Patterson, Richard C Jr., “Ambassador to Guatemala, 1948–1951,” in Immerman, “Guatemala as Cold War History,” 637.
See also Jervis, “Reports, Politics, and Intelligence Failures, “15–18.
Central Intelligence Library – virtual room Board of National Estimates.
Secret Intelligence and the American Presidency from Washington to Bush.
Constructing Cassandra, Reframing Intelligence Failure at the CIA, 1947–2001.
Services de renseignement, États-Unis, 1917-1941 [The Reason for Plotting.
