Few parts of the international system were unaffected by this superpower stand-off, with the Canada – USA relationship being particularly impacted, as the larger crisis touched off a bilateral crisis when Prime Minister John Diefenbaker refused a United States request to align the alert status of Canada’s military with that of the USA’s.
Thus, Canada’s bifurcated response represents an important puzzle for students of Canadian foreign policy decision-making.
I argue that a critical part of the answer to this question is located at the substate level, namely in a divergence in the forms of the trust-beliefs held by these two groups.
In other words, I submit that one cannot understand this bifurcated response without recognizing that the Canadian military leadership trusted the USA to look out for Canada’s best interests, while the political leadership, which in this case essentially consisted of Diefenbaker, did not.
Urban This divergence in trust beliefs was itself largely the product of these two groups’ subscriptions to different narratives concerning Canada – USA relations, and their differential exposure to a set of critical trust-enabling factors.
First, I provide my definition of trust, summarize the conceptualization thereof in which it is embedded and outline a research procedure for evaluating trust-focused explanations.
Second, I add empirical flesh to these theoretical bones by providing an overview of the events of the Cuban missile crisis and its historical context.
Third, I evaluate existing explanations for these events and identify their strengths, while also illuminating the aspects thereof which could be improved by the addition of trust.
Fourth, I present my own analysis and elaborate a trust-focused explanation that supplements existing explanations and fills the gaps identified in the third part.
While it is not possible to fully elaborate this framework here, it is useful to summarize it.
An agent’s specific reasonable belief, held despite irresolvable uncertainty, that: she can accurately predict certain of another agent’s intentions; and that the trustee is in some way obliged to have these intentions.
For trust to exist, and must prevail to the extent that the trustor makes herself vulnerable to betrayal by the trustee through reliance on the success of these predictions in the planning and execution of her future actions.
The interaction of these three elements generates a process called collective identification through which an “ingroup” is produced.
These hypotheses are evaluated through the postulation of a specific trust belief that would justify the acceptance of vulnerability in question, and of a larger narrative context within which this specific trust belief could plausibly be held.
The researcher must then evaluate whether evidence supportive of the postulated subscription to this narrative exists.
The identification and evaluation of this narrative, which is undertaken in the second and fourth parts of this article, is essential because it is in interrogating its content that the researcher can determine the substantive foundations on which the specific trust belief in question is built, as well as uncover evidence of the third psychological component just mentioned, namely the perception of a salient commonality with the other.
The evaluation of this evidence is undertaken in the final part of this article.
The Cuban missile crisis and its historical context With this theoretical scaffolding in place, it is now possible to engage the substance of the historical case.
I begin by identifying an opportunity for the acceptance of vulnerability between states.
This is a useful first step because while not all acceptances of vulnerability are the result of trust, their presence is the best empirical indicator that trust may be influencing an agent’s decision-making.
Simultaneously, the decision of the Canadian military leadership to secretly defy Diefenbaker and effectively acquiesce to this request represents a contradictory acceptance of vulnerability on Canada’s behalf.
In this section, I describe the details of these two decisions while also providing the historical context through which they gained their meaning.
Trust and the early Canada – USA relationship In order to understand the crisis, it is important to understand the critical features of the Canada – USA relationship that had developed in the half-century that preceded these events, specifically the narratives that evolved and which greatly influenced and defined agents’ decision-making, and the significant developments in the trust-enabling factors that occurred during this time.
The first third of the twentieth century saw the Canada – USA relationship move from hostility toward amity.
Nevertheless, suspicions were not the only factor influencing perceptions.
Urban resulting in significant interactivity between the two societies.
It is from these seeds that what I call the “Continentalist” narrative emerged.
Indeed, in the run-up to the Second World War, United States President Franklin Roosevelt went so far as to argue that the United States and Canada, and, indeed all parts of the British Empire, share a democratic form of government which comes to us from common sources.
We have adapted these institutions to our own needs, and our special conditions, but fundamentally they are the same.
As will be discussed shortly, the events of the Second World War would further strengthen this liberal security community.
Nevertheless, the traditional suspicions that animated what I call the “Loyalist” narrative had not completely disappeared.
In fact, there had been a number of incidents during the war when United States servicemen stationed in Canada had impugned Canadian sovereignty, thereby demonstrating, in the Canadian government’s view, a lack of respect for Canada’s independence.
And, in 1948, Prime Minister Mackenzie King turned down a free trade agreement with the USA because he believed “that the long objective of the Americans was to control this Continent.
However, the election of John Kennedy to the White House in 1960 produced a dramatically different relationship.
Much of their mutual dislike stemmed from their second meeting, which took place in 1961.
The memo concerned a number of points on which Kennedy was meant to “push” Diefenbaker.
Kennedy’s response when these events were related to him “was the strongest of them all.
Thus, by the time the Cuban missile crisis erupted, Peter Haydon suggests that the two leaders actively distrusted each other.
The crisis itself began on 16 October when Kennedy was informed that a number of ballistic missiles were being installed in Cuba by the Soviets.
Between 16 and 22 October, Kennedy and his advisors debated their response in secret.
Diefenbaker, Minister of External Affairs Howard Green and Minister of National Defence Douglas Harkness were finally briefed on the crisis by a United States envoy on 22 October, just two hours before the televised address in which Kennedy announced the discovery of the missiles.
Minister of Defence Harkness was inclined to agree to the request , but called on the prime minister for authorization.
On 23 October, Harkness again proposed raising the alert, this time to the cabinet.
Later in the day, Kennedy called Diefenbaker and, inter alia, again requested that Canadian forces raise their alert status.
After acrimonious debate, the meeting dissolved with no decision having been taken.
Harkness returned to his office and learned that parts of the United States military had raised their alert status to DEFCON 2, meaning that an imminent attack was now expected.
Diefenbaker’s repeated refusal to grant the United States request represents a refusal to accept vulnerability to the USA because it would have effectively ceded control of Canada’s relevant defences.
As just described, this decision was justified at the time by Diefenbaker’s view that the USA could not be trusted to protect Canada’s best interests, a belief, as I argue below, that is consistent with adherence to the Loyalist narrative.
The situation was the opposite for the Canadian military leadership, who did trust their United States counterparts to look out for their best interests, a belief that, as we shall see, was compatible with a Continentalist analysis which saw the defence of the two North American states as indivisible.
Alternative explanations There are two main categories of existing explanations for the actions of Canadian decisionmakers during the Cuban missile crisis.
The first, or traditional, explanation begins from the perspective that Diefenbaker’s refusal of the United States’s request was remarkable, primarily because of how it defied the will of Canada’s closest ally in the midst of the Cold War’s most acute crisis.
This contradicts the predictions of the many theories that see Canada as subordinate to United States hegemony.
By implication, the decisions taken by the military leadership are generally presented as the decisions any reasonable agent would have made in the situation, and not interrogated too closely.
Alternatively, structural explanations, such as the one offered by Patrick Lennox, argue that both Diefenbaker and the military leadership responded reasonably to conflicting structural pressures, with the contradictory result an inevitable consequence of Canada’s positioning in the international system.
Both of these explanations have important strengths but both also possess important flaws.
Below, I explore how these flaws leave both unable to coherently explain the actions of Canadian decision-makers during the crisis.
I then proceed to show how the addition of trust would resolve the most important of these flaws, at least in the case of the “traditional” explanation.
Importantly, I advance this argument cognizant of the fact that any explanation of a phenomenon in international politics that postulates an unobservable variable like trust playing an important role must meet a high bar in terms of superior explanatory power in order to justify the reduced parsimony implied by its inclusion in any explanation.
Many theories would predict that, given Canada’s reliance on the USA for security, the USA’s overwhelming power preponderance, Canada’s formal alliances with the USA, the threat posed to Canada by the missiles and Canada’s inability to independently affect the outcome of the crisis, Diefenbaker should have cooperated with the USA immediately.
First, it is an analytically unsatisfying deus ex machina as it explains Diefenbaker’s actions by simply suspending the assumption that he was a reasonable actor, without providing any explanation for why he differed in this respect from others.
While it seems likely that Diefenbaker did allow his prejudices against Kennedy to inform his decision-making , it is not obvious that Diefenbaker’s concerns were unwarranted.
Additionally, Diefenbaker’s belief that Kennedy recklessly escalated the situation at least partially in an attempt to recover his prestige is not outside the mainstream historiography of the crisis.
Finally, Diefenbaker’s complaint that Kennedy was making decisions for Canada without undertaking the consultations required by agreements like NORAD is accurate .10 If we reject the argument that Diefenbaker’s decisions were self-evidently unreasonable, we are forced to delve deeper than do the often overly descriptive traditional explanations of his actions.
Doing so also focuses attention on the need to explain the decision-making of the military leadership, an analysis often elided because the military leadership’s decisions were simply assumed to be obviously reasonable.
Lennox presents an alternative explanation in which he argues that because of its position within a USA-dominated hierarchical sub-system, Canada’s foreign policy is driven by an imperative to demonstrate its subservience to the USA while, due to its simultaneous membership in an anarchic international system, it is concurrently compelled to demonstrate its independence.
The key problem with Lennox’s explanation is that it does not explain how the pressures he identifies actually influence agents’ decision-making.
Basically, Lennox cannot explain why Diefenbaker was pushed in one direction and the military leadership in the other and not vice versa, or why they were pushed in this instance and not in others.
Without specifying how structural forces are translated into decisions and how agents are differentially influenced by them, the theory is left indeterminate.
However, with some modification, the traditional explanation can be provided a more rigorous structure while still maintaining its admirable specificity.
The critical change that must be made is to abandon the dismissive assumption that Diefenbaker was acting unreasonably, and instead inquire into the reasons for his decisions.
As discussed, however, this move also requires developing an explanation for the military’s decision-making.
Analysis In this section I provide a trust-focused hypothesis that better explains the aforementioned acceptance of vulnerability than the just evaluated alternative explanations.
This hypothesis must not only explain how the trustor in question was able to justify the critical trust-belief, but also why there was such a significant divergence in the trust-beliefs held by the military and political leaderships.
I argue that the answer lies at the sub-state level, and that the divergent behavior of the military and political leaderships resulted from the fact that the former trusted the USA to look out for Canada’s best interests while the latter did not.
Furthermore, I also argue that this divergence was itself caused by subscription to different narratives concerning Canada – USA relations, and differential exposure of the military and political leaderships to a set of trust-enabling factors.
As already discussed, I argue that Canada and the USA established a liberal security community by the late 1920s.
This community emerged out of a collective identification based on a shared adherence to liberalism.
While the same factors that resulted in the advent of liberal trust may also have been pushing Canadians toward other trust-beliefs, one cannot assume that these additional beliefs would automatically obtain.
Specifically, while adherence to liberalism does require liberals to solve their disputes with other liberals non-violently, it does not require that the members of the liberal community look out for each other’s best interests, and it was the answer to this latter question which was critical for Canadian decision-makers between 22 and 24 October 1962.
They key puzzle, then, is why the military and political leaderships gave such divergent responses.
Solving this puzzle requires examining how additional narratives, such as the Loyalist and Continentalist narratives I identified earlier, interact with the basic foundation of collective liberal identification in defining agents’ cognitive frameworks.
Throughout his career, Diefenbaker demonstrated that he subscribed to the Loyalist narrative much more than to the Continentalist one.
The Loyalist narrative carried within it an abiding suspicion that the USA did not genuinely respect Canada’s separate existence as an equal sovereign polity.
Faced with an expanding Soviet strategic threat, the RCAF and the United States Air Force in particular realized that a successful defence of each country could only emerge from an effective partnership.
The Continentalist logic undergirding this analysis was well articulated in 1962 by Dr.
Thus, given these diverging narrative lenses, it is not actually all that surprising that Diefenbaker and the military leadership differed in their interpretation of the crisis and in their views regarding the correct response thereto.
Importantly, as described earlier, subscription to a narrative conducive to the establishment of trust, while necessary, is not itself psychologically sufficient for the establishment of a trust belief.
Two additional factors, namely familiarity and positive affect, are also necessary.
Trust-enabling factors In this final section, I examine whether the empirical evidence is consistent with the trust-focused explanation just elaborated.
In addition to specifying a narrative according to which agents will act, any explanation that imputes differing levels and forms of trust to different actors needs to be able to demonstrate corresponding differences in the level of exposure of the agents in question to the factors theorized as enabling trust though the generation of familiarity and positive affect.
While I have identified five such factors, limited space forces me to focus only on the three that played the greatest roles in this case.
Nevertheless, this analysis strongly supports the hypothesis that the two groups’ exposure to these five factors was as differentiated as would be expected by my theoretical framework.
As discussed earlier, the first 60 years of the twentieth century saw the Canada – USA relationship on a trajectory of growing and expanding trust, and much of this correlated with high levels of interactivity between the two states.
This elevated level of interactivity is similar to the levels of interactivity during the 1910 – 1930 period, when I argue that trust was established between the two states, and significantly higher than in the years before 1910.
While these sorts of population-wide measures are useful for setting the analytical stage, they are less useful when identifying influences of particular importance to smaller groups like military and political decision-makers.
I begin by examining the military leadership for whom interactivity with their United States counterparts had intensified significantly during the Second World War.
The connections that Canadian Chief of General Staff Charles Foulkes formed with United States officials provide a good example of the types and patterns of relationships and interactions that developed.
In addition to these personal connections, Canadian and US officials were constantly meeting to coordinate policies and operations.
During the postwar period, interactivity and integration between the armed forces more generally increased dramatically.
The establishment of North Atlantic Treaty Organization and its integrated command structure in the early 1950s followed.
More important, however, was the establishment of NORAD in 1957 which, for continental defence purposes, essentially merged operational control of the two states’ air forces.
Finally, the ratification of the Defence Production Sharing Agreement in 1958 effectively created a defence production system rationalized at the continental level.
Overall, these agreements institutionalized levels of integration that were unprecedented.
Diefenbaker was largely unexposed to this high level of military interactivity.
Indeed, between 1935 and 1957, when so much of this cooperation was occurring, the Conservatives had been shut out of government.
And while it would not be surprising if someone like Douglas Harkness was converted to the trusting position of the military due to his inevitable exposure to these structural dynamics in his role as Minister of Defence, this would likely not have been the case for the rest of the government.
Clearly, the onset of the Cold War generated strong perceptions of Canada and the USA sharing common interests.
And indeed, by 1962, the Arctic barrier which had previously protected Canada from the Soviet threat had been obliterated.
This realization was probably most influential in the RCAF and the USAF, which came to see the political constraints imposed by their countries’ separate sovereignties as an obstacle to their missions’ accomplishment.
These critics felt that the strong identification between the two militaries threatened Canada’s independence and sovereignty , traditional concerns of both Diefenbaker and the Loyalist narrative.
Diefenbaker’s lack of interest in, and understanding of, military matters and his distrust of the military brass only exacerbated his concerns, as exemplified by his extraordinary feud with the military over the BOMARC issue.
Diefenbaker and Kennedy’s poor relationship also stemmed partially from an incompatible definition of interests, one that was manifested clearly during the crisis.
Kennedy interpreted the Cuban missiles as a threat to the USA, and indeed the free world.
That Diefenbaker had already developed a deep distrust for the Canadian military, who subscribed to a similar threat perception as Kennedy, likely only reinforced Diefenbaker’s assessment.
Altercasting I use the term “altercasting” to refer to how agents communicate their understandings of other agents to these others.
This case includes some strong instances of altercasting, specifically the ways in which institutional structures can predispose agents embedded in them to hold certain beliefs.
For example, by supporting agreements like the 1947 military cooperation agreement, the DPSA and NORAD, the two militaries altercast each other as trustworthy partners.
Urban Critically, the structures which these agreements put in place, such as common equipment, officer exchanges and integrated commands, meant that, especially for the Canadian military, its objectives could not be met without relying on United States personnel.
For example, NORAD always had a United States commander and a Canadian deputy commander.
Such reliance strongly predisposed agents, even if only to protect their ontological security, to trust the partner on whom they were relying to look out for their interests.
Thus, when the crisis arrived and a request from NORAD came through, it is unsurprising that the military accepted the requested almost without question.
Again, however, we see a striking contrast with the political leadership.
By failing to consult Diefenbaker, something that Diefenbaker thought Kennedy was required by treaty to do, Kennedy spectacularly altercast Diefenbaker as someone not trustworthy enough to consult.
Contrariwise, the Canadian military leadership undermined this decision and effectively accepted this vulnerability on Canada’s behalf.
This divergence between the Canadian political and military leaderships represents a remarkable puzzle that requires explanation.
Existing theories help to supply such an explanation by pointing to important relational dynamics between decisionmakers and identifying structural pressures that likely influenced them.
But, overall, these explanations leave important gaps and fail to provide a satisfactory explanation for these events.
The modification of what I call the “traditional” explanation of Canada’s actions in the Cuban missile crisis, through the addition of an analysis emphasizing the importance of trust in agents’ decision-making, does a good job of filling these gaps.
As I have demonstrated, an examination of factors that a trust-focused analysis would emphasize provides important insights into how Diefenbaker’s decision can be rendered more intelligible.
This is not to say that trust was the only variable at work in this episode.
As observed, Diefenbaker did reverse his position two days after the initial request was made, when it appeared that a nuclear war was imminent.
Critically, however, because I have argued that trust is only a part of this explanation, this fact does not undermine the importance of the trust explanation as part of a larger multi-causal one.
Rather, it simply demonstrates that in extremis Diefenbaker felt Canada’s interests aligned with those of the USA’s more than with those of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
The fact that when one is forced to choose, one chooses the lesser evil, even an untrusted one, does not undermine the fact that the lesser evil is still evil.
Similarly, the important differences between the narratives to which the military and political leaderships adhered, as well as their exposure to the critical trust-enabling factors, provides a strong basis for understanding why such remarkable disagreement existed between the two groups.
This evidence supports the contention that trust, and a lack thereof, played an important role in structuring the cognitive frameworks of these agents, and, by extension, in generating, at a sub-state level, Canada’s schizophrenic response to the Cuban missile crisis.
This assumption fits into the class of beliefs psychologists call heuristics.
By “sticky” I mean that once trust is established, the threshold for its repeal is higher than was the threshold for its establishment.
See Heath for a good, brief discussion of why explaining actions by ascribing irrationality to the agents in question is highly problematic.
One reviewer has suggested that Diefenbaker’s decision, three days into the crisis, to “ratify” Harkness’s decision might render this discussion somewhat moot.
Diefenbaker made his decision and stuck with it for a significant length of time in the teeth of the greatest crisis of the Cold War.
Moreover, the evidence we have for why he ultimately changed his position, namely the heightening of the crisis, suggests that it was an additional factor, namely a perceived increase in the seriousness of the Soviet threat, that shifted his position.
The fact that Diefenbaker, when he felt forced to choose between the USA and the the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, chose to align with the USA in no way undermines the argument that he did not trust Kennedy to look out for Canada’s best interests.
Please refer to Urban for an elaboration of the theoretical justification of the indicators I employ.
For example, under Diefenbaker both the Permanent Joint Board on Defence and the Cabinet Defence Committee fell into disuse.
This campaign included tours of NORAD headquarters for members of the Canadian elite, and the feeding of anti-government stories to journalists.
Pearson and Canada’s role in nuclear disarmament and arms control negotiations, 1945–1957.
