McNamara offers his account of the century just past, as he remembers participating in it, as The material is designed to be flexible.
The well as his reflections on its meaning for the lesson plans can build on one another, or be 21st century.
They can be used intensity that marked his years as defense whether you and your students watch the whole secretary for presidents Kennedy and Johnson, film or only selections from it.
You should feel McNamara’s message compels us to pay attention free to duplicate materials for your students to our own roles in and for colleagues who the 21st century.
Some might be interested. of what McNamara At my age, 85, I’m at age Although the lessons says in the film is where I can look back are designed for a fifty highly controversial— and derive some conclusions minute class period, the thoughts of one about my actions.
My rule has been you may wish to devote man reflecting on his more or less time to own history and the to try to learn, try to understand certain aspects.
Develop the encourage you to adapt That other accounts, lessons and pass them on. the materials to meet other reflections, may —Robert McNamara, The Fog of War the needs of your differ markedly from classroom.
These lessons will help your students to this guide a provocative and useful way connect the film and its message to 20th to engage your students in a vicarious century history and to consider McNamara’s conversation with Robert McNamara about role as a political and military figure.
Just War and Proportionality............................15 TEACHING STRATEGIES 6.
Oral History and the Vietnam Experience ......16 • Activities 1, 2 ..................................................6 7.
Film as Media ..................................................17 • Activities 3, 4 ..................................................7 8.
What kind of world do we want for the • Activities 5, 6 ..................................................8 21st century?....................................................19 • Activities 7, 8 ..................................................9 Behind the Scenes—Critical Oral History........22 About the Choices Program ..............................23 On DVD 5.11.04.
McNamara relives the horrors and triumphs War in Cuba, Vietnam, and around the world.
We are of the 20th century as the basis for a discussion about encouraged to experience the 20th century vicariously as what humanity wants for the 21st century.
Above all, the filmmaker and his subject walk us through McNamara challenges viewers to confront the role that the experiences of leaders involved in these seminal conflict, and in particular nuclear conflict, might play in events.
From Woodrow Wilson’s vision for a world without war, to the fire-bombing of Japan in World War II, the world’s brush with nuclear catastrophe during the Cuban missile crisis, and the war in Vietnam, this chapter in history is far-reaching and, in an important sense, still unfolding.
World War I – The First World War was a catastrophe of global proportion.
Nine million people died fighting on battlefields that stretched across Europe, parts of Africa, Asia, the Middle East, and the world’s oceans.
As the war came to an end, President Wilson proposed the creation of a League of Nations to enhance international cooperation and to ensure peace.
Strategic Bombing in World War II – World War II was even more deadly than World War I Air power was an integral element of the military strategy of both the Allied and Axis sides.
Millions of civilians died in Europe and the Pacific, especially in Japan, as a result.
The bombing culminated in the firebombing of more than sixty Japanese cities.
The use of two nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki marked the introduction of nuclear weapons into warfare.
While East and West were caught in a nuclear stand-off, lethal “proxy” wars were fought all over the globe between allies of the United States and allies of the Soviet Union and/or the People’s Republic of China.
The crisis has come to be recognized as the most dangerous confrontation of the Cold War; the United States and the Soviet Union came to the brink of nuclear war.
Disaster was avoided only at the last moment when Soviet Premier Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles, United States President Kennedy agreed not to attack Cuba, and Cuban President Castro agreed to permit the Soviets to remove the weapons.
October 1962 was a moment so frightening and dangerous that its reverberations are still felt today.
Americans, convinced that the fall of South Vietnam to Communism would eventually result in the “fall” of all of Southeast Asia, believed this war was an effort to prevent North Vietnam from unifying North and South Vietnam under Communist leadership.
To the combined Communist forces of the North Vietnamese and the National Liberation Front the war was a sign of United States imperial ambitions in the South.
The war stretched across several generations and killed more than three million Vietnamese and 58,000 Americans.
There was intense international opposition to the war and widespread protest at home.
The United States loss in Vietnam dealt a profound psychological blow to America.
Nuclear Weapons – Two nuclear bombs dropped by the United States on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945 killed more than 150,000 people.
By 1946, the atomic bomb was being called “the ultimate weapon,” a force of unprecedented destructiveness.
A nuclear arms Extensive background on race ensued, as each side threatened the other with thousands of nuclear weapons. each of these topics is Today the United States and Russia, while ostensibly allies, still threaten each other with roughly available on the web at 28,800 of the 30,000 currently known to exist.
At least six additional countries now www.choices.edu/fogofwar. possess nuclear weapons and others are attempting to obtain them.
Write the following key terms on the board and ask students to suggest definitions.
Then instruct them to take notes on these terms as they view the movie. appeasement morality collective security power colonialism proportionality containment rationality domino theory responsibility empathy unilateral ethics values just war war criminals 2.
Ask students to read the film’s synopsis and the historical context to familiarize themselves with the content of the film.
In-depth discussions of each of the historical topics described are available on the web at www.choices.edu/fogofwar and may be assigned as homework prior to viewing the film.
Ask students to recall anything they have learned about Robert McNamara, either from assignments in their history classes or from their relatives who might have lived during the time he was Secretary of Defense.
For homework prior to viewing, ask students to research Robert McNamara.
Suggest that they include at least one interview with someone who lived through this period.
Ask students to identify at least three similarities and /or differences. is built around eleven lessons from the life 5.
Instruct students to select one question or challenge that Robert of Robert McNamara.
McNamara presents to us in The Fog of War and be prepared to share this in class.
There’s something AFTER VIEWING THE FILM: SUGGESTIONS beyond one’s self.
Choose one or more of the activities described in this guide to connect the film to topics you may be covering in your classes.
Refer students to the resources available from the web at www.choices.edu/fogofwar. have to engage in evil.
HANDOUTS • “Empathy and Foreign Policy” We must try to put ourselves inside their skin and look at us through their eyes, IN THE CLASSROOM just to understand the thoughts that lie behind their decisions 1.
Ask students to think about an enemy—personal, national, international.
Have them and their actions. construct a description of that person, group, or nation.
Form groups of three to four students and distribute copies of “Empathy and Foreign Policy” to each student.
Instruct the groups to work collectively to develop their responses to the questions and historical events presented in the worksheet.
THE CASE OF THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS OBJECTIVES • Analyze and interpret the most important documents of the missile crisis.
HANDOUTS • “The Khrushchev Letters—How to Respond” At the end we lucked out.
Rational individuals came that close to • Kennedy’s letter to Khrushchev total destruction of their societies.
The most significant paragraphs are highlighted for educational purposes.
Call on students to EXTRA CHALLENGE – explain the significance of the highlighted paragraphs.
Form small groups and ask students Ask students to read Castro’s to discuss how they would advise President Kennedy to respond.
Have groups share their letter to Khrushchev outlining responses with the class. his position.
In small groups, discuss the questions States would have acted posed on the worksheet.
Ask students to assume Khrushchev’s perspective in considering differently if it knew and Kennedy’s response.
Ask students to consider some or all of the bulleted questions posed on the second half of the handout.
THE TONKIN GULF OBJECTIVES • Analyze the significance of the Tonkin Gulf incident on United States policy.
HANDOUTS • “Tonkin Gulf—Case Study” IN THE CLASSROOM President Johnson authorized bombing 1.
Call on students to share with the class their responses to the “Questions for Class wrong, but we had in our minds a Discussion” in the handout. mindset that led to that action.
OBJECTIVES • Delineate the values surrounding international efforts to regulate war.
HANDOUTS • “Values in a Time of War” LeMay said, “If we’d lost the war, IN THE CLASSROOM we’d all have been prosecuted as war 1.
Ask the groups to discuss how their decisions would be affected by the actions of —The Fog of War the enemy.
JUST WAR AND PROPORTIONALITY OBJECTIVES • Explore a framework for analyzing political violence and war.
Ask them to identify the standards the international LeMay’s answer would be clearly “Yes.” community has established for when and how force may be used.
Have them list several —The Fog of War examples of political violence, citing either examples from wars or terrorist acts.
Explore these examples in terms of the decisions to use violence and how violence was employed.
Finally, ask them if 9/11 has changed Are the “rules of war” the way they view justifiable force.
EXTRA CHALLENGE – • Compare the perspective of an average American with that of Robert McNamara.
Suggest that they develop a magazine• “Oral History and the Vietnam Experience” style profile of the IN THE CLASSROOM interviewee focusing on 1.
Ask students to compare the experiences of veterans with influenced the direction of those of non-veterans.
Ask students how their own attitudes toward the Vietnam War changed as a result of their between the Vietnam War interviews.
Ask students how they think they might have responded to a draft notice during the Vietnam War.
FILM AS MEDIA OBJECTIVES • Investigate the role the film’s structure and form play in its meaning.
HANDOUTS • “Film as Media” IN THE CLASSROOM Now I remember exactly the sentence 1.
In the large group, ask students to recall some of the striking moments of the film.
Develop a list on the board of the But you can fix it up some way. —The Fog of War types of things students noticed.
Distribute the handout and lead a large-group discussion around each of the five topics EXTRA CHALLENGE – provided.
Alternatively, you may wish to break your class into five smaller groups and assign The “Eleven Lessons from the each one of the five topics to discuss as a group.
Then have each group lead a discussion on Life of Robert McNamara” are their topic with the rest of the class. not those that McNamara has identified himself.
Ask students to find two or three reviews of The Fog of War, evaluate the places where they students compare McNamara’s appeared, and compare their own perspective on the movie with those of the critics. lessons with those derived by Errol Morris.
McNamara’s lessons are available on the web at www.choices.edu/fogofwar.
OBJECTIVES • Students are challenged to come to terms with their own views on America’s future role in the world.
McNamara presents in the film to challenge us to think about the 21st century.
Have students go online • I think the human race needs to think more about killing, about conflict.
Have students frame their response as They will be joining others a letter to Robert McNamara. across the country in expressing their views.
A report on student views will be developed and shared with elected officials.
In The Fog of War, McNamara says that empathy was present in the Cuban missile crisis but absent in Vietnam.
In Thompson’s mind was this thought: Khrushchev’s gotten himself in a hell of a Consequences: fix.
Write a short paragraph where you develop an empathic view of the United States’ adversaries, in this case Germany or Japan.
Choose a current conflict in which the United States is involved—directly or indirectly.
Examples think we did put ourselves in the skin of might include Al Qaeda and the United States, Israel and the Palestinians, or various the Soviets.
Write a short empathic view of one or didn’t know them well enough to more of the other parties involved.
We must try to put ourselves inside their skin and look at us through their eyes, just to understand the thoughts that lie behind their decisions and their actions.
After reading Chairman Khrushchev’s October 26 and October 27 letters to President Kennedy, compare the styles and the substance of the two letters.
Why did Kennedy and his advisers either drunk or under tremendous stress.
Then before we could respond, we believe Khrushchev would accept Kennedy’s proposal.
Additionally, some ExComm members had a second message that had been saw the second letter as evidence of a power struggle within the Kremlin.] dictated by a bunch of hard-liners.
So, what to do? —The Fog of War MCNAMARA’S ACCOUNT OF THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS In The Fog of War, McNamara suggests that the leaders in the United States disagreed on how It wasn’t until January, 1992, to respond to the two letters.
He also recalls that, thirty years later, he learned for the first time that tactical nuclear nuclear warheads, including 90 tactical warheads were on Cuba at the time of the crisis. warheads, were on the island at the time of this critical moment of the crisis.
Why Khrushchev outlining his had the ExComm not considered the possibility of tactical nuclear weapons as part of the position.
McNamara’s response upon learning, in 1992, that • Compare McNamara’s comments on the Kennedy tapes to his comments about the crisis Castro would have been today.
Rational individuals came that close to total destruction of their societies.
There were sonar soundings, torpedoes had been detected – other indications of attack from patrol boats.
We spent “Whereas the naval units of the Communist regime in Vietnam, in violation of about ten hours that day trying to find out the principles of the Charter of the United Nations and of international law, what in the hell had happened.
Now therefore, be it “Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United States of America in Congress assembled that the Congress approves and supports the determination of the President, as Commander in Chief, to take all necessary measures to repel any armed attack against the forces of the United States and to prevent further aggression.
The United States regards as vital to its national interest and to world Make no mistake about it.
And we have declared war on tyranny and aggression. peace the maintenance of the international peace and security in southeast Asia. —President Johnson, June 10, 1965 Consonant with the Constitution and the Charter of the United Nations and in accordance with its obligations under the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty, the United States is, therefore, as the President determines, to take all necessary steps, including the use of armed force, to assist any member or protocol state of the Southeast Asia Collective Defense Treaty requesting assistance in defense of its freedom.
Even congressmen who opposed the war were they’re both often wrong. reluctant to deny the funds and resources necessary to support the United States effort.
The Tonkin Gulf —The Fog of War Resolution was repealed by the Senate in June 1970.
United States involvement in the war continued until January 1973, although no formal declaration of war was ever requested.
MAKING CONNECTIONS One reason to study history is to make connections, discover recurring patterns, and consider the relevance for our world today.
He authorized the attack on the assumption it had occurred, and his belief that it was a conscious decision on the part of the North Vietnamese political and military leaders to escalate the conflict and an indication they would not stop short of winning.
We were wrong, but we had in our minds a mindset that led to that action.
That was the declaration of General William Tecumseh Sherman in early 1865 as he surveyed the devastation brought by his 60,000 Union troops to the people of Georgia during the closing months of the Civil War.
When a democratic society goes to war, the decisions made and actions taken are not just the responsibility of those in authority, but are the collective responsibility of the people.
Once war has begun, few Americans would question that bringing the conflict to a speedy conclusion is a justifiable goal, or end.
The moral difficulty comes in deciding which military actions, or means, should be employed to attain a worthy end.
Your assignment is to consider each of the targets in terms of its military significance and moral implications.
Your task is to decide whether the means of aerial bombardment are justified by the ends, or goals.
LeMay recognized that what he was doing would be thought immoral if his side had lost.
JUST WAR AND PROPORTIONALITY Throughout history, the world has known political violence and war.
For centuries political and religious thinkers from many traditions have wrestled with two key questions.
These two questions are central to something known as “just war” theory.
Today, just war theory underlies much of accepted international law concerning the use of force by states.
For example, states may use force in self-defense against an armed attack.
Despite these laws and norms, there are those who oppose the use of violence under any circumstances.
Over the years, the international community has been working to better define the rules of war.
The Geneva Conventions established in the aftermath of World War II introduced new internationally accepted regulations on the conduct of war between states.
These rules protect non-combatants, govern the treatment of prisoners of war, prohibit hostage-taking, and respect diplomatic immunity.
In addition, the concept of proportionality—long a part of just war theory—has gained new importance as the weapons of war have become increasingly destructive.
Proportionality argues that it is wrong to use more force than is necessary to achieve success.
Investigate an example of a violation and write about what happened to the leaders.
In the film, The Fog of War, Robert McNamara asks the viewer several questions.
Recognize that at times you will have to engage in evil, but minimize it.
ORAL HISTORY AND THE VIETNAM EXPERIENCE Robert McNamara was the Secretary of Defense during the Vietnam War.
He participated at the highest levels, in the decision-making that led to the eventual deployment of over five hundred thousand ground troops.
As United States involvement in Vietnam escalated, he became the subject of increasing controversy.
The Vietnam War years were a period of intense controversy and turmoil in the United States.
Of those who did not serve, some worked to support the war from here at home; others were involved in protesting the war and working to change United States policy.
Together their experiences and recollections are as much a part of the history of the Vietnam War as the fighting in Vietnam.
To appreciate the human side of the war, you will be asked to talk with people who lived through this controversial period.
Sensitivity and respect on your part are essential during the interview process.
Using a tape recorder may help you avoid distractions during the interview.
Not all of the questions below are applicable to both those who served and those who did not.
Several of the questions are intended to compare your interviewee’s perspective and memories with those of Robert McNamara.
Norman Morrison, a Quaker, killed himself on the Pentagon grounds in protest of the Vietnam War.
FILM AS MEDIA The way a film tells its story can have as much bearing on how we understand the film as the words spoken and the action on the screen.
This critically acclaimed movie by the renowned filmmaker Errol Morris examines issues of war and peace in the 20th century through the lens of one of the century’s pivotal figures.
In The Fog of War, Robert McNamara offers his account of the century just passed, as he remembers participating in it, as well as his reflections on its meaning for the 21st century.
He delivers his reflections with the conviction and intensity that marked his years as Secretary of Defense for presidents Kennedy and Johnson.
THE INTERVIEW The Fog of War is a conversation with Robert McNamara drawn from more than twenty hours of interviews conducted by Errol Morris.
Traditional interview technique would have Errol Morris and Robert McNamara talking together with a camera recording the conversation.
To capture one-on-one conversation without the distance created by the third person he invented the Interrotron.
This device allows Morris to remain in a separate space while his image is projected onto the camera, talking directly with his subject.
Errol Morris developed the Interrotron not to dilute the intimacy of conversation but to intensify it.
Teletype clicking across the screen, numbers falling from the skies over Japan, declassified documents, and dominoes tumbling across a map.
Robert McNamara is the only interviewee in the film—the only person who tells his story.
Errol Morris has drawn the content of his interview with Robert McNamara from more than twenty hours of tape.
We can identify omissions but we can only speculate as to who made the choices and why.
WHY MAKE THIS FILM In The Fog of War, the filmmaker moves back and forth between time periods.
We talk with McNamara today, a man in his eighties reflecting on his life, on the lessons he’s learned, and on the contributions he can still make to our future as we shape the 21st century.
And we witness an earlier McNamara—the small boy on Armistice Day, a college student fascinated by philosophy, a young military man in the Pacific theater in World War II, a successful young leader in the business world, and Secretary of Defense to two presidents.
Compare McNamara’s lessons THE TITLE with those identified by Errol Errol Morris considered several titles for his film before deciding on The Fog of War.
McNamara’s lessons considered The Fog of War, then The Logic of War, and Only the Beginning, and McNamara’s are available on the web at Century, and Wilson’s Ghost before returning again to The Fog of War.
Robert McNamara’s life has spanned many of the most significant historical events of the 20th century; he has played a major role in some of the most controversial and important moments in the history of the United States.
Since his retirement from public life, he has devoted much of his energy to reexamining the past – his past.
McNamara has met with former adversaries and written extensively about his interpretation of history and his hopes for the future.
We are the strongest nation in the President Woodrow Wilson was one of the first leaders of the 20th century to sense that without world today.
I do not believe that political change, the human race might destroy itself in catastrophic wars of ever-greater we should ever apply that economic, destructiveness.
The key requirements to avoid such a catastrophe, he believed, were to make a political, and military power unilaterally.
If we had followed that moral priority of reducing killing, and to take a multilateral approach to issues of international rule in Vietnam, we wouldn’t have security.
Not Japan, not in the Second World War, in the Cold War, and in the numerous conflicts that exist today.
Robert McNamara and James Blight, in their book, Wilson’s Ghost, endorse and update Wilson’s If we can’t persuade nations with comparable values of the merit moral and multilateral priorities.
Moreover, in the wake of the 9/11 tragedy, they add empathy of our cause, we’d better to Wilson’s priorities.
They urge that greater effort be made by all sides to grasp reality as reexamine our reasoning. experienced by others before misperception leads to greater violence and conflict. —The Fog of War So the failure of empathy in the West and among its opponents has been a core reason that the 20th century was the bloodiest in all of human history and—to use Wilson’s own image—a heartbreaking century.
We have known for at least fifty years that we, the human race, possess the physical ability to destroy ourselves and the world as we know it in a nuclear war.
We have known for more than forty years, since the Cuban missile crisis, that a lack of empathy between nations can lead us to the brink of a nuclear war and, but for luck, even over the brink into total catastrophe.
Now, after 9/11, we can be absolutely certain that people we do not understand, but who feel intense hatred toward us, wish to destroy us and have proved they are wellorganized, resourceful, and ruthless—such people are seeking the most efficient available means of carrying out our destruction, that is, with nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass destruction.
Reducing the Risk of Conflict, Killing, Is it right and proper that today and Catastrophe in the 21st Century there are 7,500 strategic offensive nuclear warheads, of which 2,500 are on 15 minute alert, to be In The Fog of War, Robert McNamara addresses his question to all of us regardless of where we launched by the decision of are from and where we live.
I think the human race needs to think more about killing, about conflict.
VOICE HEARD – Think about Robert McNamara’s challenge to us from your perspective, living in the United You can enter your responses to States at the dawn of the new century.
The results of this online ballot will be tabulated Use this worksheet to help clarify what concerns you and what is important to you.
Then write and shared with elected a letter addressed to Robert McNamara.
Think of this as a letter responding to one or more of officials nationwide following the questions or challenges he presents in The Fog of War. the 2004 national elections.
A clash of ideologies and political values will fuel conflict and instability in the world.
The gulf between the developed and developing worlds will widen, making it increasingly difficult to address common problems.
The United States will act unilaterally and the international community will turn against us.
Nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons will proliferate and end up in the hands of terrorists.
The United States will drain its resources trying to solve other countries’ problems.
The United States will lose access to oil and other key resources abroad.
At any time, ultimate outcome, yet we’re forced to understand events in revelations can indicate that they were mistaken reverse, working our way retrospectively in critical respects, and even that their backward to their supposed causes.
To agree to creates a profound disconnect between participate, their curiosity about what they lived experience and our understanding of might learn must overwhelm their fears that experience.
Caught in the moment, about the effects possible revelations might decision-makers often feel confused, have on their reputations.
But the moment of truth occurred at our June scholarly study of decision1997 conference in Hanoi.
Vietnamese making usually removes the confusion and General Dang Vu Hiep revealed that an The Cuban missile crisis conference, fear, focusing simply on explanations of Havana, January 1992 attack on United States forces in the Central outcomes.
Critical forced the Americans to shoulder a far oral history often yields rich and surprising greater share of the burden for the more insights into what it was really like for than three million people killed in that decision-makers, then and there, thus war.
The United States had been mistaken, and the yielding more accurate analysis and mistake had tragic consequences. applicable lessons for decision-making, Robert McNamara’s remarks in The here and now.
Reducing the Risk reveal information and perspectives so of Conflict, Killing and Catastrophe in the The Vietnam War conference, startling that the participants can scarcely Hanoi, June 1997 21st Century, by McNamara and James comprehend what they are being told.
In Wilson’s Such a moment occurred at our January 1992 conference in Ghost, McNamara and Blight outline the lessons of Havana on the Cuban missile crisis.
General Anatoly McNamara’s experience in public life and combine them with Gribkov revealed that the Soviets had deployed short-range the lessons learned in the critical oral history projects on the tactical nuclear warheads in Cuba, and that if the expected Cuban missile crisis and Vietnam War that Blight has United States attack and invasion had come, the Soviet directed.
The renowned filmmaker Errol Morris commander would probably have used them. read Wilson’s Ghost, and approached McNamara for Cuban President Fidel Castro added that he had a half-hour interview for a cable TV show.
Upon hearing the first five minutes on camera, McNamara told this, several United States participants, led by Robert Morris that if the United States had lost the war in the McNamara, literally went pale and temporarily Pacific, in which he had participated, he had no speechless, their eyes wide with disbelief.
The doubt that he and his superiors would have, and Americans knew that the attack may have been just should have, been tried for crimes against humanity hours away, but they did not know that ships due to their role in the firebombing of more than carrying the invading forces would likely have been sixty Japanese cities.
Morris, startled by destroyed and any United States marines making it to the McNamara’s directness and energy, immediately beaches would have been incinerated.
McNamara agreed, giving Morris literally thrown into a time machine and the others present nearly 24 hours of interviews, over three long sessions.
As could watch and palpably feel, as if watching an instant Morris has said, The Fog of War is in essence a conversation replay thirty years later, some of the horror, revulsion and between two Bob McNamara’s— a forty-something decisiondespair the leaders felt at the time, as the clock seemed to tick maker and an eighty-something scholar—about the meaning down toward nuclear holocaust. of his experience with violent conflict in the 20th century.
The program provides a vehicle for secondary school students to grapple with significant international issues and thus encourages a renewal of civic engagement among American youth.
The Choices Program curricular resources involve students in a dynamic conversation between the past and the present, and provide students with the tools to make reasoned and informed judgments about the future.
Drawing from both contemporary and historical events, each unit focuses on a critical turning point in international public policy.
By engaging students in critical thinking, shared deliberation, and informed decisionmaking, the Choices Program approach to classroom teaching creates a solid foundation for civic and international education within the core curriculum.
Choices curricular resources are currently used in 6,500 schools nationwide.
Considering Its Place in Cold War History, © Choices for the 21st Century Education Program.
The United States in Vietnam, © Choices for the 21st Century Education Program.
Science, Morality, and the Atomic Bomb, © Choices for the 21st Century Education Program.
Challenges for Democracy, © Choices for the 21st Century Education Program.
Additional resources for use with this Teacher’s Guide are available online.
