Some of President John F Kennedy's advisers recommended that the United States launch a surprise air attack on Cuban and invade Cuba.
This would have led to direct combat between United States forces and Soviet forces.
During the crisis Cuban dictator Fidel Castro urged the Soviet leaders to launch nuclear war against the United States if the United States invaded Cuba.
The Soviets had a total of 42 nuclear-armed ICBMs, of which 36 could be launched on 15 minute warning; of these, 26 were deployed in hardened silos.
United States photo-reconnaissance satellites verified the reverse--that the United States had nuclear superiority--in 1960.
United States knowledge of its superiority was revealed to the public and the Soviets in a press briefing by Roswell Gilpatrick on October 21, 1961.
Until then Soviet leaders probably thought the United States believed Soviet forces were vastly larger than they were; and didn't know where Soviet forces were, hence couldn't target them.
The Gilpatrick briefing likely came as a great shock to Soviet leaders.
Historians and Soviet crisis participants interviewed later favor explanations #1 and #2, with focus on #2.
The Lunas and Beagles were ideal for nuking a United States invasion force.
THE United States RESPONSE A JFK warns Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev to deploy no missiles in Cuba, Sept. and Sept., 1962.
JFK expressed little concern about the military consequences of the Soviet missile deployment.
The White House tapes don't reveal such concerns; and non-elected officials were more hawkish than JFK, suggesting that electoral political concerns weren't driving hawkish thinking.
But JFK did privately express fear of impeachment or defeat in the 1964 election if the missiles stayed in Cuba.
Exclude only missiles and warheads for now, to freeze the military status quo.
Maybe extend the blockade to cover oil and other items later, if necessary, to strangle Cuba.
A surprise United States conventional air strike against the Soviet missiles, followed immediately by a United States military invasion of Cuba.
Early in the crisis JFK and most of his advisors favored option #3, Surprise Attack and Invasion.
United States officials didn't come up with the Quarantine idea until Oct., three days into the crisis.
SCARY EVENTS AT SEA The Soviets deployed four Foxtrot-class submarines near Cuba during the crisis.
The United States devised a system to signal these subs to surface by exploding practice depth-charges near the sub, and transmitted this scheme to Moscow during the crisis.
Hence they interpreted depth-charge explosions not as signals but as an attack meant to sink them.
One sub commander considered nuking a United States destroyer in response.
THE SETTLEMENT A Khrushchev sent JFK a letter on Friday Oct. offering to remove Soviet missiles from Cuba in exchange for a United States noinvasion pledge regarding Cuba.
He ignored the second letter and publicly accepted Khrushchev's first offer--a Soviet withdrawal of its missiles from Cuba in exchange for a US pledge not to invade Cuba.
That's why he warned publicly against it--he thought his bluff wouldn't be called.
Hence nearly overlooked the no-invasion pledge as a solution to the crisis.
Khrushchev didn't expect the United States to detect his missile deployment.
United States leaders underestimated Soviet and Cuban military capabilities in Cuba.
More interestingly, the United States was unaware that the Soviets had 98 tactical warheads and means to deliver them in Cuba.
JFK was unaware of symmetry of Soviet and United States missile deployments.
On October 28 Khrushchev thought JFK intended to announce the start of war at 5:00m. that day.
United States anti-submarine operations were more aggressive than JFK knew.
Indeed, they were more aggressive and dangerous than the United States Navy itself knew.
On Oct. the Navy forced to the surface a Soviet submarine that, unbeknownst to the Navy, carried a nuclear torpedo and was commanded by a Soviet officer that feared he was under attack and briefly considered firing his nuclear torpedo.
The Soviets could have thought this a precursor to a United States first strike.
The Soviets scrambled fighters to shoot it down; the United States scrambled nuclear-armed fighters in response.
United States test intercontinental ballistic missiles were armed with nuclear warheads during the crisis; and a scheduled test from this test-field was still conducted.
A United States intelligence ship remained close to Cuba early in the crisis--an inviting target.
We now know he made a plan to agree publicly to withdraw the US IRBMs from Turkey if this was necessary to resolve the crisis.
But JFK did formulate his last offer/threat as an ultimatum with a deadline--a risky act.
Had he not been President history probably would have been different and more exciting.
JFK had a hidden plan to pursue a public Jupiter trade. -The Soviets had nukes in Cuba, including tactical nukes, commanded by officers with predelegated authority to use these weapons at the outset of the crisis.
Khrushchev withdrew this authority during the crisis but there is no guarantee these weapons would have gone unused in event of war. -The United States seriously intended to oust Castro.
It also provoked Castro to seek nuclear war if Cuba was invaded. -A soviet sub commander considered launching a nuclear weapon at a United States destroyer.
The United States was in a great rush to resolve the crisis, pressing matters at a desperate pace on October 27, when Kennedy told the Soviets that the United States would 6 use force unless matters were resolved in a day or two.
United States belligerence toward Cuba: perhaps the United States could have avoided the crisis by leaving Castro's regime alone.
United States superiority: there are some capabilities one does not want to have.
United States domestic politics: > Soviet missiles in Cuba did not give the USSR a firststrike capability; and added little to Soviet secondstrike capability.
So any second-strike benefit to the USSR would be brief; and any harm to the United States would be delayed only a year.
He would have set a higher ceiling had he thought the Soviets were deploying.
Perhaps the historical record understates the prevalence and effectiveness of conciliation as a tool of statecraft.
Hence history features successful acts of belligerence while successful conciliations are downplayed.
