In a Jeremy Pressman is a Ph.D. candidate in the Department of Political Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Many provided comments and suggestions, and I would especially like to thank David Art, John ""Mike"" George, Kelly Greenhill, Daniel Kryder, Sarah Iischer, Stephen Van Evera, Cory Welt, and the anonymous reviewers of Security Studies.
An earlier version of this article was presented at the 1997 Northeast Political Science Association meeting in Philadelphia.
To date, the September warnings have not been the focus of much scholarly attention.
George, George and Smoke, Kahan and Long, and Sorensen highlight a second explanation for United States action based on international credibility, the United States opted for a military response to preserve its international credibility by keeping the Soviets deterred and United States allies impressed with American strength.
In this article, I reject the military balance explanation and regard the international credibility explanation as largely an outgrowth of domestic politics.
Instead, I propose answers to these questions that rely on domestic politics but differ from past efforts to rely on domestic politics.
I also challenge Paterson and Brophy's dismissal of the role of domestic politics in explaining United States policy toward Cuba in the fall of 1962.
There are a few sources that pay attention to the September statements.
Such concerns included the erosion of the United States nuclear deterrent, a numerical gain in missiles and nuclear warheads, increased coverage of United States targets , reduced warning time of a Soviet attack for the United States, or the possibility this would be the first of many Soviet missile emplacements in Cuba.
I argue that Kennedy, with growing press coverage and under heavy Republican pressure in August and September regarding United States policy toward Cuba, issued the tough-sounding statements to inoculate himself against Republican charges that he was weak in dealing with Cuba and, more generally, the international communist threat to the United States.
Absent the press coverage and Republican pressure, the wording, timing, and public nature of the statements might have been different or a statement might not have been made at all.
Kennedy issued the statements to combat domestic critics, not because he ever thought the Soviets would actually consider deploying offensive weapons in Cuba.
In fact, intelligence and administration officials were fairly certain the Soviets would never deploy offensive weapons in Cuba.
When he was informed on 16 October of the presence of Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, however, he could not back away from the September statements.
Responses to the Soviet missiles that were not seen as ""action,"" such as purely diplomatic efforts to remove the missiles, were no longer considered feasible by United States officials.
Thus I argue that even though the statements had been issued with an eye toward Democratic victory in the November 1962 congressional elections and maintaining Kennedy's presidential popularity, the statements constrained his range of action once the crisis began.
This was largely due to international credibility concerns and, to a lesser extent, the same domestic concerns that led the White House to issue the statements in the first place.
He issued the statements so as not to look weak to Congress and the American people and now he had to uphold his pledge to ""act"" so as not to look weak to the Soviet Union and in the international arena.
This explanation of the September statements and the military response8 to the discovery of the missiles suggests a more general theoretical insight 8.
Bohlen considered air strike, invasion, and blockade as avenues of military action.
Leaders under attack from the hawks often feared both looking soft on communism and that the perception of weakness in the battle against communism would hurt their popularity and electoral performance.
As a result, they might issue tough, anti-Soviet statements for domestic political consumption, assuming they would never be forced to live up to them.
The statements form a key element of an ""immunization confrontation,"" a clash in which presidents seek to inoculate themselves against charges of being soft on communism.
If at some later date a crisis arises and Soviet action violates the domestically inspired United States statement, United States leaders would be forced to respond to uphold the statement.
They would be forced to uphold the statements not only to continue to placate their domestic critics but also—and more importandy—to defend America's international credibility in the global struggle against communism.
If, as in the Cuba case, the statement narrowed the president's range of action, then the initial domestic pressure by hawks had profound international consequences.
Even more generally, one might consider whether an immunization confrontation could result from any situation in which hawks and doves are engaged in fierce debates over the direction of a given country's foreign policy.
There may be cases of doves using tough language to fend off hawkish critics only to find down the road that these statements constrain their policy choices during international crises as long as the doves are concerned about their state's credibility on the international stage.
This article rejects Paterson and Brophy's conclusion by focusing on a slightly different set of questions, challenging some of their assumptions, and marshaling additional evidence, some of which has only become available subsequent to their article's publication.
I also explain how my article differs from other previous explanations based on domestic factors.
Section one spells out more clearly what I mean by domestic political factors.
Section two describes both the press coverage of the buildup and the right-wing attack on the Kennedy administration's policy toward Cuba in the fall of 1962.
Statements by United States decision makers are presented in sections three and four, followed by a section on polling data.
I do not contend that input from the political opposition is inherendy bad; in some cases, domestic opinion or opposition groups may prevent a leader from pursuing a disastrous policy.
Public pressure could also work in the opposite direction, forcing leaders to forswear more militant policies at an early stage and thus leaving a state with only diplomatic options.
One way to answer this question is to specify the points at which the administration felt vulnerable to challenges within the domestic arena, as well as the nature of the domestic threats that actually emerged.
I also address factors that are solely related to Kennedy's presidential strength, however.
In this article I argue that in the fall of 1962, Kennedy saw the Cuba issue as one on which his reputation and popularity were on the line.
In summary, domestic vulnerabilities could be related to congressional or presidential strength.
In the fall of 1962, domestic press coverage of the Soviet buildup in Cuba, the impending congressional elections, and Republican attacks on Kennedy's Cuba policy exposed these domestic vulnerabilities and led to specific United States policy steps.
In Congress, the administration wanted to avoid midterm losses that would undermine party strength in Congress and possibly damage Kennedy's reputation and popularity.
While the 1962 elections primarily affected the issue of Democratic congressional strength, press coverage and Republican attacks could play on all the domestic vulnerabilities.
There are a number of works that emphasize some aspect of domestic politics in the assessment of United States decision making.
Stone, Bernstein, and Nathan were early critics who highlighted the role domestic politics played in the crisis.
Each discussed the press coverage and partisan politics prior to the missile crisis.
Furthermore, they rejected a military balance explanation for U.S. policy and suggested that domestic political considerations had forced Kennedy to act by foreclosing the diplomatic option.
According to Stone, Kennedy ruled out negotiations or turning to the United Nations because of the impending congressional elections.
Yet these early writers did not place great emphasis on the September statements.
Moreover, they wrote before the release of the transcripts of the Ex Comm meetings and before revelations such as the Jupiter trade.
Hampson contended that the earlier writers missed the presidential element in Kennedy's electoral concerns in their domestic politics arguments; JFK was worried about both his presidential strength and the 1962 elections, not just the latter.
Hampson implied that international credibility played a role in U.S. policy making, but he concluded that in that case an ultimatum, not a blockade, would have been the most ""appropriate"" policy.
He did not spell out the relative importance of international political and domestic electoral concerns.
For more examples, see 5 in Richard Ned Lebow and Janice Gross Stein, We All Lost the Cold War , 422.
As part of the resolution of the crisis, the United States secretly agreed to remove Jupiter missiles from Turkey.
More recent works such as those by Lebow and Stein and by White have continued to reassess the role of domestic elements.
Lebow and Stein downplayed the role of personal politics but highlighted the importance of international factors and domestic considerations, including in the latter Kennedy's fear that a weak response to the Soviets would cause hardliners in the United States bureaucracy to revolt.
They did not dwell on the interrelationship between international credibility, domestic politics, and the September statements.
White presented an argument that is probably the most compatible with this article.
He did not, however, fully engage the international credibility argument; he was more focused on the selection of the blockade over other military options rather than why a military option trumped diplomatic ones, and he included some normative judgments about the decision makers.
In sum, I see a number of differences between this article and previous work on the role of domestic politics in explaining United States policy toward Cuba.
THE REPUBLICAN OFFENSIVE AND MEDIA COVERAGE OF THE SOVIET BUILDUP IN CUBA A FTER A LULL for most of 1962, the Soviet Union renewed and intensified arms shipments to Cuba in late July.
This did not escape the notice of the United States intelligence community, Kennedy officials, or the American press.
REPUBLICAN ATTACKS On 28 August, members of Congress began highlighting the Soviet buildup in Cuba and questioning the Kennedy response.
Stephen Young and Frank J Lausche were the first to bring up the issue on the Senate floor, but neither challenged the Kennedy administration.
It was Senator Kenneth Keating , however, who led the Republican charge.
Mr President, the time for the truth is now and I hope the American people 15.
On 5 September, for instance, Senator Clair Engle commended the president's position and his ""very clear"" statement of 4 September.
Interestingly, Engle contrasted what he saw as the status quo with the possibility that ""on the other hand, if ground-to-ground missiles are put in place in Cuba, they could deliver a nuclear warhead against targets in the United States.
Were such missiles to be introduced, the United States should ""move to take them out"" rather than pursue a policy of interdiction.
In CQ's four regional election reports, CQ writers listed Cuba as a campaign issue in at least seven senate races involving Democratic incumbents (Colorado, Florida, Pennsylvania), Republican incumbents , and an open seat .25 THE MEDIA Press coverage of die Soviet buildup in Cuba began in the first weeks of August and gradually increased as the month wore on.
The next day, United States officials said ""they had no information 23.
This is an admittedly rough and noncomprehensive measure of what issues were important in the campaigns.
Of CQ's descriptions of the thirty-nine Senate races, seven discussed Cuba, two suggested a link to Cuba, twenty-eight made no mention of Cuba, and two had an unopposed contest or a challenger who did not run a campaign.
See ""Midwestern States,"" pt. of weekly report no. , 5 October 1962; ""Southern States,"" pt. of weekly report no., 12 October 1962; ""Western States,"" pt. of weekly report no., 12 October 1962; and ""Eastern States,"" pt. of weekly report no., 19 October 1962.
Meanwhile, Cuba assumed an ever-larger role in Kennedy's press conferences.
As had been noted in his briefing notes for the press conference, Kennedy responded by acknowledging the arrival of Soviet technicians, though his admission of new supplies ""in large quantities"" was more forthcoming than the briefing book suggestion to acknowledge the arrival of Soviet cargo ships in Cuba.
By 29 August there were more questions about Cuba, and they were asked earlier in the press conference.
One reporter specifically referred to Senator Capehart's speech criticizing the nonreaction of the Kennedy administration to the alleged flow of troops and supplies into Cuba.
On 13 September Kennedy led the conference with a tough statement on Cuba and the first two questions sought further clarification on United States policy toward Cuba.
Throughout September, events and policies continued to develop with regard to Cuba and the Soviet-sponsored buildup.
In addition to Kennedy's statements on 4 and 13 September, the president asked Congress on 7 September for standby authority to call up 150,000 reserves any time before 28 February 1963.
This request was approved by the Senate on 13 September and the House on 24 September.
The latter article includes the major points raised by Roger Hilsman in his background press briefing of 24 August 1962.
Kennedy also mentioned Cuba in his answer to question 9 on the foreign aid bill then before Congress.
On 13 September, questions 1-2, 10, 12, 14, 18, and 20 dealt with Cuba.
The fifth press conference, on 26 September, was a special meeting for business editors and publishers and contained no mention of Cuba.
In early October, Congress approved the foreign aid bill including several provisions to sanction countries that allowed their ships to carry military or economic cargo to Cuba.
Gourevitch raises the possibility of the ""second image reversed"" where international factors may in fact shape domestic concerns.
Applied to the Cuban case in United States politics, it would be worth investigating the extent to which the international realm had shaped the very same domestic factors that best explain the September statements and the military response to the discovery of the Cuban missiles.
To fully answer this question requires a separate research project; even if as a result of such research, one were to totally reject the independent effect of domestic politics, it would still be an important intervening variable.
Keating ""probably was genuinely concerned about American national security.
SEPTEMBER T HE STATEMENTS and writings of JFK and odier leading officials support the claim that the timing, form, and public nature of the September statements were primarily determined by the need to address domestic concerns.
Though the evidence is not definitive, die United States desire to warn the Soviets appears to have played only a secondary role.
Why the September statements were first mentioned as an option on 23 August is less certain and may have been due to growing press coverage, anticipated Republican charges, or a desire to warn the Soviets about the buildup in Cuba.
On 23 August Kennedy met with his national security team to discuss Cuba.
The meeting included President Kennedy, Rusk, McNamara, Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric, Taylor, National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy, and McCone.
On 31 August, after being notified the previous day about the buildup in Cuba, the United States embassy in Moscow recommended an ""unpublicized demarche"" to the Soviets.
The same day, Walt W Rostow (State Department) told McGeorge Bundy, National Security Advisor, ""we should consider very seriously drawing a line which we would not only state publicly but to Moscow and Havana as well.
Although McCone made no specific reference in his notes to the idea of issuing a statement, it is plausible that the idea was discussed at the 21 August meeting.
On 3 September Rostow told JFK that drawing the line in a statement might diminish anxiety in the United States and abroad in the public mind.
We thought it important that this kind of public statement be made not only to reassure the Congress and the American people but also to put the Soviets and the Cubans on notice as to what the position of the United States would necessarily be.
And we were concerned that as a political issue, it would get out of hand with congressional resolutions and campaign speeches.
On 4 September 1962 Keating attacked Kennedy's Cuba policy on NBC's Today show.
After being asked in what respect Keating was inaccurate, Salinger is alleged to have said, ""Well, the President will deal with those inaccuracies.
Theodore Sorensen, recorded interview by Carl Kaysen, 6 April 1964, 47, JFKL Oral History Program.
Daniel and Hubbell outline a similar version of the story but offer no citation.
In both Dobrynin-Sorensen meetings, the major topic according to Sorensen's notes was avoiding Soviet provocations in the months before the November elections.
On 5 September 1962 another presidential adviser, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., expressed his concern to the president regarding the Cuban situation.
The Dobrynin-Sorensen meetings fit with repeated Soviet promises not to complicate U.S.-Soviet relations before the November elections.
JFK, in addition to hearing of the concerns of other advisers about Cuba and domestic politics, received a memorandum from a worried Bundy with recommendations for the president's approach in the 13 September press conference.
The Congressional head of steam on this is the most serious that we have had.
The immediate hazard is that the Administration may appear weak and indecisive.
One way to avoid this hazard is to act by naval or military force in die Cuban area.
The other course is to make a very clear and aggressive explanation of current policy and of its justification.
Bundy wanted the president to be aware that a forceful statement on Cuba was needed to undermine Republican attacks.
In Bundy's 1988 book, he acknowledges the central role during the crisis of domestic political considerations.
While I cannot rule out such a credibility argument, on balance the evidence favors a domestic political one.
The wording, timing, and nature of the statement are consistent with motivations primarily rooted in domestic politics; documentary evidence undermines the case for international credibility as the primary factor in the issuance of the statement.
Pressure was building on Capitol Hill with Capehart's speech on 29 August and Keating's on 31 August.
The disagreement over how and whether to warn the Soviets was unresolved, with Gilpatric recommending gathering further intelligence information before issu55.
Bundy and Robert Komer, of the National Security Council staff, mention Cuba and domestic politics on other occasions.
The confusing distinction Kennedy made between offensive and defensive capabilities and the failure to delineate a specific United States response provided a rather muddled warning to Soviet officials; if the central intent was to warn the Soviets, the warning could have been much more clear even with what Kennedy knew at that time.
Absent the domestic pressure, the deliberations could have continued as U.S. officials struggled to weigh the advantages and disadvantages of different types of statements.
In practice, given Gilpatric's conclusions on 1 September, it is possible that a statement might not have been issued for some time or at all.
As Bundy recognized on 31 August , however, the domestic situation necessitated a statement in the near future.
This time pressure contrasts with the memos dealing with warning the Soviets; if this had been the primary motive, the statement would likely have been issued later, if at all.
The public nature of the statement was also not foreordained, but public issuance proved crucial in shaping United States behavior during the missile crisis.
As the Moscow embassy suggested on 31 August and others mentioned, the United States could have undertaken a private diplomatic effort to warn the Soviets.
A private warning would have had different implications for international credibility.
Instead, as Bundy and Rostow suggested, the United States settled on a vaguely worded public statement on 4 September and again on 13 September.
Only a public statement could be used to quiet opposition attacks and bolster JFK's domestic credibility.
If the primary United States intent had been to warn the Soviets, a public or private statement would have sufficed.
OCTOBER E VIDENCE FROM October 1962 highlights the importance of the domestic factor and bolsters a central point: the September statements constrained the United States range of action after the missiles were discovered.
On 16 October 1962, near the end of the second Ex Comm meeting, Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara attributed the problem of Soviet missiles in Cuba to domestic, not military, considerations.
With reference to an earlier question posed to the Ex Comm participants by Bundy,58 McNamara says, ""I'll be quite frank.
It is conceivable that Dillon did not want a Republican House because he feared the political impact of such a change.
Yet he was also a strong advocate of using substantial military force against Cuba.
He may have seen this congressional argument as a tool to use in his effort to sway the president or, in this case a close presidential adviser, to support an air strike against Cuba.
Even before the crisis began, Kennedy himself was concerned about domestic politics, according to McCone, then CIA director.
I then showed the President photographs of the crates which presumably would carry, or were carrying, IL 28s, Soviet medium bombers, and were deck loaded on a ship which had arrived in Havana in the early days of October.
The President requested that such information be withheld at least until after elections as if the information got into the 59.
By 20 October, both Dillon and Sorensen supported a blockade, but Dillon wanted an air strike 72 hours after the imposition of the blockade if the Soviets had not backed down by then.
Sorensen favored using the blockade to open negotiations with the Soviets.
The wording of McCone's notes does leave open the possibility that Kennedy was genuinely concerned about his foreign policy options becoming limited by attacks from the press, public, or politicians.
The specific mention of the campaign and the elections suggests, however, that harm to Democratic politics was on his mind.
While Kenneth O'Donnell, a Kennedy adviser, claims to have downplayed the importance of Cuba in the fall of 1962, he notes that the president disregarded his advice.
We had warm discussions on how he should answer [Keating and Capehart's] attacks.
I argued that the whole question of whether Cuba was a menace to America's security should be completely ignored by the Democrats.
I insisted that the average voter could not care less about what was going on in Cuba, ands that full employment and Medicare mattered more to the people in Chicago and Pittsburgh than the debate about whether die Soviet missiles in the Caribbean were defensive or offensive in range.
Kennedy himself made at least two comments relevant to the elections once the United States learned of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Brugioni claims that in a 7 September briefing, JFK told McNamara, Rusk, and several intelligence officials that ""we have to be very careful about any evidence of offensive weapons in Cuba.
President Kennedy's more famous comment, in which he raises his fear of impeachment, was first revealed by Attorney General Robert F Kennedy in his book Thirteen Days and has since been confirmed with the release of audio tapes in late 1996.
McNamara, RFK, and Sorensen were some of the president's closest advisers on the Ex Comm.
All three link the United States hard line on Cuba to domestic political considerations.
On 19 October, in arguing for an air strike against Cuba rather than a blockade, General Curtis E Lemay, Air Force chief of staff, told Kennedy that even a blockade and political talk ""would be considered.. .as being a pretty weak response to this.
Transcribed by author from audiotape number 36. at the Kennedy Library.
See also ""JFK and the Crisis Over Cuba,"" Boston Globe, 27 October 1996; and O'Donnell and Powers, ""Johnny, We Hardly Knew Ye,"" 307.
Lower-level administration officials also commented on the domestic aspects of United States policy making.
In the light of these public commitments it was clear to the president throughout the crisis that every course of action must be measured by its effectiveness in removing the missiles.
Given the awareness demonstrated by Bundy, Robert Kennedy, McNamara, Sorensen, and others to domestic factors, the notion that talking would be an acceptable response was highly suspect.
Kennedy had tried the clear and aggressive explanation approach mentioned in Bundy's memo of 13 September; with the discovery of the missiles, the only politically palatable option left was to act by military force.
POLLS T 'HOUGH HE remained popular compared to other postwar presidents, polling data on Kennedy's popularity revealed a decline in his popularity over 71.
According to Gallup polls, he started 1962 at 78 percent, was down to 73 percent by May, to 67 percent in a poll released 21 September, and 62 percent in a poll released 10 October.
While many presidents would welcome approval ratings in die low 60s, the Kennedy administration might easily have been concerned about a negative trend-line Eke his sixteen-point drop in 1962.
Gallup polling data also suggests that the public was skeptical of Kennedy's Cuba policy.
Approval of JFK's Cuba policy was consistently 14—22 points lower than his overall popularity rating.
In pollster Louis Harris's memo of 4 October 1962, he told the president that most people disapproved of Kennedy's record on Cuban issues, 62 percent to 38 percent, despite the administration's overall popularity and strong position approaching the 1962 elections.
The administration was dealing with civil rights issues in Mississippi.
First, how one assesses the Gallup poll data in part depends on the point in the fall during which one looks at the polls.
Paterson and Brophy note that the congressional polling numbers—the party preferences of voters—stabilized from July onward, but this trend would not have been apparent to Kennedy until the September and October polls were available.
Third, this polling data only deals with possible concerns about the congressional elections, not presidential popularity and the 1964 presidential elections.
Even if Paterson and Brophy are correct in claiming that polls showed a decided Democratic advantage in the fall of 1962, the White House might still have been concerned about presidential popularity.
I always felt, and some of my colleagues did, that as a result of the Bay of Pigs, the United States government would take timely action at an appropriate time, in one way or another, to get rid of Castro before the 1964 elections because certainly this was an incident which deeply affected President Kennedy.
It was obvious in various conversations that the Joint Chiefs of Staff had had with him.
Paterson and Brophy consider only Kennedy's concern about the results of the upcoming congressional elections and ignore his concern about the reputation of his presidential administration. sympathetic Congress....the Democratic administration could never count on a working majority for its domestic proposals.
For the polling data, see Los Angeles Times, 5 November 1962, in Paterson and Brophy, ""October Missiles and November Elections,"" 92.
In October, Kennedy spoke publicly about the issue of midterm election losses.
Anderson, recorded interview by Joseph E O'Connor, 25 April 1967, 4, JFKL Oral History Program.
The Kennedy administration could still be concerned about appearing weak on Cuba even if the overall Democratic congressional prognosis looked favorable.
Theodore Sorensen, special counsel to the president, claims that on 20 October 1962, Kennedy felt ""that the whole situation was going to be very harmful to the Democrats.
Polls, either early in a campaign or on the eve of the election, are not always correct or correctly interpreted; an anticipated victory is not the same as an actual one.
ALTERNATIVE EXPLANATIONS FOR United States POLICY T WO ALTERNATIVE explanations of the September warnings and the subsequent military response to the missiles are not as convincing as the domestic politics explanation.
First, one might claim that the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba would shift the Soviet-American military balance sharply toward the Soviets and so must be met by a military response.
Second, one might suggest that the United States opted for a military response to preserve its international credibility by keeping the Soviets deterred and United States allies impressed with American strength.
The military balance explanation encompasses a range of elements including United States concerns that the Soviet missiles in Cuba would erode the United States nuclear deterrent, constitute a numerical Soviet gain in missiles and nuclear warheads, increase coverage of United States targets , reduce United States warning time of a Soviet attack on the United States, or provide cover for more Soviet missile emplacements in Cuba in the future.
Concern about the military impact of the missiles was expressed by a number of socalled hawkish participants in the crisis, including Secretary of the Treasury Douglas Dillon, Raymond Garthoff, Roger Hilsman, Director of Central Intelligence John McCone, Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Paul Nitze, General Maxwell Taylor, and the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
For both alternative explanations, I first consider whether it is a convincing explanation for the September statements and then consider whether it is a convincing explanation for the military response to the discovery of the missiles in October.
There is litde evidence, however, that either alternative explains the September warnings.
The international credibility explanation is helpful in understanding the decision to force the Soviet missiles out of Cuba but only when combined with domestic political factors.
The military balance explanation faces a significant evidentiary burden because the entire Cuban crisis took place in a period of massive United States nuclear superiority.
The United States, in a speech on 21 October 1961 by Deputy Secretary of Defense Gilpatric, had let the Soviets know that Washington was aware that Soviet nuclear warhead numbers were gready inflated.
The United States possessed an overwhelming superiority in intercontinental strategic striking power and both sides were aware of it.
Until the crisis in mid-October, the Kennedy administration and the U.S. intelligence community believed almost unanimously that the Soviets would only send defensive weaponry to Cuba, so a military balance explanation does not explain the issuance of the September statements.
A Special National Intelligence Estimate released 19 September called the possible establishment of Soviet medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba ""incompatible with Soviet practice to date and with 86.
Once the United States became aware of the missiles on 16 October, a military-strategic explanation for the choice of a blockade assumes that the 40 missiles in Cuba could make a difference in strategic terms.
Moreover, even if in reality the missiles in Cuba changed the strategic balance, the president and his key advisers did not believe that the military balance had changed.
Garthoff, a United States official who believed at the time of the crisis that the missiles did worsen the strategic position of the United States, concedes that this was not a decisive factor in the mind of Kennedy or his key advisers.
Robert A Hurwitch, recorded interview by John Plank, 24 April 1964, 136, JFKL Oral History Program.
One difficulty in sorting out these various components is that United States officials often spoke in vague terms, referring only to ""military"" or ""strategic"" factors without further specification.
The Joint Chiefs pushed for an air strike on Cuba, but Kennedy argued with them and favored a blockade.
Kennedy emphasized that the Soviet deployments in Cuba added little to the existing capabilities of ICBMS based on Soviet soil.
Furthermore, key administration officials such as McNamara and Sorensen argued that the missiles did not affect the strategic balance of power.
It seems that McNamara and Gilpatric saw all these military points as irrelevant because the missiles in Cuba did not change the fact that both the United States and the Soviet Union lacked the ability to launch a first strike without suffering a devastating retaliatory launch.
Of Kennedy's September statements in effect saying the United States would accept the large Soviet military assistance to Cuba then under way but would not accept strategic offensive missiles, Sorensen stated his belief that the president had ""drawn the line"" at what he thought the Soviets would not do.
Everyone except McCone had agreed that the Soviets would not put offensive missiles in Cuba.
Kennedy meant to draw a line that would preclude a serious change in the strategic balance, but believed no missiles was a safe place to draw it.
On 17 October 1962, Sorensen wrote that it ""is generally agreed that these missiles, even when fully operational, do not significantly alter the balance of power—that is, they do not significandy 94.
The position of the Joint Chiefs of Staff was that the United States government did indeed have to take prompt and forthright action, a, to eliminate the threat to the United States just ninety miles from home, and that this indeed did provide the ideal opportunity to get rid of the focus of infection of Communism in the Western hemisphere.
This [missile crisis] was the incident that had been looked forward to.
This second alternative is more plausible given JFK's September statements; it is focused on what might be called the political balance of power.
Hurwitch, recorded interview by John Plank, 24 April 1964, 136, JFKL Oral History Program.
It did, however, represent a political move that, it was believed, must be reversed.4 The United States had made a commitment and the Soviets had brazenly defied it.
If the United States did not take forceful action, the administration feared that United States credibility would plummet.
The fear that the Soviets would take further advantage of the United States if the United States did not respond strongly was frequently mentioned in the deliberations about Cuba policy.
Kahan and Long mention domestic politics but conclude that nondomestic factors were enough.
If Kennedy had not issued the September statements, the range of policy options available to United States decision makers would not have been exacdy the same during the October crisis.
While still problematic, nonmilitary solutions would have been a possibility.
In order to consider a world without the September statements, one first needs to assess how else Kennedy might have responded to the intense Republican pressure of late August and early September 1962.
Most of the possible responses to Republican pressure are not mutually exclusive and actual Kennedy administration efforts during the fall of 1962 relied on elements of several of these options.
In reality, Kennedy chose presidential statements as his primary response to the Republican pressure, but he could have allowed his subordinates to deal with the problem.
As the administration's response played out in actuality, a number of administration officials spoke with the press and testified on Capitol Hill.
Alternatively, he might have done nothing in response to the Republican pressure.
In actuality, the administration did prepare reports for relevant congressional committees and key members of Congress and briefed them on the situation in Cuba.
A fourth alternative would have been diversionary rhetoric or actions; Kennedy could have played up another issue to divert attention from the Cuba issue.
Even without evaluating the domestic advantages and disadvantages of each option, it is still clear that none of them would have constrained United States policy in the international arena to the same degree as the actual Kennedy statements of 4 and 13 September 1962.
Statements by other members of the administration might have created some constraints, but taking no action, privately silencing critics, or diversionary rhetoric all can be used to keep domestic political attacks within the domestic political sphere.
As I have argued earlier, without the constraints imposed by the issuance of the September warnings, a solely diplomatic response to the discovery of the missiles in Cuba might have been feasible.
In my view, the evidence overwhelmingly suggests that the absence of explicit statements would have allowed the United States to consider adopting a wider range of policy alternatives.
I came across no evidence that United States officials felt that the Soviets had violated anything other than the September statements.
When Kennedy said, on 16 October, ""I should have said that we don't care"" about Soviet offensive capabilities in Cuba, he strongly implied that the absence of the September statements would have allowed a greater range of choices in responding to the Soviet deployment in Cuba.
How great that range of action would have been depends on how Kennedy would have dealt with the Republican attacks in September other than by issuing public, presidential statements.
Secretary of State Martin asked United States officials to check whether any United States statements ""should have given Khrushchev cause for caution,"" assuming the Soviet decision to deploy the missiles was made prior to 1 July 1962.
The president, he continued, had to define what he meant by his broad pledge of 20 April 1961 to protect the ""security of the Nation"" with reference to Cuba.
In such a situation, diplomatic and rhetorical pressure might have served as an acceptable demonstration of United States credibility vis a vis the Soviet Union.
In the final analysis, we can only speculate in an informed manner about what did not happen, leaving a rather unsatisfying level of uncertainty in the counterfactual scenarios.
Even if an outcome might occur in more than one fashion should not mean, however, that explaining any one of those ways is a useless exercise; as reality played out, I contend, the September statements largely created the specific concerns about international credibility that U.S. officials voiced after the discovery of the missiles.
FURTHER LINES OF INQUIRY I F DOMESTIC politics helped shape Kennedy's policy toward Cuba, it would not be the only time that he allowed domestic political factors to shape his foreign policy decisions.
American Jews had lobbied intensely for the sale; some of them had even withheld contributions from congressional candidates until 115.
At first, JFK supported MFN status for Yugoslavia, but congressional pressure caused him to break with the State Department and oppose granting MFN status.0 My explanation of the Cuban crisis suggests several possible avenues for further research.
Lebow for instance, considers the possibility that the fear of domestic political retribution influenced the decisions of President Harry Truman and General Douglas MacArthur on United States policy toward Korea and China.
A broader version of this theory—looking at the impact of hawkish attacks on doves for being too dovish—could also be tested against cases from a variety of countries.
While I have focused on the issuance of the September statements, the origin of the idea of issuing a statement remains clouded.
According to a still limited public record, President Kennedy raises the idea at the 23 August meeting that resulted in NSAM 181.
In the final analysis, Kennedy's September warnings and policy decisions during the crisis represent a middle ground.
He seemed to aspire to be tough enough to silence his critics but not so reckless as to bring about a confrontation.
His statements in September were strongly worded in the hopes of quelling domestic dissent on United States policy toward Cuba and the Soviet buildup in Cuba.
The warnings, however, did not spell out the United States response in the event that the statements were violated.
With the discovery of the missiles in mid-October, Kennedy again sought to placate his domestic critics while avoiding a Third World War.
The blockade was a military policy; Kennedy rejected a diplomatic approach that would have generated domestic protests.
Yet he also rejected an invasion or a Pearl Harbor—like air strike, in part because he feared that the Soviets would have no choice but to retaliate.
As Fred Kaplan recendy noted, by the last days of the crisis, Kennedy—almost alone among United States officials—refused to escalate and move beyond a blockade even when it appeared that the blockade would not lead to the removal of the missiles.
