Afimgpotlon A, That the USSR will yeiaove the ,IL-29s .anj rriW arrenRO adequate ground inspection.
If the removal of the bombers la sufficiently assured and the inspection arrangements adequate, we could presumably regard the incident aa closed and give soaa form of guaranty retarding the invasion of Cuba.
These arrangements would, of course, need to include isere than a provision for SecondPhase inspection by the five Ambassadors.
But even that limited progress might indicate a suf ficiently for thc omi n g attitude to make possible soma Third-Phase solution through a nuclear-free cone or otherwise.
Assumption B That the USSR will , arrange ground inspection, buty ^ refuse to rcnove t he 1L-233 on the around that those are Cuban property* This seen* rather unlikely.
If the Cubans should agree to yield on the question of adequate ground inspection, (which means something Sore than merelecoad-Phaee arrangeoenta for inspection by the five Ambassadors) then it ia hardly likely that they would insist upon the retention of the Iw8s.
II.-2C. nor provide grrpn1 errant 3 foe ground insoactiot^ and, continuing safe/yards, , , Klyrashchov will excuse his non-oerfoTT^nce on the ground that Cuha ,1s a sovereign country^ tho IL-28s belong to tho Cubans* end Castro Is flnwllllna t o ocnalt any Horn of around inspect ipji.
Under either assumption C or D we would be presented with a major choice of policy.
Stated in large terras, two available lines of policy would seen worth consideration J First , we night take the position that Cuba la effectively a puppet of the Soviet Union since it is economically dependent on Koscow; therefore, regardless of Cuban intransigence, we would continue to look to the Soviet Union to enforce the Kennedy •Khrushchev under* takings.
Or • second, we talent take at face value the Soviet assertion that Russia cannot control Castro* In that event we would tacitly or explicitly accept the fact or fiction that Khrushchev had complied to the extent of his ability and thereafter concentrate our pressure on Cuba.
In that event, not only would we refuse to give any assurance of noninvasion, but ve would nake it clear that we could not tolerate— for reasons not only of our own security but of the security of the Hemisphere— that Castro be left in the possession of offensive weapons* Advances of.
Second, Unoof, PqUcy, The second line of policy seetss preferable from the point of view of the total American interest, for tho following reasons t U Ihi ""12£2£B3 ,^£J TOP SECRE T -31.
The shifting of the burden of responsibility vould olnljnisa the dangers of a direct confrontation vita tha USSR, which might escalate into a larger conflict, 2.
It would assist Khrushchev in extricating the USSR from an involvcacnt in Cuba vhtch is proving progressively more costly and less profitable.
It would eliminate the Cuban question froa the US-USSE dialogue and thus permit progress on other najor issues* 4.
It vould provide freedom of action for the United States to deal with Castro directly, both on its own be* half and on behalf of the other American states.
Presumably that course of action should include the following elements » It should be consistent with our position that I the United States cannot accept either tha continuance of offensive weapons in Cuba or the absenca of adequate safeguards against the introduction of new offensive ' weapons.
It should be designed to tndermiaa tha authority and prestige of Castro, both la Cuba end in tha eyea of the world* <o> Xt ■ top grout -4It should ba directed toward* setting in motion a train of event* Chat would progressively enhance the American ability to deal decisively vith Castro.
The actions described In tha Department of Defense memorandum are aa follows i ""1.
At the present time it is estimated that such action within the next few days vould require attacks on S*n Julien Air Ease vith 16 P101 strike aircraft armed vith Napaln, 2.7$"" rockets and 2033 ascawitiou, accom* panied by 3 F-1Q4/P8U aircraft equipped vith GAR 8 missile to fly low level CAP, on Holguin Air Bcsa vith 8A4D aircraft armed vith napalm and 2uni rockets and 6F8U-2/F4H aircraft as CAP equipped with Sidewinder/ Sparrow missiles and 20csa ammunition (with suppression provided by 8F3Us armed with Zunl rockets and 20am). ""b.
If the attack la delayed beyond the next 48 hours, dispersal of LL23a nay require attack on additional airfields* ""3* In the absence of air counter action, the attack should be strictly confined to tha destruction ox serious damaging of the XL 23 aircraft by the cost precise air attack means available.
If there is air counter action, tha suppression of this action by the assigned suppression aircraft vould b* required.
Direc t Military tetlczL It vould be regarded as a direct attack against Cuba and the Soviet Union eight feel compelled to intervene on Cuba's behalf In order to save face} or react elsewhere.
The inclusion of petroleum under the quarantine would have immediate and sharp reflections within Cuba.
Not only normal oil consumption, but nearly all electric power production in Cuba is dependent upon fuel oil.
For this reason, it would seem very likely taat If such a quarantine were established, compliance should be forthcoming shortly thereafter.
Arguments for Quarantine At the present time not only the CAS but the HaTO countries strongly support our insistence on adequate inspection -and, perhaps to a lesser extent on the removal of the XL-28's.
The Soviet Union misht be willing to withhold the further supply to Cuba of Items on the proscribed list In order to reduce its investment in a rapidly wasting asset; for this reason it might secretly welcome a United States blockade.
The quarantine might result In the strangulation of the Castro regime without any direct loss of life* The Imposition of a quarantine on shipments of POL would be directly relevant to the immobilization of the IL-28's.
Even were the Soviet Union to run the blockade, the resulting confrontation could perhaps be restricted to sea warfare — an arena in which we have a clear advantage.
The danger of escalation might, therefore 9 be less than in the case of any form of bombing attack on Cuba which might result in bombing reprisals elsewhere.
Arguments Asalnst Quarantine The renewed quarantine would be a direct challenge to the Soviet right of free sea transit.
It would thus fall V TOT SKCRIH? — r & iQ?-s*eiigr .9. to meet one of the criteria listed earlier — an action directly opera tins only on Cuba.
Khrushchev yielded to the threat of our quarantine once by turning hie ship around* Ha could not afford the humiliation of doing 80 a second time — especially after the missiles have been removed and ho has claimed to have complied fully with his undertakings, Khrushchev vaa willing to pull back his ships carrying sophisticated weapons to safeguard USSR technology.
The USSa could not stand idly by while the economy of a Socialist state was slowly strangled; the loss of face and appearance of impotence vould be too high a price for it to pay.
The quarantine vould be resented by several of our NATO friends, including the UK, which never acknowledged its legality.
They acquiesced before because tha limited quarantine did not affect their trade; they might wall refuse to recognise a blockade which cut off valuable shipping of POL — particularly since there is a fairly widespread feeling that we have already won our point by expelling tha missiles.
Topics extensively covered in the documentation include the failed United States -led invasion at the Bay of Pigs, renewed attempts to overthrow Castro through Operation Mongoose and Operation Northwoods, United States military contingency planning for conflict with Cuba, naval warfare, Soviet and Cuban decision making and communications during the crisis, and the repercussions for U.S.-Soviet relations, and Soviet-Cuban relations in its aftermath.
It would provide a means for imposing a constant public humiliation on Castro.
So Government can perm it national air space to be constantly invaded without demonstrating its weakness » both at hone and abroad.
Such reaction ci^ht veil take the fora of an air attack on Turkey or a csove against Berlin or sossa other vulnerable point disadvantageous to us frcza the United States point of view* Tha possibility of escalation would be 'greater than in the caso of sea warfare following * reinposed blockade.
Such a course of action vould probably be regarded by vorld opinion as excessive, and it would involve grave risks of provoking retaliation elsewhere in the world.
The decision between these alternative lines of policy turns in lar^e part on a Judgment as to the extra t to which Khrushchev night in fact be prepared and able to disengage from Cuba* If, as a result of Castro's obduracy, he could cut his investment and leave Cuba without specific security coaaitoants, ha might be willing to turn his back, while the United States took advantage of the opportunities provided by Castro* s response to continued — and necessarily harrassing — low and high level surveillance.
On the other hand, if it is felt that Khrushchev could not sit idly by while we forceably eliminated tho XL23* a and wiped out the SAM sites, the surveillance course might appear too. dangerous* On this assumption an expanded (quarantine has ouch to recommend it.
If the quarantine route is followed no military action need be taken directly against Cuba; therefore, Khrushchev vould not be called upon to respond to what he Ernst necessarily denounce as imperialist aggression.
Under these circumstances Khrushchev might be prepared to see Cuba So down tho drain through the slow strangulation of a blockade.
Georga W« Ball TOP oRcRtfc EXCISED COPY FOLLOWS vH ^geRBT^opK^ %rt 50RDE. t . tf m »■ at* rtt W» win utriiar; ■N ffwrtmriiw itfi wrUUm ttr rtiiU ftir ftm »X mart faMtitiflfr tfcdor oltaor tw»9tl« C«6w would 1m oroooatod with * aajor caoioo of oollry.
Hm 9 %,orwz 'Otoe w 4l*l k/ttf -3shtttfcaj •* *• *«<— •* ruaaaaialllty atalaiaa the itafari of a 4iratt «aa faa at a tl aa vita taa 0M1, vfcUa atgfct aaealata lata a Uf|n 2» It aaal** asalat Karmataar to aafagfttlisj taa ftraa as iamalvaaattt In Cuba vfclali la aravlas pw araaalvtly aaca costly aa4 las* vrafltaala.
Tha Ualtad Stat** will aaiataia tha araaaat / i aatU taa hawsers asa raaavaa md ■a'ataata aa-alta^ laspaatlaaa, laalwriUs asstosrlata loag tan nnaairi t an /f •*tet»t «■**•« ftataa sasssrts taa liaaillaa aaaalatlast erlala, bat ta fatwca asiaas of this fall ta aaasly, taa Halts* ttataa will ) If ao atapa ara tahsa to 1 aa a rssult of thia ttataaaat, quaraatiaa to potrolona, raljyatjifcoar saaltlaa that «a will ,ORDH it** If taa Irtinw r a a n a * mtk *L la paodttat.
At l at l aa i a a «f pw»li— i aaa ri n li i waald haw laatiUta aa* aaara xaflaatlaaa vttkta teaa.
Awwp-tf fr* 9ytnml iwt tlM aat aaljr tkOUItt AC taa pa (iwnrtii atraagly i ifMCt« — aa*, pai&apa ta a laaaar fr tba XL-2S'a« lha «aviat Oalaa aijto to willia* ta atthaaU tto tetaa* aapplj ta Cato af lUaa aa taa prawrritod list i» avaar ta raaaaa lta lmihaii la a aaplily aaatla* aaaact far thla raaaaa it mt&* aatratlr aalaaaa a Of alaafcaaa.
Anwm aaaiaat Oaa«aati— <a> Tha raaaaa* ftaiwarlna wa ul * aa a dlratt aaallaagaV ta taa Savlat rl§at af fraa aaa tnaalt.
If , aa a taaalt af Caatsa'a aat kla lavaataamt aad lam Cuba vltaaat aaaniffit aataxity aaaadtaaata, aa afaj* aa aallla* ta taaa ala aaaa lattt taa , •* taa apaaataaitlaa aaartdad by I •• t tt p a an ta tinart a ml — aad aaaaaaarily aanaaalag ~ law aad Ida* laaal aarvalllaaaa.
Oa taa ataar aaaft* if it la fait taat . ait idly ay aaila aa fataaaaly aHafattad taa XL-2t'a wiaad aat taa HM aitaa, tat aaa aaaa ta la fiaUaaad aa military diractly aatlaat Caaa; eaaxafara, aa aalladapaa ta nipaii ta aaatjai — taparlaliat aaanaalaa^T lOfmi i ORO^ £ '^OPKD^ 50/q^ ^ X mm't twrUm fete »«t»tl«tloa* to data nidi walca ya* ora ja to r a lly faalltar.
I fekla* fete aiteafelaa lo aaoalaoaatf, m* 1 trying to aaaelaaa fete tnmctli wife* fete fe lata taataafe wife* dlxaatly. tooHalas ttefe fete Savlafeo X ■-ggf * aaaaltoxafeioa &MU for feorataa tin fete iraitt I If fete ftfvUfeg will r—w fete XL-21 1 Siva aa mm ihh of mlfleftfelfft (fooalaaao «* ^ faxaal ooowoaea etet all , 2.
