Improve the American economy Women’s Rights • JFK promoted women’s rights • He created the Presidential Commission for the Status of Women • Appointed Esther Peterson to the Women’s Bureau of the Dept. of Labor Court Decisions under Kennedy • The Supreme Court Chief Justice at the time was Earl Warren.
Supreme Court Cases of the Warren Court • Brown The Board of Education of Topeka, Kansas 1954 Separate but equal is unconstitutional.
Outlawed gerrymandering-drawing congressional districts to favor the party in power.
Dwight David Eisenhower Richard Nixon JFK and the Cold War JFK developed the flexible response doctrine which stated that if nations needed help fighting off communist nations, the president would push for a build up of weapons and troops.
Nikita Khrushchev, leader of the Soviet Union and John F Kennedy Green Berets JFK created the military “Special Forces” which were a unit specifically designed to fight guerilla warfare.
Alliance for Progress • JFK sent aid to other nations, especially Latin America.
He created the Alliance for Progress which was a plan to aid Latin American governments.
Over 10 years the USA pledged $20 billion to help Latin America fight communism.
This was an organization of young Americans who went to 3rd world countries to provide humanitarian services and provide stability.
Space Race In 1962 John Glenn became the 1st American to orbit the Earth. 3 years later Saturn V launched Apollo—a capsule that launched 3 men into orbit.
July 16, 1969, Saturn V launched Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin, and Michael Collins on Apollo 11.
Bay of Pigs Fiasco The first Cold war crisis for Kennedy occurred in Cuba—90 miles off the coast of Florida.
Castro immediately established ties with the Soviet Union and this outraged Americans.
Under President Eisenhower, the CIA (Central Intelligence Agency) had trained Cuba exiles to invade the island.
On April 17, 1961, 1400 armed Cuban exiles landed at the Bay of Pigs on the south coast of Cuba.
The exiles boats hit coral reefs, JFK cancelled air support and most of the exiles were captured by Castro forces.
The invasion exposed an American plot to overthrow a neighbor’s government.
Berlin Wall June 1961 • Nikita Khrushchev, leader of the Soviet Union, wanted to stop the flood of Germans pouring out of Communist East Germany.
He demanded that USA recognize Communist east Germany and Great Britain, France and the USA pull out of West Germany.
Soviet technicians and USSR offered the USA a deal— equipment arrived at Cuba. they would remove missiles in October 22, JFK announced on TV Cuba if the USA would remove that USA spy planes had taken missiles in Turkey (Russia’s photos of Soviet long range neighbor). missiles in Cuba.
JFK ordered Test Ban treaty was agreed to by that USSR dismantle missiles USSR and USA, and already in Cuba. a HOTLINE was created so that Kennedy and Khrushchev could talk at any time.
The Alliance for Progress gave ___________________ billions of dollars in economic aid.
These countries, in return, were to institute democratic and capitalistic reforms. a.
A. train to fight in guerilla warfare B. overthrow Fidel Castro C. help with basic projects/skills like irrigation, medical, etc.
A Dwight Eisenhower C Lyndon Johnson B John Kennedy D Richard Nixon Death of a President November 22, 1963—John F Kennedy was assassinated by Lee Harvey Oswald, a Communist sympathizer.
JFK was riding in a car with his wife in Dallas, Texas when this occurred.
Lyndon Baines Johnson, VP, was sworn in as the President of the United States of America.
As Oswald was being escorted from a jail, Jack Ruby, assassinated Lee Harvey Oswald to protect others who were involved in the crime.
In 1964 the Warren Commission (a group created to investigate the Kennedy assassination) ruled that Oswald acted alone.
Lyndon Baines Johnson Beginnings • Lyndon Baines Johnson assumed the role of President on November 22, 1963.
He was sworn in on Air Force One in Dallas, Texas, on the day of Kennedy’s assassination.
Election of 1964 • In 1964 Johnson ran against Barry Goldwater who was an outspoken conservative.
The Great Society was Johnson’s vision for a more perfect and equitable nation.
Peace Corps VISTA Consumer and Environmental Protection Water Quality and Clean Air Actsupported standards for the quality of air and water.
Highway Safety Act-created training standards for emergency technicians and supported a team effort between federal, state and local highway officials.
Fair Packaging and Labeling Actrequired all consumer products to have informative labels that listed ingredients.
