FOREWORD Up to February 6th, 2012, we had every circumstantial proof that such crisis was not real but a staged sham.
Now we can ascertain and prove, without a shred of a doubt, that indeed the alleged crisis was a staged sham.
It was a ""sham"" because the world never was at the edge of a nuclear war as every talking head in the world claim.
Yes, missiles were in Cuba; yes, Khrushchev was doing this to use it as a bargain chip ; and, yes, President Kennedy knew with absolute certainty that he could push Khrushchev as far and as hard as he wished, so complete was the information possessed by the United States command about the ""goings and comings"" of the leadership of the Soviet Empire.
A NOTE, added at the end of this document, dated February 6, 2012, will explain the details of such overwhelming confirmation.
INTRODUCTION We realized that we had not been clear enough about the message that we convey in this document when originally published in 1999.
The opportunity arose or, as it is being published by German sources, the opportunity was allowed to arise, to stage a needed crisis.
Five important and clarifying NOTES are posted at the end of the document.
October 16, 2002, September 8, 2007, October 21, 2008, December 28, 2009 and February 6, 2012.
President Kennedy endorsed the Bay of Pigs invasion to Cuba in April 1961.
Sometime later, President Kennedy, while addressing the Cuban community in exile, acknowledged his personal responsibility for the failure of the Bay of Pigs invasion and the ensuing problems stemming from its failure.
He apologized and handsomely made it up to the Cuban community in exile.
Weather, was not placed on alert as it should have been by those who were responsible of doing so, had the crisis been a real one.
Weather was to allow the United States government to function in case of a nuclear threat/attack thus ""preventing our return to the stone age"", paraphrasing Mr Bourassa.
Important NOTES Added After Its Original Publication Added on October 16, 2002 Once again, the Missile Crisis of October 1962, which allegedly took the world to the brink of nuclear war, is on the news.
We have just learned that the Soviet Union had a nuclear bomb in their Embassy at Washington, D.C. in 1961.
Another concrete proof that, even if there were indeed missiles in Cuba, the ""Crisis"" was just a staged act like the world may be witnessing again today.
Added on September 8, 2007 We have providentially encountered a third physical confirmation that the Missile Crisis of October 1962 was a staged event.
This third physical confirmation (see NOTE of October 16, 2002 above for second physical confirmation) is in the form of a listing found in the Clock Timeline.
This Global Security & News Analysis page is not your average ""Internet Tabloid"" as you will see when you visit their page or review their Board membership.
In this Clock Timeline page they indicate their assessment as to how close the world is to Midnight Midnight being the time for a nuclear holocaust.
As you will see, there is no listing for the year 1962 although they have many other events/years listed when much less important events that impacted the probabilities for a nuclear holocaust, took place.
Added on October 21, 2008 President Kennedy's temperament has been defined by his ingenuity and cool head during the Cuban missile crisis, yet that was not his standard profile.
Obviously, he was part of the charade thus the uncharacteristic cool and steady hand.
Added on February 6, 2012 Providentially, we stumbled upon a book which factually confirmed that the Missile Crisis was no more than a staged act.
So far, we only had as concrete proof the article on Time magazine which reported that the Emergency Command Center of the U.S., Mt.
Weather, was not placed on alert as it should have been by those who were supposed to activate it were the crisis had been a real one.
In said book we ""met"" for the first time ever, Oleg Penkovsky, a top military Soviet intelligence officer.
Oleg Penkovsky went from a Russian World War II military hero, to becoming America's best human intelligence asset in the Soviet Union.
He believed that Nikita Khrushchev's leadership was taking the Soviet Union onto the path of destruction.
Penkovsky was the highest level Soviet officer to ever spy for the United States or British Intelligence.
The Penkovsky case is considered to have been the most successful Cold War espionage operation.
Penkovsky allowed the administrations of President Eisenhower and President Kennedy to bypass the bluster and rhetoric of Nikita Khrushchev, and to know the true facts concerning Soviet military preparedness.
The files indicate that Penkovsky's acts of espionage were able to accurately define for the United Sates the limitations of Soviet power.
Through Penkovsky, the United States learned of the number of nuclear missiles the Soviets held and where, as well as their many technical difficulties.
Soviet GRU documents, provided by Penkovsky to the U.S., exposed the friction among the Soviet high command over long term Soviet military strategy.
This was known by the United States top command since July 1962, although Kennedy acted out the drama on a televised statement on October 22.
Therefore, Kennedy was on very solid and secure ground when he issued his ultimatums to Khrushchev.
No wonder the Emergency Command Center was not activated as we pointed out in 1992 As gesture of good will towards Khrushchev (to help Khrushchev save face and give this monumental sham some respectability) Kennedy agreed to remove the United States missiles from Turkey.
Kennedy also promised, in ""exchange"" to keep his hands off Cuba which, of course, has been used as the excuse as to why the United States has never booted the Castro brothers and their pathetic revolution from Cuba.
Weather) go on full alert on Nov., 1965, when a power failure darkened much of the Northeast.
Bourassa also put the facility on a high state of readiness following Kennedy's assassination in 1963.
Surprisingly, Mount Weather was not put on alert during the Cuban missile crisis, though the situation was monitored closely.
See NOTE added on October 21st, 2008 Board membership of Global Security & News Analysis.
Should you have reason to doubt the authenticity of the document, we recommend that you access our server again and click on the ""Refresh"" or ""Reload"" button of your Browser to view the original document.
