May 7,1994 r , . :3 An Introduction to an Era In October of 1962 the world came dangerously close to nuclear destruction; arguably as close as it had ever come.
The political, economic and ideological differences between the Soviets and the Americans only served to heighten the apparent suspicion each felt toward the other.
Following the Second World War, many nations, either willingly or not, came under the economic, ideological, and military umbrellas of the two dominant superpowers.
The two camps , tested each other's mettle in several theaters of operation around the globe throughout il these formative years.
Though some of these incidents involving the new superpowers and their allies, resulted in spilling the I blood of men and the blood of theory.
None held the breath of the world with the fear of total and swift annihilation as did the confrontation which came to be know as the Cuban missile crisis.
Shortly thereafter the United States continued economic relations with Cuba, who lay only ninety miles of the United States southern shoreline.
The following January the United States Ambassador to Cuba formally protested the seizure of American property by the new Cuban government.
In the midst of feverishly supporting their policy of the containment of communism outside the Soviet Union, the United States reacted to this support by embargoing all exports to Cuba with exceptionsof medicine and food provisions.
The Russian support continued, and by January 3,1961 the United States had officially severed all diplomatic relations with CUba.
Just over one month later a Cuban IRussian trade agreement was finalized and put into operation.
The President of the United States was advised by his top military counsel as well as by the C.I.A. that there was a solution to latest move by the Soviets to extend their influence into the western hemisphere.
President Kennedy, who only a year earlier had defeated staunch Republican conservative and adamant anticommunist Richard M Nixon in a close preSidential race, was advised that if only the people of Ii Cuba were given the chance to oust Castro and his Revolutionary government they I~ would take up such an action eagerly.
If the Cuban exiles from the Battista regime who II I were in the United States were trained and supplied by the U.S, they would be able to launch such an initial revolution against Castro.
Once the exiles hit the beaches of Cuba the people would rise up and join them in their cause, or so the C.I.A. and the military 2 claimed.
A sight forthe landing was chosen on the southern coast of Cuba, once again to help extinguish any suspicion of United States involvement.
I I The operation went anyway but the way the C.I.A. and the other military counsel Ii lead the President to believe it would go.
The people of Cuba did nothing close to the eager overthrow of Castro that had been predicted.
The United States advisors pleaded with Kennedy to utilize American air support to help the operation.
No direct involvement of the United States military was said to be needed, it would not be risked now.
A few weeks later, as if to add insult to injury for the Americans, Fidel Castro announced formally that he was a socialist on May 1, 1961.
On August 29,1962 American U2 spy planes flying high over Cuba were able to verify the presence of SAM defensive missiles stations.
Wary of how the Soviets might be treating their fellow traveler Castro, Kennedy warned Moscow not to introduce any offensive missiles into Cuba under threat of United States reaction.
Khrushchev denied the Soviets had supplied or will ever supply Cuba with offensive weapons.
On October 14 of 1962 U2 photographs disclosed Medium Range Ballistic Missile and Intermediate Range Ballistic Missile launching stations under construction in Cuba.
The combination of these missiles, once operable, would be able to strike most 3 r of the continental United States, parts of Canada, as well as some of South America.
Included in the group of the approximarly fourteen people to act as advisors on the newly developed missile situation were Secretary of Defense Robert McNamara, Secretary of State Dean Rusk, CIA Director John McCone, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Maxwell Taylor, Vice President Lyndon Johnson and Attorney General Robert Kennedy, the President's brother.
Ex Comm immediately began discussing several possible courses of action to be taken.
The choices ranged from a surprise invasion of the island to not doing anything whatsoever.
The group met at all hours and in secret during the first few days, occasionally it met several times in the course of twenty four hours.
The only items that would be excluded from entry into Cuban ports would be anything considered to a component of, or an item necessary for, the completion of the offensive weapons.
The term ""quarantine"" was used as opposed to ""blockade"" for the latter is considered an act of war.
On October 22, 1962 President Kennedy went on television to inform to public of the presence of the missiles and to announce the quarantine.
For two days Soviet ships plowed toward Cuba and the awaiting American blockade.
The Kremlin denied any and all claims made by the Kennedy administration.
In the two days before the Russian ships were to reach Cuba there was much debate and accusation on either 4 r p side.
The United States accused the Russians in the United Nations of secretly placing missiles in Cuba, severely altering the nuclear status quo.
The U2 photographs were shown by the United States and denounced by the Russians as fakes.
It was finally proven, however, that MRBM and IRBM silo launchers were being constructed in Cuba and that the construction was being performed and supplied by the Soviet Union.
On October 24 the Soviet ships finally reached the United States quarantined area.
Ex Comm and President Kennedy waited for the next move to be made by the Soviets.
On October 28, after receiving two somewhat different and contradictory offers from the Kremlin, Kennedy agreed not to invade Cuba and Khrushchev agreed to remove all the missiles from the sites.
In private Kennedy allowed the removal of United States Jupiter missiles stationed in Turkey to be part of the negotiations.
The administration maintained that the removal of the Jupiters was already being discussed before the crisis as they were of questionable operable status.
November 20, 1962, the United States announced the removal from Cuba of the last Russian MRBM and IRBM missiles.
The traditionalist interpretation condemns the placement of missiles in Cuba by the Soviet Union as an act of direct provocation.
The traditionalists applaud the actions taken by President Kennedy and the members of Ex Comm as intelligent, necessary and correct.
They portray the outcome of the crisis as an American foreign policy victory.
Kennedy himself won praise from the public as well as from the press in the days immediately following the Soviet arms withdrawal.
The revisionist interpretation claims that the people of the United States, the Soviet Republics, and those of the world were brought to the brink of nuclear Armageddon because the Kennedy administration was merely playing a domestic political game.
It condemns the actions taken by the American government as mere diplomatic fumbling.
A more indepth look at these interpretations can give insight into not only this major historical event, but also can provide a compelling detail on how the broader subject of history in general is viewed, interpreted, and remembered.
The Traditionalist Interpretation The traditionalists seem to 6 r find in President Kennedy at the resolution of the crisis the great leader they thought was within JFK and had yet to emerge.
Incidents early on in his presidency, most notably the Bay of Pigs failure, had supporters wondering if the charisma displayed during the debates against Nixon prior to the election would translate into equally impressive statesmanship.
Even before the crisis in Cuba some historians were making way for the predicted greatness of the administration to emerge.
Historian Herbert S Dinerstein even took the Bay of Pigs failure and made Kennedy's decisions look prudent and wise.
Dinerstein wrote, ·After a brief period of hesitation Kennedy broke off the Bay of Pigs venture because, being basically prudent, he decided the game was not worth the candle.
It was this ·calculated caution· and ·deliberateness· that traditionalists found in the deCision making process that surrounded the crisis in Cuba.
The placement of missiles in Cuba by the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics represented a clear and hostile threat and required a response from the United States.
The missiles placed so close to shores of the United States and placed there in the secretive manner in which they were represented a direct and glaring change in the nuclear status quo.
Whether or not the missiles were to actually change the strategic balance between the superpowers is a debatable issue even among traditionalists themselves.
Even Sorensen agreed that with the United States clear lead in the arms race at the time, the balance of power was more than likely shifted in appearance only.
Arguably then for the traditionalist, the missiles represented some kind of threat to the safety of the role of the United States as a western hemisphere leader, its citizens and the effectiveness of its international foreign policy.
The traditionalist argument now moves into the question of what to do now that a problem of national security has been defined.
The military advisors sought either an all out invasion of Cuba, or surgical military strikes against the installations themselves.
Other factions of the Committee pushed for the use of diplomatic measures utilizing the Organization of American States and the United Nations as mediating bodies.
In the early meetings of the group the concept of nonreaction was discussed as a way to halt Khrushchev from inflating the importance of the missiles.
Even Kennedy himself realized the difficulty in coming to a decision everyone in Ex Comm 8 could, at the very least, live with, if not completely support.
A number of members had changed their minds quickly on the solution they felt was best.
Kennedy was expressing concem for the correctness of the decision he would eventualy implement given the situation it was made under.
It allowed Khrushchev time to rethink his actions while keeping any further weapons from entering Cuba.
Most importantly, the traditionalists would claim, it left the United States in control of the situation.
For this school of thought the Russians would either have to pull back or take some kind of aggressor action.
The quarantine would either make the Soveits look weak or extremely hostile.
The blockade was put in place and the Soviet ship acknowledged it soon thereafter on October 24, 1962.
For three days terse negotiations took place between the Russians and the White House in an extremely tense and anxious atmosphere.
On 9 p the twenty eighth of October Khrushchev and Kennedy agreed on terms for withdrawal of the missiles and the retraction of the blockade.
The crisis itself was not completely resolved at this time but the most intense segments had passed.
Traditionalists reflect on this aftermath period as one of great success and perseverance for President Kennedy and members of the Executive Committee.
Some of those closest to John Kennedy during the crisis placed with him praise which equalled him with the great men of history.
Prime Minister Macmillan, though not directly involved in the negotiations, was a NATO member.
His country would have most definitely felt the shock waves of the crisis, possibly including a nuclear strike, had the situation accelerated from the blockade into full scale military engagements.
This is the context in which the traditionalist crisis view holders use the Prime Ministers statements.
The traditionalists maintains the notion that, viewed overall, the Cuban missile 10 r p crisis is to be considered an American triumph.
The actions of the President are to be praised as cautious, firm, and courageous.
He consulted with intelligent and appropriate individuals who returned to him thoughtful, useful, and largely correct information which he used in formulating responses to the aggression presented him.
The decisions of JFK and the Executive Committee with regards to their diagnosis of the Soviet build of missiles in Cuba as a threat to the United States were correct, and the decision to enforce a naval blockade of the island was the best of all possible tactics presented.
The American government showed its allies and foes alike that it is committed to remaining firm in its political posture and would not allow its policy to be compromised so close to home.
The traditionalist school claims that the Soviets provoked and the Americans persevered.
The West was once again safe due to the efforts and actions of President John F Kennedy and the Executive Committee of the National Security Council.
The Revisionist Interpretation Revisionist Cuban missile crisis theorists dispute each of the claims made by the traditionalists concerning the success of the crisis, as well as bring to light other 11 r p symptoms that lead to their conclusion that the crisis was not the sweeping American foreign policy success story court historians are claiming.
The revisionists hold fast to the claim that Kennedy needlessly risked war to satisfy doubts about his own international foreign policy image and to bolster his own popularity which would help return a Democratic Congress later in November.
They question the threat of the missiles and hold the naval blockade to be an inept and clumsy decision.
The use of the Executive Committee during the crisis is also questioned by revisionists, who believe that overall the crisis was resolved due to a moderate Soviet military attitude and sheer luck on the side of America.
The first area of United States policy toward Cuba during the crisis to come under fire by the revisionists was the decision by JFK and Ex Comm that the IRBM and MRBM missiles were a large enough threat to warrant action.
He supported his position with the Horelick Air Force Study, which investigated the strategic importance of the missiles.
The Horelick study went on to say that the number of silos constructed in Cuba were far too small to constitute Soviet first strike capability.
In addition, the study maintained that given the available technology of the time, the Soviets would have had difficulty in timing the launches of the missiles in Cuba with that of the missiles in the Soviet Union.
Even Secretary of Defense McNamara candidly remarked that • ... a missile is a missile.
The question of the revisionists about the true nature of the missiles actual or perceived threat capability did not rest in the domestic sphere.
Revisionists also point to the possible perception European nations might have to the reaction of the United States to the situation.
Another point in regards to the actual or perceived threat of the Soviet silos comes as an attack on the Kennedy administration's claim that the missiles themselves were of an offensive nature.
New Left writer and Canadian philosopher Leslie Dewart argues that these so called offensive weapons were nothing of the kind.
He goes on to give an example of a rifle or pistol being offensive in relation to an unarmed man.
This school of historic thought also takes issue with the way Ex Comm had operated throughout the crisis.
Traditionalists long have applauded the fact that Ex Comm operated without an official leader.
On the occasion when the presence of Kennedy, merely by the nature of his pOSition, made such open discussion difficult he would make himself 14 r r conspicuously absent.
The revisionists condemn this leaderless style and the fact that few men on the Committee had either military or diplomatic relations experience as a wholly preposterous way to run negotiations, especially given the nature of the ones being run at the time.
The view held by traditionalists about the effectiveness and intelligence of the decision to quarantine Cuba also falls under heavy revisionist scrutiny.
The blockade is charged with being wholly ineffective towards the apparent goal of missile removal.
For Acheson the quarantine did not remove the cHance of military aggreSSion, it merely postponed it, and in doing so made it possibly more potent.
Acheson argued that the quarantine first allowed the Soviets time to finish the launch sites already in progress, and secondly gave the Russians the option of ramming the blockade.
It left the Soviets in ·control of the future· , not the United States.
They called the quarantine a ·blunt instrument· that was entirely ·ill adapted to the purpose"" of removing the Kremlin weapons.
For the revisionists the quarantine 15 r was not warranted, not effective, and certainly not legal.
The final major point presented by most revisionists to further their critical examination of the crisis is not one usually addressed directly by most traditionalists, if it is addressed at all.
If the court historians do pay attention to this issue it is usually done as a side note or as a retaliation due some revisionist attack.
This final major r point of contention centers around the idea that Kennedy took the stance he did in Cuba for domestic political purposes.
JFK, it is charged, wished to return a Democratic congress to the Hill and improve his own' popularity standings.
Sorensen and other traditionalists vehemently deny any domestic political motivations on the part of Kennedy.
Revisionists are quick to retort that if Kennedy was truly sO concemed he might have sacrificed his chances in the election to try and negotiate.
Revisionists contend, Stone among them, that if Khrushchev had not backed down when he did, but instead had waited for the decision of a United Nations debate, the Republicans would have accused President Kennedy of being both gullible and weak.
Accusations like that could have cost the Democrats their majority in the House of Representatives.
Such accusations would be tough obstacles to climb in any time period of American politics.
There are others in the revisionist school who agree that Kennedy did more than likely hold the question of the coming elections in his mind throughout the crisis negotiations.
They, however, do not feel that this was indicative of some kind of malice on the part of JFK, nor that it was inappropriate.
Nor is it to question the motives of those who took part in those exhausting, often stormy meetings during those thirteen days.
Steel seems to be the middle ground between the traditionalists portrayal of Kennedy as the political altruist and the hard core revisionists, who tried to portray JFK as some kind of politically evil minded, callous, uncaring leader.
The revisionist view of the Cuban missile crisis attacks the notions set forth by the administration at the time and those by the traditionalists to come directly afterward.
They 17 make noise as to whether or not the Russian missiles were technically offensive in nature.
They condemn Ex Comni structurally, procedurally, and on its decided courses of action.
And finally the courageous image of JFK cultivated by the traditionalists is tarnished with accusations of sheer political gain as motivation throughout the crisis.
It has been stated in more recent years that though the Cuban missile crisis was an important event in the world of political negotiations, the times and current situations of pOlitical realms throughout the globe have changed so much as to put the crisis into antiquity.
Even given this trend in current diplomatic thought, an accusation such that the Viet Nam War, and Lyndon Johnson's decisions about that war, had begun to gestate during the Cuban missile crisis is a formidable one indeed.
Kennedy refused to use traditional methods of diplomacy that would have resolved the crisis quietly, 2.
He did so because he needed a foreign policy 'victory', 3. the intelligence analysis and data interpretation had been obtuse, 4. the administration did not understand why the Soviets would find it politically advantageous to put missiles in Cuba, and finally, 5. the stakes were not so high as the public was lead to believe.
Revisionists contend that the overall crisis was· ..the best of therapies for Kennedy's nagging inferiOrity complex·, and that the· ... deeper reaches of the story are 18 avoided, as if we feared to look too closely in the larger implications· the affair in Cuba would bring out.
These implications might, revisionists might say, reveal some flaw in the fabric of the porcelain complexion that is remembered to be one of the JFK administration.
Recent Deyelopments • There have been a number of new developments concerning the Cuban missile crisis in the last decade.
The governments of the United States, the former Soviet Republics, and even that of Cuba itself has declassified literally tons of materials formerly unavailable to scholars.
It has allowed those involved in the crisis to have a greater understanding of what the other side knew and how that effected the decisions made.
It also givers the Russians, Americans, and Cubans the chance to see how their own side was perceived by the other two.
The declassification of material has allowed these govemments to see how their decisions were perceived and acted upon.
It has allowed them to judge whether or not the messages sent out were understood in the manner they were meant.
The Cuban missile crisis may now be looked at with greater objectivity and therefore as a kind of case study in brinkmanship.
Held in the last decade, this conference featured the surviving members of Ex Comm, many department members from the Kennedy administration, and even a select group of statesmen from Cuba and the Soviet Union.
They assembled to discuss the Cuban missile crisis in the context of its own time period as well as the lessons that may have been learned. 19 r They discussed its importance in regards to what it has to offer diplomats, politicians, and military strategists of the contemporary age.
The break up of the former Soviet Republics has also been useful in the understanding of the crisis.
Up until this decade, the contribution by the Soviet government to the objective documentation of the crisis has been minimal. when there was information contributed it was characteristically biased.
Within the last two years writers in the former Republics have been allowed greater freedom in workrng on the Caribbean Crisis, as it is called there, as well as a relatively more relaxed atmosphere in regards to the accessing of information.
There have been a number of works by Russian scholars and those using information gathered from Russia published that are true historical records published in the last year.
Evaluation of InterpretatIons Both interpretations of the. crisis offer thoughtful and thorough examinations.
Each overall argument made by the two schools is consistent with the viewpoint put forth by that particular school.
The revisionists quickly try to dismiss the claim made by the Kennedy administration that the missiles were a threat warranting action.
First they argued that the missiles did not truly change the balance of power neither in fact, nor appearance.
Secondly they argued that action by the United States toward the placement of these missiles would not be understood by the 20 member of NATO and the Untie~ Nations.
The reason for this misunderstanding would stem from the United States having its own Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
One area that this view did not mention in this stage of its argument is the thought process going on in American foreign policy at the time.
Kennedy had defeated conservative Republican Nixon in the 1960 elections.
Nixon had risen to prominence in his career partly due to his support of Senator MaCarthy's political purge of communism in the United States government in the 1950's.
Any move by a government in the world toward becoming communist was seen as directed by the Soviets themselves.
The war in Korea put the Communist backed North against the United States backed South in a perfect example of the kind of conflicts with which this policy dealt.
For Kennedy not to have at least stated that he and his administration considered this bold move by the Communists to be a threat could have meant the end of his career.
Those in the Republican party would have labeled him 'soft' on Communism.
This brings up the next part of the revisionist argument that needs to be pointed out.
They claimed that Kennedy used the crisis to increase his popularity and to return 21 r~-r , the Democratic majority back to the House of Representatives.
It seems the information complied would not necessarily lead to the conclusion that is the major deciding factor motivating Kennedy.
It does appear that the pOlitics of the up coming election were, at the very least, in the back of Kennedy's mind.
The pOlitical motivation should not be seen as a necessarily incorrect or 'bad' one.
If Kennedy had not returned a Democratic House in November of 1962 it would have made it extremely difficult to deal with the crisis had it persisted longer.
If more military action had been needed it would certainly been more difficult to get the supportive legislation needed from a House Republican majority.
The Republicans could have certainly changed their attack on Kennedy once the elections were over if they had won.
They could have stopped saying Kennedy was 'soft' on Communism and begun to say he was needlessly endangering the United States.
Such maneuvers have been made by both parties throughout many different military conflicts in United States history.
The revisionistS seemed to want Kennedy to go from hardnosed statesmen to some kind of President-in-a-vacuum.
The traditionalists said the leaderless nature of Ex Comm was an advantage to the decision making process.
The revisionists used a number of examples to counter this claim successfully.
First they argued the leaderless nature of the Ex Comm meetings were ineffective.
Without someone to focus the debates, the arguments got off target or even were made to serve the interests of the departments involved.
With a definite leader the meetings could have had an agenda to follow and been more efficient.
This 22 efficiency was vital to correct decision making according to the revisionists.
Another point for the revisionists is that the leaderless style of Ex Comm was dangerous.
It is not to say that the men being consulted by the President were not of high intellect.
Nor is it to say that these men were not capable of giving thoughtful, useful advice.
It is alarming that the people making the decisions in the crisis were not directly lead by the President in their discussions and that very few of these men outside Kennedy were accountable to the people by way of elections.
The traditionalists seem to be caught up in the sentimental memory of Kennedy and Camelot.
The revisionists sometimes seem to want to tarnish this image as much as the court historians wish to protect it.
With the recent developments concerning the crisis a middle interpretation seems to be slowly emerging.
It takes into account Kennedy's cultural contributions to the United States of the early 1960's as the traditionalist would like.
This new moderate school also takes the objective approach in evaluating his performance taking into account the sentimental frame of reference.
This view can be noticed in Steel's quotation in the revisionists section of this paper.
This interpretation has been made possible largely through the continued amount of information being made available, as well as the constructive use of hindsight.
The main purpose of this paper was to reflect on the different ways in which noted scholars view of specific event in history for the purpose of detailing that event in itself.
In the process, this study illustrates how history is recorded, sometimes subjectified, and then rebroadcast for the nest batch of readers, writers, and students to pour over and contemplate.
The court historians and the reviSionists attitudes offer opposing views about the Cuban missile crisis.
Their ongoing disagreement demonstrates that the pursuit of history is as active and organic concept.
It is not the discussion of dusty figures in the nonconsequential past.
It is what we as historians and students make it, for better or for not.
To say that it is difficult to arrive at a conclusion on something like the Cuban missile crisis is only to prove the point.
Each time some event, person, or era is returned to the light of contemporary academe, it is allowed a fresh start and a new appearance.
