Sergei Khrushchev Cuba at a Crossroads, The New American Strategy, is the most detailed account of Cuba United States relations to date.
The book states that the United States embargo assists the Castros by creating a permanent state of emergency that links dissent to foreign interference and the embargo encourages the disaffected to abandon Cuba.
The book chronichles the influence of the Mafia and the military's role today.
Sergei Khrushchev is the son of the late Nikita Khrushchev, whose assistance was key to the consolidation of the Cuban Revolution and the rule of Fidel Castro after 1959.
Khrushchev lectures on Russian economic and political reforms, United States Soviet relations, the Soviet space program and Nikita Khrushchev's economic, political and security reforms.
He is profiled in Who's Who in the World, Who's Who in the United States, Who's Who of Contemporary Achievements, International Authors and Writers, International Who's Who of Intellectuals and Contemporary Authors Gala Research.
He received the Lenin prize for scientific research, the Prize of the Council of Ministers of the U.S.S.R., the Hammer and Sickle Gold Star as well as several awards for achievements in space and computer research.
We learned that when the Soviet stopped subsidizing Cuba and they didn't collapse.
It's a domestic issue."" former National Security Advisor Brent Scrowcroft, May 2008 The aim of this book is break the stalemate in Cuba policy in 2009.
This will mean abandonment of the embargo and normalization of relations without preconditions the Cubans are unlikely to accept.
Detractors will no doubt dismiss it as naive coddling of Castro, but this book is not an apology for the Castro dictatorship and the end of the embargo does not imply a retreat of American power or a passive foreign policy, as embargo sponsors would have us believe.
This book will not argue against the embargo on humanitarian grounds just as it rejects arguments for the embargo because of human rights violations in Cuba.
There were times when the embargo made sense and was plausible as a strategy to protect American interests.
In 1960, world trade was heavily skewed towards American firms and Cuba, a banana republic, was wholly dependent on the United States.
When the Soviets expired, Congress passed amendments called Mack, Toricelli and Helms-Burton to ensure Castro's demise; but by then his power, as queen-bee of the Cuban Revolution, was institutionalized.
If the embargo were going to oust Castro and company after the Soviet collapse, it would have done so by 1994.
Actually, it does work, but not the way we have been misled to believe.
It is used as a taxpayer sponsored, affirmativeaction welfare program by savvy exiles.
A bill is introduced and passed in Congress to fund the entity and appropriations are made for it.
Government programs such as the ineffectual Radio Marti also fit this description.
Felipe Sixto worked for the Center for a Free Cuba, which describes itself as an independent, nonpartisan institution dedicated to promoting human rights and a transition to democracy and the rule of law in Cuba.
In July 2007 Sixto joined the Bush White House Office of Intergovernmental Affairs and was assigned to deal with state legislators, Native American groups and Hispanic officials on issues such as Cuba, Puerto Rico, health, labor, transportation, the environment and energy.
In March 2009 Sixto was convicted and sentenced to 30 months in prison for the theft of $579,247 from the Center for a Free Cuba.
As Ali stood over Liston in triumph, photographer Neil Leifer captured one of the most iconic moments in sports history.
Forty years later, this image was matted, framed and prominently displayed in your new Senate office suite.
Less powerful than Liston, Frazier and Foreman, he understood how to unnerve his opponents before a bout.
He retired his Anglo name, rejected Christianity and went to jail for refusal to serve in Vietnam.
In 1996 and 98 Ali traveled to Cuba with medicine supplies blacklisted by the United States embargo.
He did it because he understood that American conglomerates dominate the pharmaceutical and medical fields worldwide.
He also knows that even if food and medicine were exempt from the embargo, the financial carnage the embargo leaves in its wake leaves Cubans like his friend Teofilo Stevenson, unable to buy.
Olympic gold medallist Stevenson, dubbed the Cuban Ali because of likeness and similarities, turned down Don King's offer of five million dollars to go pro in 1976 because he would have to defect from Cuba to accept it.
Mohammed Ali, a UN. ambassador for peace, has called on the United States to end the embargo on Cuba.
The United Nations General Assembly has condemned the United States embargo on Cuba every year since 1992 and demanded the United States ""take the necessary steps to repeal or invalidate"" it.
The United Nations Population Fund condemned the embargo for deterioration of Cuban living standards.
It notes that the embargo increases the cost of milk for children by 600% and puts medical equipment out of reach.
The United States embargo against Cuba is described as ""the longest and most severe set of trade sanctions ever imposed on any one nation"" by international health organizations.
Mr President, it is not a coincidence that the embargo is nearly fifty years old and Fidel Castro holds the world record for non-inherited longevity in power.
Now is the time, and I know of no better way to do it, than to boldly announce that the United States will heed the call made every year to drop the embargo on Cuba.
Unable to dislodge Castro, the ever-frustrated embargo on Cuba has metastasized into an absurd, unsustainable policy at odds with who we are.
Doomed to failure 8 because of its unilateral nature, the embargo has become an ersatz blockade.
On February 28, 2004, James Sabzali, a Canadian citizen, was charged with seventy-five counts of violating a 1917 United States law the Trading with the Enemy ""Act"" and one count of conspiracy.
He was convicted of selling water purification supplies to Cuba mostly from Canada, but also from the United States, in violation of the embargo.
Sabzali, a Canadian, ended up with a criminal record for violating American law even though he lived in another country when he sold goods to Cuba.
When he visited the U.S, he was charged with smuggling, taken to court, given a year's probation and fined $10,000.
The hapless Sabzali spent three years in the United States under strict travel restrictions, including fourteen months when forced to wear an electronic monitoring bracelet and restricted to no more than an hour drive from his home even to visit his wife and children back in Canada.
The irony is that the extended family of Osama bin Laden was allowed by the Bush White House and State Department to leave the United States immediately after 9/1 1 on private jets even as the FAA. ordered all aircraft grounded.
American intelligence never got the chance to question the bin Ladens about the attack on the W.T.C. and Pentagon.
I think you will agree, Mr President, that safe drinking water is a human right.
Certainly, had a water borne epidemic appeared, proponents of the embargo would have seized upon it as proof of Castro's disregard for human life.
At the same time, they zealously condemn businessmen like Sabzali, whose crime was to sell Cubans the wherewithal to provide clean water, defeating the United States embargo.
Unable to speak in public, he is reduced to photo ops with visiting dignitaries and quaint reflections in Granma, Cuba's daily rag.
Fidel, Raul and the Cuban government certainly don't have the military or economic might to challenge the United States.
Castro has no corporate public relations mouthpiece to compete for influence in the media outside Cuba, no entertainment empire to shape values and perceptions of young people, no recording industry or marketing gurus to shape public opinion outside Cuba about anything.
But when Oliver Stone, Kevin Costner or Naomi Campbell does lunch with Castro, the embargo crowd goes ballistic.
With the exception of sunshine in December, Cuba doesn't produce anything of value that could threaten United States market share of world trade if the embargo were lifted.
Cuba has little of importance to sell but needs everything, and that alone is why the embargo has been able to persist for so long.
Cuba's peasant cuisine won't lure Americans away from Boston Market and Popeye's.
In spite of all the embargo rhetoric about the need to punish Castro for being a dictator and a stain on human rights, the truth is that United States foreign policy is un-burdened with such trifles.
Republican and Democratic presidents and congress-people alike have advocated cruel dictators, hard-line Communists, petro-monarchs and rude oligarchs... and won accolades for doing so.
Thirtyfive years after 55,000 Americans were killed to keep the dominos from falling in south-east Asia , and when that failed, an economic embargo applied to make sure the Communists never recovered after being bombed back to the Stone Age, Nike has three footwear factories and Dominoes pizzas are falling on dinner tables in Vietnam, a one party, totalitarian Communist state.
Prominent churches on Havana's key 5th Avenue are open for worship seven days a week.
Jimmy Carter, outspoken on human rights issues everywhere, visited Cuba in 2002 and called for the embargo to be lifted.
Mr President, it is inconceivable that, against the better judgment of these men, the embargo could have value as a tool to change Cuba for the better.
Compensation claims in Cuba by nationals of Canada, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Spain and France were resolved long ago.
The disruption of ties between the United States and Cuba, codified by the embargo, makes a compensation plan impossible and, using circuitous logic, serves as justification to continue the embargo.
Complicating matters further, losses sustained by Cuba as a result of the embargo give Cuba a claim for damages and impede its ability to pay.
Mr President, Cuba's automotive fleet is the oldest in the world, a rolling museum. 60,000 specimens of battered, pre1960 Detroit muscle and chrome roam the island, lost in a time warp.
Maintained by home made spare parts, infinite patience and strong will, the ancient fleet has become a source of pride and a tourist attraction.
It is also a metaphor for Cuba's political system and United States policy.
The ancient fleet, Cuba's political system and the United States embargo are all obsolete.
To help answer this question, we need to get a grip on Cuba past and present.
For far too long, Cuba has been distorted through the monochrome lens of Cold War and Florida domestic politics.
Florida, that bastion of intellectual rigueur, is home base of the Cuban diaspora and the Magic City is touted as la segunda capital de los cubanos.
But Cuban political upheaval and the exiles it generates were common hitherto the EastWest conflict or the 20th century itself.
Uncovering this remote history is essential to have an informed discussion about Cuba and the Castros today.
Maine, which was blown up in Havana harbor in 1898 under questionable circumstances.
These wars were certainly much more pivotal and costly than the Spanish-American War.
The statue is flanked by equally impressive bronze behemoths of Bolivar and San Martin, gifts from Venezuela and Argentina in 1916 and 1950.
On January 20, 2009, in Washington, D.C., I stood on Pennsylvania Avenue and observed a remarkable lady walk down the center of the street.
She wore a lemongrass yellow wool lace shift dress with matching overcoat designed by one Isabel Toledo, a Cuban native.
The unlikely prospect that Michelle Robinson of Chicago, better known as Michelle Obama, would make such a walk, along with the symbolism of her attire and unlikely fashion designer, were not lost upon me.
If I were a babalao, I would divine the near presence of Ochun, ruler of the sweet waters of the world, its brooks, streams and rivers, and the embodiment of love and fertility.
The youngest of the orishas, she retains the title of Iyalode She heals with her sweet waters and with honey, which she also owns.
The rivers and streams she rules over always head towards her sister, Yemaya, but she does so on her own circuitous route, as rivers to the sea.
She is the most beautiful of the orishas and once saved the world by luring Ogun out of the forests using her feminine wiles.
In her manifestation as Ibu Ikole, she saved the world from drought by flying up to heaven.
Michelle Obama' s stroll in that yellow dress is an omen of great change coming to Cuba's relationship with the United States.
There is disagreement about whether the first Cubans left Florida and skipped down the keys or navigated to Cuba from the Orinoco Basin of South America.
The Tainos moved from Quisqueya as they engaged in a power struggle with the Arawak and Siboney.
Convinced that he was on the Asian mainland, the land of Kubla Kahn, the name Cuba was adapted.
The Spanish empire's heavy-handed censorship makes fact-finding elusive.
In 1478 Spain's King Ferdinand V and Queen Isabella, the benefactors of Colon's voyage, requested that Pope Sixtus IV permit the Spanish Inquisition.
Subsequently thousands of Spaniards were burned alive and in 1492 the Jews were expelled from Spain.
By 1560 it was expressly prohibited ""to print or sell any book on the Indies ""without previous and special license"" of the Crown, in addition to the Holy Inquisition's ecclesiastical censorship of all printed matter.
In 1641 the king of Spain decreed that no history books could be published in the Indies.
So posterity is left with the brief remarks of the first Castillians to traverse the Antilles.
On August 2, 1492, three eighty-ton caravels left Sevilla and set sail for the Canary Islands.
After various ship repairs and other preparations, they headed west in search of the westward passage to Asia.
On the night of October 1 1 , the Nina, the Pinta and the Santa Maria spotted land.
When Colon returned to Spain on January 4, 1493, several crewmembers stayed behind.
On September 25, from Cadiz, Cristobal Colon began his second voyage to Cuba.
He brought 17 ships and 1,500 men, including missionaries, soldiers and laborers.
There are about one hundred stowaways, as well as agricultural equipment, cattle and seeds.
Among the crewmembers to return from the first voyage was Diego Velazquez de Cuellar who would later become the Governor of Cuba and founder of both Havana and Santiago, Cuba's first capital, after subduing all Indo-Cuban resistance.
In 1508 Sebastian de Ocampo circumnavigates Cuba and proves that it is an island and in 1509 Ponce de Leon begins the conquest of Puerto Rico.
Juan de Esquivel, under orders of Cristobal Colon's son Diego, colonizes Jamaica.
Under the command of Diego Colon Moniz , Christopher Columbus's first born son and 4 l Viceroy of the Indies, Velasquez defeated and captured the Taino commander Hatuey, putting an end to the latter' s two year guerilla campaign to roll back Spanish power.
For these they fight and kill, for these they persecute us and that is why we must drive them back into the sea.
These tyrants tell us they adore a God of peace and equality, but they take our land and make us slaves.
Before the indigenous leader's execution, a Spanish priest asked him if he would accept Jesus and go to heaven.
Landowner Amador de Lares gets permission to bring four African slaves from Hispaniola.
Let's use this epochal transition around 1500 as our starting point for future projections.
In 1519 conquistador Hernan Cortes prepares his fleet in Cuba and sets sail for Aztec Mexico.
After the conquest, Havana becomes the natural stopping point for fleets returning to Spain.
On December 17 the first Catholic mass in Havana was held under a Ceiba tree and in 1520 the first large group of African slaves arrive in Cuba to work in a mine named Jaugua.
In 1533 the first recorded African slave revolt in Cuba takes place at the Jobabo gold mines.
Their heads were brought back to Bayamo to quiet the terrified colonists.
The ""laziness"" was actually a form of passive resistance to colonization.
The reader may ask what this ancient, sordid history has to do with modern issues like human rights, elections, the embargo, the Castros' reign and United States Cuba relations.
The answer is that contemporary Cuban identity, religion, language, culture, economy and attitudes are the product of this history and the diplomat, businessman and others who would understand Cuba today must know it.
Resistance to Authority Hatuey's legendary martyrdom would make actor Will Smith proud.
Today, he is considered the 'First National Hero' of Cuba and his personality has reincarnated itself through the centuries.
We will return to Hatuey and his conditioned power as we dig into contemporary Cuban attitudes.
For two and a half centuries after the Spanish conquest of Cuba, the colony remained under Castilian control.
Hernan Cortes launched the conquest of the Aztec Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 19 empire from Santiago de Cuba and the Spanish galleons laden with thousands of tons of gold and silver from Mexico and Peru made their way to Spain via Cuba.
In 1715 the Factoria was formed to purchase all Cuban tobacco at fixed prices and sell it abroad.
In 1717 the Estanco de Tobacco is established in Havana with offices in Bayamo, Trinidad and Santiago de Cuba.
In 1727, three hundred slaves cast off their chains at Quiebra-Hacha, west of Havana.
Massive force is used to beat back and prevent the revolt from spreading.
In 1740, the Compania de Comercio, another Mercantilist royal monopoly, is created to handle the booming import/export business in Havana.
It soon acquires a bad reputation with Cubans, who complain they are being fleeced and that commerce is restricted in order to keep prices high.
It is plain to see that conquest, colonialism, exploitation, rebellion and power struggle define Cuba's past.
Broad trends and mood swings revolve around these themes even if Cuban individuals today are oblivious to them.
Because of its topography and latitude, Cuba has a competitive advantage in agriculture.
For centuries it produced an export surplus of sugar, tobacco and citrus.
Today, agriculture in Cuba is in a shambles and Cuba is a net importer of foodstuffs, much of it from the United States through loopholes in the embargo put in place to placate midwestern agricultural interests.
My observation is that less than 5% of the products in Cuban stores originated in Cuba.
Imported foodstuffs are almost always high value-added, packaged and finished products.
Elite Cuban consumers pay exorbitant prices with remittances sent to them from abroad.
All remittances must be converted in to Cuban Convertible Pesos to become legal tender.
The CUC is pegged to a basket of real currencies including the Euro, Swiss Franc and the USD and is reset daily by the Cuban treasury and banking authority.
Its value is not affected by inflation, Cuba's current account, reserves or credit rating.
It is a creature of administrative fiat similar to the tokens circulated in city transit authorities and it was created to supplant the USD in response to Bush Administration pressure on banks worldwide to refuse Cuban deposits in dollars.
They are paid for via credits to Cuba granted by the government where the goods originate.
This arrangement helps explain why Cuba must first be on good diplomatic and political terms with a foreign government in order to purchase products from private companies located in the same country.
The notable exception is the U.S., which requires all payments in cash up front.
Cuba plays ball to snub Miami and show the American business community that Cuba is a worthy customer and the embargo should end in the name of greater profits.
Essentially, the Cuban domestic CUC market consists of the inflow of foreign products swapped for external funding transiting through the country while nominated as Cuban currency.
Cuban labor productivity, wages, innovation, technology, savings and employment have no bearing on consumption, prices, quality or living standards in the CUC economy.
Cuban sugar production has collapsed in recent years.% of arable land remains fallow.
Antiquated industry, lack of labor incentive and hurricanes are to blame.
The laborintensive sugar industry dominated the Caribbean and had an insatiable appetite for slave labor.
Over time, a numerical majority of the inhabitants of English, French and Spanish Carribean colonies, including Cuba, were slaves or freed slaves.
Inspired by the French Revolution and the ensuing chaos in France, the Negro Republic of Haiti was established in 1804.
As a result, by 1839 little Cuba was the world's number one sugar producer and exporter.
Cuban ingenios and fierce Spanish Mercantilism succeeded in creating a cash cow for the empire and Spanish law guarded it jealously.
Cuba was prohibited from trading with foreign powers and all Cuban products had to be exported on Spanish vessels.
The pale sweet granules are to this island what wine is to France and pasta is to Italy.
But the end of barter trade after 1990 and falling sugar prices , as well as outmoded production techniques, plunged Cuba's sugar industry into an abyss.
While modern sugar production employs state-of-the-art harvesting and processing techniques, much of Cuba's sugarcane is cut by hand with machetes.
Horse-drawn carts transport supplies and 100year-old steam generators power mills.
In 2001, Cuba spent 17 cents to produce a onepound bag of sugar worth 5 cents on the world market, one-third the price in 1985.
As we have seen, the cultivation of sugar in Cuba dates from the 1 6 century.
It forms, as Cubans readily and fondly say, part of the national identity.
Sugar dictated Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 21 land use and ownership patterns across the island.
Sugar produced great wealth that made Havana and smaller urban centers such as Matanzas flourish, financing waves of architectural riches.
The sugar industry brought railroads and the latest technology to Cuba.
Even at the turn of the 21 st century, sugar was still being produced in nearly every municipality everywhere but Cuba's western tip, where tobacco dominates, and the Isle of Youth.
By sustaining nearly half a million jobs, sugar was the livelihood of one in five Cubans.
Cuban sugarcane, 1906 In 2002, when Pedro Alvarez, the chief executive of Cuba's food importing company, stated matter-of-factly that Cuba had bought ""tens of thousands"" of tons of sugar from the United States and was looking to sign contracts to import 5,000-15,000 tons more, his words symbolized a paradigm shift in centuries-old patterns of economic activity.
Cuba remains a net exporter of sugar, but the fact that it imports any sugar at all, and is now only the 10 l largest sugar producer is a watershed in Cuban history.
The steep decline in the Cuban sugar industry should not come as a surprise.
During the Soviet period of barter and coordinated Five Year Plans, Cuban sugar traded at the equivalent of 40 cents per pound, well more than double market prices at the time, yielding an effective subsidy of $3 billion per year.
In some years, Cuba could afford to 22 re-export some of the oil that its sugar earned.
Between 1976 and 1990, sugar represented three-fourths Cuban of exports and 20% of the economy's total investments.
By the early 1990's, the sugar industry held 30 percent of the nation's industrial machinery and bought 20% of the production of the steel and machinery sector, 13% of the production of the ministry of basic industries and 8% of light industry output.
In light of the United States embargo, the demise of the Soviet bloc robbed Cuba of much more than favorable terms of trade.
It left Cuba dependent on a defunct, sole source of tractors, fuel, fertilizers and other critical supplies for a huge, mechanized sugar industry designed to barter with an extinct market.
The same scenario played out throughout all sectors of the economy, plunging Cuba into an unprecedented depression.
Sugar production fell by three million tons, falling 39% between 1992 and 1993.
Lower revenues caused investment and maintenance to falter, leading to a downward spiral of de-capitalization and further drops in output.
During this period, the United States tightened the embargo with the Mack and Helms-Burton Amendments, compounding the depression.
Faced with these new challenges, Cuba's large-scale, oil-dependent, heavily mechanized farming, which had hitherto produced the bulk of Cuba's sugar, was now obsolete.
After the embargo is lifted, sorely needed capital investment will return, spurred by the potential for Cuban ethanol exports to the United States market.
With more than 7,000 Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 23 scientists dedicated to drug research, Cuba has one of the most sophisticated biotech industries in the developing world.
After Ronald Reagan reinforced the embargo in 1982, Cuba had to rely on its own biotech industry to produce unavailable drugs.
A Cuban Research Institute has patented a promising new lung cancer drug.
The drug is called CimaVax EGF and in clinical trials it has been shown to increase life expectancy in lung cancer patients by 4-5 months.
It is administered in conjunction with conventional treatments of chemo and radiotherapy.
Cuba was a Superpower Pawn Centuries Before Kennedy and Khrushchev After the defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1688, the British and French empires became the pre-eminent military powers and both rivals were determined to vanquish the other.
The Union Jack flew over El Morro de la Habana and Cubans were British subjects just like their counterparts in the 13 colonies to the north.
But in 1763 Cuba was ceded back to Spain in exchange for claim over Florida.
Of course, the Cubans were not consulted any more than the Florida Seminoles were.
But the experience left Cubans with a new interest in the colonies that would soon become the United States.
The Criollos chafed under the same burdens as their British colonial counterparts.
In 1778 Juan de Miralles, a Cuban trader, established himself in Philadelphia and befriended George Washington and his wife, Martha Custis Washington.
He threw a ball in their honor and dreamed of 24 independence for Cuba.
Francisco Miranda, of Caracas Venezuela, led Cubans on an attack of the British garrison at Pensacola, Florida.
Then, in April of 1782, Jose Antonio Aponte, a free Afro-Cuban and Havana native, captured Providence , Bahamas from the British with a battalion of mulatto and black troops.
Cubans donated money enthusiastically to the Continental Congress of the United States after George Washington's victory at Yorktown.
Spain itself was then conquered by Napoleon's armies in 1808 and France defeated Spain in Haiti but the victory degenerated in to a Vietnam style rout for Napoleon as malaria infected French troops were unable to subdue forces led by Toussaint L'Ouverture.
Revolution echoed across the Americas from Mexico to Argentina as an enfeebled Spanish Empire could no longer rule her colonies on the American continents.
But the small islands of Cuba and Puerto Rico remained under Spanish control.
Unlike the other newly independent states of the Americas, the United States itself became a global empire en route to super-power status.
As early as 1805, Thomas Jefferson wrote that Cuba should be controlled by the United States.
In 1809 Napoleon was on the move and the Spanish monarchy could not maintain control of Spain, let alone the Spanish colonies.
The Antebellum Slave Power was determined to add Cuba as a slave state to help offset the growing number of Free States in the congress.
After the Civil War, southern states resisted adding Cuba as a United States state because its population was too dark.
Both northern and southern states were united in opposition to encroaching European empires in the western hemisphere.
The 1823 Monroe Doctrine has withstood the test of time and remains relevant today.
It exalted the original Indo-Cuban resistance to colonization Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 25 as the crucible of Cuban political attitudes.
It encompassed the formation of Cuban nationalism, the key to understanding Cuba today.
Some of the French landowners fled to Cuba, creating more plantations with subsequent increased demand for slaves.
To meet this demand, Spain allows foreign vessels to transport slaves to the island.
A slave revolt in Cuba frightens United States slave owners because whites and Negroes joined forces to demand emancipation.
Over the next seven years, Cuban ports would be opened and closed to trade several times.
During the Napoleonic era , trade between the U.S.A. and Cuba increased considerably as Cuba's sugar harvest grew in size.
United States president Thomas Jefferson sent General James Wilkinson to Spain to try and purchase Cuba.
In response, the Spanish authorities use prison, exile, torture and death to quell insurrections.
United States President James Madison instructs his minister to Great Britain to warn the British that the United States will not sit idly by if Britain were to try to gain possession of Cuba.
Within two years, over half of Cuba's trade is with the United States, her largest trading partner.
United States Secretary of State John Quincy Adams defines United States policy towards Cuba, writing, ""These islands are natural appendages of the North American continent, and one of them almost within sight of our shores, from a multitude of considerations has become an object of transcendent importance to the commercial and political interests of our Union.
In December, United States President James Monroe declares the Western Hemisphere as a United States sphere of influence and warns Europe not to interfere in the affairs of any American nations that have recently become independent.
Governments in the recently independent countries of Mexico and Venezuela plan a military expedition to support Cuban independence.
United States Secretary of State Henry Clay warns that the U.S.A. will block any move to liberate Cuba from Spain.
The United States government believed that Cuba would become part of the United States.
The Slave Power feared an independent Cuba would lead to the end of slavery that could have repercussions in the Southern states.
In January, United States citizens and ""Manifest Destiny"" advocates Moses Beach and John O' Sullivan meet in Havana to conspire with members of the Club de la Habana, a group of wealthy Cubans seeking annexation to the United States 1848: Against the counsel of Democrats opposed to extending slavery, United States Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 27 President James Polk secretly offers to buy Cuba from Spain for $100 million.
In May, American Democrats nominate Senator Lewis Cass, who has publicly advocated the purchase of Cuba, for president.
Their goal is to incorporate Cuba into the United States Starting in New Orleans, they soon have fifty chapters in eight Southern states with an estimated membership of 1 5,000 to 20,000.
The Order of the Lone Star plans to invade Cuba in the summer, in conjunction with the ""Conspiracy of Vuelta Abajo,"" a revolt organized by Francisco de Frias, Lopez's wealthy brother-in-law.
Spain discovers the conspiracy and executes Frias, while some of the conspirators escape to the United States This year Spain refuses a second request from the U.S.A. to sell Cuba.
Abolitionist Marquis Juan de la Pezuela is appointed Captain General of Cuba.
United States President Franklin Pierce offers to buy Cuba for $130 million, as per the Ostend Manifesto.
In April, influential Cuban slave owners meet in Havana with United States Consul William H Robertson and urge him to persuade United States President Pierce to send American troops to Cuba to prevent slave emancipation.
The victory of the north in the United States Civil War ends importation of slaves from the U.S.A. into Cuba.
Instead, Cuban landowners and businessmen import 28 Chinese coolies and Mexican Indians to work the fields.
Although the African slave trade to Cuba ends, slavery itself continues on the island until 1886.
The Ten Years' War, or Cuba's First War of Independence, begins on October 10 when plantation owner Carlos Manuel de Cespedes, accompanied by 37 other planters, proclaims the independence of Cuba in the Grito de Yara issued from his plantation.
On April 10, 1869, the first constituent assembly prepares the first Constitution of the Republic of Cuba and elects Carlos Manuel de Cespedes as the first president.
President Grant and his cabinet, led by Secretary of State Hamilton Fish, oppose recognition of the new Cuban government.
The United States House of Representatives adopts a resolution to recognize the new Cuban government by a vote of 98 to 25 but Grant ignores it.
President Ulysses S Grant rejects a proposal that offers Cuban independence and the abolition of slavery.
Despite official sanctions, American civilians profit by selling guns to the rebels.
Late in 1872, Spanish officials board the Virginius and arrest Americans for running guns to the rebels.
In September, Colombian Foreign Minister Don Gil Colunje proposes all Latin American republics and the United States work together for Cuban independence and the abolition of slavery.
Following the death of Cespedes, Cuban rebels ask for and are denied United States recognition.
United States Secretary of State Hamilton Fish asks England to lead a European force to restore peace in Cuba.
The remaining Cuban forces surrender to Spain and the Ten Years' War officially ends.
Slavery is abolished in Cuba. 1890s: William Randolph Hearst publishes sensational and inflammatory stories about Cuba.
On May 16, The Detroit Free Press writes: ""Cuba would make one of the finest states in the Union, and if American wealth, enterprise and genius once invaded the superb island, it would become a veritable hive of industry in addition to being one of the most fertile gardens of the world.
There is a strong party growing up in the island in favor of reciprocity with and annexation to the United States.
As another Cuban war of independence looms, the United States government detains three Cuban ships laden with $58,000 in arms and supplies for the rebels, dealing them a major setback.
While President Grover Cleveland proclaims neutrality in the conflict between Cuba and Spain, United States firms sell munitions to Spain.
The United States and Spain discuss granting Cuba autonomy, but not independence.
Despite the rebels' success and their declaration they had won the war, United States President William McKinley will not recognize Cuban independence.
In November, Spain's queen regent offers autonomy to Cuba, but both the rebels and Cuban loyalists reject the offer.
Maine is sent to Havana during the Second War of Independence on a ""friendly visit"" to protect American citizens and business.
It was the causus belli President McKinley and the Congress needed for intervention and the SpanishAmerican War began.
To no avail, Spain concedes to every United States demand except Cuban independence.
In April, the United States Congress declares Cuba has the ""right to be free and independent,"" and authorizes the president to use military force to oust Spain from the island.
President McKinley declares a blockade of the northern coast of Cuba and the port of Santiago.
Assistant Secretary of State Theodore Roosevelt, a neophyte, urges United States intervention.
They will be American soil from the moment the Stars and Stripes float over Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 31 them.
The United States attacks and sinks several Spanish ships attempting to break the blockade and captures 1,670 Spanish soldiers.
In December, the United States administered Cuban Educational Association declares that only some Cubans are fit to be Americanized and that dark skinned Cubans could not gain admission to many American universities and colleges.
The Treaty of Paris formalizes United States control of Cuba, Puerto Rico, the Philippines and Guam.
Although the treaty officially grants Cuba independence, the United States flag is raised over Havana.
Piatt would later write, ""Cubans are incapable of stable self-government.
The restricted Cuban electorate elects Tomas Estrada Palma as Cuba's first president.
The naval base at Guantanamo is opened and Cuba is paid $2,000 a year in gold coin.
In March, Cuba and the United States sign a commercial reciprocity treaty.
In July a treaty is signed to allow the United States to create coaling and naval bases in Cuba.
Accused of election fraud, Tomas Estrada Palma invokes the Piatt amendment and requests United States intervention.
The United States sends 2,000 Marines and 5,600 soldiers to re-occupy the country and military rule extends until late 1908, overseen by Secretary of War William Taft.
President Teddy Roosevelt issues an executive order that Cuba's provisional governor comes under the direct supervision of the Secretary of War.
Magoon establishes a commission to organize and compile Cuban law, hitherto a jumble of Spanish codes, military orders and decrees.
United States President Taft and Secretary of State Philander Knox adapt a ""preventive"" interpretation of the Piatt Amendment to allow United States diplomatic intervention to avoid the necessity of military intervention.
Maine determines the cause was likely an accidental fire inside a coalbunker that spread to a nearby powder magazine.
Cuban president General Jose Miguel Gomez suppresses the Agrupacion Independiente de Color with the help of United States Marines.
Cuban Negroes are excluded from much of Cuba's national life, although they have access to government jobs in the Rural Guard and the army.
United States Marines land in Cuba and two United States battleships dock at Havana.
President William Howard Taft declares this act does not constitute intervention.
General Mario Garcia Menocal of the Conservative Republicans wins the presidential election via fraud and intimidation.
President Woodrow Wilson sends United States troops to Cuba to ""protect American interests"" and Menocal.
Cuba enters World War I one day after the United States enters the war.
I boom, sugar soars to 22 cents/pound, followed by a plunge to less than four cents.
Cuban plantations go bankrupt and are scooped up by United States investors at bargain prices.
President Wilson sends General Enoch Crowder to organize new Cuban elections.
He goes on to become the personal representative of the new United States President, Warren Harding.
Morgan loan to the Cuban government and is named permanent ambassador to Cuba.
In March, the United States Senate ratifies the 1903 treaty to return the Isle of Pines to Cuba.
Crowder, with historian Charles Chapman, writes A History of the Cuban Republic: A Study in Hispanic American Politics.
United States heiress Irene Dupont purchases several hundred acres at Varadero Beach to build the mansion Xanadu.
The Cuban Congress passes a bill stating ""any Cuban who seeks the intervention or interference of a foreign power in the internal or external development of the national life"" will be imprisoned for life.
With the support of United States Ambassador Sumner Welles, Carlos Manuel de Cespedes is appointed provisional president.
In September, the Sergeants' Revolt breaks out, supported by students and led by Sergeant Fulgencio Batista y Zaldivar.
He establishes an eight-hour workday with a minimum salary, maternity benefits, and paid vacations.
Batista is president for 32 hours before putting Carlos Mendieta in power.
Batista remains army chief and continues to appoint new presidents until 1940.
The Guantanamo Bay lease is extended to 99 years at an annual rate of $ 4,085.000 President Roosevelt abrogates the 1903 treaty with Cuba that gives the United States the right to intervene to preserve internal stability or independence.
Batista offers Meyer Lansky and the Mafia control of Havana's racetracks and casinos in exchange for kickbacks.
Cuba joins the United Nations on the day the United Nations Charter takes effect.
Cuban students train to invade the nearby Dominican Republic and depose the brutal Trujillo.
Washington learns of the plans and pressures the Cuban army to clamp down on the students and stop the operation.
Batista runs in Cuban senatorial elections from his home in Florida and wins.
Meyer Lansky offers President Carlos Prio a bribe of $250,000 to step down.
Batista organizes a nearly bloodless coup and is recognized by the Truman Administration.
Batista awards contracts to dozens of United States corporations for massive construction projects like the HavanaVaradero highway in return for kickbacks.
On July 26, Fidel Castro and his men attack the Moncada barracks in Santiago.
Seventy rebels are killed and the rest tortured or imprisoned, including Fidel and Raul Castro.
United States Vice President Richard Nixon visits Havana to congratulate Batista on winning presidential elections in which he ran unopposed.
Nixon is photographed with Batista and Mafia personalities at a lavish party.
The C.I.A. and its director John Foster Dulles maintain strong ties to the United Fruit Company.
He organizes the Granma expedition with Raul and Che Guevara, an Argentinian.
Castro and his eighty-one men sneak in to Cuba to start arevolutionary war and seize power.
Most are killed or captured, but Castro and the survivors flee to the Sierra Maestra.
At the invitation of Santos Trafficante, Senator John Kennedy visits Havana and is allegedly entertained by three prostitutes while Trafficante observes through a two-way mirror.
United States Ambassador Arthur Gardener recommends the assassination of Fidel Castro.
Fidel Castro and his forces defeat the Cuban army in several small battles.
In February, the United States indicts former Cuban President Carlos Prio on charges of conspiring to violate United States neutrality laws by financing and taking part in military expeditions to be carried out from United States territory against Batista.
In December, William Pawley, an emissary from the Eisenhower Administration, meets with Batista to suggest exile in Daytona Beach.
Santos Trafficante meets with future Lee Harvey Oswald assassin Jack Ruby in Havana.
Castro imprisons Trafficante and in June deports him to the United States Manuel Urrutia, a Cuban judge, takes over as president and Miro Cardona, head of the Havana Bar Association, as Prime Minister.
After increasing friction between Castro and Urrutia over Communist influence in Cuba, Urrutia resigns.
King, head of the Western Hemisphere Desk of the C.I.A, recommends ""dirty tactics"" to destabilize Cuba.
In April, Prime Minister Castro makes an unofficial visit to the United States.
At a luncheon of newspaper editors broadcast on radio and television, he complains about unfair sugar trade.
Castro tells Nixon, ""Dictatorships are a shameful blot on Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 37 America and democracy is more than just a word,"" adding that there is no democracy while there is hunger, unemployment and injustice.
The Cuban government passes its first Agrarian Reform Law and puts limits on land ownership.
It expropriates holdings and offers a 20-year bond at 4. percent as compensation.
United States Senator George Smathers proposes a reduction in the Cuban sugar quota.
The United States government rejects the Agrarian Reform Law and the bond as insufficient In November, Che Guevara becomes president of the National Bank of Cuba.
In January Cuba expropriates 70,000 acres of United States property, including 35,000 acres owned by the United Fruit Company.
At the request of the United States State Department, United States oil companies refuse to refine Soviet oil.
In response, the United States cancels Cuban sugar quotas and prohibits most exports to Cuba.
The plan calls for a ""massive propaganda offensive,"" including radio broadcasts.
The C.I.A. creates the Democratic Revolutionary Front, the first of many Cuban exile political front groups.
United States pilot Robert E Frost is killed while bombing a sugar mill in Matanzas province.
The United States State Department acknowledged the flight originated in the United States and expresses regrets.
A consortium of Western European banks yields to United States pressure and cancels a $100 million loan to Cuba.
Cuba nationalizes all remaining United States business and commercial interests in Cuba.
China agrees to buy 500,000 tons of Cuban sugar annually for five years.
The United States government advises its citizens living in Cuba to return.
Prime Minister Castro responds by urging United States citizens to stay.
The Cuban delegation to the United Nations provides a list of 20 terrorist incidents and asks the Security Council to stop United States aggression.
On September 29, Castro's Cubana Airlines plane is impounded for debts to American creditors.
Johnny Roselli and Sam Giancana meet with Allen W Dulles about assassinating Fidel Castro.
A chief of covert operations, indicating Hoover's knowledge of Chicago crime boss Sam Giancana's plot to assassinate Fidel Castro.
In October, the United States imposes an embargo on exports to Cuba, food and medicine excepted.
The United States also blacklists vessels carrying United States government-financed cargo to and from Cuba.
In October, President Eisenhower endorses the embargo and bans all exports to Cuba, partly to assist Richard M Nixon's presidential bid.
President John Kennedy approves an invasion of Cuba at the Bay of Pigs.,500 Cuban exiles land on Cuba from United States -funded and supplied training camps in Nicaragua.
Before the invasion, United States -based terrorists burn thousands of acres of Cuban sugar cane and blow up a Belgian ship in Havana harbor.
Cuban exiles would call Kennedy's failure to provide combat forces a betrayal and subsequent to J.F.K's assassination, evidence would surface of their involvement in his murder.
Twelve hundred exiles were captured and one hundred and fourteen killed at the Bay of Pigs The C.I.A. had predicted that the invasion would spark a popular uprising and overthrow Castro.
Clearly, the C.I.A. had not studied Fidel's 195354 prison letters, which I analyze in this book.
In January, the United States breaks off all diplomatic relations with Cuba.
President Kennedy launches a verbal attack on Cuba at the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
One-quarter of the Cuban buses are out of operation for want of spare parts by late 1961.
The C.I.A. and the Catholic Church launch ""Operation Peter Pan,"" the largest 40 exodus of children in the Western Hemisphere.
From December 26, 1960 through October 22, 1962, 14,048 unaccompanied children between 6 and 18 years old were sent to the United States The C.I.A. alleges that the Cuban government takes children away from their parents for indoctrination in Communist schools.
Cuba is expelled from the O.A.S. on the grounds that Marxist-Leninist ideology is incompatible with the inter-American system.
Cuba asks the United Nations Security Council to suspend O.A.S. measures but the United Nations doesn't intervene.
There was even suggestion of blowing up a United States ship in Guantanamo Bay to create an incident similar to the Maine in 1898.
Leaflets are dropped over Cuba offering rewards for assassinating Cuban leaders $150,000 for Fidel, $120,000 for Che.
In August, United States President Kennedy escalates attacks against Cuba, which include strafing tourist hotels and British ships.
This provision is further amended the following year to withhold foreign aid from countries that allow ships under their flag to carry goods to or from Cuba.
By 1962 only half of Cuba's 1,400 railroad passenger cars are operational.
Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 41 The sugar industry is particularly affected by the failure of transport systems and mill breakdowns.
Cuba releases the remaining 1,000 prisoners from the United States -sponsored invasion at the Bay of Pigs in exchange for $53 million in baby food and medical supplies.
In early 1962, United States military leaders, working with the N.S.A, propose ""Operation Northwoods,"" a secret plan to commit terrorist acts against Americans and blame Cuba to create a pretext for invasion and the ouster of Fidel Castro.
The Northwoods plan also proposed that if the 1962 launch of John Glenn into orbit were to fail, resulting in the astronaut's death, the United States government would publicize fabricated evidence that Cuba used electronic interference to sabotage the flight.
President Kennedy prohibits travel to Cuba and makes financial transactions with them illegal.
He authorizes the C.I.A. to renew support for exiles' attacks on selected Cuban targets and all Cuban-owned assets in the U.S.A. are frozen.
Castro uses Soviet equipment to jam anti-Cuban broadcasts from United States soil.
The C.I.A. uses a Cuban operative to try to poison Castro at the Havana Libre Hotel.
After that fails, they develop a poison pen for use against Castro by Cuban dissident and exile, Rolando Cubela.
Kennedy prohibits shipments of cargoes paid for by the United States government on foreign ships that have called on a Cuban port.
He also encourages maritime unions to boycott ships named on a United States government blacklist because of their trade with Cuba.
Invoking the 1917 Trading with the Enemy Act, all Cuban assets in the United States (about $33 million) are frozen.
Enforcement of Cuba sanctions is transferred from the Department of Commerce to the Treasury Department.
Under United States pressure, N.A.T.O. countries agree to an arms embargo on Cuba but continue other trade.
The blacklisting of cargo ships increases Cuban freight costs by $50 million annually.
White House papers declassified in 2003 showed Kennedy was planning a secret meeting with Fidel Castro to negotiate normalization of CubanAmerican relations.
Castro attempted to restart the talks with Lyndon Johnson, but was rebuffed because Johnson didn't want to appear ""soft"" 42 on Communism.
Under United States pressure, the O.A.S. also adopts sanctions against Cuba and demands all members sever diplomatic and trade relations.
In December, anti-Castro Cuban terrorists fire a bazooka at the United Nations in an attempt to assassinate Che Guevara while he delivers a speech to the General Assembly.
CIA. frogmen plant two bombs on a Cuban navy vessel at the Isle of Pines.
The Commerce Department revokes the general licenses permitting the export of food and medicine to Cuba.
The Department's policy is to deny license requests for commercial transactions and only approve humanitarian donations.
Following the discovery of an arms cache of Cuban origin in Venezuela, the O.A.S. calls for mandatory sanctions covering all trade with Cuba except food and medicine.
Under United States guidance, the O.A.S. recommends severing of diplomatic relations with Cuba but Chile, Bolivia, Uruguay and Mexico dissent.
Cuba opens the fishing port of Camarioca to allow foreign boats to remove anyone wanting to leave the island.
About 7,500 refugees leave for the United States In December, the Cuban airlift allows more people to leave about 45,000 flee Cuba in the next year.
President Lyndon Johnson signs a law to exempt Cuban immigrants from general United States immigration laws and permit any Cuban who reached United States territory since January 1, 1959 to become eligible for permanent residency after two years.3,000 Cubans immediately apply for permanent status.
In December, United States Air Force pilot Everett Jackson is shot down over Cuba after dropping arms and equipment meant for counter-revolutionaries.
Che Guevara is captured and executed in Bolivia by Felix Rodriguez, a Cuban born C.I.A. officer unsuccessful at killing Castro.
Castro announces a campaign to produce ten million tons of sugar in the next harvest.
In solidarity with Cuba, American students and workers form the Venceremos Brigade to visit Cuba and assist with the zafra Every year thereafter, the V.B. send a delegation of Americans.
Rumor has it that a young man from LA, Tony Villar, was an early participant.
He is better known today as Antonio Villaraigosa, the mayor of Los Angeles.
Newly elected President Richard Nixon directs the C.I.A. to intensify covert actions against Cuba, ending the hiatus in harassment.
Cuba's economy contracts at 1. percent per year over the 1960-71 period.
Castro visits newly elected leftist Chilean President Salvadore Allende in Santiago.
Cuba and the U.S.A. begin formal negotiations over the problem of airline hijackings and an accord is signed in early 1973.
Swine flew ravages the Cuban pork industry, resulting in the loss of half a million animals.
A total of 260,561 Cubans have now received asylum in the United States since 1965.
Severe human rights abuses and repression follow, compromising the United States position vis-a-vis human and civil rights in Cuba.
United States Senators Claiborne Pell and Jacob Javits visit Cuba, the first American elected officials to visit the island since diplomatic relations were severed.
In November, American officials conduct secret normalization talks with Cuban officials, but deadlock over Cuban involvement in Angola.
He asks Orlando Bosch to unite all the Cuban exilesthe ""Miami mafia,"" into one organization.
The Marxist Angolan government requests Cuban military support and Castro agrees to send troops and equipment.
Washington defends South Africa's move as self-defense against Communism.
The United States announces that it will allow foreign subsidiaries of United States companies to sell products to Cuba and that it will no longer penalize other nations for trading with Cuba.
However, United States President Gerald Ford warns that Cuban involvement in Angola prevents the restoration of diplomatic relations.
United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger reiterates that there is no possibility of relations while Cuba has troops in Africa.
The United States threatens military action if Cuba sends troops elsewhere.
Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau visits Cuba, the first of many visits both officially and unofficially.
Trudeau was the first N.A.T.O. leader to visit Cuba after Castro took power and led the way in challenging United States trade sanctions against Cuba.
Luis Posada Carrilles and his men bomb a Cuban airliner, killing all 73 aboard.
Interest Sections are opened in Havana and Washington and discussions between the two countries are initiated on a broad range of issues.
Congress also repeals the provision of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1 96 1 banning aid to countries that trade with Cuba.
Anti-Castro terrorists bomb the Cuban mission to the U.N., the Cuban Interests Section and the Soviet United Nations Mission.
The United States puts Cuba on the list of nations that support terrorism.
Castro announces that anyone who wishes to leave may do so from the port of Mariel.5,000 Cubans flee to the United States over several months.
In September, anti-Castro terrorists assassinate the Cuban attache to the United Nations Junta Patriotica Cubana replaces C.O.RU. as the selfproclaimed central organizational structure of the anti-Castro community.
Anti-Cuban terrorist group Omega 7 bombs the Cuban consulate in Montreal, Canada.
Reagan accuses Cuba of fomenting Communist control in Nicaragua and Communist insurgency in El Salvador.
Shortly after a coup by a pro-Castro Marxist leader, 8,000 United States troops storm Grenada.
In Reagan Wald, the First United States Circuit Court of Appeals unanimously rules that United States restrictions on travel to Cuba are invalid.
In May, President Reagan appoints Jorge Mas Canosa as chair of the President's Advisory Board for Broadcasting to Cuba.
Anti-Castro Cuban exiles get the support of United States President Ronald Regan to broadcast hard-line anti-Castro news and information from the United States to Cuba on Radio Marti, funded by American tax dollars.
In protest, Cuba cancels the existing immigration agreement with the United States Bowing to continued pressure from right-wing lobbyists, Reagan bans travel to the United States by Cuban government or Communist party officials or their representatives, including academics and artists.
A report prepared by the Cuban National Bank for Paris Club creditors reveals that Cuba has bought sugar on the world market and resold it to the Soviets at a profit, used the profits to purchase Soviet oil, then sold the oil at a profit.
The United States proposes a motion at the United Nations criticizing Cuba for human rights violations.
Cuban General Rafael del Pino defects to the United States and speaks out on Radio Marti.
According to the Treasury Department, trade between United States foreign subsidiaries and Cuba averaged $260 million a year from 1982 to 1987.
In December, after the Cuban Army's victory at Cuito Canavale, Angola and South Africa reach an agreement that Cuban troops will leave Angola and South Africa will withdraw from Namibia and implement the United Nations plan for Namibian independence.
A 1988 study estimates that the United States embargo has cost United States firms $30 billion in lost exports over the past 25 years.
Castro offers to cooperate in drug enforcement and other matters of mutual interest.
Nobel Prize-winning writer Gabriel Garcia Marquez advises Castro to retire his fatigues and put on a business suit.
In Miami, the Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 47 Cuban Museum of Arts and Culture is bombed for exhibiting work by artists living in Cuba.
He had served time for a 1968 bazooka attack on a Polish ship in Miami and for sending death threats to French, Italian and Spanish heads of state.
Two armed anti-Cuban terrorists from Miami infiltrate Cuba via Santa Cruz del Norte with orders to commit acts of violence.
The United States Congress passes the Mack Amendment to prohibit all trade with Cuba by subsidiaries of United States companies and the cessation of aid to any country that trades with Cuba.
Canada and the United Kingdom express their strong opposition to the extraterritorial nature of the legislation.
Mikhail Gorbachev announces the withdrawal of all Soviet troops from Cuba.
President Bush authorizes three United States Air Force 0-2 aircraft, the military version of the Cessna 172, for the group.
Cuban officials estimate that United States sanctions have cost $15 billion from 1961 to 1991.
Democratic presidential candidate Bill Clinton endorses the ""Cuban Democracy Act"" while on a Florida campaign stop.
The U.K. and Canada bar United States subsidiaries located in their countries from complying with C.D.A. provisions.
Russia signs a series of trade agreements with Cuba, including a new oil-for sugar barter agreement.
The United Nations General Assembly votes 59 to 3, with 79 abstentions, to lift economic sanctions against Cuba.
Only Romania and Israel join the United States in opposing the measure.
Opposition to the embargo increases each year, with only Israel consistently voting with the United States By 1992 the value of total trade turnover (exports plus imports) between Cuba and the former Soviet bloc countries had fallen to $830 million; about 8% of its 1989 level.
Cuba ends its military backing for revolutionary movements in other countries.
The new 1992 Constitution and new laws provide limited property rights to foster international investment.
References to atheism and the Soviet Union are purged from the constitution.
In Miami, Tony Bryant, leader of Comandos L, gives a press conference announcing plans to carry out more attacks against Cuba, especially its hotels.
Brothers to the Rescue publicly encourage attempts on the life of Fidel Castro and violence against Cuba.
Andres Nazario Sargen, head of Alpha 66, announces that his organization had recently completed five operations in Cuba.
Alpha 66 spokesman Humberto Perez announces that its war on Castro would be extended to tourists visiting the island.
Cuba ends the ban on the use of the United States Dollar and it quickly becomes the preferred currency.
Castro gives French spirits corporation Pernod Ricard a monopoly on the island's rum manufacturing, which will bring in more than $20 million in profit annually until 2004.
Aircraft owned by Brothers to the Rescue fly over Havana at low altitude and drop smoke bombs.
Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 49 In October, a group of armed men land on the causeway to Cayo Santa Maria near Caibarien, Villa Clara, and kill a Cuban national.
Terrorist Luis Posada Carriles and five accomplices smuggle weapons to Cartagena, Colombia, during the Ibero-American Summit in a plot to assassinate Castro.
Attacks on Freedom of Expression in Miami's Cuban Exile Community) details attacks on academic freedoms and other serious restrictions on freedoms of expression in the CubanAmerican community.
Unbearable living conditions lead to protests in Havana.,000 Cubans flee; many are picked up by the Coast Guard and detained at Guantanamo.
The United States agrees to grant at least 20,000 immigrant visas at its diplomatic offices in Havana each year, up from an average of 11,000 issued annually over the previous decade.
In Cuba, two United States residents and anti-Castro terrorists are caught with 51 pounds of C-4 explosives and other equipment.
All sectors except health, education, and defense are open under the new regulations.
President Clinton eases restrictions on travel to Cuba for educational, religious, and human rights purposes.
The move is strongly criticized by anti-Castro members of Congress, who pledge to redouble their efforts to tighten sanctions on Cuba.
President Bill Clinton signs the Helms-Burton Act, allowing lawsuits against foreign companies that invest in hitherto United States owned properties seized by the Cuban government.
It also denies United States entry of executives and major shareholders, as well as their immediate families, of firms found to be ""trafficking"" in expropriated property.
The legislation also restricts United States aid to independent states of the former Soviet Union in the event they provide assistance to intelligence facilities in Cuba or for completion of the Juragua nuclear facility.
The Cuban Air Force shoots down two Brothers To the Rescue planes over international waters after their violation of Cuban airspace.
President Clinton condemns the shoot down and suspends charter travel from the United States There are twenty-five violations of Cuban airspace in twenty months by anti-Castro groups.
Canadian Trade Minister Art Eggleton announces that Canada will seek consultations with the United States under the North American Free Trade Agreement regarding the legality of the Helms-Burton Acta.
Canadian officials also say they will try to include provisions in the Multilateral Agreement on Investment that would prevent the United States from imposing secondary sanctions on its trading partners.
The European Union suspends discussions with Havana on an economic cooperation agreement because of Cuba's failure to enact political reforms and economic liberalization.
The United States denies visas to some shareholders and senior executives of the Canadian mining company Sherritt International under the Helms-Burton law.
President Clinton invokes the national interest waiver and imposes a moratorium of at least six months on the filing of suits.
The State Department threatens to ban executives of the Mexican telecommunications company Grupo Domos from entering the United States under the Helms-Burton Act.
The Mexican Congress overwhelmingly approves a Helms-Burton ""antidote"" law that imposes fines of up to $301,000 on Mexican companies that comply with the U S. legislation.
Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 51 Hurricane Lili inflicts considerable damage on the sugar harvest in Cuba.
Estimated losses for the affected provinces are 20 percent, or a minimum of 70,000 tons.
Washington announces that aircraft carrying emergency relief supplies to Cuba will be allowed to fly directly from United States territory.
The European Commission approves a $10. million humanitarian aid package for Cuba.
The European Union Council of Ministers approves anti-boycott legislation that forbids compliance with the Helms-Burton Act unless an E.U. firm receives a waiver on grounds that refusing to comply will seriously injure either a company's or the E.U.'s interests.
United States court awards under Helms-Burton will not be recognized and can be recovered in the E.U. if a successful American claimant has property there.
The World Trade Organization agrees to establish a dispute settlement panel to review the E.U.'s complaint about the Helms-Burton law.
The Canadian Parliament passes anti-Helms-Burton legislation penalizing companies for obeying the United States law, allowing the attorney general to block United States court judgments and allowing Canadians to recoup penalties.
President Clinton responds by waiving Title III of the Helms-Burton Act for another six months.
The Dutch bank ING, whose subsidiaries have substantial interests in the U.S., pulls out of Cuba and does not renew $30 million in loans to Cubazucar, the stateowned trading company.
The United States Congress passes a bill to compensate anti-Castro exiles and their families by selling previously frozen Cuban assets.
Cuban exiles bomb seven hotels and the Bodeguita del Medio restaurant in Havana.
Raul Cruz Leon, a citizen of El Salvador, admits being paid United States $4,500 for each bomb.
The Cuban American National Foundation offers unconditional support of bombings in Cuba.
Walter Van der Veer, an American, is caught in possession of incendiary devices in Cuba.
The United States administration releases a report describing the economic aid that would be available to Cuba once Castro is out of power and the island moves toward a multiparty democracy.
World Trade Organization's Director General Renato Ruggiero names a threemember panel to rule on the Helms-Burton dispute.
Cuba's government establishes a new central bank as part of its modernization program in the finance and banking sectors, but denies that the bank reflects a move toward a market economy.
Noting that Cuba has failed to improve its human rights record, the European Union extends by six months its freeze on cooperation with Cuba.
Citing financial problems, the Mexican company Grupo Domos relinquishes its investment in Cuba's telecommunications system.
Representative Ileana Ros-Lehtinen , chairman of the House Subcommittee on International Economic Policy and Trade, introduces legislation that would deny foreign aid and trade preferences to countries that sign free trade agreements with Cuba.
Caribbean Community and Common Market countries protest and warn they will not allow the proposed United States legislation to affect their relationship with Cuba.
The United States government agrees to ease temporarily its travel ban and embargo against Cuba during the visit of Pope John Paul II to Cuba in January 1998.
Catholics will be allowed to travel to Cuba from the United States and Catholic churches and charities will be able ship supplies and equipment to help organize the visit.
Group of Israel has violated Helms-Burton Act and bars the firm's officials from United States territory.
Marti' s broadcasts are switched from VHF to UHF in an effort to strengthen the station's signal in Cuba.
The Government of Cuba gives the F.B.I, and other agencies of the United States information on terrorist activities and groups working in the United States against Cuba.
His intelligence advisors tell United States President Bill Clinton that Cuba no longer poses a threat to United States national security.
Eleven Cuban political prisoners, whose release the Pope requested, are freed and sent to Canada.
Canadian company Sherritt International, sanctioned under the Helms-Burton law, announces it will build a $150 million natural gas generating plant and invest $38 million in a cell phone company in Cuba.
The Clinton administration eases controls on humanitarian shipment of food and medicine and reinstates the provision allowing Cuban-Americans to send up to $1,200 a year to relatives in Cuba.
Cuban Foreign Minister Roberto Robaina says that Havana will refuse all direct humanitarian aid from the United States as long as the United States government maintains the embargo.
Forbes lists Fidel Castro as 11 on a recent list of the world's richest ""Kings, Queens and Dictators'"" with an estimated personal fortune of $100 million.
For the first time in seven years, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights fails to pass a resolution condemning the Castro regime for its human rights violations.
Cuba and the Dominican Republic normalize diplomatic relations, which had been broken off in 1959.
This move follows Cuba's restoration of diplomatic relations with Guatemala in 1996, and Haiti and Spain in 1998.
The Clinton administration and E.U. officials reach an agreement that provides for penalties to be imposed on companies that invest in expropriated property, including denial of government export credits and other assistance.
In exchange for E.U. action on expropriated property, United States officials agree to seek changes to the Helms-Burton law.
In addition, an international registry is established for claims on expropriated property to serve as the basis for government action against subsequent investors.
Opponents in Congress maintain that the United States -E.U. agreement is not effective enough in preventing investment in expropriated property in Cuba.
World Food Program Executive Director Catherine Bertini calls for $20. million in drought assistance to Cuba.
The United States says it will contribute only if the aid is not disbursed through the Cuban government.
The United Nations General Assembly, for the sixth year in a row, passes a resolution calling for an end to the United States embargo against Cuba.
A number of senators and a group of former foreign relations officials, including former Secretaries of State Henry Kissinger and Lawrence Eagleburger, urge President Clinton to authorize a bipartisan commission to review United States Cuba policy.
President Clinton rejects the plan for a bipartisan commission to review Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 55 Cuba policy, but allows the resumption of direct postal service and increased air service.
He authorizes any United States citizen, not just family members, to send $1,200 a year to Cuba and permits, on a case-by-case basis, sales of food and agricultural inputs to private and nongovernmental organizations in Cuba.
The Baltimore Orioles play an all-star Cuban team in Havana in a game authorized by the Clinton administration as part of its effort to improve relations with the Cuban people but only after assurances that the Cuban government will not receive any revenues from the game.
The lawsuit, filed in Havana, identified war crimes such as the Bay of Pigs invasion, the use of biological warfare, bombings and air attacks, military provocations from the United States Naval Base at Guantanamo and United States support for terrorist actions.
In May, United States drug czar General Barry McCaffrey, former Commanderin Chief of the United States Southern Command, declares that Cuba is not an accomplice of drug traffickers.
President Bill Clinton eases sanctions and allows shipments of food and agricultural products to Cuba for the first time fourty years.
Panamanian authorities arrest Posada Carriles and former member of Omega 7 before the tenth IberoAmerican Summit of Heads of State and Government.
Weapons, explosives and sketches of the Cuban President's route and scheduled public appearances 56 are seized.
The Cuban American National Foundation finances the team of lawyers hired to defend the terrorists.
Cuban security announces it has investigated, documented and neutralized 63 8 plans to assassinate Fidel Castro.
Congress votes to release $90 million of frozen Cuban assets to pay a $187. million judgment against the Cuban government in favor of the families of the pilots killed in the downing of the Brothers to the Rescue planes in 1995.
In January, Havana hosts the United States Healthcare Exhibition, the first American trade show in fourty years.
In April, World Bank President James Wolfensohn praises Fidel Castro for doing ""a great job"" in providing for the social welfare of the Cuban people.
A United States court orders the Cuban government to pay $7 million in damages to a Miami woman for unknowingly marrying a Cuban intelligence agent.
The Cuba Working Group is created and releases a nine-point plan calling for specific changes in United States -Cuba policy.
In addition to lifting the travel ban and allowing unrestricted sales of food and medicine, the plan recommends increased security cooperation with Cuba including efforts to thwart international crime, drug smuggling, terrorism and environmental disasters.
Gary Speer, the acting commander-in-chief of Southern Command, tells reporters he has seen no evidence that Cuba has biological weapons.
Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 57 a James Cason, top United States diplomat in Havana, meets publicly and often with dissidents.
Dissident Oswaldo Paya, author of the Varela Project, wins the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought.
The Project collected 10,000 signatures required to call a national referendum on the economic and social reforms needed to turn Cuba into a democracy.
In February, the World Trade Organization rules in Cuba's favor viz. the Havana Club trademark dispute between the United States and the European Union.
The embargo notwithstanding, the United States exports $300 million in food to Cuba, becoming the island's top food trading partner.
Bush also announced the United States would incite and encourage illegal immigration from Cuba, ""We will better inform Cubans of the many routes to safe and legal entry into the United States through a public outreach campaign in southern Florida and inside Cuba itself.
Earlier this year, we launched a new satellite service to expand our reach to Cuba.
In February, at a meeting with Cuban exiles, United States Treasury Secretary John Snow announces that third country companies that promote travel and trade with Cuba are in violation of the embargo.
The Treasury Department freezes the assets of several companies including Canadian Hola Sun Travel.
In late 2004, Castro bans the United States dollar, citing Bush Administration harassment of businesses worldwide.
The embargo is estimated to have caused $79 billon in losses to Cuba and caused more than 3,500 deaths.
Chapter 1 • Kubla Kahn • 59 MOJITO D uring the 17 l and 18 l centuries, the Spanish Main in general and Cuba in particular 'attracted privateers and pirates for two reasons.
First, Spanish galleons laden with gold from Mexico and Peru would rendezvous in Cuba before heading to Spain.
British, Dutch and French privateers had enormous incentive to capture Spanish treasure.
By employing privateers, European powers could harass Spanish hegemony in the New World without committing an act of war.
The spoils and glory of war paid off for privateers such as Sir Francis Drake.
Drake's fleet of seven large ships and twenty-two smaller vessels set sail from Plymouth, England, on September 14th, 1585 and reached Santiago in the Cape Verde Islands on November 17, which was sacked.
On New Year's Day, 1586, they captured Santo Domingo and extorted a 25,000 ducat ransom.
On February 9th, Cartagena (in present day Colombia) was captured and occupied until March 26th.
Here again the town was plundered and a ransom of 1 10,000 ducats was collected.
Spanish Mercantilism restricted commerce to royal monopolies, giving the inhabitants of Cuba economic incentive to break Spanish law and trade with pirates.
A Cuban black market emerged long before chronic shortages of consumer goods associated with Soviet inspired 20th century state planning.
Spanish galleons, gorged with treasure that blocked gun ports, were sitting ducks for Dutchman Piet Heyn, who simply commandeered Spanish treasure ships without firing a shot.
On one such expedition, Heyn made off, or should I say Madoff Chapter 2 • Mojito • 61 with over thirtyfour tons of silver.
He went back to the Netherlands with fifteen captured Spanish ships and his original fleet intact.
Alejandro Selkirk, abandoned by his crew on Juan Fernandez Island, became the inspiration for the 1717 novel Robinson Crusoe.
Instability in Cuba was exacerbated by the War of the Spanish Succession.
The decades long struggle, known as Queen Anne's War in the British American colonies, was waged primarily by England to preserve the balance of power that the unification of the Kingdoms of Spain and France under a single Bourbon monarch would upset.
Combined French and Spanish amphibious forces used Cuba as a base to launch assaults on Charles Towne in present day South Carolina.
England retaliated with letters of marque for buccaneers like Sir Henry Morgan to wage war on Spain in Cuba.
After the 1776 American Revolution and incipient industrialization of North America in the 19th century, the United States became Cuba's major export market and American banks provided increasing amounts of capital and credit.
The colonial dependency on Spain, long in decline, made less economic sense.
Bolivar and San Martin were the new heroes of the era and Cuba wanted independence too.
But Spain was determined to hold on to the bitter end as Cuba increasingly demanded self-determination and the abolition of slavery.
In Cuba, the two issues were intertwined and supporters of independence from Spain were usually abolitionists as well and vice versa.
Civil unrest was the norm from October 10, 1868, when Carlos Manuel de Cespedes freed all his slaves and called on all Cubans to unite against Spanish colonialism, until January 1, 1899, when Spain surrendered Cuba to the United States.
Nominal independence was granted on May 20, 1902, but the Piatt Amendment limited its meaningfulness.
Thirty years' of independence struggles capped by United States armed intervention to oust Spain depressed sugar exports and left Cuban property owners deep in debt, mostly to American creditors.
Hawley, founder of the Cuban-American Sugar Company, Milton Hershey, and James H Post, who became the president of the National Sugar Refining Company of Jersey, dominated the sugar industry and the Cuban government.
Numerous labor concessions were granted and the government was obliged to build infrastructure to benefit foreign interests, even while basic services were lacking for the population.
Under American management, the Cuban sugar industry became more efficient than ever.
Over time and under increasingly right wing and repressive rulers, resentment built up against the Cuban government and its American backer.
In 1920 the Noble Experiment, better known as Prohibition, became law across the United States For Cuba it was the beginning of a thriving international bar culture and eventually, Mob culture.
On the day Prohibition went into effect, numerous companies outfitted ferries for the overnight booze cruise from Florida to the island.
By the time the Noble Experiment was repealed as a failure in 1933, the Mob and its vice industries were firmly entrenched in Cuba and a man they could do business with, General Fulgencio Batista, was in charge of the island.
But taking Cuba over was not a cakewalk; American gangsters had to earn their place at the gaming tables and brothels fair and square.
Wiseguy 'Lucky' Luciano, tried and failed to take control of Havana booze and narcotics but was run out of Cuba.
But Meyer Lansky held the Ace of Spades; Batista already knew Lansky from his bootlegging days running liquor to speakeasies up north in the 1920s.
With Lansky' s help, Batista returned from retirement in Florida, ran for the presidency and on the eve of his projected loss, staged a military coup in 1952.
Instead of running from the law, gangsters now had the power of government on their side.
Qwljamky, >dno, I'oitrifd, as from the Chapter 2 • Moj i to 63 Cuba's real status as an underworld haven was well portrayed in American cinema of the time.
In John Huston's Key Largo, produced in 1948 and starring screen legends Lionel Barrymore, Humphrey Bogart, Lauren Bacall and Edward G Robinson, a small time counterfeiter and mafia capo , ordered to leave the United States as an undesirable alien, plans on escaping to Cuba from the Everglades to make a fresh start and plan his return.
II vet who, unarmed and against terrible odds, single handedly saves his fallen war buddy's girl and stops Rocco and his minions before they reach their Cuban paradise.
The nocturnal vice industries in Cuba needed live entertainment, boosting the careers of incomparable artists like Beny More, Celia Cruz and Damaso Perez Prado, the original mambo king.
They also helped create the backdrop for an indelible part of Americana with I Love Lucy.
Ricky Ricardo (Desi Arnaz) played the exotic, drum-banging husband of mastermind as dimwit Lucille Ball.
I Love Lucy became a smash success on the new medium of television and a nostalgic 1950's American icon loved by millions.
Rum distilled from sugarcane, cigars from Vuelta Abajo, mulatas in skimpy clothes, baseball and rhumba into the wee hours.
The Cuban rap group Orishas and salsa group Charanga Habanera tell the contemporary story in their music.
You probably haven't read a chapter about pirates that digresses into how to make a chic cocktail but in a book about Cuba there is a connection.
The Mojito originated in Havana in the late 1800s and gained popularity with Americans during Prohibition.
Legend has it that a precursor to the Mojito may have existed as early as the late 16 century.
Richard Drake, an English pirate, made a concoction similar to the Mojito by mixing aguardiente , sugar, mint leaf and lime He coined the drink El Draque after his commander, Sir Francis Drake.
El Draque is still popular in Mexico, Columbia and Venezuela, Drake's old stomping grounds.
It became a popular with the Cuban working-class in the early 19 l century.
Cuban fiction writer Ramon de Palma referred to the Draquecito in an 1838 book involving a character that drank one of the cocktails daily to keep the doctor away.
Some historians believe that slaves working in Cuban sugar cane fields in the late 19 century created the Mojito.
The word guarapo , of which the Mojito is made, is of mixed African and Spanish provenance.
Slaves laboring in sugar cane fields longed for a familiar sweet drink from their homeland, made from yucca.
Thinking that the slaves were saying ""guarapo,"" this word became a part of the vocabulary.
Apart from drinking guarapo, slaves often drank aguardiente as an escape.
To this day, strong rum is prominent in everyday Cuban culture, but alcoholism is uncommon.
Angel Martinez opened La Bodeguita del Medio in 1942 as a general store and later converted it into a restaurant and bar in 1946, where the Mojito gained popularity in Havana.
Frequenting the bar were students, musicians, and soon-to-be celebrities, including Ernest Hemingway, Bridget Bardot and Nat King Cole.
Another well-known drink, the Cuba Libre, was allegedly so named in the 1890s when a group of off duty American soldiers gathered in a bar in old Havana drinking rum and the new soft drink, Coca-cola.
In 1955, Lansky took over as operator of a newly established casino at the Hotel Nacional, which was managed by International Hotels, Inc., a subsidiary of Pan Am, and the following year he started building his own hotel-casino, the Hotel Riviera.
The Riviera Hotel opened in December 1957 with a floorshow headed by Ginger Rogers that was carried in part on American network television.
Of course, he did not know that he would have to abandon it three years later.
The popular, wide-eyed 1950's love affair with Cuba as a playground was over.
In the days following Batista's flight into exile, enraged mobs sacked and looted the casinos, which they considered symbols of decadence amidst gnawing poverty.
The new Cuban government was ideologically opposed to gambling, vice and the pursuit of profit of any kind, legitimate or not.
A new, intellectually, physically and spiritually superior Cuban was to be molded and Castro took a very dim view of tourism, which he felt polluted his project.
Tourism collapsed and by 1975 reached 12,000 visitors annually, most of them from the Soviet bloc.
Of course, the hermetic wall around Cuba could not have been maintained by refusing passenger planes of tourists entry and jamming radio and television broadcasts alone, as was done by East Germany.
The United States embargo and quarantine unwittingly helped subdue nonChapter 2 • Mojito • 65 conformist influence considerably by inviting it abroad and giving it a foreign character.
Today the Riviera Hotel, like all hotels in Cuba, is the cornerstone of Cuba's feeble economy.
I have visited the Riviera numerous times and it never fails to impress.
The Cuban government has been careful to preserve the original terrazzo floors, banquet halls, interior decor and even gold plated china and silverware commissioned by Lansky and incredibly, still used in the private dining room where he held court.
I have many fond memories of sizzling music and dancing at the Copa Room, dubbed the 'Palacio de la Salsa' in the 1990s as Cuba legalized the United States dollar and attempted to bring back the hedonistic Cuba of old, warts and all, in a desperate bid to bring tourism back and stave off total collapse and starvation after the Soviet Union expired.
If ever there were the time when the United States Embargo would have forced Castro out of power, it was the summer of 1994.
Unable to pay for Mexican gasoline, cars and buses were idled and Cubans relied on 25 kilo ""Flying Pigeon"" Chinese bicycles for transport.
Unable to pay for chlorine to purify the water supply, water borne pathogens thrived.
Without crude, Cuban power plants shut down and Cubans were eaten alive in fetid, un-air conditioned apartments as mosquitoes had a field day in the still, midnight air unperturbed by electric fans.
Tens of thousands of Cubans tossed themselves in to the sea on inner tubes to drown or be rescued by the United States Coast Guard.
Had the United States embargo been lifted after all this misery failed to dislodge the government, Cuba today would at the very least have a mixed economy and the Castros' rule would not be as absolute.
Without a socialist trade and barter bloc to rely on a la COMECON and with the introduction of a dollar economy and all the inequality that brings, internal Cuban government dictate over the economy became absolutely critical to maintaining political control.
Cubans are very aware that the United States is the primary refuge of the exiled Cuban moneyed class and does its bidding, even against its own commercial interests.
Cubans know they will never be able to compete with their Miami cousins in a privatized Cuba.
The United States embargo plays a vital role in neutralizing the threat of compensatory power represented by Cuban exiles and private finance in general.
Where the United States embargo does not apply the Cuban government puts up barriers to mimic the embargo.
Canadian and European entrepreneurs who invested in Cuba in the 1990s were obliged to work within partnerships that allowed them minority stakes without ultimate control over the enterprise or ownership of any land or assets.
There is no legal or judicial framework for private enterprise in Cuba.
How much of it is by design and how much is sheer incompetence and bureaucracy is difficult to gauge.
Without perpetual economic privation and a political/military state of siege with an outsourced origin both very real and imagined, the population would be unwilling to accept the awful living conditions, sacrifice and heavy handed restrictions that ensure dependency on the government for all the basic necessities of life.
A relaxation of tensions and growth in trade would raise living standards and force the way to economic and political plurality.
For the Cuban government to maintain a war footing in the face of new realities would de-legitimatize its policies among core supporters, already on the defensive in the face of absurd restrictions and harassment of the population in the name of Cuban national security.
The only option for Castro and company will be internal policy shift to the right,e. liberalization.
Now is the time for Congress and President Obama to act on these internal Cuban realities without hecklers who haven't been to Cuba in fifty years screaming in the background.
Photo taken by the author Chapter 2 • Mojito 67 LA HISTORIA ME ABSOLVERA 3.
Every Sunday there's a book fair, and in one of the few examples of sanctioned non-governmental employment, independent, open-air booksellers sell old books and memorabilia for hard currency.
One afternoon, while browsing a table, I chanced upon an original copy of Fidel Castro's collected letters from prison.
The 94page pamphlet was published in April, 1959 and featured on its cover a photograph of a baby faced Fidel Castro with a Department of Corrections serial number around his neck.
The pamphlet was in remarkably good condition for its age and I purchased it for two or three dollars, suspecting that I might have discovered important historical material.
The seller, on the other hand, seemed wholly uninterested in the book's contents.
He also had a number of original photographs of Fidel, Raul, Che, Chapter 3 • La Historia MeAbsolvera • 69 Ernest Hemingway and Camilo Cienfuegos from the 1950s and 60s.
I snapped those up for few dollars more as I tried to hide my excitement.
I hurried back to the rented RV camper that served as my home during my stay to examine my find in more detail.
I took them back to the United States and kept them safe until 2007 as I prepared this book.
I wondered how different history might have been had, in 1959, American decision makers examined this freely available pamphlet and how relations between the two countries could have been different.
Maybe it was more expedient to just dismiss him as a Communist stooge to be gotten rid of.
Indeed, President Eisenhower refused to meet with him on his United States victory tour after the 1959 triumph over Batista.
Vice President Nixon met with him and privately called him naive afterwards.
Studying the prison letters would have significantly reduced the uncertainty about Fidel and his true intentions.
They put a vulnerable, solitary and uncensored Fidel on display years before he actually wielded power.
As a political prisoner accused of treason, he was at the complete mercy of the Batista regime and could have been killed at any moment.
Fidel depended upon his wife, sister and comrades in arms like Aguero for material and emotional support.
He nearly lost his mind while in solitary and poured himself into his letters to hold onto his sanity.
Fidel's moral compass is on exhibit for all to see and his actions during the next 50 years can more or less be predicted or at least better understood after reading his prison letters.
Fidel's moral compass is on exhibit for all to see and his actions during the next fifty years can more or less be predicted or at least better understood after reading his prison letters.
In Havana, the Hotel Nacional, unsurpassed in opulence and a magnet for movers, shakers and the glitterati of the world, opened its gilded doors to all those yearning to breathe free from the restrictions of Prohibition.
Among the Hotel Nacional' s first illustrious guests were artists, actors and writers such as Johny Weissmuller , Buster Keaton, Jose Mujica, Jorge Negrete, Agustin Lara, Tyrone Power, Romulo Gallegos, Errol Flyn, Marlon Brando and Ernest Chapter 3 • La Historia MeAbsolvera • 73 Hemingway, who donated a Blue fish specimen to the ""Sirena"" bar.
The guest list includes well-known American gangsters Santos Traficante, Meyer Lansky, Lucky Luciano and Frank Costello.
Patrons such as Winston Churchill, the Duke and Duchess of Windsor, scientist Alexander Flemming, and innumerable IberoAmerican heads of state and European monarchs backed the hotel's reputation as a deluxe host.
It was during these prosperous and heady times that General Machado, veteran of the war of independence against Spain, seized power and one Angel Castro had a son in 1928.
President Machado soon had problems governing the country as Cuba's primary export, sugar, plummeted in price, causing massive unemployment and hardship.
From Biran, a tiny outpost in sleepy but wild Oriente, Angel Castro sent his young, illegitimate son and his brother Ramon to live with an impoverished Haitian family in the big eastern city of Santiago.
The Haitian consul Louis Hippolyte Hibbert, Angel Castro's conduit for plantation laborers, would become young Fidel's godfather.
With the stock market crash of October 29, 1929, Cuba, an appendage of the United States economy, fell into depression.
The General Strike of 1933, known as the Revolution of 33, forced Machado out of power in August after eight years in power.
To his credit, he tried to diversify exports and a sympathetic administration in Washington passed the United States Sugar Act of 1934, creating a large quota for Cuban sugar imports.
While in office, Machado traveled frequently to the United States and spoke of his determination to ""civilize"" Cuba so that it could one day govern itself.
He took credit for the assassination of Julio Antonio Mella while exiled in Mexico and persecuted Cuban labor leaders.
Cuba was completely dependent on fruit exports and sugar monoculture backed by American investment and distribution.
In addition, the Piatt Amendment, which preceded Machado, gave the United States government the right to intervene in Cuba as necessary and, to the horror of Cuban nationalists, ceded Guantanamo Bay to the United States Navy as 74 a coaling station.
It was during this deeply troubled period in world history that Hitler came to power , the Spanish Civil War began and the Japanese Empire commenced hostilities in Manchuria, igniting World War II in Asia.
To many around the world, the 1930s deflationary depression heralded the end of Capitalism and the fulfillment of Marx and Lenin's prophecies.
Following Machado, Carlos Hevia was chief of state for all of 72 hours.
San Martin was replaced by Carlos Medieta y Montefour, who served for eleven months.
He was followed by Jose Barnet y Vinejeras and Miguel Mariano Gomez in turn succeeded him.
Grau San Martin had attempted to appease the labor movement's demands by supporting legislation such as an eight-hour workday.
He encouraged collective bargaining, forced utilities to lower their rates and insisted that fifty percent of all employees of foreign firms be Cuban.
San Martin's brief government was never recognized by the United States.
I have always been amazed how I constantly run into the same people whenever I'm in Havana.
So does nepotism, fratricide, internecine warfare and the personalization of politics.
In October 1948, Fidel married Mirta Diaz-Balart, daughter of the mayor of Banes, Oriente.
Mirta was the sister of Rafael Lincoln Diaz-Balart , member of the Cuban House of Representatives.
He appears to spend every waking moment, not on issues affecting his constituents, but on how to take down Fidel.
In 1955 Rafael Lincoln Diaz Balart opposed his brother in law Fidel's release under Batista's general amnesty.
Had he prevailed, Fidel may have remained incarcerated and the history of Cuba would have taken an entirely different course.
Rafael Lincoln Diaz-Balart became a senator in the Cuban legislature in 1958 and served until Batista fled the island the following year.
Born in Spain, he is now a naturalized United States citizen and in 2006 was appointed to the Florida Supreme Court by Gov.
Juanita Castro Ruz, Fidel's younger sister, is a United States citizen.
She resides in Miami and it is alleged that Miami exile Francesca Castro is one of Fidel's many illegitimate children.
Cuban politics in 2009 follow the old patterns and are still intensely personal.
In March, the two most visible and important figures in the Cuban government, outstanding party leaders credited with saving the Revolution during the Special Period and seen as successors to Raul, were summarily fired without due process of any kind.
Cuban officials said that Mr Perez Roque and Mr Lage had become too visible and that they had conveyed to foreign politicians false expectations about how the country would change and who would be in control of its direction.
The men were involved socially with a Cuban named Conrado Hernandez, who was surreptitiously recording their conversations during reg76 ular parties at his ranch in Matanzas.
Some of those recorded conversations, which Cuban officials recently discovered, included acerbic criticism and off-color jokes about various government leaders, including Fidel and Raul Castro.
Rumor has it that he purchased his first Marxist classics during this period.
Later in 1948, Fidel traveled to Columbia to agitate for a Youth Congress and got caught up in the insurrection known as the Bogotazo after the assassination of presidential candidate Gaitan in April, 1948.
Early on in life, Fidel had come to believe that he was destined for great things; everyone around him told him so.
He knew that university politics would be a stepping-stone to a larger stage.
Now Fidel could organize an armed struggle in the name of the republic, of democracy, and in defense of the Constitution of 1940.
In early speeches and writings, Fidel spoke of... the duty of free men to rebel against an unjust government... and... the obligation free people have to force change on their government.
The most filthy, cowardly, indecent, the most vile, and the most intolerable.
No matter how desperate her economic situation, Mirta is too smart to be induced to work for the government.
I will set the record straight and defend against this cowardly insult whatever the cost.
I ask you to help me in this and to do in my name what you would do if you were in my situation.
I authorize you to make whatever declarations are necessary and to take any decision necessary in my name.
I am ready to summon my own brother-in-law to court and fight him at the first opportunity.
Then in a letter dated July 31, 1954, Fidel confides, again to best friend Luis Conte Aguero , ""I never imagined that Rafael (Fidel's brother-in-law and Batista's Under Secretary of the interior) was such a scoundrel and was so corrupt.
These passages refer to an incident in which Fidel's brother in law, the uncle of his baby son, surreptitiously issued a press release that Fidel's wife had been fired from her job as a government informant... implying that the wife of Cuba's most famous rebel supported the Batista dictatorship.
The announcement drove Fidel mad with rage and exemplifies perfectly the impossibility of separating the personal from the political in Cuba.
The spats and bickering between Fidel and his in-laws continues to this day and forms the ancient nucleus of the political hatred and intrigue across the Florida Straights today.
He is in a perpetual state of indignation and outrage at historical injustice and slights, real and imagined.
He spoke out against social injustice, and in one of the most sensational episodes in Cuban history, shot himself dead, during his weekly radio program, to protest Batista's coup d'etat in 1952.
This was a progressive party that wanted to address the social and economic problems of the country and was famous for demonstrations and agitation against the endemic corruption of political life.
Chibas had his own radio program and for years used it as a soapbox to talk about the burning issues of the day in this era before television.
He became very popular, and with his popularity became very influential.
The conditioned power of Chibas was transformed into the organizational power of the Orthodox party, which made it a force in Cuban politics.
A parallel familiar to more readers would be the self-immolation of a Tibetan monk in South Vietnam circa 1967 that was captured on the American nightly news and seen by millions.
It had a major psychological impact and was a blow against support for continuation of the war in Vietnam.
On October 15, 1953, in what would be known as the Moncada Program and would create a mold for polemics in the distant future with critics over democracy and human rights for the following half century, Fidel turned the accusations upside down and put the Cuban government under Batista on trial as a usurper in violation of the 1940 constitution.
For Cuba, La Historia Me Absolvera has the historical weight of Abraham Lincoln's Gettysburg Address.
Moreover, they get absolute moral impunity without any voice accusing them.
In Cuban history, the importance of this incident reminds one of Kent State in 1970 and the Boston massacre of 1770 in American history.
Fidel's writings are drenched in obsession to defend the independence of Cuba, restore its honor and the sacred principles of revolutionary valor embodied by Jose Marti, the intellectual father of independent Cuba.
No matter that Cuba devolve into a country run by one man for fifty years.
Inside Cuba and out, Fidel Castro is the Revolution and the Revolution is Fidel and by blood and history it is Raul, but in a much more circumspect way.
Structural dependency on one mortal is the Cuban government's biggest political liability.
Without a foreign military and political existential threat, this liability will become unbearable.
The theme of death as a great cause nobler than living an unremarkable life and the preference for putting one's life at risk for the advancement of the nation permeate his speeches and expectation.
They did well because they were not born to surrender to the miserable and hypocritical life of this time.
These contemplations remind me of the manly thoughts that agitated their restless brains, the indignant rebellion against such selfish and repugnant mediocrity, that desire to become a great example for their fatherland.
Imprisoned after Moncada, he refused to compromise with the Batista dictatorship to secure his own release, a pattern of intransigence that would continue during the most difficult challenges he faced during ten United States administrations.
His eschewal of material things Chapter 3 • La Historia MeAbsolvera • 81 and reputation for asceticism were crucial as he molded the new national character to accustom itself to perpetual hardship and privation.
In characteristic form, Fidel turned poverty, want and scarcity, the result of a suffocating embargo and the population's total dependency on the sclerotic state run economy, into an endurance test of the will.
The capacity for suffering and ability to resistir served the Cuban state as an ideological Cold War bulwark against the decadent, shameful consumerism represented by the United States in the Cuban media and imagination.
Such is the irony of a country with a constitution founded on the principles of Marxism, whose ideal is superior living standards for the working class, that its unionized, government workers do not enjoy a subsistence wage.
Cubans labor and sweat, albeit very inefficiently, with the knowledge that their needs will go unmet month after month, year after year.
Washington's wishful obsession with bringing down Castro, dressed up in theories about rational actors, is naive.
December 12, 1953 My dear brother Luis Conte, It is with the blood of my dead brothers that I write this letter.
Justice, in this case, is not a monument to heroes and martyrs who fell in battle or who were murdered after battle.
Not even is it a tomb where they rest in peace along with the others who lie sprinkled through the fields of Oriente, in many cases where only their murderers know their location; It isn't even possible to speak of peace for the dead in an oppressed land.
Posterity will raise the symbols and the generations of tomorrow will relive the tribute ode to those who rescued the fatherland's honor in these times of infinite shame.
He's writing from prison where it would seem improbable that in seven years he would be the Cuban head of state.
Not even he, as we will see in other letters, knows or is certain of this.
He's serving twenty six years and many of his comrades have been killed or jailed.
Te expongo todo esto, para que sepas que llevabamos un programa valiente y avanzado que constituia por smismo parte esencial de la estrategia revolucionaria.
Nada pudo conocer el pueblo, porque adoptamos el criterio de no tomar las estaciones de radio hasta no tener asegurada la fortaleza para evitar cualquier masacre popular en caso de no tener exito.
But he also says that after the reestablishment of the 1940 Constitution, six basic revolutionary laws would be decreed which are in favor of small colonos, arrendatarios, aparcero ... the sacred right of the workers to participate in enterprise, the participation of colonos in 55% of sugar cane profits.
Clearly, Fidel's agenda went far beyond reestablishing the 1940 constitution.
He wanted to restructure Cuban society to give the state a major role in the economy.
Finally there would be a law confiscating all wealth of embezzlers of all times under a summary investigative process.
Chapter 3 • La Historia MeAbsolvera • 83 At the age of twenty-seven Fidel has one foot in the Rights of Man and the other in left-wing nationalism.
Communism and Moscow are not on his agenda but he would be obliged to choose and take sides after taking power.
Hitler's attempted takeover of Germany in 1924) saying his group is not just a bunch of armed men trying to take over for power's sake.
The Director should never have taken seriously sterile or ridiculous theories about a Putsch or a revolution, when it was really the time to denounce the monstrous crimes of the government, killing more Cubans in 4 days than they had in 1 1 previous years.
Si en Santiago de Cuba cayeron cien jovenes valorosos, eso no significa sino que hay en nuestra patria cien mil jovenes dispuestos tambien a cayer.
He says that if a hundred men can give up their lives, then there's a hundred thousand who can also die, and all they need is a leader who can show them the right path.
He's comparing the attack on the Moncada garrison to the 10th of October of 1868, the beginning of thirty years of war.
Fidel as a young man is fixated on the bloody history of Cuba, and committed to the historic mission of completing Marti' s task as he sees fit.
For Fidel, rebellion is elevated to a historic duty to overturn unjust government and resist an illegitimate usurper of power.
His issues are agrarian reform, political reform and the 1940 Constitution.
Kennedy authorized the Bay of Pigs disaster because he was misled and thought Cubans would revolt against Castro.
Castro is not released until July 24, and Che Guevara is released a week later.
On a 60-foot yacht named Granma, eighty-two men led by Fidel Castro depart for Cuba.
In Santiago de Cuba, three hundred young men led by Frank Pais in olive green uniforms and red and black armbands with the July 26 emblem attack police headquarters, the Customs House and the harbor headquarters.
The Granma lands in Las Coloradas, Oriente province, after being delayed by weather and logistical problems, including poor communications between the expeditionaries and the Cuban underground.
The rebels are surprised by Batista's troops while resting on the edge of a cane field at Alegria de Pio, not far from the Sierra Maestra.
The majority of the revolutionaries are killed or captured, but a few escape to the Sierra Maestra, inChapter 3 • La Historia MeAbsolvera • 85 eluding the Castro brothers Fidel and Raul, Che Guevara, Juan Almeida, Calixto Garcia and a handful of others.
Twelve survivors of the Granma expedition regroup at Purial and organize the first guerilla unit.
At this point the Rebel Army consists of fifteen fighters with seven weapons, and they begin to move higher into the Sierra Maestra Mountains.
In Santiago de Cuba, members of the 26 -July Movement meet secretly to discuss support for the rebels in the Sierra Maestra.
Cuban Defense Minister Santiago Rey visits Washington as an official guest of the United States government.
In Santiago, four youths are found dead in an empty building, including 14-year old William Soler.
They had been arrested as suspects in revolutionary activities and tortured.
The war opens with a successful rebel attack on a small army garrison at the mouth of the La Plata River.
Angel Sanches Mosquera leads a company of elite Batista troops into the Sierra Maestra mountains to search for the rebels.
Rebels are attacked by the Army at Altos de Espinosa and disperse for three days.
In Santiago, Frank Pais is arrested for his participation in the November 30 uprising.
Student leader Jose Echeverria and a small group take over a radio station in Havana.
In a simultaneous attack on the presidential palace, thirty-five rebels and five palace guards are killed.
Batista, who tells the press that there are no guerrillas in the Sierra Maestra Mountains, inaugurates the new Shell Oil refinery.
The Havana Hilton opens with a party attended by half of Batista's cabinet.
Under orders from Batista, Police Captain Esteban Ventura guns down four of the surviving student leaders of the March 1 3 Palace attack.
In the Sierra Maestra, United States journalist Robert Taber interviews Castro on film.
In Santiago, at the trial of ""Granma"" survivors, Judge Manuel Urrutia declares that all should be acquitted.
Two other judges send men to prison for varying periods of up to eight years.
Arthur Gardner, United States Ambassador to Cuba and a close friend of Batista, is removed from office.
The first major battle of the war is a rebel attack on the El Uvero garrison in a small town south of the Sierra Maestra range.
After days of discussion in the mountains, the Manifesto of the Sierra Maestra is issued, signed by Fidel Castro, Raul Chibas and Felipe Pazos.
Ernesto Che Guevara is the first fighter promoted by Castro to Commander.
Chief of police Colonel Jose Salas Canizares kills Frank Pais, a twenty-three-year-old leader of the July-26-Movement and a Castro ally.
The crowds are too large for the police to control and the city closes down for three days.
Francisco Perez Rivas, Maria Urquiola Lechuga, Mercedes Urquiola Lechuga, Jose Manuel Alvarez Santa Cruz , Francisco Miares Fernandez , Manuel de Jesus Alfonso , Enrique Delgado Mayoral (age 18), Eliecer Cruz Cabrera , Eladio and Ignacio Alfonso Carrera (ages 16 and 18), Jose Herrera Leon , Ubaldo Fiallo Sanchez , Antonio Fernandez Segura, Jorge Alvarez Tagle , Juan Fernandez Segura, Francisco Gomez Bermejo , Pastor Valiente Hernandez, Norberto Belanzoaran Lopez and others.
At Palma Mocha, in the Las Cuevas region, the Rebel Army, lead by Fidel Castro, is victorious over Batista's army.
Members of the July-26-Movement in Cienfuegos attack the naval police headquarters and the garrison of the Rural Guards.
Augusto Fernandez Conde, denounces the atrocities of the Batista regime at the World Medical Association meeting in Istanbul, Turkey.
El Cubano Libre, the newspaper of the Rebel Army, is published by Guevara in the Sierra Maestra.
A weekly news magazine, Revista Carteles, reports that twenty members of the Batista government own numbered Swiss bank accounts, each with deposits of more than $1 million.
Raul Castro and Juan Almeida leave the Sierra Maestra with a column of sixty seven men to open a second front in the mountains north of Santiago, the Sierra Cristal.
In March forty-five civic institutions sign an open letter supporting the July-26-Movement, including the national organizations of lawyers, architects, public accountants, dentists, electrical engineers, social workers, professors, and veterinarians.
A national strike fails due to timing errors and lack of popular support.
Batista launches a vast offensive against the guerillas in the Sierra Maestra Mountains.
In the Sierra Maestra Mountains, the Rebel Army holds the first peasant assembly attended by 350.
In Santo Domingo, on the Sierra Maestra Mountains, the rebels achieve a serious victory with many captured prisoners and supplies.
The Battle of Jigue lasts about ten days and marks a turning point in the war.
From the Sierra Maestra, Radio Rebelde broadcasts the text of the Caracas Pact, signed by Castro and others.
It calls for armed insurrection to establish a 90 provisional government and an end for United States support of Batista.
The Mariana Grajales Platoon participates in the battle to destroy Batista's military garrison in Cerro Pelado, Oriente.
It states that tenant farmers and sharecroppers are entitled to the land they work.
The Rebel Army captures the army garrison at Alto Songo in Oriente province.
In a mock general election, Batista's presidential candidate, Andres Rivero Agiiero, is declared the winner.
In Havana, William D Pawley meets with Batista for three hours, offering that the dictator retire to his home in Daytona Beach, Florida.
The rebels capture the towns of Guayos, Cabaiguan, Placetas, Manicaragua, Cumanayagua, Camarones, Cruces, Lajas, Sagua de Tanamo, Puerto Padre and Sancti Spiritus.
United States native Alan Robert Nye is arrested by the Revolutionary Army in Baire, near Jiguany, and charged with a plot to assassinate Fidel Castro.
Che Guevara takes the city of Santa Clara and captures over 1,000 prisoners.
It was inconceivable to the United States policy makers that a revolution in Cuba could turn out badly for them.
Force is a physical power; I do not see what morality one may derive from its use.
To yield to force is an act of necessity, not of will; at the very least, it is an act of prudence.
Total renunciation is incompatible with the nature of man and to take away all free will is to take away all morality of conduct.
His name is seared into the subconscious of every Cuban man, woman and child both in Cuba and in exile.
The fetish around him is evident on television stations of both Havana and Miami and creates headwinds for an objective analysis.
Fidelismo wields conditioned power in Cuba more substantial than all the accumulated American culture and a value absorbed over the years and thrives on conflict with it.
Fidel Castro Ruz is the illegitimate son of a successful Galician immigrant and his Cuban servant girl.
Raised in tiny Biran, Holguin, a frontier town in Cuba's version of the lawless west, he is the historical heir to the liberators Antonio Maceo and Jose Marti... the dictators Machado and Batista... and Grand Master Jose Capablanca, the Cuban prodigy who at the age of thirty-three beat Emmanuel Lasker to become chess champion of the world in 1921.
He is both pope to the poor of the world and a diabolical despot; David versus Goliath and a demagogue.
After the triumphal arrival of the barbudos in Havana on January 8 th 1959, Fidel began to speak in the first person plural whenever he delivered one of his legendary, interminable speeches.
It was a moment of conception, as it were, the real and imagined, holy and unholy melding of a revolution and its leader.
Nevertheless, for years following 1959 little was known about his personal life and out of security concerns he was of no fixed address.
After decades of corrupt politicians who pilfered the treasury and enriched their family and friends, Cuba's new ruler had no interest in self-aggrandizement and vanity of the common sort.
Any overt show of concern for himself would have been 94 inappropriate even though he knew he was the sine qua non of the revolution.
Foiled assassination attempts fueled his youthful legend but now as these pages are written the Grim Reaper is knocking and cannot be denied.
Even now in his retirement, the personality cult, sans the cult of personality a la Stalin, burgesses the quasi-religious faith of Cuba's loyal and ageing base.
It remains to be seen how long the Cuban nation will soldier on, looking for cues from speeches of yesterday after he is gone.
Fidel Castro is stubbornness, righteousness, egalitarianism and now senility.
Cubans adore and pity him while cursing the economic madness and political stagnation he has wrought.
Facilitated by the Cuban Adjustment Act, it is the path of least resistance and is a key factor in the political longevity of Fidel Castro.
No nascent civil disobedience or counter cultural movement ever grew to threaten his power.
The Castro brothers have analyzed the Gorbachev experience and are determined not to have Cuba follow down the same road.
Their ultimate test will be how long they can influence events in Cuba from the grave.
External pressure to force political plurality is a threat to the managerial and military elites and will continue to retard reformers as long as the Cuban head of state, a Castro or not, sustains the Cuban peoples belief that he will defend them against powerful moneyed interests from abroad.
The first Cuban leader after Raul will have to be charismatic and swift on his feet if he is to resist Miami Cubans' pent up desire to rule the island.
The answer lies in Fidel's conditioned power and the existential threat from the U.S.A., real and hyped up as needed.
Living standards in Cuba were below what Polish, East German and Soviet citizens had under Communism and Cubans have a predilection to make the invidious comparison of their lot to the American way of life forty-five minutes away by plane.
The privation was far worse than the Great Chapter 3 • La Historia Me Absolvera • 95 Depression of the 1930s.
Tens of thousands of Cuban's who hadn't had a decent meal in three years tossed themselves into the sea and spontaneous demonstrations broke out in Havana in 1994.
Tensions were boiling and there was a danger that the army and police would use lethal force against civilian demonstrators.
Fidel understood how delicate the situation was, mounted an open jeep and spoke directly to protestors.
The 1959 Revolution was an indigenous popular uprising against Batista.
Washington needs to know that Fidel and the Cuban government have always been nationalist, Communist and internationalist, in that order.
The central European communist states did not have any of these factors in their favor.
The old Hungarian, Romanian and Bulgarian monarchies were puppets alongside Hitler's armies.
For centuries the Poles suffered under Russian domination that even Lenin condemned and East Germany was the defeated, divided and indebted vassal state of Stalin and his heirs.
The leaders of the ""People's Democracies"" were Communists first and last and their allegiance was to the Soviet Union.
With the exception of Czechoslovakia, Communism was forcibly installed on bayonets.
Subservience to Moscow de-legitimatized unelected rulers of people obligated to profess an ideology in conflict with their own nationalist tendencies.
Anti-communist uprisings in East Germany , Hungary , Czechoslovakia and Poland were the natural response by people who felt smothered by an aggressive alien power.
In Yugoslavia, a brilliant revolutionary similar to Fidel Castro united Croat, Serb and Bosniak and commanded a legitimacy never achieved by Soviet satellites.
The natural instinct to be free of outside control, paradoxically a libertarian sentiment, works in the wily Fidel's favor as a Communist, but as a Communist second, nationalist first.
Cuban Security Services 96 Cuba' s security and intelligence agencies are among the best in the world.
They have infiltrated every dissident group in Cuba and every exile group in Miami.
In 1995 he defected to the United States as the sole pilot of one of Cuba's most advanced MiG fighters.
He was inducted into a Miami church where a young single mother of two children who had left Cuba 30 years earlier fell in love with him.
Ana Roque, his bride to be, said he was like a knight in shining armor.
He had a master's degree in history and had been a major in the Cuban Air Force but was also a handy man.
He condemned Brothers to the Rescue, the violent anti-Castro group that lost two Cessna airplanes to an air-to-air missile fired by a Cuban MiG on February 24, 1996.
Miami exile leaders, many of whom counted him as a friend, were stunned.
She was left to mourn her loss but also to deal with an emotionally charged exile community grieving for the four men who died.
He informed on Brothers to the Rescue and other Miami anti-Castro groups to the Cubans but also to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, which had him on its payroll since 1993.
But he also told on the Cuban military to the exile groups, writing a book, ""Deserter,"" that was published by the Cuban American National Foundation.
Ana Roque conceded that Mr Roque missed his two children in Cuba terribly — he talked to them twice a month and sent packages — and the couple argued over her refusal to have another child.
She said he was frustrated, a former pilot working for $4.50 a hour in clerical and construction jobs.
In newspaper interviews she said he suffered Chapter 3 • La Historia Me Absolvera • 97 rejection from exiles that she said suspected him of being a spy because of his military background.
But doors had started to open in his final months in Miami and he started working in the parts department at an aviation company and as a personal trainer.
She believed that he had plans to revalidate his master's degree so he could teach.
In an interview from Cuba with C.N.N. , Mr Roque railed against ""right-wing rhetoric"" in Miami.
She insisted that the Roque' s life in Florida — a three-bedroom house in western Dade County, with the wedding and family pictures in the living room and the half-done paint job her husband will never finish — was not a sham.
Her children, an 11 -year-old son and a 12-year-old daughter, were estranged from their father and Mr Roque became a loving substitute, helping them with homework and picking them up at school.
She said that as a husband he was faithful, affectionate and protective, and would call her if she was late from the supermarket.
The acme of seduction is to leave a mark believing in you even after s/he has been played for a fool.
American author Robert Greene has written incomparable tracts on this topic.
Then there is the remarkable case of Ana B Montes, an American spy for Cuba who risked and lost everything for the Revolution and never got a cent for her trouble.
Ana Belen Montes, an intelligence analyst who was the Pentagon's top expert on Cuba, pleaded guilty to espionage, admitting that she spied for the Cuban government for 16 years because she opposed United States policy toward Havana.
Montes, 45 years old in 2002, acknowledged in Federal District Court that she had revealed the identities of four American undercover intelligence officers and provided the Cuban authorities with reams of other secret and top-secret military and intelligence information.
She was not paid for her efforts, lawyers in the case said, and was just reimbursed for some travel expenses.
Montes engaged in the activity that resulted in this charge because of her moral belief that United States policy does not afford Cubans respect, tolerance and understanding,"" her lead lawyer, Plato Cacheris, said in a statement.
Montes was sentenced to twenty five years' imprisonment and five years' probation on a single count of conspiracy to commit espionage.
She was obliged to submit to extensive debriefings and lie-detector tests by American intelligence and law-enforcement officials who will try to assess the damage she caused to 98 Cuba' s security and intelligence agencies are among the best in the world.
Brothers to the Rescue, which welcomed Mr Roque as a pilot only to have him label them as terrorists, was stunned.
Roque had met Mr Roque at her Baptist church in 1992 only days after he fled Cuba by snorkeling over to the American base in Guantanamo.
In newspaper interviews she said he suffered Chapter 3 • La Historia Me Absolvera • 97 3.
All of them were long term United States residents who had sought asylum under the pretense of fleeing Cuba.
The Five were arrested in Florida in 1998 and proclaim their innocence because their targets were violent Miami groups such as Alpha 66, Omega 7 and C.O.R.U., not the United States government.
The Cuban government for its part maintains that terrorists based in and tolerated by the United States have killed 3,478 Cubans.
The prosecution argued that the Five also attempted to infiltrate the United States Southern Command.
The Five will probably be swapped for jailed Cuban dissidents in the future.
He was a decorated veteran of Angola and after immigrating to the United States he worked as flight instructor when he wasn't spying on anti-Castro groups.
He was sentenced to fifteen years and his wife was deported to Cuba in 2000.
Fernando Gonzalez Llort stated at his sentencing ""If it were not very clear to me that the fanaticism, hatred and irrationality felt towards Cuba are generated and stimulated by only a minority segment of the CubanAmerican community living here, I would not have agreed to be represented by a member of that community.
After all, that was what this same District Attorney's Office offered Mr Frometa when he bought a Stinger missile, C-4 explosive, grenades and other weapons from an undercover government agent.
If there are still any doubts among those present in this courtroom, they need merely take a look at the documents declassified by the United States government itself in 1997 and 1998, which clearly expose the decisions adopted by this country's top leaders.
Its strategy was to work towards the adoption in Congress of measures aimed at economically strangling the Cuban people, with the false hope that this would lead them to rise up against the revolutionary government, while at the same time, a wave of terrorist attacks against Cuba would be organized and financed from Miami, with the goal of damaging the already recovering economy.
On July 23, 1998, the Miami Herald reported comments made by terrorist Tony Bryant, who laughed over how he was questioned by F.B.I, officials after his boat was found near Havana with explosives on board.
According to what Bryant told the newspaper, he promised he would not do it again, and they let him go.
We have an expert on terrorism like Mr Hoyt, who believes that ten explosions in a one-year period would constitute a wave of terrorism in Miami, but not in Havana.
We have an air safety expert for whom the acts of provocation perpetrated by Brothers to the Rescue against Havana, widely publicized on television, would be a different thing if they were perpetrated against Washington, because they would be, according to him, more urgent and verifiable.
We have people who for forty years have publicly advertised themselves as terrorists, yet the prosecutors to my left only seem to have noticed it when they testified in this case for the defense.
Agents Angel Berlingueri and Hector Pesquera, the latter no less than the head of the local F.B.I., proudly appear as guests on the same radio stations, with the same people and on the same programs that violate federal laws by openly raising funds to organize terrorist activities or defend terrorists around the world.
By 1963 all commercial activity with Cuba was prohibited in an attempt to bring down Castro.
What began as a strategic political move by a consummate military man to snuff out a successful insurgency morphed into a military defeat and apocalyptic Cold War brinkmanship for Kennedy and then devolved in to a domestic political football game.
At about 2m., Batista, his family and closest associates, board a plane at Camp Columbia and leave Cuba forever.
This time, fortunately for Cuba, the revolution will achieve its true objective.
Manuel Urrutia is installed as President and Jose Mira Cardona as Prime Minister.
The United States government officially recognizes the new Cuban government.
Throughout the island, Batista's henchmen and former police are executed in firing squads after being prosecuted in military tribunals.
The group allegedly represents former police guards known for cruelty and violence and members of former Senator Rolando Masferrer's private army.
Fidel Castro, Commander of the Rebel Army, replaces Miro Cardonas as Prime Minister of the Revolutionary Government.
Major Jesus Sosa Blanco is executed at the ancient moat of La Cabanya Fortress.
In Havana, two members of Rolando Masferrer's private army are captured after a shootout in which two policemen and a civilian are wounded.
Castro announces that general elections will be held in Cuba in two years.
The Cuban government nationalizes the Cuban Telephone Company, an affiliate of I.T.T., and reduces telephone rates.
An editorial in the front page of Revolution calls for an end to the executions.
Roberto Corral Miramon , Roberto Lopez Paz , Roberto Perez Merens, Jose Sosa Mojena and Andres Arango Chacon.
Allegedly the plot also involves pro-Batista exiles Rolando Masferrer and Ernesto de la Fe.
Heriberto Bertematy Rodriguez is sentenced to death for trafficking and selling marijuana.
Alan Robert Nye, a lieutenant in the United States Naval Reserve, goes on trial in Havana.
Prosecuting attorney Lieutenant Jose Antonio Suarez asserts that Nye received $100,000 from the ousted Batista regime.
In Havana, after a public trial that lasts 7 hours, Alan Robert Nye (a thirty-one-year-old American from Chicago) is convicted in a plot to assassinate Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro.
He is sentenced to death, but is allowed to leave the island as long as he never returns.
Castro visits the United States as a guest of the American Society of Newspaper Editors.
Castro signs the Agrarian Reform Act, which expropriates over 1,000 acres of farmlands and forbids foreign land ownership.
In Cairo, Che Guevara makes the first official Cuban government contact with the Soviet Union.
President Urrutia resigns, and Osvaldo Dorticos Torrado becomes Cuba's 1 9 th president.
Huber Matos, a leading figure in the revolutionary war, resigns his post as military commander of Camaguey province, along with fourteen officers, because of the ""rising influence of Communism"" in the revolution.
Camilo Cienfuego's plane mysteriously disappears during a night flight.
Huber Matos is sentenced to twenty years in prison for conspiracy and treason.
The Army announces that death sentences will not be carried out during the Christmas season.
The Soviets will also supply Cuba with crude oil, petroleum products, wheat, iron, fertilizers and machinery.
The Soviet Union fills the commercial vacuum left by the United States.
The French ship La Coubre explodes in Havana harbor, killing dozens of soldiers and workers.
President Eisenhower approves a covert action plan against Cuba that includes the use of a ""powerful propaganda campaign"" designed to overthrow Castro.
By summer, several clandestine and C.I.A.-funded stations in the United States join Radio Swan in broadcasting to Cuba.
In the U.S., the Frente Revolucionario Democratico is formed by Cuban exiles to oppose the government of Fidel Castro.
At the same time, United States companies, under pressure from the United States government, refuse to sell fuel to Cuba.
United States diplomats Edwin L Sweet and Wiliam G Friedman are arrested at a meeting of counterrevolutionary conspirators.
They are charged with ""encouraging terrorist acts, granting asylum, financing subversibe publications and smuggling weapons.
In response to these seisures, the United States congress passes the ""Sugar Act,"" eliminating Cuba's remaining sugar quota.
Cuba retaliates by nationalizing all United States businesses and commercial property.
President Eisenhower cancels the 700,000 tons of sugar remaining in Cuba's quota for 1960.
China agrees to purchase 500,000 tons of sugar from Cuba each year for five years.
The planes belong to a Cuban delegation visiting the United Nations that includes Premier Fidel Castro.
Four boats set out from Miami to invade Cuba under the leadership of Rolando Masferrer Rojas.
United States imposes a partial economic embargo on Cuba that excludes food and medicine.
Cuba nationalizes additional properties owned by American interests in response to the economic embargo imposed by the United States October 30.
In a cable from Havana to Washington, the United States embassy reports ""during the past three months the popular support of the Castro regime has dropped markedly.
A dozen Cuban children travel from Havana airport to the U.S., beginning Operation Pedro Pan.
In the first two years of the revolution, Cuba loses more than 50% of its doctors and teachers.
At the United Nations Security Council, Cuba charges that the United States is preparing an invasion.
In a speech, Castro demands that United States embassy staff be reduced to eleven, the same number as Cuba's embassy in Washington.
Included are rocket launchers, truck-pulled field artillery, heavy tanks, antiaircraft and anti-tank guns.
He says, ""After the uprising, there will have to be a military decision on whether to help the people with a mass invasion or with a continuation of the infiltration by specially trained men.
Eloy Gutierrez Menoyo and members of the Second Front of Escanbray during the revolution arrive in Key West, Florida, on a fleet of three fishing boats.
It is also true that at first the Communists distrusted me and us rebels.
It was a justified distrust, an absolutely correct position, ideologically and politically.
The Communists were right to be distrustful because we of the Sierra, leaders of the guerrillas, were still full of petty-bourgeois prejudices and defects, despite Marxist reading.
The ideas were not clear to us, though we wanted with all our strength to destroy tyranny and privileges.
Then we came together, we understood each other, and began to collaborate.
The Communists have given much blood, much heroism, to the Cuban cause.
At least ten violations of Cuban airspace by hostile airplanes are reported.
Major William A Morgan and Major Jesus Carreras Zayas, both former military aides to Castro, are executed in Havana for treason.
A number of leaders opposing the revolution are arrested at a strategy meeting in Miramar, including Humberto Sori Marin, Manuel Puig, and Regelio Gonzalez Corso.
Immigration and Naturalization agents in Miami arrest Rolando Masferrer Rojas.
The alleged attack violates the Neutrality Act that forbids the launching of any military expedition from United States territory against a nation with which the United States is not at war.
The Kennedy Administration opposes pro-Batista exiles while encouraging other anti-Castro groups.
Jose Miro Cardona, issues a statement that asserts, ""We are not, nor could we be, counterrevolutionaries.
We were revolutionists who fought against the previous regime, which had impoverished the whole country for the benefit of a minority lust112 ing for gold and power.
Rolando Masferrer Rojas is formally charged with violating United States Neutrality Laws in an attempt to overthrow Cuba's Fidel Castro.
Another explosion at the store El Encanto destroys the seven-story building.
Cuban airfields are bombed by ""mystery planes"" in order to destroy the Revolution' s air force.
A total of eight B-26 bombers attack airfields at Ciudad Libertad , San Antonio de los Banyos and Santiago de Cuba.
After three days of lighting the invading force is defeated by the Cuban army.
In Havana, 10 counterrevolutionaries, including Humberto Sori Marin, Manuel Puig, and Regelio Gonzalez Corso are executed for treason.
A record low rainfall creates one of the most severe droughts in the island's history.
James Luther Adams, Lillian Hellman, David Owen, David Riesman, Noam Chomsky, Timothy Leary and others.
Five Cubans and one American are executed by firing squad for ""counterrevolutionary activities"" during the Bay of Pigs invasion.
At the White House, a program against the government of Fidel Castro is introduced by the name Operation Mongoose.
The United States Federal case against Rolando Masferrer Rojas is dismissed without explanation.
He had been charged with violating United States neutrality laws by financing a twenty-seven-man invasion of Cuba.
United States President John F Kennedy authorizes Operation Mongoose, which aims to eliminate Fidel Castro and the Cuban Revolution.
Under United States encouragement, the Organization of American States suspends Cuban membership.
President Kennedy broadens the partial trade restrictions imposed by Eisenhower to a ban on all trade with Cuba, except for non-subsidized sale of foods and medicines.
An assortment of United States naval vessels gathers about the Cuban coastline.
The regime, with all the power of repression at its disposal, has shown that it can contain the present level of resistance activity; 4) The regime's apparatus for surveillance and repression should be able to cope with any popular tendency toward active resistance.
Any impulse toward widespread revolt is inhibited by the fear that the apparatus inspires, and also by the lack of dynamic leadership and of any expectation of liberation within the foreseeable future.
President Kennedy expands the Cuban embargo to include imports of all goods made from or containing Cuban materials, even if made in other countries.
Biryuzov, commander of the Strategic Rocket Forces, and a high-level delegation, arrives secretly in Havana to suggest the deployment of nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Between January and August, 5,780 counterrevolutionary actions are reportedly carried out in Cuba. involve sabotage of important economic objectives.
The United States Coast Guard impounds two boats in Marathon, Florida, after members of the Florida-based ""Student Revolutionary Directorate"" used them to fire automatic weapons at Havana beachfront buildings the night before.
The twenty three members of the expedition are not arrested, and no charges are brought against them.
Discredit and isolate the regime; Harass the economy; Intensify intelligence collection; plit regime leadership and relations with Bloc; Assist Cuban exile groups and Latin American governments to take actions; f Be prepared to exploit a revolt.
United States senators George Smathers, Strom Thurmond and Kenneth B Keating propose direct aggression against Cuba.
Soviet freighter Poltava arrives in Cuba with the second shipment of MRBMs.
In Havana, five C.I A agents are arrested and large quantities of weapons are confiscated.
United States government cables all Latin American governments and N.A.T.O. countries new measures to tighten the economic embargo against Cuba.
In Washington, a memo from Edwin M Martin (Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs) to U Alexis Johnson (Deputy Under Secretary of State for Political Affairs) outlines a two-track course of covert action against Cuba.
President Kennedy demands the withdrawal of Soviet missiles and imposes a naval blockade.
Khrushchev agrees on condition that Cuba receives guarantee of nonaggression from the United States and Jupiter missiles aimed at the Soviet Union are removed from Turkey.
At a press conference, President Kennedy states that as long as Cuba commits no aggressive acts against any nation in the western hemisphere, it was never the intention of the United States to invade Cuba.
The United States exchanges $53 million of medicines and baby food for 1,113 exiles captured in the ""Bay of Pigs"" invasion.
In Miami, President Kennedy meets with survivors of the 2506 Brigade in a ceremony televised from the Orange Bowl.
The Kennedy administration prohibits travel to Cuba and makes financial and commercial transactions with Cuba illegal for United States citizens.
In a meeting at the White House that includes Cyrus Vance, Richard Helms, McGeorge Bundy and additional staff from the State Department and the C.I.A., President Kennedy objects to exile groups holding press conferences after illegal aggressions against Cuba.
She adds that in her opinion Che Guevara, Raul Castro and Vilma Espin are opposed to any idea of rapprochement.
The Second National Front of Escambray, Alpha-66, the Anti-Communist Liberation Fr ont, and elements of the People's Revolutionary Movement and the 30th of November Movement have reached a working agreement.
Although the working agreement is essentially action-oriented, the member organizations tend to the view that the original revolution promised by Castro should be reclaimed and redirected.
The adherence of Manuel Ray's Revolutionary Junta would increase the influence of this grouping, which probably has the most potential appeal to Castro's opponents within Cuba, but which is an object of concern to more conservative exiles.
Revolutionary Unity , Revolutionary Recuperation Movement , Christian Democratic Movement , Revolutionary Student Directorate , and other less well-organized center groups, have held aloof from attempts at unity.
The Alliance for Cuban Liberty , and the Association for Economic Recovery of Cuba have had difficulty attracting adherents.
They principally look to the return of their lost property, rather than action and politics.
Further down the document states that ""So far the efforts toward unity have been tentative and competitive.
Political divisions, both ideological and personal, are deep and there appears to be little disposition or ability to effect a real accommodation of views.
The groups on the left distrust those on the right and vice versa; the center groups are wary of both.
Any formula for unity would have to be so diluted as to be almost meaningless.
The plan renews support for exile attacks on selected Cuban targets that include transportation facilities, power plants, fuel production and storage operations.
President Kennedy asks French journalist Jean Daniel to tell Castro that he is now ready to negotiate normal relations and drop the embargo.
Cuba becomes the first nation in the Western Hemisphere to jam American radio broadcasts.
Castro tells American journalist Herbert L Matthews that Cubans had put forward the idea of Soviet missiles on the island.
Castro sends a verbal message to President Lyndon B Johnson through Lisa Howard of ABC News.
Castro's sister, Juanita Castro, defects, and becomes a prominent radio commentator in Miami.
The Department of State immediately issues a sharp rejection; Cuba must first end its dependency on the Soviets, and cease to support revolutionary groups in Latin America.
The Organization of American States adopts mandatory sanctions against Cuba, requiring all members to sever diplomatic and trade relations.
Khrushchev is ousted as First Secretary and Premier of the Soviet Union.
Che Guevara resigns his Cuban citizenship and leaves to wage armed struggle in Latin America.
The port is opened to foreign boats, and within two months about 7,500 refugees have arrived in the United States December 1.
In its first year, the airlift brings more than 45,000 refugees only about 5% require federal assistance, and only for a short time.
Cuba announces a new trade agreement with the Soviet Union that includes credits for $91 million.
United States President Lyndon B Johnson signs into law the Cuban Adjustment Act, which exempts Cuban immigrants from general United States migration laws.
Any Cuban who has reached United States territory since January 1, 1959 is eligible for permanent residency after two years.3,000 Cubans immediately apply for permanent status.
United States Air Force pilot Everett Jackson is shot down over Cuba and captured after dropping arms and equipment intended for counterrevolutionaries in Las Villas province.
Rolando Masferrer Rojas and sixty-seven others are arrested in Marathon, Florida, for an alleged plot to invade Haiti and then Cuba.
Among the weapons seized by United States federal agents are machine guns, handguns and knives.
The first meeting of the Latin American Solidarity Organization opens in Havana.
Che Guevara is killed in Bolivia by United States -trained rangers in the village of Vallegrande.
The Cuban government announces petroleum rationing due to a cutback in deliveries from the Soviet Union.
Two British journalists are arrested and then expelled after photographing military sites in Havana.
In Havana, an American pilot is captured when his small plane is shot down after dropping a cargo of weapons for counterrevolutionaries.
It is asserted that had the microfaction succeeded, ""it would have subordinated Cuban sovereignty"" to the Soviets.
In Miami, two businesses who regularly ship packages to Cuba are bombed before dawn.
Castro launches the ""revolutionary offensive"" which nationalizes 55,000 small businesses and leads to state control of nearly all trades and services.
A new economic agreement with the Soviet Union reveals a 13% decrease from the previous year.
United States Senator Robert F Kennedy is shot in Los Angeles, California.
Orlando Bosch and others fire a bazooka at a Polish freighter docked in the port of Miami.
Castro announces the start of a campaign to produce ten million tons of sugar in the next harvest.
The Boeing 727, with eighty passengers and a six-person crew, lands in Havana's Jose Marti Airport at 10:21m.
The first contingent of the Venceremos Brigade, a group of volunteer workers from the U.S., arrives in Cuba to work on the sugar harvest.
A report of the Cuban Academy of Sciences asserts that the Cuban family is in a state of crisis.
The United States warns the Soviet Union to discontinue construction of a nuclear submarine base in Cienfuegos.
By this time, more than 85 percent of Cuban trade is with the U.S.S.R. and allies.
In Miami, a few hundred Cuban exiles gather to dedicate a monument to the ten-year anniversary of the Bay of Pigs invasion.
In Puerto Rico, on the eightiet anniversary of Albizu Campos' birth, 80,000 people march through San Juan demanding independence.
Castro arrives in Chile for a three-week visit, his first to a Latin American country since 1959.
Castro begins a sixty-three-day tour of Africa, Eastern Europe, and the Soviet Union.
Cuba joins the Council of Mutual Economic Assistance , the Soviet trading bloc based on coordinated central planning and barter exchange.
At the United Nations, Cuba requests that in light of adopted resolution 1541 that the United Nations declare that Puerto Rico has a right to self-determination.
Cuba accepts a United States proposal to begin formal negotiations over the problem of airline hijackings.
Eastern Airlines flight 8894 lands at Miami International Airport at 11:55 A.M. with the last eighty-four passengers of the Cuban airlift.
Since 1965, 3,049 flights had brought 260,561 Cubans to the U.S., making this the largest airborne refugee operation in American history.
The 13 Congress of the Cuban Labor Confederation ties wages to productivity in an effort to improve efficiency.
The Committees for the Defense of the Revolution celebrates its 13* year.
According to Cuba's official newspaper Granma, the total membership is now about 4,750,000.
OMEGA 7, an anti-Castro paramilitary group is founded in the United States September 28.
They are the first United States elected officials to visit the island since the break of diplomatic relations.
In a T.V. interview from Mexico City, United States Senator Edward M Kennedy urges the United States government to lift the embargo and normalize relations with Cuba.
Cuban exile leader Luciano Nieves is assassinated after coming out in support for dialogue with Cuba.
Maurice A Ferre, Mayor of Miami, asks Attorney General Edward H Levi for federal help to combat ""violence in the Cuban exile community that the police regard as politically motivated.
Mayor Ferre sites the assassination of Luciano Nieves, and the bombings of T.V. station WKID in Dania, among other incidents.
Mayor Ferre estimates that the actual terrorists number less than two dozen.
A government survey seeks to discover why so few women ran in the 1974 People's Power elections and why so few were elected.
The Organization of American States votes to end political and economic sanctions against Cuba.
This opens the way for each member nation to decide whether to have diplomatic and trade relations with Cuba, which many had already established.
At the request of the newly inaugurated Angolan government, Cuba sends a large contingent of troops to help the Angolans repel an invasion by South African forces launched on October 23.
The report identifies over eight attempted plots to kill Castro between 1960 and 1965, as well as additional plans against other Cuban leaders.
It adopts party statues, a programmatic platform, and approves the draft of the constitution.
President Ford announces that Cuban involvement in Angola prevents the possibility of restoring full diplomatic relations in the near future.
The 1988 Cuban/ Angolan victory at Cuito Canavale would mark the turning point in the frontline states' war against the apartheid regime.
Among the changes is the establishment of new administrative division of the island.
It seeks to preserve and strengthen families, promote social changes and increase the participation of women in Cuban society.
United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger states that there is no possibility of United States relations with Cuba while Cuba has troops in Africa.
Cuban troops in Angola would go on to play a decisive role in defeating the South African army and hastening apartheids demise.
Cuban airliner crashes after an explosion nine minutes out of Barbados, killing 73 people, most of them teenagers.
In 1998, Carrilles admits to over a decade of anti-Castro terrorist activities funded by the CubanAmerican National Foundation , a Miami-based non-profit organization and the most powerful lobby in Washington.
At a mass funeral for the victims of the October 6 bombing, Castro blames the sabotage on the C.LAOctober.
Orlando Bosch is arrested in Venezuela in connection with downing of the Cuban airliner that killed seventythree people.
Fidel Castro is elected president of the State Council, which, under the new constitution, consolidates the previous positions of president and prime minister.
The new president serves as head of state, head of government, and commander in chief of the Armed Forces.
United States President Carter drops the ban on travel to Cuba and on United States citizens spending dollars in Cuba.
Legendary jazz trumpeter Dizzy Gillespie travels to Havana and meets his soon to be protege, Arturo Sandoval.
The United States and Cuba sign a maritime boundary and fishing rights accord.
The United States and Cuba open interests sections in each other's capitals.
Somalia expels all Soviet advisors and breaks diplomatic relations with Cuba, citing the presence of Cuban and Soviet advisors in Ethiopia.
At the request of the Ethiopian government, thousands of Cuban troops, supported and led by Soviet, East German and Cuban officers, help repel a Somali invasion of Ethiopia.
United States Secretary of State, Cyrus Vance, states that he does not foresee the normalization of relations with Cuba due to the presence of Cuban troops in Africa.
Castro calls for the removal of United States military bases from Guantanamo Bay.
Bombings of the Cuban United Nations Mission, the Cuban Interests Section, and the Soviet Mission by anti-Castro exile groups follow throughout the fall.
United States government announces that the full force of the law will be used against those responsible for the July terrorist actions.
Ted Weiss introduces unsuccessful legislation to end the United States trade blockade against Cuba and re-establish diplomatic relations.
Cuba develops close relations with the Sandinista government in Nicaragua.
At a meeting of the sixth summit of the Nonaligned Movement in Havana, Castro is elected chair of the movement and serves until 1982.
A new penal code takes effect, replacing the criminal code passed in 1936.
We had been given a little food and medicine, but we had no idea what it was like out there beyond the bars.
In the 1980s, he was a prize winning investigative journalist who traveled abroad frequently.
From Dream To Reality', a report on the Soviet Space Program and its prospects in 1985.
Ten years later, he was marooned in the squalor of centro Habana, Havana's most dilapidated and desperately poor neighborhood, and began writing a series of shocking vignettes about the decay engulfing the city.
The stories were brought together to form the Havana Cycle, better known as the Dirty Havana Trilogy, and was first published in 1998 in Spain after being turned down by Cuban printing houses.
I have brought the Fidel Castro interview together while sampling Dirty Havana Trilogy to bring into relief the chasm between the high priest of the Revolution and the common people down below.
I conduct this exercise not to mock Fidel Castro or discredit thegenuine gains of the Cuban Revolution but to juxtapose its lofty ideals and official pronouncements with the sheer madness of the 1990s as the country descended into pure hell.
I saw it with my own eyes and I have no doubt that Fidel Castro was fully aware of what was occurring.
The interview with Fidel Castro begins Federico Mayor With China, Vietnam and North Korea, Cuba is considered the last bulwark of socialism.
They make up the assemblies of their respective municipalities, and nominate candidates to the provincial and national assemblies, the highest bodies of state power at those levels.
The delegates, who are chosen through a secret ballot, must receive over 50% of the valid notes in their corresponding jurisdictions.
She had recently been widowed, and now she lived in fear. Since her husband died, she was a filthy mess.
Even squashed flatter than a cockroach, she was still a bossy and dictatorial as ever, which is why even her daughter avoided her.
When I was at the door, she said, ""The people can't be neglected this way.
This building is falling to pieces, there's never any water, or gas, or food.
We made a pact to live together and love each other forever, she with her sculptures and me with my novels.
In those days, she called me daddy and she was very longing and she'd say, ""I really need you, daddy.
She'd had solo shows, been toasted with California wine, and sold her drawings for a thousand dollars each.
And she pointed out the gallery owner and a little fag who helped her hang the show, and her cousin and the neighbors, who were there too.
Fidel Castro — The United States, such a vocal advocate of multi-party systems, has two parties that are so perfectly similar in their methods, objectives and goals that they have practically created the most perfect one-party system in the world.
Over 50% of the people in that ""democratic country"" do not even cast a vote, and the team that manages to raise the most funds often wins with the votes of only 25% of the electorate.
The political system is undermined by disputes, vanity and personal ambition or by interests groups operating within the established economic and social model and there is no alternative for a change in the system.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez — They built flimsy rafts out of tires, board, and ropes, and they set out to sea as merrily as if they were on their way to a picnic.
For four years, people had been starving and going mad in my country, but Havana suffered most.
Fidel Castro — The developed capitalist system, which later gave rise to modern imperialism, has finally imposed a neoliberal and globalized order that is simply unsustainable.
It has created a world of speculation where fictitious wealth and stocks have been created that has nothing to do with actual production.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez — I went to see Joseito, a taxi driver who lost his job in the crisis and now was gambling for a living.
The police made a sweep sometimes and wiped out two or three, locked everybody up for a few days, and then let them go.
I had three hundred pesos in my pocket, and Joseito convinced me to play.
I never win anything when I gamble, but he was ranking it in from the start.
Federico Mayor Forty-one years after the Revolution, and despite all of the difficulties it has had to confront, the regime that you established has endured.
Fidel Castro The tireless struggle and work alongside the people and for the people.
The fact that we have settled for convictions and acted accordingly that we believe in humankind and in being our country's slaves and not its masters.
We believe in building upon solid principles, in seeking out and producing solutions, even in apparently impossible and unreal conditions in preserving the honesty of those with the highest political and administrative responsibilities, that is, in transforming politics into a priesthood.
This could be a partial answer to your question, setting aside many other elements particularly related to our country and this historical era.
The poor man, or slave, it makes no difference what you call him, can't afford to have a complex ethical code or demand much from his pride, since he's always in danger of starving to death.
But we men make things a little more complicated, wanting to rebel, take stands, and all that.
Our national currency experienced an extraordinary devaluation, and the budget deficit reached 35% of our gross domestic product.
In spite of this, we did not close down a single heath care center, a single school or daycare center, a single university, or a single sports facility.
Nobody was fired and left on his own without employment or social security, even when fuel and raw materials were most scarce.
There was not even a trace of the customary and hideous shock policies so highly.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez ""Pedrojoan fell off a bus and they took him to the hospital!"" — I had to get hold of myself.
They told me which hospital he had been taken to, and I shot off like an arrow.
It was the worst hospital in Havana, the dirtiest and most godforsaken of them all.
The boy and a teacher had already been there for two hours, and no one had attended to them.
He had been hanging out the door of a crowded bus, when he started to lose his grip.
I'm falling."" But the asshole said, ""So fall, what do I care?"" And then Pedrojoan was head over heels in the street, the bus still going forty miles an hour.
Fidel Castro — We have opened up the economy to the extent that it has been possible and necessary.
We have not gone for the same insanity and follies as in other places, where the recommendations of European and American experts have been followed as if they were Biblical prophets.
This happened, as we all know, in both former socialist countries and in others that never were socialists, under the pious, tolerant, and complicit cover of the neoliberal philosophy that has become a universal pandemic.
The West is well aware of where the money is deposited and what has happened to the embezzled or stolen funds, but nobody has said a word about it.
It had been thirty-five years since vendors were heard in full cry in Cuba.
Now they were starting up again, but fearfully, whispering in the customer's ears, sometimes so softly and rapidly they couldn't be understood.
Once in a while a policeman would ""confiscate"" a bag full of pizzas or hamburgers and take all the vendor's money for good measure.
The guy would hand everything over, terrified, because otherwise he'd be slapped with fines, a trial, and a criminal record.
Federico Mayor — The demise of the U.S.S.R. suddenly deprived Cuba of precious aid.
Fidel Castro — They were not trying to influence the Revolution but to destroy it.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez — I was buying food outside the city and bringing it back and selling it in Havana.
Anything would sell, from heads of garlic to lemons, even ox meat, whatever could be found.
The farmer could barely hold the men off, a crowd with machetes, knives, and sacks.
The farmer explained that the animal was sick when it died and that it was rotting quickly.
All they were asking was to be allowed to take a piece of it, and they would bury the head and the hooves themselves, and whatever else was left of the mangy, skeletal beast, covered in green flies.
Federico Mayor But, this does not mean that the continuation of the embargo is another test that the Cuban people can easily overcome.
Fidel Castro -The blockade, of course, is a painful burden for each and every Cuban.
The Third World nations, as well as most of the United Nations member countries, have repeatedly demanded he lifting of the blockade.
This just kept getting worse, and everyone was trying to get out however they could, go somewhere else.
Carlitos, born and raised in the midst of chaos, called his mother and brother every day, crying.
He was spending a fortune on phone calls and he wasn't concentrating his interests or energy on anything concrete.
In any case, all conditioning becomes unacceptable when the inalienable principles of our homeland are involved.
The political organization adopted by a sovereign nation cannot be subjected to conditions.
Cuba will neither negotiate nor sell out its Revolution, which has cost the blood and the sacrifice of many of its sons and daughters.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez — Three weeks passed, and nothing strange happened.
In the early hours of the morning, we tried to pick up a dirty old man.
When I moved him so two of us could lift him and carry him to the truck, we saw he was lying in a puddle of blood.
He vomited up some black blood; at the same time he clutched a sack of mangoes.
The sack was heavy, but he dragged it with him, vomiting black blood on the mangoes.
Cuba will never accept political conditions from the European Union, and much less from the United States.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez — I stuck out my hand and started to ask everyone who passed by for money, muttering something indecipherable.
When you're begging, you can't speak clearly, or try to make sense, or anything like that.
You're pathetic vermin, a germ begging for a few coins for the love of God.
Staring like a moron or an idiot, shoving my upturned palm in people's faces and babbling gibberish.
They're all scraping bottom themselves, and they hate anyone who comes complaining to them.
Federico Mayor Since the days of McCarthyism, Washington has tended to consider that the only regimes that are harmful and must be eliminated are the communist regimes.
But the White House has tolerated, without blinking, the likes of Somoza, Trujillo, Duvalier and others.
Fidel Castro — It would be better not to delve into the hypocrisy and indecency of that policy.
The market will dry up some day for the industry of lies; it is drying up already.
If you really delve into the truth, you will realize that the political conception of imperialism, as well as the neoliberal economic order and globalization process imposed on the world, is orphaned and defenseless when it comes to ideas and ethics.
It is in this field that the main struggle of our times will be decided.
And the final result of this battle, with no possible alternative, will be on the side of truth, and thus on the side of humanity.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez The Chicano and I drank a lot of beers sitting at a table in the lobby of the Hotel Deauville.
On a Sunday night in Central Havana it's dangerous to sit down to drink with a fat, rosy-cheeked white guy.
The hordes get a whiff of dollars and circle around, ready to sink in their fangs.
Children begging for coins, whores making advances, guys offering rum, tobacco, aphrodisiacs, everything on the black market, at very low prices.
After socialism and don't bite the hand that feeds you, it was every man for himself.
With regard to Hillary Clinton, I remember when she appeared before Congress and so brilliantly defended a social program for medical services, which are beyond the reach of millions of poor people in America.
It was said there were epidemics of conjunctivitis, hepatitis, and who knows what else, and the private stands were closed.
How lovely it must be to come visit for a week and admire the sunsets from a far-off, quiet place without getting too involved.
Some tasks are highly individual and often manual and craft-like; their large-scale production and technology are not fundamental.
However, there are investments that require capital, technology and markets, in which associations with foreign companies can be highly advisable.
The potential oil deposits in the 110,000 square kilometers of the Gulf of Mexico belonging to Cuba could not be explored or exploited by our country without technology and capital from abroad.
The guy next door was still making tin buckets, but he didn't want a helper.
If only I could get a job riding with a truck driver, that would be pure happiness.
I'd sell a few joints for him and that way I'd make enough to keep on until who knows when.
Fidel Castro — On the other hand, within the country, when it comes to obtaining the highest quality and yield in special crops like tobaccothe work of dedicated and almost fanatical lovers of this type of farming, which should be manual and carried out on small plots of land no machine or big company could replace the individual work.
Those people with these special qualities are given the land they need, free of charge, in order to farm it on their own.
Also procurement and marketing state enterprises have successfully developed.
He was living in a dump in Mantilla with a f . . . -up son who supported himself by selling grass, but who spent more time in jail than he spent in their dump selling the stuff he brought back from Baracoa.
He sold coconut oil, coffee, and chocolate too, on the black market, but he made his real money dealing in excellent mountain weed and he brought so much back that he could sell it cheap.
Fidel Castro — Our ideology and our preference is socialist, which bears no relation whatsoever to the selfishness, privileges and inequalities of capitalist society.
In our homeland, nothing will pass into the hands of a high-ranking official, and nothing will be given away to accomplices and friends.
Nothing can be efficiently exploited for the benefit of our society will pass into the hands of either Cuban or foreign individuals.
At the same time, I can assure you that the safest investments in the world are those authorized in Cuba, which are protected by law and by the countrys honor.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez — At the rum dispensary, the line was around the block, but I sidled up, gave the worker a look, and handed him my bottle.
If you've got money, there's no reason to stand clutching your ration book and cooling your heels for two hours just to buy a bottle of rum.
It pisses them off when someone with money comes along and screws them.
Fidel Castro — As to the reference you made to the dollarization of the economy, I should say two things.
After Bretton Woods, the United States acquired the privilege of issuing the reserve currency of the world economy.
Secondly, there is a national currency in Cuba that is not ruled in any way by the International Monetary Fund.
As I noted earlier, that currency has experience a sevenfold increase in value, and in record time.
I can say what I want, since now I'm so old they won't do anything to me.
There's no place in the world where the government can take care of everything.
I paid ninety pesos a month in rent, but it was worth it because she wouldn't let anyone fix anything themselves, not even a faucet.
Fidel Castro At the same time, a convertible peso has been established, on a part with the dollar, whose free circulation was simply an unavoidable need, not the result of an economic conception.
I believe that in the future it will never be necessary again to ban the possession of dollars or other foreign currencies, but its free circulation for the payment of many goods and services will only last for as long as the interests of the Revolution make it advisable.
The little girls hustling in Havana are twenty years old, and they look like models.
Vicious, too, and they've got deals going with the police, taxi drivers, hotel concierges.
Fidel Castro — I recently attended an international economists meeting in Havana.
Among the participants there were representatives of financially distressed countries where debt servicing accounts for over 40% of budget spending.
There is clearly a great sense of helplessness in the face of the challenges posed by an inevitable globalization process marked so far by the fatal sign of neoliberalism.
At that meeting, the representatives of the Inter-American Development Bank and the World Bank defended their points of view with complete freedom, but for many of those present the conclusions were very clear regarding the unsustainable nature of the prevailing economic order.
She's fat, in her fifties, her legs covered with cellulite and big, ugly, purple varicose veins.
Glancing at me, she raised her eyebrows in greeting, and kept digging in her nose, absorbed in her boogers.
Thank goodness her daughter's a little sex kitten and can take care of herself.
Ancient, ugly, and pot-bellied he may be, but he doles out dollars like there's no tomorrow.
Fidel Castro — It is not possible to continue along the path that widens the gap between the poor and the rich countries and produces increasingly serious social inequalities within them all.
At the moment, Latin American and Caribbean integration is fundamental.
It is only by joining together that we can negotiate our role in this hemisphere and the same applies to the Third World countries vis-a-vis the powerful and insatiable club of the wealthy.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez I went back to my room on the roof with its common bathroom, the most disgusting bathroom in the world, shared by fifty neighbors who multiply like rabbits, since most of them are from the east of the island.
In Guantanamo a person joins the police force and then arranges to be transferred to Havana , dragging the whole family along.
Each day no fewer than two hundred people s***, pee, and wash in that bathroom.
I s*** in a piece of paper and I toss the bundle onto the roof of the building next door, which isn't as high.
Fidel Castro I have also said that because the current world economic order is unsustainable, it faces the very real danger of a catastrophic collapse, infinitely worse than the disaster and prolonged crisis set off in 1929 by the crash of the United States stock market, where stocks had been inflated beyond sustainable levels.
Not even the enthusiastic and highly experienced Allan Greenspan, chairman of the United States Federal Reserve whose sleepless eyes do not stray for a minute from the statistical data emanating from the uncontrollable and unpredictable roulette wheel that is the speculative system, in which 50% of United States families have placed their debts and invested their savings would dare to claim that this danger does not exist.
The remedy to prevent it has not been invented, nor can it be invented within such a system.
The mouths of the sewers were clogged where they opened onto the bay and s*** was flooding the street in front of the Los Marinos bar.
In front of Los Marinos, a group of baby sluts were waiting for customers, very young, pretty, flirtatious, smelling of perfume.
It had been a while since Cholo came by this way, but he supposed that one whore was the same as the next, just as it had always been.
The girl was surprised that such a disgusting old man would call for her.
The changes will not spring forth from anyone's head, but the heads must be prepared for these inevitable changes, which will take on a wide variety of forms and follow a wide variety of paths.
From my point of view, the changes will fundamentally result from the action of the masses, which nothing would succeed in holding back.
The building dates back to 1936, and in its heyday it mimicked the massive banks of Boston and Philadelphia, with their solid, sober facades.
In fact, the facade is still in good shape, and tourists are always amazed by it and take pictures, an did even appear in magazines, especially as photographed on stormy days, I've seen impressive photos, with the wild sea crashing against the Malecon, in that gray-blue hurricane light, the building splashed with water but solid and August.
And makeshift rooms crowding the hallways and black men's quarrels and brawls.
The blindness, superficiality and irresponsibility of the so-called political class will make the road more difficult, but not impregnable.
In the back there was a tiny space for a kerosene stove, and I had to stand hunched over, because a wooden platform with a ladder cut the room in half.
She put the boy down in one comer, and we took up the rest of the space, f*** frantically for hours.
Or a little tenderly, at least; she kept telling me that no man had ever f*** her that way.
Just as we were in the middle of things, stones and dust started to rain down on us.
Fidel Castro — People frequently talk about the horrors of the holocaust and the genocide that have taken place throughout the century, but they seem to forget that every year, as a result of the economic order we have been discussing here, tens of millions of people starve to death or die of preventable diseases.
They can wield statistics of apparently positive growth but in the end things remain the same or even worsen in the Third World countries.
Growth often rests on the accumulation of consumer goods than contribute nothing to true development and a better distribution of wealth.
The truth is that after several decades of neoliberalism, the rich are becoming increasingly richer while the poor are both more numerous and increasingly poorer.
Isabel cooked it Italian style, with lots of garlic, and it was delicious.
December came, and I was waiting for the first wind from the north to set out to sea again.
We were getting along selling that, because Isabel had decided she wanted to play wife, claiming that Yankees made her sick.
They stood in the middle of the roof with Baldomero in his handcuffs carrying the plastic bag.
All the neighbors were watching nervously and suspiciously from their doorways.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez — Day was dawning, a red-orange stain behind heavy, dirty-gray clouds.
And I was almost frozen. — I had been fishing all night, floating thirteen hundred feet from shore, sitting in the hollow for a little raft made from an inner tube.
Floating nearby were at least twenty other fishermen like me, but September and October aren't good months.
I was like that old man from Cojimar who went fishing alone in his boat on the Gulf Stream and didn't catch a fish for eighty-four days. — Except that old man was a hero in the classic sense, worn down to the bone but never vanquished.
These days, no one is as stubborn as he was or has such a sense of duty or devotion to their work.
The stuff heroes are made of gets scarcer every day. — That's why politicians and clergymen talk themselves hoarse urging loyalty and solidarity.
The politicians and the clergymen think they can make everything change by sheer force of will, by spontaneous generation.
We like to break off from the pack and keep watch from a distance, eluding the snapping jaws of our fellows.
Their economies, which sometimes appear to be doing well according to the macroeconomic figures, have fallen prey to major financial and technological powers.
All of these economies are subject to flights of capital to the wealthy countries, in amounts that nobody fully knows or can calculate.
Their weak currencies are defenseless against the attacks of speculators.
The hard currency reserves with which they attempt to defend their economies, at the high cost of idle funds that do not contribute to economies, at the high cost of idle funds that do not contribute to economic and social development, are lost in a matter of days when faced with any danger of devaluation.
Incomes earned through a privatization that gives away national heritage are lost without providing the slightest benefit.
The threat of a financial crisis or devaluation leads to overnight flight of all forms of capital, including both the shortterm loans and the funds of nationals terrified by the imminent risk of seeing their savings dwindle.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez The night passed, me sitting slumped on the Malecon, not a cent in my pocket, no rum, no food, no joints to puff and get high on.
I went to bed early, but I slept very badly; it was anxiety, hunger, cockroaches wandering around, a rat gnawing, and a presence in Isabel's room.
It isn't clear exactly what's wrong, but Isabel is bad about caring for the santos, and that's why it's so murky in here.
Finally I slept a little, troubled by nightmares, fears, and a terrible stink of s*** coming from the bathroom; for two days there 'd been no water.
Latin America, like the rest of the Third World, is a victim of the international economic order imposed, which I have already described as unsustainable.
Divided and balkanized as they are, and seduced by deceptive illusions of progress and development emanating from the siren song of a hemispheric free trade agreement, the countries of Latin America are in danger of forever losing their independence and of being annexed by the United States.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez I opened the door and the slut came in, still dressed to go out, in tiny shining gold shorts with half her butt hanging out, a tight little see-through shirt showing off her beautiful naked breasts, and white spike-heeled boots.
Lots of times, I've tried to recruit her for our little rooftop orgies, but there's no way.
Fidel Castro — Living in a consumer society does not necessarily make people educated.
It is amazing, sometimes, how their knowledge can be superficial and simplistic.
Cuba has raised the average educational level on its people to ninth grade, and this is just the beginning.
In ten years, their average cultural level will be that of a university graduate; and that will be comprehensive, not simplistic knowledge.
No one can prevent our people from achieving the goal of being the most cultivated, in addition to having a profound political culture that is neither dogmatic nor sectarian; a political culture that is severely lacking in many of the world's wealthiest nations.
WE will place at the service of this lofty goal the great technologies created by humankind, while avoiding commercial advertising. — It would be perhaps be better to wait a while before talking about true freedom of expression and thought because that can never be reconciled with a brutal economic and social capitalist system that fails to respect culture, solidarity, and ethics.
Some important event was coming up, maybe the anniversary of some historic occasion or the fall tourist season.
Some things were important and others weren't; some things were good and some were bad.
Federico Mayor For several years now, we have seen an embryo of opposition being born on the island; that is, dissident groups are beginning to organize.
Pedro Juan Gutierrez — A green Jeep came speeding down San Lazaro, mounted with two loudspeakers and two red flags.
It was broadcasting a protest speech, but it was moving so quickly the speech was impossible to understand.
Everything runs off into the ocean, but the kids, and some adults too, come anyway.
They spend hours in the sun, drinking rum and eating ices, ignoring the sewer smell and enjoying themselves.
The tourists take pictures of them, and they stand stock still, laughing or making faces for the camera.
After each photo, they drop their poses, and the children run to beg for coins.
Our country has been the target of dirty warfare, mercenary invasions and threats of direct military attacks.
She lived alone on the eighth floor, second from the top, of a building on San Lazaro, in Central Havana.
It depressed her to go out on the balcony and look down on what resembled the aftermath of a bombing.
For a long time now, she hadn't even opened the balcony doors. — More and more often she took refuge in the memories stored in her wardrobe and dresser drawers.
When they met, she was a lovely eighteen-yearold girl, and he was a man of forty-nine, a widower, polished and paternal.
She was dazzled by the glamour of it all, and five days later they were married.
It filled up with common people from the provinces, uncouth blacks, ragged, dirty, rude people.
The buildings crumbled since no one took care of them, and little by little, they became dormitories, thousands of people crowded into them like roaches, skinny, underfed, dirty, unemployed people, drinking rum at all hours, smoking marijuana, beating on drums, and multiplying like rabbits, people without perspective, with limited horizons.
Nobody was sad or wanted to kill themselves or was terrified for fear the ruins would collapse and bury them alive.
In the middle of the debacle, they laughed, lived their lives, tried to enjoy themselves as best they could.
Fidel Castro — Before, they each dreamed of their own happiness, and today, they all dream of happiness for everyone.
All he had to wear was one pair of shorts and one shirt, both old and stained, and a worn-out pair of rubber sandals.
His dream was to go to the United States and live in one of those cities where it snowed and it was cold, where a person could really bundle up.
He would v e liked to work as a truck driver or a bus driver, marry a blond, blue-eyed American woman, drive around in his super modern truck and have three or four very light-skinned children, thought it was possible they might turn out like their grandparents, in which case they'd be even blacker than he was.
His hair was kinky and he had a big mouth and dark skin, but he didn't quite look black.
Ever since he was a kid people called him ""The Moor"", because he looked Arab.
He knew he was handsome, but he wanted to be white, suave, well-dressed, and have lots of money and a car and a nice house.
Older men and women were nice, because they were like mothers or fathers as well as lovers, and he never had to worry about money.
A floating 1951 Chevy pickup with its drive shaft attached to a propeller is driven across the high seas towards Florida.
Cuba's population is slightly more than Michigan's and is just 3.79% the size of the total United States population of 301,000,000.
A demographic crisis awaits Cuba as the working age population stagnates while the number of retirees soars.
The United States faces a similar crisis as baby boomers retire en masse after 2010.
Cuba's infant mortality rate of 6.04 per 1000 live births is on a par with infant mortality in the United States.
Life expectancy is 77. years compared to 77. in the United States American manufacturing and pharmaceutical companies dominate world markets.
Considering the financial and technological gap between the United States and Cuba as well as United States laws that ban the sale of medicine and medical equipment, health comparisons between the two countries are a highly politicized and emotional issue for the Cuban government and general population.
Most Cubans know someone who suffered or died because for lack of a medicine patented or manufactured only by American companies, putting them out of reach of Cubans even if they could afford the oftenexorbitant price.
The United States embargo foments a black market in prescription drugs that doubles the price of already expensive American medicine.
Whatever shortcomings the Cuban healthcare system may have, the United States embargo absorbs the blame and relieves the Cuban government of responsibility for any failures.
With this background in mind it becomes clear why health statistics are a matter of Cuban national pride and even of state security.
The fact that Cuban public health continues to hold on to its gains even under the crushing weight of the United States embargo is of incalculable value in generating internal cooperation in the absence of livable wages as well as sympathetic world public opinion in favor of Cuba.
Favorable public opinion translates in to credit and loans from democratic foreign governments.
If this were not enough, Cuba goes over the top by becoming the physician to the dispossessed of the world.
American policy makers have never understood that Fidel thrives when the United States attempts to use starvation and misery to create intolerable conditions in Cuba.
Most Cubans and Latin Americans see the embargo and increasingly, trade agreements with the United States through the biblical parable of a third-world David versus an obscenely rich and immoral gringo Goliath.
The infant mortality rate is a key measuring stick of the health and overall well-being of a population as defined by the United Nations.
The political and economic capital obtained by Cuban medical missions abroad is measurable in the United Nations general Assembly votes condemning the United States embargo and is fungible for billions of dollars in trade, especially Venezuelan oil.
Venezuela sells 100,000 barrels of oil a day to Cuba for just US$27 a barrel-on credit.
Cheap, high sulfur Venezuelan crude keeps Cuba functioning and her ancient fleet of pre1960 Detroit muscle on the go.
Cuba has some 20,000 doctors in Venezuela who are concentrated in the poorest sections of the country and are a big boost to Hugo Chavez's popularity.
While the Cuban doctors attend to people who have been marginalized all their lives and who have never received any real medical care, the United States government under George W Bush is trying to entice the Cuban doctors to defect to the United States.
It is difficult to overstate the damage this policy does to the image of the United States as a country that cares about people.
The United States forfeits the right to lecture others, including Cuba, about human rights when it does all within its enormous power to stop the poor of the world from taking care of themselves.
President Obama, as the son of a man not unlike the people Cuba assists today, you can not permit United States policy to penalize those living on less than two-dollars a day.
Political and Humanitarian Governed by a very provocative leader and living in the shadow of an angry giant, Communist Cuba became utterly dependent on the Soviet bloc, twelve time zones away.
For ideological as well as practical reasons, Cuba pioneered medical diplomacy as a means to break through diplomatic and economic isolation while taking the high moral ground against the United States.
For Cuba, medical diplomacy is the collaboration between countries to improve relations and simultaneously produce health benefits while creating badly needed excess returns for Cuba.
Since the triumph of the Revolution, medical diplomacy has been a key element of Cuban foreign policy and foreign aid strategy.
Despite Cuba's economic difficulties and the exodus of 90% of its doctors, Cuba launched medical diplomacy in 1960 by sending a team to Chile to provide disaster relief after an earthquake.
Three years later and with the United States embargo in effect, Cuba began strategic medical diplomacy by sending a group of fifty-six doctors and nurses to Algeria.
Cuba has provided medical assistance to scores of developing countries throughout the world ever since.
After Fidel and after Raul, Chavez will be the new dean of world revolution and socialism of the 21st century.
This shift could lead to changes in the perception of the current barter arrangement between the countries.
As of early 2009, with the collapse in oil prices, the arrangement should remain stable.
Political changes or improvements of health indices in Venezuela could alter the perceived value of Cuban medical diplomacy.
The Cuban government's internal stability is vulnerable to changes in the relationship and the political fortunes of Hugo Chavez.
Cuban medical diplomacy is looking for new horizons outside the Venezuela relationship, threatening to destabilize the uneasy status quo in numerous needy countries.
By serving the poor in areas in which no local doctor would work, by making house calls a routine part of their medical practice and by being available free of charge 24/7, Cubans are upending the nature of doctor-patient relations wherever they practice.
A truly progressive American government committed to human rights would finance the Cuban missions.
Since 1960, Cuba's conduct of medical diplomacy has improved the health of the less privileged in developing countries while improving relations with their governments.
Cuban medical aid has improved the lives of millions of people, even in countries whose governments are allied with the United States To make this effort sustainable, thousands of developing country medical personnel have received free classes, room and board in Cuba and train with Cuban specialists as apprentices in medical schools in their own countries.
Cuba does not miss a single opportunity to offer and supply disaster relief assistance regardless of whether or not Cuba is on good terms with a nation's government, even the United States.
In the immediate aftermath of Hurricane Katrina Cuba offered to assist New Orleans with free medical care.
Of course, the Bush administration declined and Fidel knew he would, but the symbolism of the gesture brought him enormous prestige in the eyes of many.
Medical Diplomacy as Foreign Policy Because good health is vital to personal well-being as well as societal development, the impact of Cuba's medical diplomacy on other countries has greatly improved both its bilateral relations with those countries as well as its standing and support in multilateral organizations.
The creation of goodwill requires an initial investment of unrequited sweat equity.
The resulting I.O.U. may be accumulated, invested and spent just like money.
Even before the triumph of Revolution, Fidel made the health of the individual a metaphor for the health of the body politic.
Therefore, he made the achievement of developed country health indicators a national priority.
Rather than compare Cuban health indicators with those of other countries at a similar level of development, he began to compare them to those of the United States.
Infant mortality and life expectancy statistics took on enormous significance.
Both are considered to be proxy indicators for socioeconomic development because they include a number of other indicators as inputs, including, nutrition, medical services, sanitation, housing, education, employment, economic growth and fair distribution of resources.
For internal political reasons, it is important for Cuba to compare favorably with the United States in order to demonstrate the superiority of the Cuban way.
Cuba's favorable socioeconomic indicators, which are the fruit of capital investments in the people, yield not only a more productive workforce, but also bolster the conditioned power of ideological belief essential to Fidel's long reign.
They are at the center of Fidel's rebuttal of human right's objections by the United States.
This striving for world-class health indicators has been so important that in many of his major speeches, Fidel has dedicated considerable time to discussing them.
Cuba's infant mortality rate was 5. per 1000 live births, a figure less than that of the United States, which was 7. per 1000 live births in 2002.
These achievements are watched closely and are worth billions in advertising.
Even more striking is the change in the ratio of doctors to population.
This was part of Fidel's 1984 family doctor plan to put a doctor on every block.
Cuba's accomplishments in health are not just in primary care or in the graduation of doctors.
Cuba shares its expertise through numerous international medical conferences that it holds every year and through scientific exchanges.
Because research is crucial to the operation of a health campaign and can lead to badly needed income, Cuba publishes fifty-four professional medical journals and makes itself a world player in the discovery of new medicines.
As early as 1982, the United States government recognized Cuba's success in the health sphere in a report that affirmed that the Cuban health system was superior to those of other developing countries and rivaled that of many developed countries.
Despite economic hardship during the 1990s after the dissolution of the Soviet Union and the subsequent 75% plunge in trade along with the tightening of the then threedecade-old United States embargo, Cuba continuously increased its spending on domestic health as a percentage of G.D.P. in order to shield the most vulnerable population from the worst effects of the Special Period.
Fortunately, it worked, and the initial deterioration in the population's health indicators was only temporary.
Today, even some United States analysts who oppose Fidel Castro agree that Cuba's health system has produced impressive results despite the many material shortages that it always has faced.
Some critics also recognize, albeit reluctantly, that Cuban medical diplomacy is producing positive effects in the recipient countries.
This quickly generated considerable admiration for Cuba, which translated into political backing in the United Nations as well as tangible benefits from Angola, Iraq and other countries that could afford to pay fees for professional services rendered, albeit the charges were considerably below market rates.
Early success with medical diplomacy and the accumulation of goodwill as well as the ability to convert it into cash led Fidel to announce in 1984 that Cuba would train 10,000 new doctors specifically to increase the volume of international medical aid.
Only Cuba trains doctors with the intent of sending them abroad like a cash crop.
Cuba, Venezuela, Bolivia It is ironic that in 1959 Fidel unsuccessfully sought financial support and oil from Venezuelan president Romulo Betancourt.
It would take forty years and many economic difficulties before another Venezuelan president, Hugo Chavez, would provide the preferential trade, credit, aid and investment the Cuban economy desperately needed.
This partnership is part of the Bolivarian Alternative for the Americas to unite and integrate Latin America in a social justice-oriented trade and aid block under Venezuela's lead.
It also has created an opportunity to expand Cuba's influence well beyond anything hitherto.
The most impressive Cuban medical mission ever attempted is the present one with Venezuela.
The symbolic and material payoffs for Cuba are clearly demonstrated, for example, by the oil-for-doctors trade agreements between the two countries.
The accords allow for preferential pricing for Cuba's exportation of professional services vis-a-vis a steady supply of Venezuelan oil, joint investments in strategically important sectors for both countries, and the provision of credit.
An additional agreement included the expansion of the Western Hemisphere wide ophthalmologic surgery program to perform 600,000 eye operations over ten years.
By 2007 there were over 35,000 medical personnel providing services through Barrio Adentro I, the primary health care program of Venezuela.
They made 30 million house calls, something previously unheard of on that scale and in those locales.
During the same period, under Barrio Adentro II, which provides medical diagnostics and physical therapy and rehabilitation, 10,856 histological exams were conducted, 84. million clinical laboratory exams were done, 808,153 CAT scans and 47,454 nuclear magnetic resonance exams were performed, among others.
The newly established Comprehensive Diagnostic Centers handled 886,609 emergency room visits and performed 7. million diagnostic exams; and the Comprehensive Rehabilitation Wards also established under Barrio Adentro II handled 520,401 rehabilitation consultations and applied 1. million rehab treatments.
The second largest medical mission operates in Bolivia, with over 1,500 Cuban doctors providing pro-bono care, particularly in impoverished rural areas and in the departments of La Paz, Santa Cruz, Cochabamba and Chuquisaca.
Cuba has provided the National Ophthalmologic Institute in La Paz with modern equipment and specialists who, along with Bolivian doctors and recent graduates from the Latin American Medical School , have treated over 3,000 indigent patients.
New accords stipulate the opening of two additional ophthalmologic centers, one in Cochabamba and another in Santa Cruz.
Each one will be able to treat fifty patients a day and the La Paz center will permit doctors to attend to one hundred patients daily.
As a result, Bolivia will have the ability to perform ophthalmologic operations on a minimum of 50,000 patients annually.
Cuban sources indicate that by the end of 2008, their medical teams had assisted one million Bolivians free of charge and performed 23,000 ophthalmologic operations.
In 2008, there were some 1,500 Bolivians studying at the school and another 3,000 have started the pre-med course.
Cuba provides the six-year medical school free of charge to low-income students who commit to practice medicine in under served communities in their home countries upon graduation.
The benefit to millions of underserved people worldwide will be incalculable and the political payoff Cuba and Venezuela will be huge.
Like a high-yield bond that keeps on paying, the geopolitical benefits will be reaped for years to come as students trained by Cuba and Venezuela ascend the ranks of academia, the media and government in their own countries.
Today, medical students whom Cuba trained as doctors in the 1970s are now in positions of authority and increasing responsibility.
During this time, Cuba also has provided free medical care in its own hospitals for individuals from all over Latin America regardless of political affiliation.
In 1998, under Haitian President Rene Preval, Cuba began its medical mission with Haiti, the poorest country in the Western Hemisphere.
This marvelously cost-effective operation brings medical attention to people who would otherwise not receive it and, in my view, the United States government must learn from it and emulate it to earn the title of leader of the free world.
Jamaicans too have been going to Cuba for free eye surgery as part of Operation Miracle.
A spokesperson for the Jamaican Health Ministry indicated that patients reported positive feedback on the surgeries that had been administered in Cuba.
The number of patients who subsequently reported complications amounted to less than three per cent of the 2,300 patients who were treated in Cuba as of 2008.
Cuba has offered disaster relief over the years to every country that has experienced a catastrophe.
Women in the remote highlands of Pakistan began naming their newborns Fidel.
Cuba now has a long, successful track record in raising health and quality of life indicators at home and abroad, often under difficult circumstances.
As a result, wealthy donor governments feel comfortable financing Cuban medical missions to third countries in what is called triangular trade in aid.
Japan stepped up and provided two million doses of vaccines for 800,000 children and US$ 57 million to equip a hospital in Honduras where a Cuban medical brigade works.
Multilateral agencies, such as the World Health Organization and the Pan American Health Organization also finance medical services provided by Cuba for third countries.
Both organizations provided funding for Cuba's medical education initiatives.
Cuba's Comprehensive Health Program is supported by 85 NGOs and through triangular trade in aid has received US$ 2.97 million in support.
Medical Diplomacy Worldwide In the 1970s and 80s Cuba dispatched large civilian assistance programs in Africa to complement its military support of Marxist governments in Angola and Ethiopia.
With the fall of the Soviet bloc, Cuba's program was scaled back severely, but not disbanded.
Having suffered a post-Apartheid brain drain, South Africa began importing Cuban doctors in 1996.
On the African continent, South Africa finances some of the Cuban medical expeditions in third countries.
This South African-Cuban alliance is much more limited in scope than the Venezuelan-Cuban arrangements.
As of December 2007, the Comprehensive Health Program was in Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Chad, Eritrea, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, GuineaConkary, Equatorial Guinea, Mali, Namibia, Niger, Rwanda, Sierra Leone, Swaziland, and Zimbabwe.
Cuban medical teams have also worked in East Timor since 2004 to create an independent healthcare system.
Recent Cuban disaster relief medical missions are still providing assistance in post-tsunami Indonesia and post-earthquake Pakistan.
Shortly after the tsunami, Cuba sent a medical team and equipment to provide disaster relief.
They also were providing some preventive as well as curative care on their visits to refugee camps.
Less than a week after the devastating October 2005 earthquake in Pakistan, Cuba sent a team of highly experienced disaster relief specialists comprised of 2300 doctors, nurses and medical technicians.
The rest worked in thirty field hospitals located across the earthquakestricken zone.
The team brought everything they would need to establish, equip, and run those hospitals.
In May 2006, Cuba sent fifty-four emergency electrical generators as well.
Cuba has consistently offered or provided aid to Armenia, Iran, Turkey, Russia, and all Latin American countries that have suffered natural or man-made disasters.
In 1990 I visited a Havana hospital and met Ukranian children recovering from the 1986 Chernobyl disaster.
Incredibly, they continued to receive care throughout the worst of the Special Period.
Among other things, free medical education allows Cuba to inculcate its values in young people worldwide.
Cuban medical specialists have either established medical schools or lectured in medical faculties in Angola, Ethiopia, Guinea-Bissau, Nicaragua, and Yemen.
Graduation levels peaked in the 1980s before the fall of the Soviet bloc.
The Latin American Medical School was established in 1998 specifically to train students from poor communities in Latin American and African countries.
There were a total of 10,661 foreign medical students from 27 countries studying in Cuba at the ELAM during the 2005-2006 academic year.
As I have traveled across Latin America and observed the health and welfare of parents and children from Buenos Aires to Monterrey, I realized I could quickly deduce much about a person by good or bad teeth.
In Cuba, on the other hand, everyone seems to have perfect teeth and gums.
Graduates from these medical schools take the National Final Cuban Examinations at the end of their program and then do an internship in their home countries.
Then they take their home country's qualifying examination to become licensed to practice medicine.
The training of foreign future leaders in the medical field who owe their success to Fidel's Cuba ensures that the United States embargo will never work.
Cuba's medical diplomacy forms the bedrock of Cuba's charm offensive to isolate the United States and it has succeeded.
United Nations action on issues critical to Fidel's Cuba, such as an end to the United States embargo and human rights abuses, is overwhelmingly in Fidel's favor.
Indeed, Cuba was elected to the United Nations Human Rights Council by direct, secret ballot in which all member states were elected individually and not in blocs.
The State Department is aware that in 2005 General Assembly votes, only Israel, the Marshall Islands and Palau supported the United States embargo on Cuba.
Among Cuba's trading partners, voting coincidence with the United States ranked between 6 and 22 % during 2005.
President Obama, you said you would go before the United Nations to let the world know America is back.
Clearly, Cuba's medical diplomacy is a contributing factor to this pattern.
Rather than isolating Cuba, it is the United States that is out of step.
Far from being marginalized by Washington's anti-Castro offensive, Cuba is an influential member of the Non-Aligned Movement and was elected its leader.
Although the amount of trade between Cuba and MERCOSUR is small, the agreement was geopolitically important for its timing just before the release of the United States -sponsored Commission for a Free Cuba's tough report recommending tightening the United States embargo (as if that were possible) and promoting regime change.
Cuba's export earnings from medical diplomacy are now a key source of income.
Data on the breakdown of benefits is difficult to establish, not least of all because the Cubans are understandably circumspect in providing information.
Rates paid to Cuba for doctors have ranged from zero to some rate well below United States market prices.
Rates depend more on the recipient's ability to pay than any other factor.
Nonetheless, the amounts are no doubt truly significant and rival earnings from tourism.
The Economist Intelligence Unit estimated that the increase in non-tourism services exports between 2003 and 2005 was US$1. billion for a total of US$2. billion, which puts non-tourism services ahead of gross tourism receipts of US$2. billion in 2005.
Official data for export earnings from medical products (medicines and equipment) were below US$100 million in 2004, but there have been press reports citing a figure of US$300 million for such products.
Cuba also exports biotechnology products to 40 countries but does not release sales data.
Two important earnings streams are the licensed manufacture of Cuban medicines in other countries and as well as joint venture production facilities abroad.
Havana officials I spoke with emphasized the importance of these ventures but do not provide details.
Cuba has licensing agreements, including one in the United States for anti-cancer drugs and a joint venture production facility in China.
Treatment facilities have been built in other countries, particularly in the field of ophthalmology, under agreement with Venezuela.
The oil-for-doctors barter is critical to Cuba's economy because of preferential and stable pricing for Cuba's professional services exports and because Venezuela insulates Cuba from any escalation of oil prices, much as the U.S.S.R. did.
In late 2008 oil prices collapsed and remain low as of this writing, but low oil prices are a temporary condition resulting from the deflationary financial crisis.
Finally, between 2002 and 2006 OPEC authorized US$50 million in grants for a range of Cuban physical development programs abroad.
He offered Cuba's wealth of experience in health and education to support that agenda.
In these remarks, he laid down a gauntlet not only for the Bush Administration.
The export of Cuban doctors also provides a safety valve for disgruntled medical professionals who earn much less at home than less skilled workers in the tourism sector.
Their opportunities for enrichment abroad are high both within the parameters of medical diplomacy and even more so beyond it.
In an effort to break the oil-for-doctors trade that supports the Cuban economy, the Bush Administration announced a change in its Cuba policy to facilitate immigration to the United States for Cuban doctors sent abroad by Cuba.
Bush administration was to tempt Cuban doctors with vastly increased earnings and an incomparably superior material quality of life in the United States as a strategy to foil Cuban medical diplomacy at the expense of those most in need in developing countries.
President Obama, we both know that enticing Cuban doctors to claim asylum and then claiming they are fleeing repression is not the American Way.
The fact that the Bush administration tried to destroy Cuba's medical diplomacy program shows that United States foreign policy has been adrift without a moral compass.
In Latin America, the United States is seen as having an ulterior motive and does not get the respect it deserves.
As you travel around the world, you sell America by selling yourself, and it's working.
Your V.O.A. speech to Iran and trip to Turkey will generate more good will and understanding than billions spent on advertising in the Muslim world.
But gestures must be followed by deeds or the world public will label you a hypocrite within twelve months.
On the contrary, even when they have been seduced and subverted and are drawn across the line, the right thing to do is to keep the way open for their return."" Walter Lippmann, July 1959 ""We should lift all trade sanctions against Cuba.
If there are scarcities of food or medicine, that there be no doubt about who is responsible.
They will do as good a job as any trained diplomat in conveying American values and beliefs to the Cuban people."" -Sen.
Christopher Dodd, 1999 Democratic countries that wish to help the Cuban people should recognize the existence of a new situation that calls for new thinking.
The goal would be to contribute to creating a less tense atmosphere, where it would be difficult for the hardliners to obtain alibis to cultivate false nationalism and to block changes.
Immediate steps could be taken such as permitting Cuban Americans to visit the island and help their family and friends economically without restriction.
This step would make people who receive assistance more independent of the totalitarian state.
It would also be very valuable to promote exchanges between the American and Cuban people in all spheres, including cultural, academic, scientific, and sports. Dr.
Oscar Espinosa Chepe, Cuban economist jailed in 2003 On October 6, 1976, a McDonnell Douglass DC-8 exploded at altitude as it approached Barbados. people, including Cuba's teenaged Olympic fencing team, were killed.
A The incident remains the first and only mid-air bombing of a civilian airliner in the Western Hemisphere and association with the downing of flight 455, as I describe below, sullies the good name of the United States.
Even now in 2008, United States jurisprudence, precedent, political expediency and tradition oblige our country to defend and protect those who would hijack airliners and ships, kidnap, take hostages or commit murder of their own countrymen as long as they're Cuban nationals while the Castros are in power.
For, as we shall see, the embargo has become much more than a prohibition on commercial intercourse with a hostile foreign government and ironically, has extended Fidel and Raul Castro's lease on power indefinitely while Cuban political evolution is frozen in time... just like the cars on the Malecon.
A had concrete advance intelligence on generalized plans by Cuban exile terrorist groups to bomb a Cuban airliner.
In 2005 The national security archive posted documents showing that the F.B.I's attache in Caracas had multiple contacts with one of the Venezuelans who placed the bomb on the plane, and provided him with a visa to the United States five days before the bombing, despite suspicions that he was engaged in terrorist activities at the direction of Luis Posada Carriles.
The highly detailed intelligence was provided by a source known as ""a former Venezuelan government official"" who ""is usually a reliable reporter,"" according to the classified report.
The case came to public attention in 2005 after Posada attempted to sneak into the United States under an assumed name while using a fake Salvadoran passport and was caught by United States Customs at the Mexican border.
Bush Administration, correctly believing that the Bush clan would be sympathetic to him.
After living for two months in Miami unmolested by law enforcement, he was detained after vocal diplomatic protests by the Venezuelan government, which considers him a terrorist fugitive.
Venezuelan authorities requested his extradition back to Caracas where he escaped in 1985 after being incarcerated for the bombing of Flight 455.
The reader is advised that Posada was a fugitive from Venezuelan justice decades before Hugo Chavez became president of that country.
It is difficult to overestimate the damage done to the credibility of the United States in Latin America by the Bush administration's refusal to extradite a convicted airplane bomber while constantly invoking the 9-11 attacks as rationale for its domestic and foreign policies.
The press agencies of Cuba, Venezuela and much of Latin America have informed hundreds of millions of people about this and will not let them forget about it.
He called on the C.I.A. to fully declassify its voluminous files on Posada ""as a concrete contribution to justice for those who have committed acts of terror The Archive also posted a declassified C.I.A. summary that provided new details of Agency ties to Posada and Bosch in the 1 960s and 70s.
The C.I.A. continued to maintain relations with Posada after he became a high ranking official in the Venezuelan secret police, DISIP, between 1967 and 1974, although the nature of Posada's work for the Agency during that time remains censored in the document.
The C.I.A. also admitted that it had multiple contacts with Orlando Bosch in 1962 and 1963.
Bosch, according to the F.B.I., was committed to para-military attacks on countries he believed supported Cuba, including Colombia, Panama and Mexico.
According to the document, the alliance discussed the kidnapping and execution of a diplomat.
In July 1976, C.O.R.U. members did in fact attempt to kidnap the Cuban ambassador to Mexico; one of his aides was shot and killed.
After Posada escaped from prison in Caracas, he flew aboard a private aircraft to Aruba, and was then taken to El Salvador where he assumed the alias ""Ramon Medina"" and became ""support director"" for the illicit contra resupply operation being run by the Reagan White House out of Illopango airbase in San Salvador in the 1980's.
In a 3 1 page deposition given to F.B.I, agents in Tegucigalpa, Honduras, as part of the Independent Counsel investigation into the Iran-Contra scandal, Posada detailed his participation in these covert operations, including flying on resupply missions for contra soldiers in southern Nicaragua.
The operations were covert because they violated United States as well as international law and were acts of war against a country at peace with the United States.
Reagan's obsession with tiny Nicaragua was such that he approved arms shipments to Islamic Iran, where blindfolded American hostages languished and served as the indignant centerpiece of Reagan's 1980 electoral campaign only a few years earlier.
Posada was happy to help stop Nicaragua from becoming ""another Cuba,"" where thousands of Cuban doctors tended to the sick, penniless and malnourished while Cuban teachers taught illiterate peasants to read and Cuban soldiers advised the Nicaraguan army as they fought the Contras and braced for an outright United States invasion.
In a personal incident I will never forget, while walking down a street in Esteli, Nicaragua, in 1988, 1 was accosted by a group of desperate Nicaraguans convinced that I was a Cuban medic who could save the life of their loved one.
In connection with tbo loss of Flight number 4SS in the Caribbean Sea on Oc confidential source of our Miami Office who reliable information in the past, reported o toe following significant information which 1 Mr L 0.
Morales Havarrete reportedly stated that this A broup had previously attempted to bomb Cuban* aircraft in ■»■> and in Jamaica.
It is noted that Castro and Castillo rlcan citizens who have been active in anti-Castro at activities in the past.
Castro, a resident of the Dominican Republic, in a leader of Coordination of United Revolutionary Organizations , an anti-Castro terrorist organization which has claimed responsibility for numerous terrorist acta throughout the Caribbean.
Castillo la a subject in an attempted kidnapping plot against the Cuban Consul In Her l tin, Mexico, on July 23, 1976, engineered by CORD which resulted in the death of the Consul's bodyguard.
CantlUo wae able to •senp* from Mexico and ■ vannown to have fled fro* Caracnu to Puerto rtlco on October 15, 1370, following the arrest of Poanda, Orlando Bosch Aviln and others, in connection with the Cuban* air oraah, Castillo's present wnereabonta Is unknown, / Morales Navarre te told onr source that some peopla in the Venezuelan Government are Involved In tb* Cubana K>8 bombing and thfct If Posada talks, tbon Morale* Nnvarrste sill ""go down the tube"" In a Venezuelan-etyle Watergate.
The Venezuelan Judicial Technical Police reportedly haw knowledge of the particlpante in this sot but havu been prohibited from investigating by DISIP officials irtio wish to cover up Venezuelan participation.
Jposada and Fabri have prevloualy been nrreetcd by Venezuelan authorities for providing false Identlfientlon and explosives to Boson.
According to Mora lea Havarrete, arrsst«d auapect nernan Rioerdo Lozsno telephoned Bosch fro* Trinidad stating ""a bu» with 73 dogs went off a cliff and all got killed.
J inane s and Hulz Hernandez are la jail In Mexico in connection with the attempted kidnapping of the Cuban Morales Havarrete also atated that Bosch told him that Guillomo Movo traveled to Chile in early 1976 to viait Bosch.
When he ran out of money, he asked another exile figure, Rafael Quintero for help.
A source in Venezuela supplied the C.I.A. with detailed intelligence on a fundraiser held for Orlando Bosch and his organization C.O.R.U. after he arrived in Caracas in September 1976.
The source described the dinner at the house of a Cuban exile doctor, Hildo Folgar, which included Venezuelan government officials.
Bosch was said to have essentially asked for a bribe in order to refrain from acts of violence during the United Nations meeting in November 1976, which would be attended by Venezuelan President Carlos Andres Perez.
This document records the summaries of traces on the two exiles that had by then been arrested in Caracas, Orlando Bosch and Luis Posada.
The C.I.A. also noted that he provided information to them on the activities of other exile groups.
It censored a section of the document that described the services he performed for the C.I.A. while a high official in the Venezuelan secret police, DISIP, between 1967 and 1974.
Other C.I.A. records show that the Agency continued to have contact with Posada until June of 1976, more than eleven years after he was first recruited.
The memo indicates that the bombing had caused some dissention in C.O.R.U. over its tactics, but that the organization headed by Orlando Bosch is planning to sell bonds to finance future operations.
This F.B.I, report contains a range of information on ""a small terrorist organization headed by Orlando Bosch Avila,"" and other Cuban exile terrorists.
Based on sources close to Bosch's group, Accion Cubana, the report details Bosch's efforts to raise funds from specific individuals in Miami, Caracas, and elsewhere.
The F.B.I, also reports on the activities of Guillermo and Ignacio Novo, who are described as ""two Cuban exiles with long records of terrorist activities.
Most importantly, on pages 8 and 9, the document describes the meeting in the Dominican Republic where C.O.R.U. was created in June 1976 to unify five different exile groups.
According to the memo, ""these groups agreed to jointly participate in the planning, financing and carrying out terrorist operations and attacks against Cuba"" and targets in other countries.
Reagan likened the contras to the founding fathers of the United States even as they blew up civilian hospitals, murdered peasants and raped girls in front of their parents and forced fathers to have intercourse with their daughters for the Contra soldiers' entertainment.
The goal was to make Nicaragua ungovernable while the leftwing Sandinistas, democratically elected in 1984 after a popular revolution toppled the Somoza dictatorship in July 1979, remained in power.
The operations were termed ""Low Intensity Conflict"" and were applied to other countries such as Afghanistan and Angola.
Americans were outraged at our association with the barbaric Contras and in 1984 the United States 9 Kornbluh, Peter.
At Illopango airbase, known as ""Cincinnati"" in the BC records, the Reagan administration secretly established a mini air force of re-supply planes along with warehouses of supplies.
Two F.B.I, agents interviewed Posada at the United States Embassy in Tegucigalpa, Honduras in February 1992.
He described in detail his work for the contra war, escape from a Venezuelan jail and sojourn in a private aircraft to Aruba, and El Salvador.
The 31page interview transcript also provides extensive details of his activities in El Salvador and Guatemala after the Iran Contra scandal broke in November 1986 and after the contra supply operation was shut down.
Although Posada accumulated $40,000 from the contra work he and others were paid from arms' sales to Iran, he eventually ran out of money.
The National Security Archive sought the declassification of the Posada files through the Freedom of Information Act and called on the United States to declassify all intelligence on Posada.
Two Trinidad and Tobago police officers interrogated Hernan Ricardo Lozano and Freddy Lugo immediately after the plane went down.
Their statements were turned over as evidence to a special investigative commission in Barbados after the crime.
Information derived from the interrogations suggested that the first call the bombers placed after the 12 Kornbluh, Peter.
He said that he had been paid $16,000 to sabotage the plane and that Lugo was paid $8,000.
Ricardo ""in his own handwriting recorded the steps to be taken before a bomb was placed in an aircraft and how a plastic bomb is detonated,"" The Archive also released three declassified F.B.I. intelligence reports that were sent to Secretary of State Henry Kissinger after the bombing.
The updates, classified ""secret"" and signed by director Clarence Kelly, focused on the relations between the F.B.I, legal attache in Caracas, Joseph Leo, Posada, and one of the Venezuelans who placed the bomb on the plane, to whom Leo had provided a visa.
One report from Kelly, based on the word of an informant in Venezuela, suggested that Posada had attended meetings in Caracas where the plane bombing was planned.
Both Bosch and Posada were arrested and imprisoned in Venezuela after the attack.
Posada escaped from prison in September 1985; Bosch was released in 1987 and returned to the United States illegally.
Like Posada, immigration authorities detained him; over the objections of the Justice Department, which determined he was a threat to public security, George Herbert Walker Bush's White House issued him an administrative pardon in 1990.
The report details Leo's contacts with Lozano and Posada going back to the summer of 1975, and notes that Leo suspected Posada and Hernan Ricardo Lozano of acts of terrorism, but still granted Ricardo's request for a visa to the United States.
He fled to El Salvador using the alias ""Ramon Medina"" and worked on the illegal contra resupply program run by Lt.
But in September 2004, the president of Panama mysteriously pardoned him and three co-conspirators.
The ""justification"" for the Havana hotel bombings was that the Cuban tourism industry provided badly needed hard currency to the Castro regime and allowed it to remain in power and oppress its citizens in spite of the unilateral United States embargo.
So by blowing up hotels and killing Cuba's European and Canadian sun worshipers, tourism would suffer, weakening the regime and hastening its demise.
This is the grotesque logic of the embargo as it has evolved and hardened over the years; from commercial boycott and diplomatic protest to sabotage and cold-blooded terrorism.
Posada has been one of the world's most unremitting purveyors of terrorist violence while American governments both Republican and Democrat have encouraged or tolerated terrorists who shared the United States government's agenda viz.
President Bush has repeatedly stated that no nation should harbor terrorists and that all nations should work to bring individuals who advocate and employ the use of terror tactics to justice.
Now is the time for President Obama and the Congress to reverse decades of de-facto sympathy and support for terrorists who cloak themselves in our flag.
Their tactics are incompatible with democratic principles and the human rights that the United States is so passionate about.
By increasing the threat level to Cuban state security, they, along with the United States embargo they insist is the leverage needed to democratize Cuba, make Cuban dissidents' and reformers' attempts to change Cuba for the better all but impossible.
Any domestic attempt to reduce the Castros' dictatorial powers is branded as treason against the liberating Cuban Revolution and genuine reformers are prosecuted as Benedict Arnolds and sent to jail.
So the United States government strangulation of Cuba economically and its tolerance of terrorism and human trafficking based in Miami have created a permanent state of emergency that makes peaceful political and civic evolution impossible.
As Sergei Khrushchev has said, it is not a coincidence that the embargo and Fidel' s rule will be entering their fifth decade together.
The Cuban government refuses to issue Sergei Khrushchev a visa to speak in Cuba.
President Obama, go to Havana, without preconditions that would allow the Cuban government to object and stop you.
Put on a guajiro's hat and greet the Cuban masses under a blazing sun in Revolution Square.
Go to the base at the statue of Jose Marti, and deliver a live, uncensored, televised speech as only you know how.
Invite Raul Castro to speak freely in the United States in reciprocity.
Tell the people of Cuba that the United States will abandon the embargo and normalize relations without preconditions.
Explain that the United States remains committed to civil right and civil liberties in Cuba, but will no longer use coercion and will no longer take its Cuba policy marching orders from Miami.
Tell the Cuban people that selfemployment and small business enterprise is the proven way out of poverty and that the United States stands ready to encourage nascent Cuban entrepreneurs on the condition they remain in Cuba.
Announce that American businesses may conduct business with Cuban firms and allow the Cuban government to feel victorious about overcoming the embargo and its backers in Miami.
Your speech need not last longer than ninety minutes, one fourth of Fidel's typical speech on the virtues of the Revolution and evils of the United States when he still had his health.
Follow my prescription and you will achieve what nine presidents before you could not.
You will bring change to Cuba without firing a shot, or starving a child, or coddling a terrorist.
In one moment you will destroy the status quo and psychology of United States Cuba relations and set off a cascade of events the Cuban government will not control.
The centralized Cuban economy will dissolve and morph in to a market economy with a large but increasingly irrelevant state sector as private sector wages surpass government salaries.
The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 passes in the United States Congress.
It prohibits aid to Cuba and authorizes the President to create a ""total embargo upon all trade"" with Cuba.
By the early 1960s, conditions in many industries had become critical due to the lack of replacement parts.
Virtually all-industrial structures were dependent on supplies and parts now denied to Cuba.
One -half of the 1,400 passenger rail cars were out of service in 1962.
Louis A Perez, Jr., from his book Cuba, between Reform and Revolution, 2nd Edition Pg.
A In February 1961, he joined the C.IA.'s Brigade 2506 to invade Cuba, although the ship to which he was assigned never landed at the Bay of Pigs.
A recruited him and trained him in demolitions; he subsequently became a trainer of other paramilitary exile forces in the mid 1960s.
A documents in this chapter reveal that he was terminated as an asset in July 1967, but then reinstated four months later and apparently remained an asset until 1974.
The documents also show that he remained in contact with the Agency until June 1976, only three months before the plane bombing.
A payroll in the mid-1960s, he participated in a number of plots that involved sabotage and explosives.
The Foreign Assistance Act is amended to prohibit aid to ""any country"" that provides assistance to Cuba.
The United States government cables all Latin American governments and NATO countries new measures to tighten the economic embargo against Cuba.
As of today, the transport of United States goods is banned on ships owned by companies that do business with Cuba.
The United States Department of Commerce announces the requirement of specific approval for exports of all food and medicine to Cuba.
The Foreign Assistance Act is amended to prohibit United States aid to countries that continue to trade with Cuba.
Less than one month after President John F Kennedy's assassination, United States Attorney General Robert F Kennedy seeks to end the travel ban to Cuba in a memo to Secretary of State Dean Rusk.
He refers to the ban as ""inconsistent with traditional American liberties,"" and difficult to enforce.
Robert F Kennedy's memo of December 12 is discussed at a State Department meeting and Undersecretary of State George Ball rules out the possibility of ending the travel ban to Cuba.
In Washington, Representative John B Breaux and senator J Bennett Johnston Jr., Democrats from Louisiana, argue that it is in the national interest for Louisiana to be allowed to sell rice to Cuba.
United States Secretary of State Henry Kissinger states that there is no possibility of United States relations with Cuba while Cuban troops are in Africa.
There had to be some improvement in Cuba's human rights performance, and specially in terms of releasing political prisoners.
A reduction in Soviet-Cuban military ties."" From the book: ""Cuba, Voices of Change,"" by Lynn Geldof May 25.
The Carter Administration relaxes laws to allow United States residents to send money to relatives in Cuba.
Ronald Reagan is inaugurated as United States President, and institutes the most hostile policy against Cuba since the invasion at Bay of Pigs.
Despite conciliatory signals from Cuba, the new United States administration announces a tightening of the embargo.
The Reagan Administration reestablishes the travel ban, prohibits United States citizens from spending money in Cuba, and allows the 1977 fishing accord to lapse.
According to new regulations by the United States Department of the Treasury, United States citizens who travel to Cuba can only spend a maximum of $100 per day.
In alliance with conservative Republicans, Cuban emigres and the United States Congress pass the Mack Amendment, which prohibits all trade with Cuba by subsidiaries of United States companies located outside the U.S., and proposes sanctions or cessation of aid to any country that buys sugar or other products from Cuba.
United States Congress passes the Cuban Democracy Act, which prohibits foreign-based subsidiaries of United States companies from trading with Cuba, travel to Cuba by United States citizens, and family remittances to Cuba.
The United Nations General Assembly votes heavily in favor of a measure introduced by Cuba asking for an end to the United States Embargo.
State Department spokesman Joe Snyder in the LA Times; ""The Cuban government, in violation of international law, expropriated billions of dollars worth of private property belonging to United States individuals and has refused to make reasonable restitution.
For the third year in a row, the United Nations General Assembly votes overwhelmingly for a measure to end the United States Embargo of Cuba.
The Clinton Administration announces a new people-to-people-contact plan.
Since then, each time the vote comes up at the U.N., the number of nations voting against the embargo increases.
President Clinton signs the Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity Act which imposes penalties on foreign companies doing business in Cuba, permits United States citizens to sue foreign investors who make use of American-owned property seized by the Cuban government, and denies entry into the United States to such foreign investors.
President Clinton suspends enforcement of Title III provisions of the Helms-Burton Act.
President Clinton again suspends enforcement of Title III provisions of the Helms-Burton Act.
For the 6th straight year, the United Nations General Assembly passes a resolution to end the Cuban embargo.
In Washington, the organization Americans for Humanitarian Trade with Cuba is formed to promote humanitarian trade with the island.
In Boston, Roman Catholic Cardinal Bernard Law urges United States President Bill Clinton to end the 36-year-old embargo.
The United States Treasury Department denies PWN permission to participate in EXPOCUBA, an exhibition of pharmaceuticals in Cuba.
The United Nations General Assembly adopts a resolution against the United States embargo on Cuba for the 7th consecutive year.
The United States Treasury Department investigates two United States organizations for traveling to Cuba without a license; Global Exchange and Pastors for Peace.
From Havana, United States Senator Christopher Dodd, a member of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee urges his government to establish a ""new conversation for the new millennium"" with Cuba.
Six members of the United States Congressional Black Caucus visit Cuba to evaluate the United States -imposed embargo.
Maxine Waters and Barbara Lee of California, Sheila Jackson-Lee of Texas, Julia Carson of Indiana and others.
The coalition of Americans for Humanitarian Trade With Cuba join the United States Association of Former Members of Congress to call on the Clinton administration to end the embargo on food and medicines to Cuba.
A resolution is passed in the United Nations General Assembly on the need to end the United States embargo against Cuba.
In a more symbolic than legal decision, Cuban courts order the United States to pay $121 billion in damages for the 4-decade-long embargo.
A similar lawsuit in November 1999 found the United States government liable for deaths and damage from ""aggressive policies towards Cuba,"" in the amount of $181 billion.
Observers content that both lawsuits came about in response to a ruling by a United States federal judge in Miami ordering Cuba to pay $187 million to families of pilots shot down by Cuban fighter planes in 1996.
At a meeting of the International Chamber of Commerce, American businessman and ICC Vice-President Richard D McCormick, calls for an end to the United States trade embargo of Cuba, ""...embargoes don't work,"" said McCormick.
The United Nations General Assembly passes a Cuban-drafted resolution calling for an end to the United States -Cuba embargo.
Voting with the United States against the resolution are the Marshall Islands and Israel.
In Washington, the Cuba Policy Foundation releases a poll in which a majority of Americans are said to support the idea of doing business with Cuba and allowing travel to the island.
Most agree with the decision to reunite Elian Gonzalez with his father in Cuba.
Organizers of the Latin Grammy Awards announce that they will change the location of this year's event from Miami to Los Angeles fearing violent protests from anti-communist exiles.
The United States government turns down a Cuban offer to compensate Americans for properties confiscated by the Revolution 40 years ago.
In Philadelphia, Canadian businessman James Sabzali is found guilty of violating the United States embargo against Cuba.
I do this because these allegations were made maybe not coincidentally just before our visit to Cuba.
In preparation for this unprecedented visit, I requested, and we all received, intense briefings from the State Department, the intelligence agencies of my country, and high officials in the White House.
One purpose of this briefing was for them to share with us any concerns that my government had about possible terrorist activities that were supported by Cuba.
I asked them specifically on more than one occasion is there any evidence that Cuba has been involved in sharing any information to any other country on Earth that could be used for terrorist purposes.
Matt Welch writes in Foul Ball , ""Even though the people are generally smart and jaded enough to tune out the government's propaganda, they don't have much of anything to replace it with, except for the odd B.B.C. broadcast-and contact with foreign tourists.
More and more Republicans are not willing to let the larger interests of the United States and their own constituents be sacrificed to the gods of electoral politics.
In Washington, House Majority Leader Dick Armey says the United States should open trade with Cuba.
General Assembly overwhelmingly approves a resolution asking the United States to end the 40-plus-years embargo against Cuba.
European nations expressed objection to the embargo, citing United States penalties on countries and companies doing business with Cuba as ""extraterritorial,"" and saying that the embargo is a bilateral issue between the United States and Cuba and should not be imposed on others.
According to an article in the Christian Science Monitor about 180,000 United States citizens visited Cuba in 2002.
United States Senators Max Baucus and Chuck Hagel introduce a bill in Congress that seeks to lift the embargo.
Stephan Vitvitsky writes in Tufts Daily; ""... the Cold War ended in 1991 when the Soviet Union ceased to exist.
There is no more communist threat and the United States is the lone superpower of the world.
Ten United States Senators from both political parties form the ""Cuba Working Group,"" to promote an end to the embargo against Cuba.
Members include Max Baucus, Democrat from Montana, and Pat Roberts, a Republican from Kansas.
The United States House of Representatives approve a bill ending travel restrictions to Cuba for United States citizens.
At the end of the day they return to a resort in Cancun, Mexico, where the first United States -Cuba travel conference is held.
The United States Treasury Department's Office for Foreign Assets Control passes a regulation that bans publication of scientific articles from regimes subject to sanctions by the United States government, as is Cuba.
United States President George W Bush establishes the Committee for Assistance to a Free Cuba, and further enforces the ban on travel to the island.
The United States Senate votes in favor of lifting the ban on travel to Cuba.
The result is similar to a vote at the House of Representatives last month.
The United Nations General Assembly votes overwhelmingly against the United States economic embargo of Cuba for the 12th consecutive year.
United States President Bush signs Presidential Proclamation 7757, which bans vessels from traveling to Cuban ports from United States ports.
According to a letter sent by the United States Office of Foreign Assets Control to the United States Congress late last year the Treasury Department had four full-time employees dedicated to investigating Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein, and over two dozen assigned to investigating Cuban Embargo violations.
The letter reveals that over $8 million were collected in embargo violation fines since 1994, and over 10,683 ""enforcement investigations"" opened since 1990.
Relating to terrorism, the OF AC opened 93 ""enforcement investigations"" between 1990 and 2003.
For the 13th consecutive year, the United Nations General Assembly votes overwhelmingly against the United States embargo on Cuba.
Voting with the United States for the embargo are Israel, Palau and the Marshall Islands.
By the end of the week, Cuba has agreed to purchase about $125 million in farm goods from United States companies.
The United States House of Representatives Appropriations Committee approves an amendment that rolls back a rule issued by the Treasury Department last February that requires that Cuba pay for food imports from the United States before they leave port.
The full House and Senate must approve the amendment before it becomes law.
The National Security Archive releases a memo written by Attorney General Robert F Kennedy on December 12 1963 (less than a month after President Kennedy's assassination), in which he seeks to lift the travel ban to Cuba.
Also released is a memo about a December 13 1963 meeting at the State Department (to which Kennedy was not invited), in which Undersecretary of State George Ball rules out the possibility of ending the travel ban.
For the 14th straight year, the United Nations General Assembly votes to end the United States embargo against Cuba.
The Cuban government refers to this as an ""act of aggression,"" and Cuban dissident-journalist Oscar Espinosa Chepe considers the fund ""...counterproductive.
I believe Cubans have to be the ones who love our problems and any interference serves to complicate the situation,"" he says.
For the 15th straight year in a row, the United Nations General Assembly votes overwhelmingly on a resolution to demand an end of the United States embargo against Cuba.
The vote is 1 83 in favor of the resolution and 4 against, with the nation of Micronesia abstaining.
Voting with the United States is Israel, the Marshall Islands and Palau.
Presidential candidate Obama says he is in favor of rolling back restrictions on Cuban American travel and remittances to Cuba at a speech in Miami in front of the Cuban American National Foundation audience.
This is a bold move with much political risk that has not been done by any serious presidential candidate in history.
This effectively sets a deadline for the President to formulate a comprehensive Latin America policy that will most likely have to include some action with regards to United States policy towards Cuba.
Raul Castro announces a major reorganization of the Cuban government where Foreign Minister Felipe Perez Roque and Vice President of Council of State are fired.
The character of the Cuban government after Raul leaves the scene becomes clearer.
After some political wrangling, the Senate passes the Ominbus spending bill that will continue to fund United States government operations but contains controversial language that is a small step towards easing the restrictions of Cuba sanctions.
Senator Menendez objects to having the Cuba language in the bill but eventually supports the bill as Treasury Secretary Geithner sends him a letter stating that the language will not substantially change United States Cuba trade laws.
Senator Menendez can see the writing on the wall that the momentum is building against the Embargo.
This meeting may have been scheduled in advance of the Summit of the Americas so the two Presidents could develop a working relationship and perhaps even discuss Cuba in order to formulate talking points before, during and after the Summit.
Venezuelan President Hugo Chavez ""fires the first shot"" at Obama before they meet at the Summit of the Americas next month.
Chavez challenges President Obama to discuss Cuba before and during the Summit.
New Cuban Foreign Minister Bruno Rodriguez made a statement that Cuba would work with the European Union to discuss human rights violations and would work with the E.U. to normalize relations.
Costa Rica and El Salvador, where the leftist FMLN has just won a national election, both announce that they will normalize relations with Cuba.
It appeared to be coincidental that the decision was made public on the same day that Salvadoran President-elect Mauricio Funes reiterated his campaign pledge to re-establish relations with Havana made the comments hours before he was to meet with United States Assistant Secretary of State Thomas Shannon.
Republican Congressman Jerry Moran from Kansas introduced Bill , Agricultural Export Facilitation Act of 2009.
It is designed to facilitate the sale of United States agricultural products to Cuba, as authorized by the Trade Sanctions Reform and Export Enhancement Act of 2000.
United States Senators Byron Dorgan , Michael Enzi , Myron Brilliant from the United States Chamber of Commerce, President of the American Farm Bureau Federation Bob Stallman and Human Rights Watch Executive Director Jose Miguel Vivanco will hold a press conference Tuesday, March 31, at 12:00m. in room SVC-203 of the United States Capitol Visitors Center in support of S428, the Freedom to Travel to Cuba Act.
There is a managerial/military Brahman bureaucratic caste, answerable to Raul Castro that exercises decision-making power over all matters of importance.
Members of this elite did not achieve their status through business acumen or inherited wealth, but through loyalty and appointment.
The caste's power will grow as Fidel, the consummate micro-manager, slowly fades away and is replaced by Raul, who prefers to delegate authority.
After Raul their power will expand again and the pressure to monetize their authority could lead to de-facto ownership and a nascent market economy from the top down, creating a noveau riche cubaine.
The Castros' top priority, from the grave, will be to prevent this from occurring.
Large state enterprise in the agricultural and other sectors will continue to dominate the brick and mortar economy because it is less lucrative than trade and banking, and tends to be outright un-profitable and in dire need of investment.
Cuban state power serves as a bulwark against foreign power of every stripe and the military is the key to state power in Cuba post Raul Castro.
The productivity of Cuban enterprise will remain low, ensuring the low purchasing power of the majority and reliance on the discipline and coercion of military structures in the economy.
Large-multinational manufacturers will open shop in Cuba, attracted to low wages and proximity to the world's largest consumer market after the embargo is lifted.
This scenario coupled with fear of United States and exile domination, would be fertile ground for a populist to take charge.
A new Fidel could succeed by replacing ideology with religion and playing up egalitarianism, nativism and antiAmericanism.
Illicit opportunities for self-enrichment on the side are the primary current material benefit of membership in the Brahmin caste.
These opportunities are sought out due to the dearth of market incentives, morbidity of the peso economy and wide acceptance of filching and corruption.
It is at the root of the crass materialism common in today's Cuba and in post-Soviet Russia.
This phenomenon is totally incompatible with the morality required to maintain Socialist ideals and guarantees the end of the Cuban Revolution.
The privilege achieved by the Brahman caste, and the fear of its loss, ensures resistance to Miami exile power.
The caste will wrap itself up in nativism, not just nationalism, which exiles have a claim to.
Since the caste cannot match the compensatory power of Miami, the condign power of the state will be its defense against foreign domination.
How well he solves the inherent structural weaknesses of the command economy will determine how many options are available once he passes away.
Years of token salaries and universal government subsidies keep many young people off the labor rolls because it's more lucrative to hustle.
Others live comfortably enough off money sent from Miami and elsewhere.
The destructive sociological effect bears similarities to what we saw in the United States under welfare.
Iris, a young Cuban girl, turns down neighborhood janitor positions in hopes of higher-paying work at nearby resort hotels where she can earn tips in CUCs.
Cuba struggles to increase productivity while hundreds of thousands of people, if not millions, are not motivated to take work seriously.
Even highly educated people would rather remain idle or work in the tourist industry as waiters or taxi drivers than work as professionals requiring brainpower.
This has lead to a profound disrespect for serious professions that make a country more competitive.
Iris says she has blanketed all the state agencies that run tourist resorts near her home with resumes, but she lacks the high school diploma required for even menial work.
So she spends most days hanging out in front of her house, watching horse-drawn buggies go by in her hometown of Ciudad Bandera, where the national flag was first raised on May 19, 1850.
Officially, Cuban government figures show its unemployment rate is just 1. percent, the lowest in Latin America.
My personal observations of Havana during normal business hours support this assertion.
A 2007 survey conducted by Juventud Rebelde, a government newspaper, showed that in Guantanamo province alone there were 1 8 times more unemployed people than official figures reflected.
When Raul Castro took office on Feb., 2008, he announced an increase in state pensions and wages.
In April, economic commentator Ariel Terrero announced on state television that the government would lift caps on wages.
I suspect that very few Cubans understand that real wages can rise only if productivity rises.
He added that he did not view this as a violation of egalitarianism, but rather, as Lenin put it, ""from each according to his ability, to each according to his work.
The state pays salaries in nearly worthless pesos and sells most consumer goods, even those produced in Cuba, in the Cuban Convertible Peso , which is a Cuban paper proxy for the Euro, United States Dollar, British Pound and Swiss Franc.
In an interview, Eduardo, 30, a stagehand who got his first job in 2004, said most of his friends worked for the first time when they were in their late twenties — after emigrating to Florida.
The money they would pay me is not going to meet my basic needs,"" he said.
Calls to be like Che and sacrifice for the greater good cannot substitute for concrete incentives, especially when there is dire want but no glory or immortality to be had for the heroic effort.
The lack of incentives in Cuba's economy explains the coercive nature of the government and ascension of the military.
At the height of the Cold War, Cuba's soldiers became a legend in Africa and on the island when they punched through enemy lines, defeating South Africa's army in Angola.
Today, Cuban generals are attempting to apply the profit motive to businesses that range from growing beans to running hotels and airlines.
Cuba's Revolutionary Armed Forces rent rooms to tourists through Gaviota SA, the island's fastest-growing hotel conglomerate.
They sell premium cigars, peddle consumer goods through an island-wide retail chain and serve lobster dinners at the Divina Pastora restaurant in Havana's landmark Morro Castle.
The military also plays a role in allotting nickel mines and leasing offshore ocean lots for oil exploration.
The U of Miami's Institute for Cuban and CubanAmerican Studies estimates that the FAR control more than 60 percent of the island's economy.
Raul has traveled to China numerous times to study Beijing's economic policies and in 2003 he invited the leading economic adviser to then Chinese premier Zhu Rongji, who played a leading role in opening up China to foreign trade and investment, to give a series of lectures in Cuba.
In the 1990s, Cuba sent its military officers, who had previously trained at prestigious Soviet military schools, to learn hotel management in Spain and accounting in Europe, Latin America, Asia, and Canada.
Upwardly mobile officers burnt the midnight oil reading business books such as ""In Search of Excellence"" by Tom Peters and Robert H Waterman.
As Defense Minister, Raul Castro adopted standard accounting and management incentives to run military-owned factories that made everything from uniforms to bullets.
The government cautiously courted foreign capital and invited foreign entrepreneurs to jumpstart the economy.
In 1998, a Spanish businessman started a travel agency and hydroponics vegetable farm inside the vast helicopter hangar at a former submarine base in the port of Mariel.
The farm proved short-lived because Aerogaviota, the transport company belonging to the Cuban army, was unreliable.
It shipped only a few loads of produce; the rest was left behind to rot.
The Spaniard found it impossible to coordinate Cuban labor with unpredictable transport flights.
According to retired American diplomat Philip Peters, now a director of the Lexington Institute, by the year 2000 approximately 1,400 state companies out of 3,000 were being evaluated for or being run under perfeccionamiento management techniques.
Using such methods tripled profits in just two years for a tire plant, according to the manager who spoke to Peters in 2001.
As Cuban enterprise gains in productivity through perfeccionamiento, the groundwork is laid for market reform in the future.
The military found foreign joint-venture partners for Cuba's moribund citrus industry, which collapsed after losing its markets in the Soviet bloc.
Ironically, the Israeli government, unable to say no to its benefactor in Washington, is one of only four nations to vote in favor of the United States embargo when the United Nations General Assembly roundly condemns it every year.
Fidel's About Face I remember the hope that Cubans and foreign businessmen felt at that time.
There was an endless whirl of conferences, expos, trade shows, and trade agreements.
Alamar Associates, trade consultants specializing in Cuba since 1974, had organized the United States -Cuba Agricultural Conference.
During a meeting at Havana's Palacio de Convenciones, Fidel Castro himself unexpectedly dropped by, spoke for hours about agriculture and commodity prices and then took live questions from the audience.
I sat in the second row, three meters from Castro, and was called on to speak.
I remember how the distinguished panel, including the senators, Kirby Jones, and top Cuban government ministers, not to mention the Cuban security men, held their breath as I spoke.
No one knew what I, an unknown young man in suit and tie, might say to el Commandante.
Fidel's long-winded, circuitous answer was that comparisons between the two countries could not be made, Cuba already had its agrarian reform in the 1960s and farmers' markets were currently open.
In 2003, he reversed the business opening, arguing that they were sullying the revolution.
By 2004, Cuba's economy had turned a corner and Fidel canceled business and management courses funded by the European Union, Sweden, and Canada, which together trained more than 1,300 high-ranking Cuban officials in capitalist management techniques.
As a result, free trade zones vanished, self-employment was curtailed and joint ventures were put on hold indefinitely.
As of 2008, Cuba conducts $2 billion annually in oil barter for medical care with Venezuela, and China invests heavily in Cuban nickel mines.
Tourism receipts, remittances from abroad, and pharmaceutical and cigar exports comprise the economy's remaining components.
The Military's Role For ideological and political reasons, Cuba effectively abstains from the world economy when the United States embargo does not accomplish this for it.
The inevitable result is autarky, a subsistence economy, no savings and public dependency on the state.
I am not suggesting that the Castros secretly want the United States embargo to continue or want to keep the Cuban people impoverished.
They don't, and an end to the United States embargo in their lifetime would be a huge political triumph for them.
Once the initial euphoria wears off, it would also be the beginning of the end of the political system they built.
The current Castroite system needs monopolistic control as well as conflict and controversy to keep it from going soft.
The Castroite system is incompatible with, fearful and mistrustful of the decentralized, impersonal, corporate power that could pose a challenge to it if given a toehold in Cuba.
An analogy would be the uneasy feeling many American communities have towards WalMart.
I do not think the Castroite system is without its merits and rationale, but it belongs to an earlier time, just like the embargo.
The Cuban military, as the obedient servant of state power and with the ability to command and control without ownership, has expanded its sphere of influence.
Today, the military's web of companies is run by the Grupo de Administracion Empresarial SA, or the Business Administration Group, which is located on the fourth floor of Cuba's defense ministry building.
Julio Casas Regueiro until he became defense minister on February 18, 2008, the day Raul succeeded Fidel.
By turning officers' clubs and naval bases into resorts, the tourism company Gaviota, which means sea gull, has become GAESA' s most important business.
They control the best hotels but leave management to Spain's Sol Melia and France's Club Med.
Of Cuba's roughly 40,000 hotel rooms, Gaviota' s currently has approximately 8,500.
Hal Klepak, Canada's former military attache in Havana, has written a book on the Cuban military.
For military enthusiasts who wish to visit the island's colonial forts and the barren land that surrounds the United States naval base in Guantanamo, Gaviota offers exclusive tours.
It also rents cars, runs marinas, manages gourmet restaurants and operates an attraction that allows tourists to swim with dolphins, according to a recent study by the Spanish Institute of International Trade.
Generals hold the top management slots in the country's economic ministries.
Rosales del Toro, other generals run the civil aviation, fishing, telecommunications and transportation ministries.
A colonel runs Habanos SA, a joint venture with the Spanish firm Altadis, which markets the country's famous cigars abroad.
Mark Entwistle, a former Canadian ambassador to Havana who now advises foreign companies in Cuba, has said the military has the power to cut the bureaucratic red tape that bedevils other Cuban entities.
For example, a Canadian business that wanted to grow soybeans was unable to get permission from the ministry of agriculture.
Giving the armed forces a critical role in running the economy has helped the Castro brothers reward their supporters and gives the military a stake in the status quo.
A number of high-ranking ""entrepreneur soldiers"" have already been discharged and are often jailed for corruption.
Many officers envy fellow soldiers involved in joint ventures and covet their superior living standards.
During his time in Havana from 2001 to 2003, many Mexican businessmen complained to him that the ""juniors"" were demanding bribes and kickbacks as a condition of doing business with their fathers.
The most notable dismissals included Carlos Lage, widely credited with saving the country after the collapse of the Soviet Union, and Felipe Perez Roque, a likely successor to Raul.
These moves leave little doubt that the military will take power on Raul's demise.
The fact that Fidel was consulted before the firings is evidence of his continued power, even from a hospital bed.
At the same time, Raul has loosened controls on how state companies spend foreign currency.
He cancelled a decree requiring the Central Bank to approve all state company expenditures in excess of $10,000.
Business leaders are relieved and said the change would benefit the entire economy by reducing bureaucratic delays and paperwork.
The 2003 decree was originally enforced at the behest of Fidel Castro to fight corruption.
It was part of the re-imposition of rigid control after the loosening of the 1990s to cope with deep economic crisis.
Cuba's economy was battered by three hurricanes in 2008, drops in commodity export prices and the global financial crisis.
In one year, Cuba's current account went from a $500 million surplus to a deficit of more than $2 billion.
Since taking office last year, Raul Castro has taken small but symbolic steps such as lifting restrictions on some consumer goods and rescinding tourist hotels' exclusion of Cubans.
He has also decentralized agriculture, granted producers more autonomy and lifted income caps, declaring that workers and farmers should maximize their income.
After Fidel's death, Raul, assuming he is in good health, will accelerate economic reforms and liberalization.
But the Cuban state will resist the formation of a moneyed elite outside its own ranks.
At some point in the future, Cuba will no longer be able to resist, though the exclusion of exile money and personalities will be a more achievable priority.
After Raul, a disciplined group of senior army officers will likely rule Cuba in collective fashion.
They will have command over the economy and political life, and the security services will clamp down very heavily.
The new leadership will decree further loosening of economic restrictions on small-scale Cuban enterprise and foreign investment and will seek rapprochement with the United States.
The government will commute political prisoners' sentences but will not permit organized political opposition.
Cubans will not accept American-style elections and the Cuban government would be suicidal to accept them.
If the United States posture remains hostile,e. the embargo, and there is a credible threat that Cuba will be taken over by Miami exiles, then the Cuban government will maintain its character.
After Raul, United States policy must remain decoupled from Florida politics.
This does not imply that the United States should wait for him to die before changing its posture.
Raul will not leave his succession to chance either and his replacement will not make the changes Washington seeks.
This means not just sitting down to chat, as Obama said he would during the election campaign, but the normalization of relations with a country with whom we are not at war.
By engaging Raul now, his successors will have to continue the process from day one.
American policy makers must not be misled into believing that somehow, after the Castro lineage is finished, the Cuban government will back down or be overthrown, as if Cuba were a monarchy or tin-pot dictatorship.
Nationalism predates the Castros and will thrive after the Castros are dead.
American policymakers must not be seduced by the Miami-Cuban fantasy of turning back the clock to 1959 and taking over.
Only this way can we influence what happens in Cuba instead of reacting to one fait accompli after another.
Generous dresser drawers and nightstands with George Jetson's version of the future accouterments were separated by a headboard that would bear tales of affairs and loss if it could only accept an offer that could not be refused and spill its cedar guts.
But a more vexing story of benign neglect and decay was the real headliner.
It was enough to make you hold your breath while paring back the bed sheets to see what else might be revealed.
Years ago I heard a rumor that J Lo her trademark rear end insured for a billion dollars , would not sleep on a hotel bed with sheets and blankets less than a certain regal thread count.
Here on the ""executive floor"" of Lansky's erstwhile Caribbean jewel, it was a relief just to find that the bed linen was cum stain free.
The Hale Old Man and the Septic Tank Cuba and Haiti are both nearly on the Tropic of Cancer, which means it is always warm or hot.
Presently the azure waters in front of the Havana Malecon will have turned U.P.S. brown, but there is no mistaking the contents for anything Christmasy or kosher.
Meanwhile, the Copenhagen Climate Summit is under way as protesters' heads and T V. cameras roll.
Oblivious to history, the Left pretends that painting industry Red will make it green.
The United States is committed to helping Haiti ""today, tomorrow and for the time ahead"", Secretary of State Hillary Clinton declared on a January 16 visit to Port-au-Prince.
El que no sabe que aprenda Rudy Calzado It is not difficult to divine what the Castro brothers really think.
Cubans already know their society does not work as advertised, but it sure looks good compared to Haiti, even before the earthquake.
In Cuba, all consequential matters are decided at the very top and everybody else, from broadcast personalities on down to the general public, automatically tows the line or falls silent.
Favorite news topics are those of global scope and issues far removed from Cuban influence.
The latest example is across the ninety mile Windward Passage to Haiti.
Fidel, whose legal guardian as a child was Haiti's consul in Santiago so many years ago, has correctly pointed out that the appalling death toll is the byproduct of Haiti's condition as Third World hell.
The genial Castros are quite correct in their critiques but blind to the failure of their own solutions.
When they are mistaken or wrong by omission, especially in business affairs and the economic and social realities confronting Cuba, Cuban ""public opinion"" follows them like three blind mice into a black hole at the end of a dead end.
Of course, in a nation of knaves, fools and Forrest Gumps, ""public opinion"" has little meaning and no significance.
Free higher education guaranteed notwithstanding and for all the sunshine in Cuba, you would be hardpressed to find a Cuban who doesn't have his head where the sun don't shine.
Paul Lafargue and the Right to be Lazy ""If, uprooting from its heart the vice which dominates it and degrades its nature, the working class were to arise in its terrible strength, not to demand the Rights of Man, which are but the rights of capital exploitation, not to demand the Right to Work, which is but the right to misery, but to forge a brazen law forbidding any man to work more than three hours a day, the earth, the old earth, trembling with joy would feel a new universe leaping within her.
Like Christ, the doleful personification of ancient slavery, the men, the women and the childeen of the proletariat have been climbing painfully for a century up the hard Calvary of pain; for a century compulsory toil has broken their bones, bruised their flesh, tortured their nerves; for a century hunger has torn their entrails and their brains.
His father once owned coffee plantations in Oriente, Cuba, and may have been part of the exodus of criollos from Haiti to Cuba after the establishment of the Negro Republic of Haiti in 1804.
Paul Lafargue was born in Santiago de Cuba, and counted a French republican, a French Jew, a mulatto and a Caribbean Indian among his grandparents.
Paul Lafargue's Utopian vision of an advanced industrial society of leisure enjoying the fruits of ever-increasing labor productivity brought on by technology has in a limited sense been achieved in a few developed countries today.
But in Third World, commodity-based economies with low human development and capital investment in a nation's key resources -it is peoplethe laws of market economics are astringent on society's progress even as they become less compelling,e. the reward side of the marketplace vanishes to a point while the downside remains a slippery slope.
The wretchedly needy people of the world live in the midst of great natural resources but Capitalism is unable to provide for them no matter how high commodity prices go... hence illegal immigration all over the world.
Now in the Age of e-commerce, merchandise and their payment flow seamlessly across borders at the speed of light while boatloads of Haitians regularly perish at sea attempting to reach the Promised Land and eight year old American children languish on the Department of Homeland Security's no-fly list.
Socialism and public-sector economies make more sense for an impoverished nation when looked at from the miserable vantage point of survival and subsistence in a mean world.
This creates a grand opening for the left and makes comity with the United States difficult.
Like most of Latin America, Cuba and Haiti are birds of a feather, conceived as outposts of slave empires in the infamous Triangular Trade and molded as colonies to produce sugar, coffee and tobbaco... as sovereign nations today they are destined to be societies maladroit, economic pantywaists at the mercy of world markets and their thirst for cheap labor and raw materials.
The productivity, wages and living standards of these nations will never reach First World expectations and, indeed, big business interests and their governments have a long, sordid history of foiling weak nations' attempts to even the playing field.
To paraphrase the world's richest man and greatest philantropist Bill Gates, Capitalism has forsaken the wretched of the Earth.
In Cuba, a great social experiment has been underway for half a century.
The right to higher education, healthcare and employment are enshrined in the constitution but, alas, the right to be lazy and its exercise is the upshot.
Unlike these nations, Cuba recuses itself from World trade under the mantra ""socialism or death"", and the United States have a tailor-made embargo that unwittingly assists the Cuban government to maintain its monopoly over the economy.
Maurice White Leaders reared in failed states and societis are often backward, gimpy and corrupt.
If enough individuals develop a personality disorder, the national traits of an entire nation begin to change for the worse.
Cuba, like Haiti, suffers a permanent economic dislocation, but on a higher plane of poverty under the direction of a disciplined, well organized group less chaotic than its surroundings.
Regardless, the bonhomie of cheery islanders born in ""paradise"" is reduced to levity in both nations.
The stellar CubanAmerican entrepreneur has his diametric opposite in the feckless nincompoop running Cuba's state enterprises at a loss.
The successful Haitian businessman is outnmubered one hundred to one by Haitians living on less than two dollars a day.
Fallow fields in Cuba at an opportunity cost and deforestation in Haiti at a profit.
In the Third World, churlishness in thought and deed, at work and at play; stupidity and mediocrity, like a slow-motion earthquake, rumble underfoot for years until all their latent chaos is released in the avalanche of a ""natural"" disaster.
