SOURCE 1A The source below outlines the discussions that members of the Executive Committee from the United States of America held regarding the deployment of Soviet missiles to Cuba.
The kind of people involved in the EXCOMM meetings were diverse and even conflicting in their opinions.
From the most conservative, probably General Taylor as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, or Dean Acheson, to the most liberal, Adlai Stevenson, they encompassed a broad spectrum of political opinions.
The conservative extreme, represented by Acheson and Taylor favoured an out and out military showdown.
Acheson himself saw the entire affair as a test of wills and believed the only respectable course of action for the United States was a decisive air strike.
General Taylor, along with the other Joint Chiefs, strongly supported Acheson's position.
He proposed withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey and Italy in return for the Soviets doing the same in Cuba.
The reaction to this from other EXCOMM members was a swift and overwhelming negative.
The reasons most clearly articulated by Robert Kennedy against the strike were that it would have brought death to thousands of innocent Cuban civilians and to thousands of US military personnel.
Also, such attacks ran the risk of triggering the launch of nuclear weapons.
Kennedy himself wrote that a 'surprise attack would erode if not destroy the moral positions of the United States throughout the world'… Some favoured the blockade because it offered more flexibility and fewer liabilities than a military attack.
The attack would create an all-ornothing situation for both the United States and the Soviet Union.
It didn't allow time for the Soviets to freely consider their position and comply with American wishes.
It provided for no diplomatic manoeuvring by which a peaceful solution could be found.
It explains the Soviet Union's position on the deployment of missiles to Cuba.
It is well known to you, Mr President , the attitude of the Soviet government and personally, of Nikita Khrushchev toward the dangerous developments connected with the US administration’s position on the issue of Cuba.
An unrestrained anti-Cuban campaign has been going on in the USA for a long time and apparently there is a definite United States policy behind it.
Behind the scenes, however, officials of both the United States and the USSR were negotiating a non-military resolution to the crisis.
The Soviet Union would remove its missiles from Cuba and the United States would remove its missiles from Turkey.
On 28 October Kennedy and Khrushchev announced that Soviet missiles would leave Cuba.
The only public announcement of missiles being removed were those from the Soviet Union.
The United States ‘quarantine’ continued, turning into a verification mission that the Soviet Union was keeping its promise to remove the missiles.
The dismantling of American missiles in Turkey began as well and the missiles were removed a few months later.
Estimates at the time of the crisis, of casualties had the two nations traded nuclear missiles, were in the hundreds of millions.
The only leader to survive in power for more than two years was Castro.
Kennedy was assassinated in 1963 and Khrushchev was ousted as Soviet leader the following year.
SOURCE 2A The following source outlines the reasons for the emergence of Black Power Movement in the United States of America in the 1960s.
The demand for Black Power in 1966 was an expression of the eagerness among young black activists for militant self-defence and rapid social change.
The ‘Black Power’ slogan summarised their bitterness towards white society and their rejection of Martin Luther King Jnr’s philosophy which focussed on non-violence, racial integration and alliance with white liberals.
The Black Power Movement celebrated black pride and stressed the importance of black selfdetermination as no mass movement had done before.
As never before, the identity of African-Americans became the central focus.
They were told to reject skin bleaches and hair straighteners, to give their children Islamic names and to glorify soul music.
This message and the Black Power’s critique of American society, was accepted by other marginalised groups and helped shape their protests.
On 5 June 1966, James Meredith was shot in ambush as he attempted to complete a peaceful march from Memphis, Tennessee to Jackson Mississippi.
Civil Rights Leaders such as Martin Luther King Jr, Floyd McKissick of the Congress of Racial Equality and Stokely Carmichael of the Student Non – Violent Coordinating Committee rushed to Meredith’s hospital bed.
They were determined that the march James Meredith started must be completed.
Local townspeople harassed the marchers while the police turned a blind eye or arrested the activists as troublemakers.
Carmichael felt that African Americans needed to feel a sense of racial pride and self-respect before any meaningful gains could be achieved.
He encouraged the strengthening of African American communities without the help of white Americans.
SNCC and CORE began to reject white membership as Carmichael abandoned peaceful resistance.
Colleges teamed up with young blacks wearing traditional African colours and clothes.
At the bottom of the photograph Americans are seen protesting for ‘BLACK LIVES MATTER’, after George Floyd was killed by a white American police officer on 25 May 2020.
Probably the most noteworthy of these was its influence on black culture.
For the first time, blacks in the United States were encouraged to acknowledge their African heritage.
Colleges and universities established black studies programmes and black studies departments.
Blacks now found out that African culture was as rich and diverse as any other and they were encouraged to take pride in that heritage.
The Black Arts Movement, seen by some as connected to the Black Power Movement flourished in the 1960s and 1970s.
Young black poets, authors and visual artists found their voices and shared those voices with others.
Unlike earlier black arts movements such as the Harlem Renaissance, the new movement primarily sought out a black audience.
The same spirit of racial unity and pride that made the Black Power Movement so dynamic also made it difficult and to some, dangerous.
Blacks were still victims of racism, whether they were being charged a higher rate for a mortgage, getting paid less than a white co-worker for doing the same work, or facing violence at the hands of white racists.
Some, for example, suggested that blacks received paramilitary training and carried guns to protect themselves.
