This omission can in large measure be attributed to the slow pace of declassification of relevant documents by both Washington and London.
They also tell a story that illuminates the blurry intersection of intelligence and foreign policymaking, constituting something of a case study in the emergence of an intelligence liaison during the Cold War.
BREAKING US-CUBAN DIPLOMATIC TIES, EXPANDING US-BRITISH INTELLIGENCE RELATIONS (JANUARY TO MID-APRIL 1961) On the afternoon of 3 January 1961, senior State Department official Livingston Merchant telephoned British Ambassador to Washington Sir Harold Caccia to inform him and his government, 'before the news was carried on the radio', that the United States was breaking diplomatic relations with Cuba.
This was a logical supposition given Berne's neutrality and tiny two-person embassy in Havana, compared to United Kingdom's status as a Cold War ally with a sizable embassy in Cuba that enjoyed close working relations with the American diplomats stationed there.
He urged the Embassy in Washington to 'exercise discretion, and not hand over reports, even those not marked ""Guard"", without scrutiny', and to treat the fact that information had originated in the Havana Embassy as confidential, even if the information itself was innocuous.
Forwarding a gossipy report by an embassy second secretary who had recently visited Miami on the activities of the anti-Castro Cuban emigre community there, Sutherland stated that a real survey of Castro's enemies, both internal and external, would require a serious intelligence collection and collation effort combining information from the United States, Mexico, Caracas, and other Latin American sources a job well beyond the already strained Havana embassy's resources.
Nevertheless, like any close observer, the British could not help but notice the mounting signs of a potential intervention in Cuba by anti-Castro forces, with or without overt United States aid or involvement.
Having crossed swords with John Foster Dulles over the CIA operation that overthrew Guatemala's leftist Arbenz government in 1954 (London thought the Eisenhower administration was exaggerating the Communist threat in Central America),17 they were well aware that Washington reserved the right to undertake covert operations against Castro, this nuisance in their own selfstyled sphere of influence.
Trying to discover the calculations behind the American request, the British Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd secretly cabled Ambassador Caccia to try to find out whether to expect Washington to attempt a repetition of the 1954 affair.
In fact, Dulles admitted candidly, he hoped that a British refusal to transfer the Hunter jets would compel Castro to turn behind the Iron Curtain for arms, and in so doing help provoke opposition both inside Cuba and in the region.
Alluding to a weapons shipment from Czechoslovakia that had been triumphantly disclosed by Washington and used to help tarnish the Arbenz regime (which had similarly been rebuffed when it tried to buy arms from West European countries) as Kremlin-aligned and thereby justify the 1954 coup, Dulles noted 'that in the case of Guatemala it had been the shipment of Soviet arms that had brought the opposition elements together and created the occasion for what was done.
And just in case the message was not clear, Caccia reported, Dulles had repeated, 'on a personal basis', that 'he hoped that any refusal by us to supply arms would directly lead to a Soviet bloc offer to supply.
Then he might be able to do something; for he was convinced that Castro was not only a bad man but had a streak of lunacy in his make-up which might have incalculable results.
A few months later, in March 1960, Eisenhower secretly approved a CIA plan to sponsor an anti-Castro invasion.
It is not clear from the sanitized United States record of the conversation, nor does it seem likely, that the American revealed that this 'most encouraging development' was actually a by-product of the secret plan approved by Eisenhower in March to initiate a covert operation to effect Castro's overthrow, using a group of anti-regime exiles as a cover for the agency's activities.
Although Macmillan promised Eisenhower in early July to 'try to help you in any way we can over what might develop into a really serious Russian threat' in Cuba,27 senior United States officials remained disappointed by British reluctance to take firmer measures against the Castro regime, especially in cutting off economic connections.
The problem, Eisenhower suggested, was 'that our allies equated every problem with every other problem.
On 22 July 1960, Macmillan responded with a 'personal, sympathetic, and rather ""hawkish""' telegram, lamenting that he could do nothing to block shipping in peacetime but otherwise commiserating over Washington's predicament ('Castro is really the very devil.
In a cagey response, Eisenhower sent a long recitation of 'the Cuban problem' but dodged Macmillan's apparent efforts to learn more about covert operations, instead describing plans for economic and 'counterpropaganda' efforts against the Castro government.
While the high-level US-British exchanges had yielded London's agreement in August to tighten its arms embargo on Cuba,34 a probably frustrated Macmillan gave up his attempts to prod the Americans into a franker exposition of their strategy for toppling Castro and of their covert steps in that direction, and the correspondence with Eisenhower petered out.
It had been one such warning, in fact, according to 'One Hell of a Gamble', that had prompted Castro to take the restrictive measures in early January 1961 against the United States Embassy that had led to the cutting of diplomatic relations.
British observers in Havana were unsure what to make of the January 1961 war scare.
While 'hardly' crediting the idea that the Cuban leadership seriously expected an imminent Yanqui invasion, Marchant conceded the possibility that they 'may genuinely fear' that Eisenhower, evidently committed to overthrowing Castro, might 'at least do nothing to prevent counter revolutionary ventures inside and into Cuba' before his term ended on 20 January.
As the presidential transition passed in Washington without any major action by 22 February 1961 Marchant could report that 'the tension which rose hysterically during the phantom invasion is down to uneasy normal again'38 the new guessing game continued among the Cubans, the British, and other observers about John F Kennedy's intentions toward Cuba.
In mid-February, Foreign Office officials seemed impressed by an analysis of American options by Che Guevera (whom the British Embassy had credited with 'sound a note of sanity and caution' during the January war scare39) in an interview with a Canadian journalist relayed and assessed by London's representatives in Havana.
British analysts took special note of Che's citing of continued aid from 'the Soviet bloc and China', and Sutherland's comment that the Embassy agreed that the Communist bloc 'would do everything possible to keep the Cuban economy afloat' and could provide sufficient goods to 'effectively take the place of the United States' in the face of an indefinite American trade embargo.
If Castro's position was thus relatively secure, rendering course impractical, the Foreign Office specialists seemed to agree, then pressure tactics such as an economic blockade (which Britain and other American allies would be prodded to join) were bound to prove counterproductive as well as futile.
They differed on the scale and strength of internal resistance within Cuba, and, consequently, the practicality and advisability of any attempt to overthrow the Cuban revolutionary government by landing anti-Castro Cuban exile forces in the hopes of stimulating an island-wide revolt.
By late March and early April, as rumors of a possible assault on Cuba by anti-Castro forces in the near future streamed into London from various diplomatic outposts, the British Embassy in Havana transmitted regular reports on what it could learn about the level of anti-government activity and dissatisfaction inside Cuba.
These reports (hedged by reference to the 'extreme difficulties of obtaining reliable information in this country of exaggeration, rumour and official deception'43) concluded in every instance that despite some grumbling and pockets of acute anti-government feeling, Castro and his government appeared firmly entrenched in power.
A Latin American Department analyst observed that the last century of Cuban history had shown that 'guerrilla activity can be endemic for long periods, without necessarily disrupting the national life or leading to the downfall of the government'.44 More urgent and explicitly pessimistic appraisals of the chances for success of any invasion of Cuba by anti-Castro forces came from the British Embassy in Havana in the two weeks preceding the invasion.
Signs that an operation was imminent grew more concrete, alarming, widespread, and credible, in contrast to the often shrill Cuban claims that the Embassy had been routinely reporting for months.
In late March, for example, an 'increasingly disquieted' British Ambassador in Caracas (Sir Douglas Busk) had expressed concern to the Foreign Office about reports that 'we, and I expect you', were receiving that anti-Castro forces were not only planning to invade Cuba but also expecting to receive 'massive and pretty well overt' United States cooperation.
Even if the invasion succeeded in installing a democratic regime, Busk warned, the impact of this blatant example of interference in a sovereign country would be 'disastrous' in Venezuela.
Prospect of badly organised landings planned on the assumption that internal opposition is strong enough to give decisive support continues to cause considerable concern to me and to all my European colleagues. f the American assessment is based exclusively on counter-revolutionary sources it is almost certainly wrong.
Significantly, Edmonds noted that Marchant's analysis also appeared compatible with the conclusions of a 'paper now being considered by the J.I.C., which are, broadly, that the Castro regime will probably last'.47 The passing days only intensified Marchant's view that a landing of antiCastro forces in the near future that counted on support from within Cuba to accomplish a quick military victory would be a dubious proposition.
Morale inside Cuba would be the 'decisive' factor in any clash of arms, since the 'well-armed' militia numbered about 200,000, obviously large enough to crush a landing force of the scale being bandied about in press and other reports.
And, at least for the moment, he saw no sign that the population was ready to rise up in support of a returning exile army, especially one lacking a popular leader and possibly tainted by charges of including Batista supporters and others trying to regain propert}' seized by the revolution.
This might be hastened along, even against the force of the government's indoctrination and repression measures, by an 'intelligent campaign of radio programmes from without and perhaps whispering campaigns from within'.48 It is unclear whether British Prime Minister Harold Macmillan passed on the gist of the FO's warnings (or even whether he had been infonned of them) when he met with President Kennedy in Key West, Florida (on 26 March), and in Washington in early April.
In the midst of a series of formal and informal meetings that focused on bilateral, European (economic, Berlin), NATO, nuclear, and Asian issues , the two touched only briefly on Cuba.
According to Macmillan's account, Kennedy (like Eisenhower before him) did not explicitly tell him about the CIA-backed invasion plan that was on the verge of going forward.
Instead, during a 'fairly desultory conversation' on the afternoon of 6 April, the President alluded cryptically to the 'problem' (i.e., the 'disposal problem' in subsequent Bay of Pigs post-mortems) of 1,200 Cuban exiles in Miami, and asked the Briton what he thought should be done with them.
He thought it would be better to let them go to Cuba and become guerrillas', although Kennedy noted that 'of course' Ambassador Adlai Stevenson would deny any United States role in the affair at the United Nations.
Whether or not Macmillan conveyed the sense of alarm and apprehension felt by the British observers on the scene in Havana about the prospect of a debacle in Cuba, British diplomats evidently did transmit that viewpoint to counterparts in the State Department, who appeared not to disagree seriously with them.
Embassy at Havana showing that an effective uprising in support of an invasion could not yet be expected.
A report from the British Embassy in Nicaragua relayed word from a French diplomat in Managua who had been told 'in strictest confidence' by a source close to the government that 14 landing craft were at that moment assembled in Puerto Cabezas on the Atlantic coast to transport a landing force of some 2,000 anti-Castro fighters to Cuba.
There they were expecting to receive United States air support as they came ashore.
In Washington, urgent inquiries to the State Department by the British Embassy failed to add to early press reports of the invasion, but a conversation with one mid-level official (the Deputy Director of Caribbean Affairs) on 17 April seemed to confirm the divergence in British and American analyses of the situation on the ground in Cuba.
On the other hand, there was essential agreement between the assessments of Marchant and his European diplomatic colleagues in Havana and at least some (and perhaps most) of the mid-level specialists in the State Department.
But State also agreed that it was 'unlikely that internal uprisings alone would bring the Government down in view of the strength of Castro's police force' a prediction that succeeding days would amply bear out.
It concluded despite the lack of official confirmation from Washington that the intervention had at the very least the Kennedy administration's full blessing and probably its active support, although its precise role remained unclear.
While insisting that the 'news was not entirely unexpected', Hankey admitted that a serious miscommunication, misperception, or worse had caused London to misjudge its main ally's intentions.
The Foreign Office had received numerous and varied reports indicating that an invasion was in the offing, but 'had supposed, however, from all that we have been told by the Americans that they did not consider the moment altogether ripe for such an operation and that they were fully aware of the serious reactions to which it could lead on their position in the rest of Latin America ...' in other words, that they had taken Britain's own warnings to heart.
But the British ambassador and his colleagues in London and Havana, shaken by what they regarded as appallingly bad judgement by this inexperienced new United States president and his administration (as well as what they saw as a singularly poor performance by the CIA), feared that the angered, humiliated Americans might compound the error by ordering a second, more massive armed invasion of Cuba.
This would have even worse consequences so they set out to do whatever they could to prevent that from happening.
Even as Caccia reported JFK's refusal to use force to save the invasion from collapsing, the Ambassador warned that it would be 'wrong' to conclude that United States tolerance of a Communist regime in Cuba would last indefinitely.
Preparing Macmillan for a forthcoming meeting with Kennedy, Caccia reported on 4 May after a session with presidential national security adviser McGeorge Bundy that 'Cuba has been a hard blow.
Detecting a new hesitancy in decision-making over Laos and other pressing foreign policy issues, the envoy observed that this was 'not altogether a bad thing', considering that, 'In view of the amount of needling which they are getting at home', the 'alternative might be for them to decide on action for the sake of action, only to fall down the nearest manhole'.58 Caccia's concerns reflected comparable doubts about the new US leadership, and the implications for the Anglo-American alliance and the Cold War as a whole, at the highest levels in London.
I 'feel in my bones' that President Kennedy is going to fail to produce any real leadership.
Otherwise we may drift to disaster over Berlin a terrible diplomatic defeat or a nuclear war.
This broad British loss of confidence in the competence, judgment, and direction of their principal ally across the Atlantic was also accompanied by, to some degree, a loss of trust.
Having been burned once, the British now frankly doubted whether they could take at face value claims by Kennedy and his associates that they would not now invade Cuba absent some major provocation.
Its failure to recognize Cuban realities clearly understood and communicated by Her Majesty's representatives in Havana, deception of the inexperienced new United States president, questionable merging of analytical and operational responsibilities in the same agency, and highhanded mishandling of and ignorance regarding putative Cuban partners against Castro both on and off the island among other alleged evils and miscues were seen as major contributors to the fiasco.
A has further suffered and it is hard to see how it can continue to function as previously ...', declared Caccia.
The British believed these had the best agent network among opposition groups within Cuba.
Apprehensive about United States policies toward Cuba, British officials reacted enthusiastically when the Kennedy administration seemed to open the door to more intimate consultations.
The American closed the meeting, which he had initiated, by reaffirming his interest in keeping 'in close touch with us over the Cuban situation', the British envoy cabled London.
This card might even allow Britain to 'establish ... ourselves as a primary source of objective information on the state of Cuba' and lower the 'harmful influence of the C.I.A., with its wishful thinking and intrigues'.71 Ambassador Marchant in Havana also responded with alacrity to Achilles' invitation, substituting the embassy's Head of Chancery, Iain Sutherland, for a 'casual courier' who was scheduled to visit Washington, in order promptly to give United States officials the 'full picture' on events in Cuba over the past year.
It is a nice illustration of the presumably common (but rarely documented) phenomenon of foreign policy-makers, particularly the weaker power in an alliance, seeking to gain leverage by providing intelligence information.
While Marchant dispatched post-mortems on the invasion, stressing the lack of coordination with anti-regime opponents within Cuba (especially Ray's MRP) and Castro's strengthened post-invasion position (these were days of 'triumph' and 'exultation'),74 Sutherland journeyed to Washington for a series of private meetings with United States officials.
Awaiting him at the British Embassy was an urgent message from Hankey, underlining the FO's hopes and tactics regarding his forthcoming encounter.
Second, the invaders' failed to coordinate their actions with potential allies inside Cuba, especially Ray's group.
Third, Castro's held 'at least the passive support' of a majority of Cubans until the end of 1960, and, though his support had been ebbing prior to the Bay of Pigs, his position was greatly strengthened as a result of recent events.
Fourth, there was a lack of a 'really popular' figure among the anti-Castro activists.
Fifth, there were no severe shortages of commodities or other economic problems that threatened Castro's rule or could not be alleviated with Soviet-bloc aid.
For all these reasons, the British warned, a second US-backed intervention, direct or indirect, would be a grave mistake, since it would not only fail to stimulate an anti-Castro uprising but would meet even Fiercer resistance than had the first one.
To his clearly skeptical British visitors, the embattled CIA director denied that the invasion plan had counted on a popular uprising in support of the landing, that the attackers 'represented pro-Batista forces', or that Ray's supporters had been excluded.
The US-British meetings offered an opportunity for some detailed exchanges and comparison of notes, and what appeared to be an amicable understanding to continue and deepen the new intelligence-sharing arrangements.
The Americans probed in particular for any evidence Sutherland could pass along on the role of Soviet and Soviet-bloc (e.g., Czech) technicians and advisors in putting down the Bay of Pigs landing, the size of the Soviet Embassy in Havana, any signs of 'active disloyalty' in the Cuban militia, and the extent of Castro's coordination with the Soviet ambassador during the recent events.
Sutherland, for his part, put in a plea for the United States to help the understaffed British Embassy to collate and analyze intelligence on key personalities in both the pro-Castro and anti-Castro camps.
But looming over all the discussions was uncertainty and evident Anglo-American discord over what would and should follow in the confrontation between Washington and Havana.
A British diplomat duly called on Achilles again the following day and received the reassuring (from London's perspective) response that the National Security Council had shelved any plans for an early military intervention or blockade in favor of a diplomatic offensive in Latin America to 'condemn and isolate' the Castro regime.
Achilles' comments comforted British officials somewhat, but considerable uneasiness remained.
Sooner or later I am sure the United States Govt will find itself face to face with the fact that the only way of getting rid of Castro in the reasonably near future is by military intervention.
Yet emotional undercurrents also unsettled AngloAmerican ties in the aftermath of the Bay of Pigs.
The event helped expose the ambivalence at the heart of the British view of their ally across the Atlantic, a complex mixture of, on the one hand, gratitude and admiration at American readiness to take on the burden of leading and defending the West in the Cold War struggle against Communism, and, on the other, a sense of regret at the waning of British power in international affairs and resentment of being the 'junior partner' of the Anglo-American alliance despite possessing a deeper and more nuanced knowledge and understanding of foreign affairs.
At times, these sentiments contributed to a bit of schadenfreude at the Americans' plight as they struggled to escape the hole into which they had dug themselves.
Alluding in late December to an ongoing exchange of estimates 'through J.I.C. channels', the British Embassy in Washington considered the 'general tone' of recent CIA and State Department assessments passed to London such as NIE 8561 of 28 November, 'The Situation and Prospects in Cuba', and a memorandum by the State Department's Bureau of Intelligence and Research to be 'not markedly out of line' with those of Britain's embassy in Havana.
PRELUDE TO CRISIS (JANUARY TO SEPTEMBER 1962) As 1962 began, then, the situation in and regarding Cuba seemed, for the moment, relatively stable.
In his year-end review, sent to the Foreign Office in mid-January, Marchant reaffirmed his strong belief that the Bay of Pigs had been a godsend for Castro.
All in all this was, 'a tour deforce which, I believe, not even the prodigious Fidel Castro could have brought off had it not been for that blue-print for disaster the April invasion an operation which, as seen from here, made the Suez campaign look like a successful picnic'.91 Neither Marchant nor his Canadian colleague92 in Havana discerned any opposition figures in or out of Cuba who seemed to enjoy significant popular support, nor much evidence in any form of an indigenous antiCastro movement capable of challenging the regime.
In fact, Marchant later recalled the first months of 1962 as a comparatively placid time when most Cubans seemed to concentrate on going about their daily business and getting on with their lives, with political excitement confined to behind-thescenes strains within the leadership in contrast to the tumultuous events of the previous two years.
With Castro momentarily in the background as the year opened (having criticized his own cult of personality and launched a short-lived experiment in collective leadership), the 'government seemed determined as far as possible to get the country back to normal, to give it a more stable, less revolutionary look.
The Militia was sent back to school and to work and there were fewer beards, guns and uniforms to be seen in the streets.
When the Prime Minister had inquired about the Cuban situation, during a private chat after lunch at Government House on 21 December, Kennedy had answered tersely that he intended to 'try to mobilise the Organisation of American States to bring pressure on Cuba because Castro's regime was really intolerable'.94 The United States president evidently did not tell Macmillan, however, that the diplomatic effort to increase hemispheric pressure on Cuba to which he alluded was but one public face of an ambitious secret program to topple Castro that his administration was gearing up.
Nor did Kennedy reveal that the renewed focus on crushing the revolutionary regime on the island would also include stepped-up pressure on the United Kingdom and other European allies to join in the economic sanctions against Havana.
Beginning in late January 1962, these two storylines would run in parallel, occasionally intersecting, and increasing in intensity as alarm mounted in the summer and early autumn at the Soviet military build-up in Cuba, in the period preceding the crisis itself in October.
The trade dispute story, though too convoluted to describe in depth here, offers a fascinating glimpse into perennial Anglo-American disagreements during the Cold War over the broad issue of the efficacy and propriety of 'economic warfare' as well as in particular in relation to the Castro regime ever since it took power.
The latter resisted such pressures to restrict British trade or shipping with Cuba as matters of 'principle' as well as UK economic self-interest.
The Sturm and Drang over possible British and NATO economic sanctions against Havana, with consequent strains for Anglo-American relations, formed the backdrop for the simultaneous evolution of the intelligence liaison regarding Cuba between the two countries.
Ironically, just as British officials in London were doing their utmost to resist NATO conscription into Washington's campaign against Cuba, the British Embassy in Havana was seeking to expand intelligence cooperation among the NATO allies who still maintained diplomatic representation there.
Iain Sutherland raised the subject when he cabled back to London an inquiry as to the advisability of comparing notes with other NATO missions in Havana on the subject of Cuban military strength, especially as a JIC paper on that topic was reportedly under preparation.
He assumed it would be shown to the Americans but wondered whether it would be discussed in NATO channels as well.
The French, for instance, have an Air Attache resident in Mexico and accredited to Havana who had now paid two visits to Cuba, the last to attend the military parade on January 2.
We quoted him on one or two points of identification in the report on the military parade.
The Dutch have some quite good contacts through KLM in the aviation field.
Sutherland's message, which was considered by the Foreign Office in February and March just as it was embroiled in trying to respond to a mission by State Department aide Walt Rostow to prod NATO into measures against Cuba, sparked a series of discussions and inquiries in London and Washington regarding the scope of British and West European intelligence activities on Cuba and cooperation with the United States.
Instead, Parsons proposed regular but informal exchanges among interested NATO embassies, beginning with the British, Canadians, Dutch, Germans, 'and possibly Italians', and to 'set the ball rolling' with a consideration of the JIB estimate.
K Elliott noted that an operation that looked 'too much like an organised NATO activity' would be 'very awkward indeed' if word escaped, since 'the few NATO countries left out will be resentful and make a fuss' when they found out.
Therefore, he 'strongly' opposed including the Germans and Italians (let alone the Portuguese or Norwegians), and bringing in the others would largely depend on 'those Missions' security arrangements, and the degree of Cuban competence in coping with operations of this kind.
We are rather concerned that the Americans do not seem to be telling us all they know in this field.
J.I.B. do not consider that this particular point is sufficiently important for you to take any risks in finding about the points in their brief.
They mention, however, that they have had difficulty in getting information of this sort from the Americans and we agree with you that it would be a great pity to expend your limited resources in this direction on gathering intelligence that is already available in the Pentagon.
One factor contributing to British annoyance with the Americans, although Edmonds did not mention it to Havana (perhaps because of its sensitivity), was London's suspicion that United States intelligence was conducting aerial reconnaissance of Cuba and refusing to divulge the results even to their closest ally.
By then, concern had begun to mount over reports streaming in since late July of increased shipping traffic from the Soviet-bloc to Cuba on the 27th the British Embassy in Havana had been asked to investigate a JIB report that a 'considerable number of Russians are arriving in Cuba by sea"""" in the wake of high-level Soviet-Cuban exchanges, including a visit to Moscow by Cuban Defense Minister Raul Castro.
The Anglo-American consultations took the form of two lengthy meetings at the Pentagon, attended, on the United States side, by representatives of various service intelligence branches and the National Security Agency, and on the British by Sutherland, an embassy army liaison officer, and a second recent staffer of the UK Havana embassy, John MacDonald.
A 'useful background' to these latest reports, Slater noted, was provided by the 'excellent' NIE produced by the CIA shortly before they appeared, indicating that the Americans did not feel the need to modify their assessment of Cuban military strength.
It seemed superfluous, since in any case NIEs incorporated intelligence 'obtained by all methods' and the Pentagon had assured him that this would be true for the brief for the Havana embassy as well.
Asking the Americans about aerial reconnaissance intelligence missions might be awkward and counterproductive as well.
The Americans might consider aerial reconnaissance over Cuba to be 'a particularly sensitive subject at the present time', he added, in light of the increasing evidence that the Soviet bloc's latest model radar equipment and surface-to-air missiles might be arriving in Cuba, the installation of which might threaten even fast high-altitude planes such as the U-2s.
Washington had been periodically sending U-2s over Cuba throughout 1962 (on a monthly and then, beginning in May, twice monthly basis), the most recent flight being on 5 August.
And, ironically, it was on 29 August the same day Sutherland had made his case to London against asking about the spy flights that, in a mission that Brugioni would term 'a milestone' in the crisis, a United States U-2 plane for the first time photographed clear evidence that SAM missile sites were under construction in Cuba, along with much other military activity on the island.
Though he did not say so, this evidence helped underpin President Kennedy's public statement of 4 September on the military build-up in Cuba which described the equipment delivered to date, including SAMs, as essentially defensive but warning the Kremlin that 'the gravest issues would arise' should the Soviets install offensive weapons or establish military bases.
Virtually squirming as he discussed the subject due to what he described as stringent new security 'wraps' which had been put on information concerning the military build-up in Cuba, Rodgers nevertheless made it clear that the Americans now possessed irrefutable evidence about the presence of ground-to-air and short-range sea-to-sea missiles, operated by East bloc technicians.
This left the Britons with the strong impression that a 'considerable amount' of the current intelligence on Cuba had come from overhead reconnaissance.
Still more revealing to Sutherland was the Pentagon officer's acute interest in learning what the British thought the Soviets would do next.
The previous day, Khrushchev had responded to Kennedy's 4 September statement by issuing a TASS announcement reaffirming the Kremlin's commitment to defend revolutionary Cuba from United States aggression.
The American also queried whether the British believed that the new evidence of a stronger Soviet military commitment to Cuba presaged some sort of bargain, or new crisis, over Berlin, or perhaps one of the countries bordering the Soviet Union with United States military bases such as Iran or Turkey.
Sutherland did not share that interpretation, but, he informed London, Rodgers' ominous concerns seemed to reflect those of senior Pentagon and State Department officials.4 The Pentagon's growing apprehension over the build-up also translated into new tasks to relay to the British Embassy in Havana.
As Sutherland reported on 17 September, recent United States intelligence on Soviet-bloc shipments to Cuba of equipment and personnel superseded the information, inventory, and conclusions in the NIE which had formed the basis for the previous brief given the British, in August.
Now, although a formal new brief was not ready, Sutherland received a list of preliminary 'priority targets' identified by United States intelligence, mostly in the Havana, for the embassy staff to investigate.
Washington resumed its pressure on the NATO allies, especially Britain, to curtail its trade and shipping ties with Cuba.
By late August, several factors were pushing Cuba to the forefront of the Kennedy administration's concerns, not only the intelligence reports of the Soviet military build-up but also the internal momentum of the covert Operation 'Mongoose' program (as its advocates pushed for a 'phase two' that would include more aggressive steps), and growing Republican attacks on Kennedy for being 'too soft' on Cuba as the mid-term Congressional election campaign heated up.
The preponderant United States attitude toward Britain and other European allies on the Cuban issue, both inside the Kennedy administration and in Congress and the press, merged exasperation, irritation, frustration, and resentment as well as incomprehension that Washington's putative partners in the battle against Communism around the world could seem complacent and even mercenary when it came to doing business with Castro's regime.
Despite the token gesture on credit reporting requirements in July, State Department officials complained that 'NATO continues generally to regard Cuba as a US problem',128 while Lansdale groused in late July that 'Critical spare parts still arrive in Cuba, including shipments from British and Canadian firms.
Despite recognition by September that the Kremlin's shipments of hardware constituted a serious new commitment to preserving Castro's regime (rather than a 'propaganda exercise'), they tended to attribute the move to genuine, even understandable Cuban alarm over possible United States intervention,132 and to worry at least as much about containing Washington's emotionalism as Moscow's expansionism.
Combined with the Kennedy administration's impatience with British reluctance to join in their anti-Cuban efforts and secrecy regarding sharing information, the schism between Washington and London may therefore have inhibited and hampered intelligence cooperation regarding military developments in Cuba at precisely the critical moment when maximum collaboration was most needed when Soviet nuclear missiles were being deployed.
BRITAIN ON THE BRINK By October, on the eve of the missile crisis, nine months of disagreements over trade with Cuba had brought Anglo-American relations to a quite prickly juncture.
Despite a public communique released after the meeting declaring that the two had agreed on means to contain Communist 'expansion and subversion',134 privately there was no meeting of the minds on the issue of Anglo-Cuban economic ties.
Faced with mounting domestic political criticism, Kennedy impatiently told Home that he 'simply couldn't understand' why London refused to help the United States by joining in a trade embargo against Castro, the Foreign Secretary reported to Macmillan on 1 October.
American officials, who were in fact trying to step up covert attacks in the Operation 'Mongoose' program, responded . rather disingenuously that while opposing such attacks in principle the US was powerless to stop them.1 The divergence in British and American views of the covert harassment program emerged clearly when Sutherland and another embassy expert on Cuba, Paul Scott, met on 18 October with senior State Department official Robert Hurwitch, Special Assistant for Cuban Affairs and an aide to Assistant Secretary of State for Inter-American Affairs Edwin Martin.
Now (after profusely thanking London for reports from its Havana embassy), without divulging his own involvement or any other information regarding 'Mongoose', he probed the Britons for their assessment of the impact on 'the Cuban populace' of the naval and coastal raids such as those that Alpha 66 had been conducting.
There appear to have been no significant differences, however, between US and British intelligence estimates prior to the crisis regarding the unlikelihood of Khrushchev's deploying nuclear missiles to Cuba.
No less than Kennedy and his advisers in Washington, the British Embassy in Havana was stunned by the revelation that the Soviets had secretly sent nuclear-capable mediumand intermediate-range missiles in Cuba.
British experts in London and Havana shared the view of CIA analysts (if not that of Director McCone) who believed that Khrushchev would be loathe to risk such an action.
They attributed proliferating reports of varying reliability regarding Soviet bloc military activities in Cuba to the well-known erection of surface-to-air missile sites and other defensive preparations.
The ongoing transmission to United States officials of reports from the British Embassy in Havana did nothing to shake the prevailing assumptions in Washington.
Nor has any evidence emerged to suggest that it affected the timing of the United States discovery or decision-making regarding the U-2 overflights that led to it.
Indeed, British skepticism at the Kennedy administration's initial claims that the Kremlin had really deployed such missiles in Cuba ran so deep that Ormsby-Gore implored Kennedy, successfully, to authorize the unprecedented release of the highly-classified U-2 photographs of the missile sites, primarily in order to convince UK public opinion that they were actually there.
JIB director General Strong was initially 'quite skeptical', McCone later told the Excomm, but gradually 'became thoroughly convinced' and helped persuade Ormsby-Gore and his government that the missiles were for real.5 Perhaps British analysts trying to make sense of the confusing and often contradictory tangle of rumors, breathless tales, vague reports of mysterious military installations or weapons in Cuba had feared falling victim to another Wormold.
This expat vacuum cleaner salesman-turned-intelligence source, fictional protagonist of Graham Greene's Our Man in Havana , was able to captivate his handlers, fan fears of Russian infiltration of Cuba, and receive a steadily increasing stipend (with which to satisfy his daughter Milly's expensive tastes) by supplying them with bogus agent reports and blueprints of a secret weapon under construction.
This was actually modeled on the parts ('the sprayer detached from the hose-handle of the cleaner, the needle-jet, the nozzle and the telescopic tube') of an Atomic Pile vacuum cleaner.
My Lord, Any record of the story of these first two weeks of the Cuban Crisis must necessarily read more like a wildly improbable sequel to 'Our Man in Havana' than a Foreign Office despatch.
Indeed I doubt whether a month ago any reputable publisher would have given a moment's consideration to a story in which Soviet Russia was to be credited with shipping some four dozen giant missiles, each one longer than a cricket pitch, across the Atlantic to Cuba, where, Russian military technicians disguised as agricultural advisers would set them up in secret on launching sites some of them just off the main road less than 50 miles from Havana.
Certainly no publisher could have accepted a Chapter II in which less than a week later the same missiles were being feverishly dismantled, packed up and reshipped back across the Atlantic.
Marchant conceded, however, that the storm did not break 'out of a clear sky,' as most Cubans had been waiting for at least two years ' some hopefully some fearfully ' for 'something to happen' that would end the uncertainty and suspense clouding the Castro regime's future as a result of its simmering battle with Washington, a conflict that the Bay of Pigs had clearly not concluded.
Intelligence agencies must therefore be excused if they tended to discount the hundreds of recent rocket stories from their usually unreliable sources.
The arrival of much of the Russian equipment, the daily movements of technicians, of the sand and cement, all this was cheerfully accounted for by the generally accepted fact that the Russians were known to be busy building ground to air rocket sites all over the country.
Since installing 'offensive missiles' in Cuba was the one thing that could justify a United States invasion (and 'incidentally' lose Castro the support of all South American governments), it had seemed 'axiomatic' to Marchant and his diplomatic associates in Havana that 'with offensive rockets based in Cuba he could not survive as ""maximum leader"" and this country could not survive as a Soviet satellite' and that, therefore, 'neither Castro nor Khrushchev would consider such a move.
The results of photographic reconnaissance of mid-October showed just how wrong we had been', the British envoy acknowledged.
By 2 November, the Foreign Office had prepared and circulated a confidential 'tentative assessment' of the motives for the missile deployment giving primary attention to the argument that Khrushchev's main aim had been to shore up the Soviet position in the strategic nuclear balance.
Unlike most United States analysts,161 however, Roberts was willing to entertain the possibility that Khrushchev may have genuinely feared a United States attack to wipe out Castro's fledgling regime.
He is an intelligent man with a deep understanding of his immense responsibilities not just to the people of the United States alone but to the whole human race and he knew from the start that the decisions he was called upon to take might lead to global nuclear war.
He kept in close touch with every aspect of the whole operation, one moment asking Mr McNamara to check whether United States Air Force aircraft in Florida were properly dispersed in case of a surprise attack ; choosing personally which aerial photographs should be released for the press; checking the precise wording of Zorin's speech to the Security Council; advising on the precise manner in which Soviet ships should be intercepted.
He telephoned incessantly but this extraordinary attention to detail did not prevent him from keeping the main issues clearly in focus.
The period of most acute tension was during Tuesday night and Wednesday morning when the President assumed that contact would shortly be made between Soviet and American ships.
If the Soviet ships had orders to try and run the blockade a serious clash would ensue and events from then on, he fully realized, might take on an intensely dangerous turn.
Once it was known that the Communist bloc ships were turning back and the first surprisingly mild reactions from Moscow had been gauged the President was visibly relieved of a great burden.
It is true that by Friday night he was becoming impatient and even angry but his reactions and his anger at this time were more nearly in the style he displayed when he thought he had been doublecrossed by the steel barons, and it was something very different from the grim subdued mood he was in earlier in the week.
Comparable arrangements presumably continued regarding reports from Canadian and West European diplomats resident in Havana, as well as the Chilean Embassy (in an intelligencesharing relationship established in December 1962 which presumably lasted until Santiago severed relations with Havana in 1964) and possibly other Latin American envoys.
Evaluating the impact of the relationship on the events of 1961-62 must necessarily be an iffy business, however.
Clearly British skepticism about the efficacy of a US-backed emigre operation to topple Castro did little or nothing to deter or those CIA and Kennedy administration officials who approved the Bay of Pigs, though it may have reinforced the sense of caution that impelled Kennedy and some advisors to take measures to reduce the 'noise level' of direct United States involvement.
It seems more likely that British advice was taken more seriously after the April 1961 debacle, reinforcing, though undoubtedly in a subsidiary way, the position of those in the State Department, the CIA, and the administration who warned that Castro's position had if anything become stronger, and consequently counseled against any repetition of a Bay of Pigs-type operation.
Prior to the discovery of the missiles in October 1962, AngloAmerican friction over how best to deal with Cuba, including the sticky trade dispute, as well as United States secrecy regarding aerial reconnaissance and covert operations, may have impaired intelligence cooperation.
As for the missile crisis itself, British intelligence seems to have zero effect on the CIA's location of the Soviet deployment, but London's analyses may have served to corroborate the pervasive United States post-hoc interpretation of Khrushchev's action as having been motivated primarily by a desire to redress the Soviet position in the strategic nuclear balance of power.
In sum, the story presented above does not compel any dramatic alteration in our understanding of the crises in US-Cuban ties in 1961-62, but does illuminate the uses of intelligence within alliances, offers a slightly more skeptical, less Washington-centric view of this oft-told Cold War story, and provides additional context and background for understanding differences between London and Washington on the issues of sanctions, 'economic warfare,' and relations with Communist Cuba.
And, finally, the story presented yields some unusually candid peeks into the Anglo-American 'special relationship' during one of its more difficult passages.
There have been scattered allusions to British intelligence assessments of the dim prospects for success of an anti-Castro emigre invasion prior to the Bay of Pigs, particularly regarding the lack of prospects that such a landing would set off a general uprising, in contemporaneous press accounts and subsequent memoirs.
As best I can determine only Dino A Brugioni and Mark White refer even in passing to the secret information-sharing arrangement in which London passed to Washington reports from the British Embassy in Havana.
The author also thanks David Welch, Welsey Wark, Raymond Garthoff, Sam Halpern, Tim Naftali, Piero Gleijeses and Domingo Amuchastegui for helpful comments during the preparation of this essay.
While one official minuted that 'we might ... approach the State Department' on the matter, it is not clear if Britain formally requested that the Americans undertake a general assessment of the anti-Castro forces.
Dulles noted that he had not cleared his statements with the State Dept., but his reasoning seems to have been shared there and the Anglo-American discussion on that point exposed a fundamental divergence about how to deal with Castro and the Cuban revolution.
In the preceding months, the Eisenhower Administration had also pressured the British to block the sale of six unarmed helicopters to the Cuban Navy.
In Aug.60 the Americans gave the British an aide-memoire noting the 'deteriorating' Cuban situation and the United States determination to restrict exports to Cuba of military equipment, including aircraft, ships, or communications gear capable of being used for military purposes; the British agreed to go along with the policy with some minor differences of interpretation.
It was mostly the prospective highvisibility American role what Kennedy would call the noise level that Busk objected to.
Unfortunately, although some JIC records have been released , material relevant to the Cuban crises remains closed and exempted from the 30-year rule.
Neither a Secret State Dept. briefing paper prepared for the JFK-Macmillan talks, a joint Anglo-American memo of follow-up actions, nor a secret summary of the results transmitted to United States embassies abroad, specifically mentioned Cuba among the topics formally addressed at the summit.
Nor do the British records of conversations, which can be found in CAB/133/244, PRO, aside from an aide-memoire by Macmillan documenting the private exchange with JFK described below.
Declassified United States documents indicate that Ray, a former minister of public works under Castro, was in fact included in pre-Bay of Pigs planning among the anti-Castro exile leaders on the Cuban Revolutionary Council beginning in late Feb.61.
Schlesinger, too, by then was complaining about the CIA's negative attitude toward Ray because of his alleged lack of controllability even though he offered a more plausible chance of rallying anti-Castro opinion within Cuba.
As will be seen below, Canada, along with Britain, provided political and military intelligence on Cuba from its embassy in Havana to United States officials after Washington severed relations with Cuba, according to information obtained by the British Embassy in Washington in early 1962.
Braddock, Robert A Stevenson, Robert A Hurwich, and P Torrey, and the Pentagon's Maj.
Such counter-revolutionary organisations as existed inside Cuba have been hamstrung, at least temporary.
He reaffirmed that view the following month in his annual review for 1961.
According to one former United States intelligence official, the British reluctance to interfere in trade relations with Cuba extended to a refusal to go along with United States proposals to use such assets in anti-Castro operations or to undermine the Cuban economy.
Parsons would be Britain's UN Ambassador during the 1982 Falklands War.
The draft had added the words 'and possibly the Germans and Italians if necessary' to the list of embassies, but this was deleted in the final letter.
Marchant allowed that the 4,000 total might hold if it included both military personnel and civilian technicians.
United States intelligence estimated at the time that 3,000-5,000 Soviet-bloc personnel were in Cuba, according to a report of that date incorporating the latest intelligence information (including that provided by the British, although it is not explicitly attributed) presented by CIA director John McCone on 21 Aug. to top officials, including Rusk, McNamara, Robert Kennedy, and Gen.
See handwritten comments by Cromartie, 4 Sept.62, and a P.USD. representative ('The U.2's are in the headlines again.
Parsons, American Dept., FO, 17 Sept.62, top secret/guard, 11921/62G, enc.
By late Sept. and early Oct., the British Embassy in Havana was reporting a noticeable letup in the arrival of Soviet military personnel and equipment.
In any case, it appears that these reports were not shared with the British as part of the information-exchange organized earlier in the year.
After meeting with Kennedy to receive his approval for NSAM 194, Ball recorded privately that the measures were intended 'more for American public opinion' than for any practical impact on the Cuban situation but that JFK had 'felt strongly that we had to do something along this line' and that the measures would increase the cost for Soviet-bloc shipping to Cuba.
The extent to which the British stand was motivated by economic considerations rather than reflections on international law, principle, and Cold War efficacy obviously requires a more detailed study than is possible here.
Macmillan's apparent allusion to a possible United States attack against Cuba 'some months' earlier remains cryptic, as Kennedy and his aides later denied any intention to invade Cuba in the months leading up to the discovery of the Soviet missile sites in mid-Oct.62 although historians have located evidence of serious contingency planning for possible military action against Cuba during this period.
Quotations from Graham Greene, Our Man in Havana, Penguin paperback ed., first published by William Heinemann Ltd and Viking Press in 1958.
British Embassy, Havana , 'The Cuban Crisis Chapters I and II', 10 Nov.
The Chilean agreement to pass reports from its embassy in Havana to United States officials was reached during President Jorge Alessandri's visit to Washington in Dec.62.
The former cable related that in noting to Alessandri and the Chilean Foreign Minister that Washington accepted that it was up to Chile to decide whether or not to break relations with Cuba, 'We did request that so long as they maintained mission in Cuba it would be most helpful to get more information about developments there, thereby utilizing the presence to the benefit of the countries of the hemisphere.
Antonio Undurraga Perez Cotapos, who for the previous 2 years had been Counselor and Consul General at the Chilean Embassy in Havana.
