While life ultimately went on as it had before, the Crisis was an incredibly important event for both the Cold War and the future of negotiations surrounding nuclear weaponry, as it was the closest the world has ever come to mass nuclear warfare.
The negotiations of the Crisis had a profound effect on the future relationship between the United States and the Soviet Union, as both sides learned valuable lessons which would shape their future strategies in diplomacy and decision making.
The diplomacy of the Crisis was far from polished, as the US attempted to defuse a situation the Soviets had initiated and continually complicated.
Although Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev claimed to be instrumental in the peaceful resolution of the Crisis, he was, in fact, the opposite, as his actions only worsened it, increasing the tension in a situation already involving the fate of the world.
We see this in how he lied about Soviet activity in Cuba, overestimated his negotiating power, sent conflicting messages to American President John F Kennedy, and in how Kennedy’s handling of the crisis shows the Soviet leader’s role in the exacerbation of the Crisis.
In 1959, Fulgencio Batista, who had been the Cuban dictator for seven years, was ousted by a group of young Socialist revolutionaries, led by Fidel Castro.
This change in power was primarily a function of the Batista administration’s disintegration, as the revolutionaries were able to seize power without military confrontation.
This caused Castro to start his Socialist movement, which he saw as the best way to separate Cuba from the capitalist, and, as he saw it, imperialist, United States.
Soviet aid began in 1960, when they set up a “trade-and-aid” agreement, effectively trading Cuban sugar (and some money) for Soviet equipment, and was substantial by the beginning of 1962.
In response, the United States cut off most of their Cuban sugar importation.
A divide was formed, as the United States was clearly uncomfortable with Cuba’s socialism, a feeling that would manifest itself in the Bay of Pigs invasion.
In April of 1961, John F Kennedy had just taken office, and Cuba had gone socialist two years before.
In the final years of his administration, Dwight D Eisenhower initiated a plan for an attack on Cuba, with the goal of killing Castro.
It was called the Bay of Pigs, the name of the inlet where the invasion was planned to begin.
The United States used 1,500 Cuban exiles trained by the CIA, who set out to invade and instigate a revolution that would overthrow the Castro regime.
Unfortunately for the United States and their CIA operatives, their goal of starting an insurrection did not gain popular support from the general Cuban population as they had hoped, instead, they were greeted by the Cuban military, who had managed to acquire intelligence of the invasion in advance.
After several hundred were killed, Kennedy considered sending in air support, but ultimately decided to cut his losses and leave the remaining 1,113 men to be taken prisoners.
The failed attack at the Bay of Pigs caused the Soviet Union to reevaluate their role as allies of Cuba, to start considering assuming the role of a protector against the United States.
It also caused the divide between the United Stated and Cuba to grow drastically, as Cuba grew towards a style of socialism closer to the Soviet Union’s.
The plan accomplished both of these goals efficiently, and, Khrushchev believed, effectively.
The Soviet Union was falling far behind the United States in the development of nuclear weapons; their long-range missiles, known as ICBMs , were too weak to reach the United States from the Soviet Union, while the United States’ missiles could reach the Soviet Union easily.
In addition, the United States had missiles in Turkey as part of a NATO base, adding to their nuclear power over the Soviets.
Khrushchev had been worried that Castro would not comply because he wanted independence, but ultimately Khrushchev was able to persuade him, showing Castro the progress it would make with the defense of Cuba and spread of communism.
The United States noticed an increase in Cuban military activity, and by August and September, reports of nuclear missiles in Cuba began to come in to the United States.
They were confirmed on October 14, when a United States U-2 reconnaissance plane captured images of long, thin, cylindrical objects covered in canvas at a Cuban military base.
Analysts soon confirmed that they were MRBMs, easily within range of the United States.
Days later, the presence of IRBMs was also confirmed, but by then the United States had already formed an Executive Committee to deliberate on what action to take, and had begun to mobilize for a possible invasion of Cuba.
Before we look at the failures of Khrushchev’s diplomacy, we must first look at the United States’ decision to set up a blockade, or a “quarantine” as the Soviets called it, of Cuba, which prevented any more materials to be shipped into or out of the country, as it was the focus of Khrushchev’s early negotiations.
Faced with the Soviet missiles, Kennedy the ExComm were forced to make difficult decisions regarding how to respond.
As the discussion progressed, however, the idea of a blockade, first suggested by Robert McNamara (who had originally advocated for an airstrike), was adopted by John Kennedy as choice.
He saw it as the only way to get what he wanted from the Soviets with the lowest risk of instigating a nuclear war.
He was then able to gain enough support in the ExComm to go through with it, while continuing to prepare for any military action that hopefully would not be necessary.
On the Soviet side, Khrushchev’s confidence was still high, and it would remain high going into his negotiations with Kennedy.
The roots of Khrushchev’s worsening of the Crisis are in his initial interaction with the United States surrounding Soviet activity in Cuba, which was filled with lies and deception.
The Soviets then proceeded to lie outright to United Stated officials about his activity in Cuba.
This was after Kennedy had been told by Andrei Gromyko, Soviet Minister of Foreign Affairs, that there would be no “offensive arms” in Cuba.
With a foundation based in lies and presumptuousness, Khrushchev ’s early diplomacy continued to exacerbate the Crisis, as his letters to Kennedy showed no willingness to compromise.
In the address, he made known his plans for a blockade of Cuba, saying, A strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under shipment to Cuba is being initiated.
He also insinuated that the United States was prepared to engage the Soviets in combat if they did not comply.
Any hope for a quick and easy resolution was erased by Khrushchev’s response.
Khrushchev’s letter of the following day was one of incredible defiance and confidence, as he attempted to use the new balance of power he perceived to his advantage.
Kennedy responded later that day, in a brief letter in which he pointed out to Khrushchev that he had initiated the current events by furtively sending the missiles to Cuba, and asked again for Khrushchev to respect the quarantine.
The Soviet leader responded the following day, in a long message explaining his views and feelings, still as confident in the negotiating power of the Cuban missiles as he was in his first letter.
The next section will look at this offer, along with the conflicting one Khrushchev sent immediately after, in more detail.
In this next stage of diplomacy, a backpedaling Khrushchev tried to get out of the conflict without making the mistakes of his initial correspondence too obvious.
Nevertheless, he failed at this as well, sending a pair of conflicting offers for a resolution of the conflict, which only led to confusion for the United States and further aggravated the Crisis.
The first, sent on October 26, was the conclusion of message focused on Khrushchev’s newfound desire for peace.
Despite going on for a while on these points, Khrushchev does back down from them, recognizing Kennedy will never take them as the truth.
From this, he proposes a simple resolution to the crisis, offering a promise that no more missiles would be sent if the United States promised not to attack Cuba or assist in attacking her.
Then, Khrushchev said, the armaments would no longer be necessary for defending Cuba, and would be removed.
This is a remarkable change from where Khrushchev stood only one letter earlier, when he threatened the United States and refused to observe their blockade, showing the Soviet leader’s realization that the presence of the missiles in Cuba did not bolster his negotiating power, as he had hoped.
This proposal likely would have led to a quick and easy resolution had Khrushchev not made the situation even more complicated with a second offer, sent the next day, which negated the progress that had been made towards a solution.
Before Kennedy could respond to Khrushchev’s first offer, Khrushchev sent another one on the 27th that made no reference to the first.
It began with praise for Kennedy for his response to United Nations leader U Thant’s proposal, which was essentially the same as the one Khrushchev had suggested.
He then went on a long-winded complaint about the United States’ military presence around the Soviet Union, especially the missiles they had in Turkey, all of which was not mentioned in the previous letter.
So by bringing up Turkey in this second offer, it is clear Khrushchev was making a desperate attempt to save his image as a negotiator, to avoid the weakness portrayed in his first offer.
This selfish act only heightened the tension of the Crisis for no reason, as Kennedy and the ExComm were then forced to decide how to respond to Khrushchev’s enigmatic proposals.
We continue to see how the diplomacy of Khrushchev worsened the crisis by looking at how it affected the American leaders.
Within the ExComm, there was major controversy which proposal to respond to, adding to the stress that had been building throughout the Crisis.
The main point of disagreement within the committee was whether Khrushchev would accept anything without the Turkey clause; Kennedy predicted that no, they would not, while much of the ExComm believed the Soviets would still accept a response to the first proposal.
The transcripts of this deliberation also suggest that Robert had more support within the ExComm, as it got to the point where he jokingly suggested Kennedy leave so the rest of them could go forward with their response.
While Khrushchev did accept Kennedy’s proposals, the effort Kennedy had to put forth and the uncertainty he had to deal with during his deliberations demonstrate the extent to which Khrushchev increased the intensity of the Crisis.
If Khrushchev had been consistent and stuck with the proposal his first letter, the tension created by the second letter would have been eliminated, and a resolution would have been reached much sooner.
With the conclusion of the negotiations, we must look at how a peaceful resolution was reached, and how the road reaching it was lengthened and twisted by Khrushchev.
The main reason Khrushchev’s diplomatic action prevented the sides from easily reaching a peaceful resolution is that his role in the conflict was that of a fraud.
We see this in his recounting of the Crisis in a speech given to a Soviet audience, where he expressed that he considered the outcome to be a success for the Soviets, in that they accomplished their goals of protecting Cuba and avoiding a nuclear war.
Khrushchev also does not mention the ways in which he prolonged the Crisis through his early correspondence and enigmatic proposals.
Castro, Khrushchev’s ally in the conflict, advocated for an invasion of the United States.
While this correspondence shows Khrushchev’s willingness to prevent the Crisis from becoming any worse, it does not come close to outweighing all the ways he did make it worse.
Furthermore, by the time he sent the letter to Castro on October 28, he had already been assured by Kennedy that the United States would not invade Cuba, removing the possibility of a need for soviet involvement, and from the aforementioned thesis of Harold Macmillan, we know Khrushchev had no desire to stand up to a United States invasion.
The Crisis has served as a learning experience for all international conflicts that have arisen since it happened, and will continue to provide valuable lessons for the future, evident in the fact that no similar conflicts have occurred since.
For the Soviets, the most important lesson has been that “crisis avoidance better than crisis management” , referencing Khrushchev’s lack of intelligence in initiating and prolonging the Crisis.
On the American side, the focus has been on conflict management, and the necessity of compromise in the resolution of any contentious situation, not that Kennedy failed in this, but that he exemplified the favorable results of not pressing one’s power too far.
The Crisis also demonstrated the importance of direct communication, as it was essential to a harmonious resolution to the Crisis.
However, with this resolution and the way it played out, Khrushchev came away as the villain, as he continually added stress to a conflict that did not need any more of it, and did nothing to help solve it.
