Thesetapeswere still highly classified,exceptfor the tapes of October16, 1962, which had been transcribed, ""sanitized"" and publishedin 1985.
I was allowedto listen to the still-classifiedtapes becausethe appropriate authoritiesin Washingtonand at the KennedyLibraryheld that, since I had beenpresentat these meetingsas SpecialAssistantfor National Securityto PresidentKennedy,listeningto the tapeswas only a renewedaccessto theircontents,parallelto the renewedaccessto classifieddocumentsthat is often extendedto thosewho workedwith thosedocumentswhilein office.
As I listenedto thesetapesI was rapidlypersuadedthatwhateverone mightthink of PresidentKennedy'sdecisionto engagein suchsecrettaping-and I thinkI would have opposedit if I had beenasked-the resultingrecordhas importanthistorical value.
I thereforeundertookthe taskof transcribingthe tapesof the most important day, October27, and presentlythe necessaryWashingtonprocessof ""sanitization"" anddeclassification was completed.Noneof thestill-classified materialexcisedaffects the substanceof the transcript,and whatwas cut was, in the main,alreadyknown to closestudentsof the crisis.
The full transcript is available from the John F Kennedy Library in Dorchester, Mass.
McGeorgeBundy was Special Assistant for National Security to Presidents Kennedyand Johnson, 19611966.
He is presently working on a bookabout political decisions related to nuclear weapons.
InternationalSecurity, Winter 1987/88 C 1987by the Presidentand Fellows of HarvardCollege and of the MassachusettsInstituteof Technology.
Discussionsinvolvinga numberof speakersare nevereasy to recordand transcribeclearly,and we aredealingherewith equipmentof 1962 and a transcriber with no claimsto expertskill.
In closingI want to reportthat in repeatedlisteningto thesetapesof discussions in the CabinetRoomon the hardestday of the hardestnuclearcrisisso far, I heard no voiceraisedin angerand no rancorousexchange.I havebeenat painsto indicate wordsthatweregiven specialemphasisby a speaker,but all suchemphasesare well withintherangeof even-tempered exchange.I alsofoundno momentin whichanyone forgotthat, whilethe possibilitiesunderdiscussioncouldbeclarifiedand assessedby one advisoror another,and even by all of us together,the decisionsmust be thoseof one man.
Thesetapesexist becauseof what I continueto thinkwas a questionable decisionby JFK,but noneof his admirersneedsto be ashamedof what the tapestell abouthis way of makingmuchlargerdecisionson a dangerousday.
Blight'ssummaryof background and developments of the crisis, indicatedby largertype.
Bracketed paragraphs withineachtranscriptsectionsummarizepartsof thefull transcriptnot reprintedhere.Italicswithinthe transcriptindicateemphasisnotedby transcriber McGeorgeBundy.Minorchangesin punctuationand capitalization madeby the editorare not indicated.
The transcript begins with the ExComm in consternation and initial confusion after having received Khrushchev's second, public, and more demanding letter.
The letter demanded that American Jupiter missiles be removed from Turkey in exchange for removal of the Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The members of the ExComm wonder which they should regard as the real Soviet offer.
It is clear that all would prefer to reach an accord that does not include the appearance of trading the Jupiter missiles.
There ensues a wide-ranging discussion in which the President, believing that a trade of missiles will appear fair and reasonable to many observers, is confronted with arguments that such a trade might be very difficult and potentially very damaging to intra-NATO relations.
Reasons are sought for believing in the efficacy of responding to the terms of the first letter while ignoring the second.
The development of this response (nicknamed the ""Trollope Ploy"") can be traced in this transcript.
The Trollope Ploy is endorsed by most ExComm members immediately, but the President initially resists.
He believes it overlooks the wide public appeal of the missile trade proposed in the second letter from Khrushchev.
The ExComm discusses why two letters were received so quickly, one public and one private, with contradictory contents and conflicting messages.
Llewellyn Thompson suggests that after Khrushchev sent the first letter, the Soviets may have become aware of a statement of Austrian Foreign Minister Bruno Kreisky, mentioning the possibility of a missile trade.
Thompson suggests that either the Soviets interpreted the statement as a signal of American willingness to trade missiles, or the Soviets themselves put Kreisky up to it, then responded affirmatively to a ""signal"" they sent themselves.
McGeorge Bundy suggests that the private Khrushchev proposal of the day before has been overruled by his harder-line colleagues in the Kremlin.
Thompson suggests they may have been completely unaware of Khrushchev's earlier letter at the time it was sent.
Encouraging signs had also emerged from an unofficial channel opened up by the Soviets the day before.
Alexander S Fomin, ostensibly a Counselor at the Soviet Embassy in Washington, but generally believed to be a high ranking officer of the KGB, had met with John Scali, State Department correspondent for ABC News, early in the afternoon at a Washington restaurant.
Fomin had asked Scali whether he thought the United States would agree to a deal for ending the crisis that involved, in essence, a Soviet pledge to withdraw the missiles from Cuba and never to replace them, for an American pledge not to invade Cuba.
Scali took this proposal to Dean Rusk, who sent him back to tell Fomin that the United States government would be interested in such a proposal, but also to tell him that time was getting short.
These opening pages of the transcript also suggest that the members of the ExComm feel an acute shortage of time.
Many students of the crisis have assumed that this sense of urgency appeared only when the ExComm learned that an American U-2 had been shot down over Cuba, but the sense of urgency is clear long before this news arrives.
Adlai Stevenson's worry that Khrushchev's second letter, if not dealt with promptly, will cause the Americans to forfeit the peace initiative; the President's concern that the Turks may respond unilaterally to the Soviet proposal in a way that derails United States diplomatic efforts; and the fact that work is continuing at the Cuban missile sites day and night.
United Nations hinting that the United States might be amenable to a trade of missiles.
Surprisingly, these factors are more related to diplomatic considerations than to strictly military ones such as the operational status of the Cuban missiles, the difficulty of maintaining the quarantine without incident, or the danger to American reconnaissance aircraft.
Will you check and be sure that the letter that's coming in on the tickeris the letterthat we were seeing last night [The President and SecretaryMcNamarabriefly discuss the intensity and frequency of Americansurveillanceof the Soviet missile sites in Cuba.
I ought to have-In case this is an accurate statement, where are we with our conversations with the Turks about the withdrawal of theseNITZE: Hare6says this is absolutely anathema, and as a matterof prestige and politics.
Yeah, we have a reportfrom Finletter,and we've also got a reportfrom Rome on the Italianswhich indicates that that would be relativelyeasy.
We would have to work it out with the Turkson the basis of putting a Polarisin the waters, and even that might not be enough accordingto the judgment that we've had on the spot.
We've got a-we've got one paper on it already,and we're having more work done right now.
The NATO requirementinvolves the whole question as to whether we are going to denuclearize NATO, and I would suggest that what you do is to say that we're preparedonly to discuss Cubaat this time.
I don't think we can-if this an accurate-and this is the whole deal-we just have to wait-I don't think we can take the positionBUNDY: It's very odd, Mr President, if he's changed his terms from a long letter to you and an urgent appeal from the Counselor 8only last night, set in a purely Cuban context, it seems to me we're well within our-there's nothing wrong with our posture in sticking to that line.
He-uh-I still think he's in a difficultposition to change it overnight having sent you a personal communication-JFK: Well now let's say he has changed it.
I would answer back saying I would prefer to deal with your-with your interesting proposals of last night.
We're going to be in an insupportable position on this matter if this becomes his proposal.
In the first place, we last year tried to get the missiles out of there because they're not militarilyuseful, number 1.
Number 2, it's going to-to any man at the United Nations or any other rationalman it will look like a very fair trade.
We did it on a basis where if we talked to the Turks,I mean this would be an extremely unsettling business.
Well thisis unsettling nowGeorge, because he's got us in a pretty good spot here, because most people will regardthis as not an unreasonable proposal, I'll just tell you that.
I don't see why we pick that track when he's offered us the other track, within the last twenty-four hours.
I think you have to assume that this is their new and latest position and it's a public one.
Yes, but I think we have to be now thinking about what our position's going to be on this one, because this is the one that's before us, and before the world.
As between the twoI think it clearthat practicallyeveryone here would favor the private proposal.
But seriously, there are disadvantages also in the private one, which is a guarantee of Cuba.
But in any case this is now his official we can release his other one, and it's different, but this is the one that the Soviet government obviously is going on.
Isn't it possible that they're going on a dual track, one a public track and the other a private track;the private track is related to (words unclear), and the public track is one that's in order to confuse the public scene additionalpressures.
I think, yes, I think that the-uh-NATO-Warsaw Pact arms problem is a separate problem and ought to be discussed between NATO and Warsaw Pact.
They've got hundreds of missiles looking down the throat of every NATO country.
And I think this is-we have to get it into that context.The Cuba thing is a Western Hemisphere problem, an intrusion in the Western Hemisphere.
I'd handle this thing so that we continue on the real track which is to try to get the missiles out of Cuba pursuant to the private negotiation.
The other way, it seems to me-if we acceptthe notion of a trade at this stage, our position will come apart very fast.
Or if we had any understanding with the Turks that they ought to come out, it would be different.
I'd just like to know how much we've done about it and how much did we talk about itBUNDY: We decided not to, Mr President.
This thing would be all over Western Europe, and our position would have been undermined.
Because immediately the Soviet Union would know that this thing was being discussed.
In their own terms it would already be clear that we were trying to sell our allies for our interests.
It seems to me we ought to get word to Stevenson that if this is put up there he should immediately say we will not discuss-discuss the Turkish bases.
I think it would be very desirable to tell that until we get time to think about it, this thing-the fact of the matter is that we received a letter last night from Khrushchev with an entirely different proposal.
Therefore we first ought to get clarification from the Soviet Union of what they're talking, at least give us-as I say you're going to find a lot of people think this a rather reasonable condition.
Well, I think that it's relevant here to be able to say that we support the declarationof Iran that they would not accept foreign missiles in Iran.
The Turkishproblem is a NATO-WarsawPact problem, and it's an arms problembetween these two groups that is something for these two groups to talk about with eachotheras a problem of disarmament with respect to NATO and the WarsawPact.
Well, there's also this thing of upsetting the status quo, and we did not upset it in Iran.
He's put this out in a way that's caused maximum tension and embarrassment.It's not as if it was a private proposal, which would give us an opportunity to negotiate with the Turks.He's put it out in a way that the Turksare bound to say they don't agree to this.
Until we have gotten our position a little clearerwe ought to go with this-uh-last night business so that that gives us about an hour or two, we don't have KhrushchevRUSK: There's nothing coming in yet on our tickers.
He says he'd like to consider the following statement be issued-this is Stevenson""The United States does not have any territorial designs against Cuba, but of course we cannot tolerate SovietCuban aggression against us or our sister republics. the Soviet offer to withdraw weapons in Cuba assurance of our peaceful intentions towards Cuba.
GovernorStevenson recommendsthat such a statement be made in order to prevent the Soviets from capturing the peace offensive.
GovernorStevenson also recommends that we not consider the Turkish offer as reported in the attached Reuters dispatch as an alternative or an addition to the Khrushchev proposal in his letter.
I think that-uh-we ought to go at-we ought to get a statement ready which will-uh-I'm not sure that-which would-uh-these references to last night's-back on that, number one.
Number two something about the work on the bases stopping while we're going to have a chance to discuss these matters.
Khrushchevmay have picked up the statementwhich Kreisky, the Austrian Foreign Minister,made day before yesterday-has made and which he may think was inspired by us, in which he raised the question of Turkish VOICE: Of course, maybe the Russians got Kreiskyto do it, too.
And if we publish the letter of last night, Tommy, what other letters will get published.
I think probably this-uh-whole exchange, this refers-uh-starting with this crisis-this refers to the previous letters.
I've got the feeling that if you have someone explaining the situation, you have to publish the exchange.
You perhaps don't have to put out the letter as much as you do the three proposals or so.
The first point being that this-uh-this question of Cuba and the must be resolved within the next few days; it can't wait.
The negotiations and discussions must-uh-get on, and the work that is continuing despite our protests has been going on.
Uh-this action that has been taken is not an action just by the United States but is an action by all of the Latin American countries plus the United States.
Uh-we would-uh-obviously consider negotiating the giving up of bases in-uh-Turkey if we can assure the-uhTurks and the other European countries for whom these bases were emplaced that there can be some assurances given to them for their own security.This will entail inspection as we anticipatethat there will be some inspection in Cuba and in the United States-uh-at the time that these bases are withdrawn from Cuba and we give assurances that we are not going to invade Cuba.
I don't see how we can ask the Turks to give up their defense.... unless the Soviet Union is also going to give up their-uhVOICE: ... weapons.
Not only the weapons, but agree not to invade TurkeyMCNAMARA: ... and allow inspection to ensure that they haven't.
We think that's a very good point made by the Russians, and we would be glad to-and we finally feel that this is a majorbreakthroughand we would be glad to discuss that.
It completely changes the characterof the deal we're likely to be able to make, and also therefore our action in the interim.
This should be knocked down publicly.A private-let me suggest this scenario-we knock this down publicly in the way we've just described, separating the issues, keeping attention on Cuba, and the four-pointreply that Bob has framed.Privatelywe say to Khrushchev, ""Look-uh-your public statement is a very dangerous one becauseuh-it makes impossible immediate discussion of your private proposals and requires us to proceed urgently with the things that we have in mind.
I guess we say we are reluctant to release this letter which would display the inconsistency in your position, but we don't have very much time.
Before we even got the first letter translated, he added a completely new deal and he released it publicly.
Now the problem is going to be-uh-not just this fact that we have this exchange with him .... but the fact that he's going to have a ploy publicly that's going to look rather satisfactoryat present.
I think that we're going to have to, in the next three or four hours, not just put the ball completely in-uh-in his hands and allow him to do whatever he wants.
We have an exchange with him and say he's double-crossed us, and we don't know which deal to accept, and then he writes back, and in the meantime he's got all the play throughout the world.
Yeah, but I think that's awful toughMCCONE: I don't think you can turn that down publicly without-uh-referring publicly to his letter of yesterday.
He's offered this deal ..... that he will withdraw the bases in Cuba for assurances that we don't intend to invade.
He said, in his letter to me, he said that we were to permit inspection.
Obviously that entails inspection not only of Cuba but entails inspection of the United States to ensure that we're not-by United Nations observers-to ensure that we're not getting ready to-uh-invade.
Now this is one of the things U Thant-the bases in Cuba-uh-involve-uh-the security of the Western Hemisphere.
This must be brought to fruition.-uh-The question of the Turkishbases, we think that's excellent, that you brought that up, and that-uh-that-uhthere should be disarmamentof the Turkishbases, but that has nothing to do with the security of the WesternHemisphere.
It doeshave to do with the security of Turkey,and we would be happy, and we're sure the Turks would be, of making a similar arrangementin Turkey.
We will withdraw the bases from Turkeyif-uh-and allow inspection of Turkeyto make sure we've done that, and you withdraw your invasion bases of-uh-of the Soviet Union and permit inspection there.
And work's got to stop today, before we talk about anything.At least then we're in a defensible position.
The other thing is to not have the Turksmaking statements, so that this thing-Khrushchev puts it out and the next thing the Turks say they won't accept it.
Then whatever we do in Turkey-in Cuba-it seems to me he has set the groundwork to do something in Turkey.So I think we ought to have the Turks-we ought to have a talk with the Turksbecause I think they've got to understand the peril that they're going to move in the next week.
When we take some action in Cuba, the chances are that he'll take some action in Turkey, and they ought to understand that.
And in fact he may even come out and say that.... he's tried to be fair and if we do any more about Cuba then he's going to do it to Turkey.
We ought to try to get them not to respond to this till we've had a chance to consider what action we'll take.
The Standstill Agreement and the Problemof the Two Different Audiences As the discussion progresses, we see the quandary into which the American government felt itself thrown by the second letter from Khrushchev.
The President veers off in one direction, while many of his senior advisors take quite a different tack.
The President has in mind the United Nations audience or world opinion.
He returns again and again to the prima facie reasonableness of the proposal in the second, public, letter from Khrushchev-especially the idea of trading NATO missiles in Turkey for Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The President, in fact, seems throughout much of the early discussion to assume that there is no way the Soviets are going to remove their missiles without the benefit of some such trade.
As Paul Nitze has said, the mere suggestion of appearing to trade away the security of our NATO ally, Turkey, in order to solve an American local problem in the Caribbean, is ""absolutely anathema"" to the Turks.
Bundy, obviously speaking for several others, believes that any such trade might lead to a precipitous and general weakening of NATO, with long-term disastrous consequences.
The President wants a standstill agreement; he believes it represents an offer that will play well in the court of world opinion.
The President's advisors, it appears, have nothing against a standstill agreement per se, only the implication given by the President that it is a precursor to a public trade of missiles.
At this stage, the solution to the problem of how to respond to Khrushchev is still far from obvious.
Now let's-uh-I would think the first thing we have to do is to-as I say, rather than get into the details-the fact that work is going on 10.
One must be careful to make neither too much nor too little of the differences at this stage between the President and his advisors.
One may be tempted, for example, to revise the revisionist thesis and argue, on the basis of this transcript, that a dovish President is pulling his reluctantly hawkish advisors along toward a trade.
It's going to be tough in England, I'm sure-as well as other places on the continent-we're going to be forced to take action, that might seem, in my opinion, not a blank check but a pretty good check to take action in Berlin on the grounds that we were wholly unreasonable.
Most think-people think that if you're allowed an even trade you ought to take advantageof it.
These are all the things that-uh-why this is a pretty good play of his.
That-uh-being so-uh-I think that we-the only thing we've got him on is the fact that now they've put forward varying proposals in short periods of time, all of which are complicated, and under that shield this work goes on.
Mr President, it's largerthan the missiles, because he says ""the means which you consider aggressive""which-this could include planes, the presence of technicians, and everything else.
He could take missiles for missiles, which wouldn't be good enough from our point of view because it's to Cuba.
It would be tough for three weeks because the problem is if the work on their bases stops, that's in my opinion our defensible position.
Stop the the operabilityof it-uhMCNAMARA: I would certainlyput that in the same message.
Well no, the only thing that I'm trying to suggest is all these proposals come; they're all complicated, and what they can do is hang us up in negotiations on different proposals while the work goes on.
I myself would send backword, by Fomin, for example, that last night's stuff was pretty good; this is impossible,at this stage of the game, and that time is getting very short.
Our public position is as you outlined it, but I think that it's very important to get themto get the message that they-if they want to stop something furtherin Cuba, they have to do better than thispublic statement.
After a brief discussion about the precise number of Jupitersin Turkey,the President speaks with Stevenson and solicits his views on how to respond to the two Soviet proposals.
Well that's if you start talking about Cuba and about Turkey,and then you talkJFK: Let's get it out of this problem, then we might as well I mean just decide on sand in hisgears for a few minutes.
I'm just trying to cope with what the public problem is about-because everybody's going to think that this is very reasonable.
There follows a lengthy discussion of the precise wording of the letter in preparation to Acting United Nations Secretary General U Thant.
Variousportions of drafts are read aloud and criticized.Two interruptionsoccur, one from George Ball who is apparentlyworking on a draftreply to the Soviets, and one from Maxwell Taylor,who reports that United States reconnaissanceplanes have drawn fire over Cuba.
The President then puts a hold on the night-flight draft previously approved, and Rusk discusses possible public remarksregarding an American U-2 that has strayed off course over the Soviet Union.
One is, do we want to have these conversations go on, on Turkeyand these other matters while there's a sort of standstill in Cuba, or do we want to say that we won't talk about Turkey and these other matters until they've settled the Cuban crisis I think these are questions.
That being true, I think the best position now, with him and publicly, is to say we're glad to discuss this matterand this whole question of verification and all the rest once we get a positive indication that they've ceased their work in Cuba.
Otherwise-uh-what we're really saying is ""We won't discuss Turkey till they settle Cuba,"" and I think that he will then come back and say the United States has refused his offer, and I don't think that's as good a position as saying we're glad to discuss his offer if we can get a standstill in Cuba.
That puts us in a much stronger world position because most people will think his offer is ratherreasonable.
I think we ought to put our emphasis right now on the fact that we want an indication from him in the next twenty-four hours that he's going to stand still and disarm these weapons.
Then we'll say that under those conditions we'll be glad to discuss these matters.
But I think that if we don't say that he's going to say we rejected his offer, and thereforehe's going to have public opinion with him.
So I think our only hope to escape from that is to say that we insist that he stand still.
The United States would be glad to discuss this matterwith you and others after consultation with the members of NATO, whose interests are also involved.
The discussions required for any peaceful settlement of these other matters, however, will require time for consultation with the countrieswhose interests-uh-with these countries and cannot be undertakenby this country until it is assured that work on these bases in Cuba has halted and the bases themselves are inoperable.
VOICE: The only question I'd like to raise about that is that while really it sets Turkeyas a quid pro quoVOICE: That's my worry about it.
The point is-the point is that we're not in a position today to make the trade.
And we won't be-maybe-may in three or four days, I don't know, we have to wait and see what the Turkssay.
We don't want to be-we don't want the Soviet Union or the United Nations to be able to say that the United States rejected it.
Well there are two differentaudiences here, Mr President, there really are, and I think that if we sound as if we wanted to make this trade, to our NATO people and to all the people who are tied to us by alliance, we are in realtrouble.
I think that-we'll all join in doing this if it's the decision, but I think we should tell you that that's the universal assessment of everyone in the government that's connected with these allianceproblems.
That the knockdown in this White House statement this morning was well received.
Yes, but I should say that also, as the situation is moving, Mac, if we don't for the next twenty-four or forty-eight hours, this trade has appeal.
Now if we rejectit out of hand and then have to take military action against Cuba, then we also face a decline.
Now the only thing we've got for which I would think we'd be able to hold general support would be-well let's try to word it so that we don'tharm NATO-but the thing that I think everybody would agree to-while these matters, which are complicated, are discussed, there should be a cessation of work.
If they don't agree to that, the Soviet Union, then we retain the initiative.
The result will probably be a Soviet counteroffensive-perhaps the seizure of West Berlin or a counter-attack on the Turkish missiles, or both.
The President does not believe the NATO allies understand that war is imminent and that if war comes in Cuba, they will stand vulnerable to a Soviet attack, all because they were reluctant to trade off a few obsolete missiles in Turkey.
The President seems to believe that he cannot get his trade without a NATO meeting, that such a meeting is unlikely to support a trade in any event, that the Soviets will therefore continue working on the missile sites and thus that the United States must, bereft of any other diplomatic options, destroy the missile sites before they are completed.
Two very different reactions are provoked by the President's dark and blunt portrayal of the situation, both motivated quite clearly by the wish to 12.
McNamara first proposes defusing the Jupiters in Turkey and increasing coverage by Polaris submarines near Turkish shores to protect the Turks in the event of an American attack on Cuba.
RFK suggests a step-wise approach, in which the standstill is agreed upon first.
After work on the missile sites is stopped, the United States can consult with the NATO allies about a trade, perhaps involving a Polaris component.
Martin and Bundy suggest that the United States in effect simply say ""thank you"" to the first Khrushchev letter after releasing it publicly via U Thant.
By now he seems convinced that without a public trade on the terms of the second Soviet letter, war is very likely.
Thus Bundy suggests that, lacking an agreement, the United States ought seriously to consider tightening the quarantine rather than going immediately to war.
Despite the President's pessimistic mood at this stage, neither he nor anyone in the room expresses enthusiasm for attacking Cuba.
This is a far cry from the discussion as it has often been portrayed, sometimes by the participants themselves, as a fight between hawks and doves, between those seeking war and fearing no retaliation and those fearing war and expecting retaliation and escalation.
Rather, each participant seems to be working mightily and, often quite creatively, to find a way to a diplomatic solution to the crisis.
If you have a Council meeting you'll probably get a strong reaction from a great many of the members of NATO against our taking any action in Cuba.
Mr President, I wonder if we should not take certain actions with respect to the Jupitersin Turkeyand Italy beforewe act in Cuba.
If we decided to take that action with respect to the Jupitersin Turkeyand Italy before we acted in Cuba, then we could tell NATO that at the time we talked to them about this proposal from Khrushchevand our response to it.
I don't think we can make any limited attacks when they're shooting at our reconnaissanceaircraftbecause we would-we would not dare to go in with the kind of limited attackthat we've been thinking about the last twenty-four hours without taking out their SAM-sites.
The moment we take out the SAM-sites and the MiG airfields we're up to the sortie program.
If we send sorties in against Cuba, we must be prepared to follow up with an invasion in about days.
If we start out on that kind of a program, it seems to me the Soviets are very likely to feel forced to reply with military action some place, particularlyif these missilesJupiter missiles-are still in Turkey.
Now if we were willing to undertake-first place, I think that kind of action is desirable prior to invasion of Cuba.
We've already detected three submarines off the United States coast in the last forty-eight hours.
Now they-as far as we know they don't carrymissiles, but that's just happenstance.
Well, I think we have to say to the Turks we're going to cover the targets with Polaris missiles.
Yes, but I think, if we're going to take them out of Turkey they say they'll take them out ofBUNDY: It's one thing to stand them down, Mr President, in political terms, it's one thing to stand them down as a favor to the Turkswhile we hit Cuba, and it's quite another thing to trade them out.
But what we could do is unilaterally, unilaterally-bilaterally with Turkeywe would agreed to defuse them and replacethem with Polaris.
Then we'd go back to the Soviet Union and say, ""Now the threat is there-the threat is gone, you don't have to worry about that; we're going back to your letter of last night,and this is the proposal we make.
If you made an offer-up there now-and you also ask U Thant to find an answer to this, now if U Thant should come back and say, number 1, that they're going to continue to work , in which case I suppose we have to move in some way, or they're going to say that they're going to discontinue the work on the bases.
Uh-they say they're going to discontinue the work on the bases, they can either accept our proposal, or they can rejectthe proposal and say we still want Turkeyfor Cuba.
If they rejectthe proposal and say they want Turkey for Cuba but they're going to discontinue the work on the bases, thenI would think would be the time to have-bring NATO in and say, ""This is the proposal.
We haven't lost anything, and they've discontinuedthe work on the bases.
I think if you have a meeting of NATO tomorrow morning-uh-I don't see that that's going to-I InternationalSecurity 12:3 j 54 think it's going to shoot this other possibility which U Thant has suggested, of going forwardwith this letter and seeing if we can trade the non-invasion of Cuba for this, and I think we're keeping the pressure on, we don't look like we're weakening on the whole Turkey complex.
It's going to be-You see, they haven't had the alternativespresented to them.
So when the time-the crucialtime comes, obviously we want it, now the question is whether it's tomorrow morning or Monday morning.
If tomorrowwe don't have a favorableanswer from U Thant or Khrushchev to this message that's going out now, is it importantto strike tomorrowor do we have some more time.
It would seem to me the NATO meeting ought to be held before the strike.
If it's necessary to strike tomorrow,there ought to be a NATO meeting tomorrow morning.
May I just say-what if he says, ""We'regoing to discontinue the work on the bases and we going to-uh-we're going to make the missiles inoperative, and we'll work out with you United Nations supervision,"" that could take three weeks to just work that problem out there.
If he said he's going to discontinue work on the bases and he's willing to make them inoperable, we carryon surveillanceRFK: And we continue the-uh-theMCNAMARA: The blockade.
No, that's an excellent course of action which I don't believe he'sgoing to accept.
The probabilityis he won't say he'll stop work on the bases, and we're faced with a decision tomorrowwhat to do.
Yeah, but of course we're in-before the world we're in much better shape.
It would seem to me that we ought to surfaceall of this correpondence including this letter.
Then you've got the world-the attention of the world focused back on Cuba and LatinAmericaand the fact that work there is not and this makes it I think much tougher for him go to ahead.
On the other hand, Mr President, if NATO seems solid on this, this has a chance of shaking Khrushchevoff this point.
Suppose that we give him a letter which is addressed to his letter of yesterday and ask U Thant to release them both-he's the fellow to release them-and then he releases correspondence which consists really of an offer from Khrushchevand we-we come back and write.
Well, I think that he'd probablyjust say that the work's going on, that we're not going to take these that we're not interested in this deal, then I think we're going to have to do something-I don't think he has to say that it is-but the escalation is going to go on, and we think this is very likely, that there would be some reprisal against possibly Turkey and possibly against Berlin, and we should be aware of that.
What we don't want is to have a cheap turndown by them, without realizing that the turndown puts us in the position of then having to do something.
What we're going to be faced with is-because we wouldn't take the missiles out of Turkey, then maybe we'll have to invade or make a massive strikeon Cuba which may lose Berlin.That's what concerns me.
Mr President, here's one other variation here that Mr Foster14has given some thought to, and that is that we say that the missiles in Cuba and the missiles in Turkey be turned over to the United Nations for destruction and that the-uh-nuclear defense of NATO, including Turkey, is provided by other means.
The Soviets don't want to let anybody get at them, and see what their technology is.
If we follow SecretaryMcNamara,what we're going to do is say to the Turks-which they're bound to think is-uh-under Soviet pressure, we want to get your missiles out of there.
Well what I'd say-what I'd say to the Turks:""Lookhere, we're going to have to invade Cuba.
We want to reduce your danger while at the same time maintaining your defense.
Then I think, before we attack Cuba I think we've got to decide how we'll respond to Soviet militarypressure on NATO, and I'm not prepared to answer the question.
We haven't even thought about it for some hours, and it's been on my mind a good deal.
Bundy is suggesting that the ExComm may want to add these items to the list of items restricted by the quarantine.
At the conclusion of this sequence the President approves the Trollope Ploy.
First, Bundy and Sorensen argue that the President ought to consider a private response to the first, acceptable Khrushchev letter.
For the time being, this idea seems to lay fallow mainly because whether the response is private or public seems to the President secondary to his belief that the terms of the second offer, requiring the missile trade, are necessary to any resolution of the crisis.
I don't agree, Mr President, I think there's still a chance that we can get this line going.
In fact, the President appears never to have quite believed that a deal could be struck with Khrushchev on the basis of the non-invasion pledge alone.
But Thompson's forthright contradiction of one of the President's fundamental assumptions prompts increased insistence by RFK, Bundy and Sorensen that Thompson might be right.
Finally, the President agrees and so the Trollope Ploy is on its way to becoming policy.
There's nothing strange differentbargainTHOMPSON: Mr President, if we go on the basis of a trade which I gather issomewhat in your mind, we end up, it seems to me with the Soviets still in Cuba with planes and technicians and so on even though the 16.
It appears that the reluctance of the President to forego the trade and embrace the Trollope Ploy was also due to his keen awareness of the price of being wrong.
The President Kennedy who emerges from this transcript has a sense that if his advisors are wrong, if the Soviets do require a missile trade, and if the United States fails its chance at such a trade and has to go to war, the trade will retrospectively increase in attractiveness and in proportion to the destructiveness of the resulting war.
Yeah, but our technicians and planes and guaranteeswould stil exist for Turkey.
Let's not kid ourselves that we've got-that's the difficulty.Today it sounds great to reject it, but it's not going to, after we do something.
Norstad just feels that no matter what we do, there's going to bewe've got to have NATO have a hand on this thing or otherwise we'll find no matter-if we take no action or if we take action-they're all going to be saying we should have done the reverse-and we've got to get them with us.
Now the question really is-two or three-two questions-first, whether we go immediately to the Turks and see if we can work out some-see if they're receptive to the kind of deal which the Secretarytalkedabout.
If they're notreceptivethen we ought to go to the general NATO meeting because the NATO meeting may put enough pressure on them.
I just tell you I think we're better off to get those missiles out of Turkeyand out of Cuba, because I think the way of getting them out of Turkeyand out of Cuba is going to be very grave .... and very bloody, one place or another.
The Turkswill not take them-will not agree to take them out except under NATO pressure.
Well, I'm not sure-because I think-let's speculate with this, Mr President.
If you have that conviction, and you are yourself sure thatuh-this is the way we want-the best way out-then I would say that an immediate personal telegram. . . . was the best thing to do.
What I think you'd have to do is get the Turksto agree-accepting it over their opposition and over NATO opposition I think wouldbe-I'd rathergo to the total blockade route, which is a lesser step than the military action.
What I'd like to do is have the Turksand NATO equally feel that this is the wise move.
I wonder, Mr President, inasmuch as your statement this morning does give some answer to the public statementof the Soviets, whether we can't defer this for twenty-four or forty-eight hours while we try the private letter route in answer to his private letter of last night.
Stevenson argues that the standstill in Cuba is a prerequisite to a discussion of issues, such as those involving NATO and the WarsawPact.
But I mean-by negotiation-we're going to have to take our weapons out of Turkey.
This is, maybe, just pressure on us, I mean, to accept the other, I mean so farTHOMPSON: The important thing for Khrushchev, it seems to me, is to be able to say ""I saved Cuba, I stopped an invasion,"" and he can get awaywith this, if he wants to, and he's had a go at this Turkeything, and that we'll discuss later.
All right, what about at the end of this, we use this letter and say, ""will be a grave risk to peace.
In other words, Mr President, your position is that once he meets this condition of the-uh-halting of the work and the inoperability,you're then prepared to go ahead on either the specific Cuban trackor what we call the general detente track.
Yeah, now it all comes down-I think it's a substantive question, because it really depends on whether we believe that we can get a deal on just the Cuban-or whether we have to agree to his position of tying.
I think that having made it public how can he take these missiles out of Cuba .... if we just do nothing about Turkey.
The position, even in the public statement, is that this is all started by our threat to Cuba.
He mustbe a little shaken up or he wouldn't have sent the message to you in the first place.
Because I think, one, it's just in general terms, rather defensive, and it just says we don't want to get in-please don't into discussion of NATO, or Turkey,because we want to talk about Cuba.
The other one says, ""You made an offer to us, and we accept it,"" and you've also made a second offer which has to do with NATO, and we'll be glad to discuss that at a later time.
The other first letter-of Adlai-I don't think says anything, I don't think we're any furtheralong, except we don't like you-what you said.
I think it sounds rather defensive about this has really thrown us off by the fact that you've brought this thing up.
Well we can't-I'll tell youSORENSEN: I tell you, Mr President, I think Adlai-I think if we could take our letter, introduce some of the elements of his letter in the last part of it, that might do it.
Why don't we try to work it out without you being able to pickJFK: The one you're going to have to worry about is Adlai, so you might as well work it out with him.
As I say, we're not going to-he's not going to-now Tommy isn't so sure, but anyway, we can try this thing, but he's going to come back, InternationalSecurity 12:3 | 62 I'm certain, but the only thing is I don't want him-that's why we've got to end-end with saying, whatever we're going to do, that we've got to get a cessation of work.
That's right, but I think that Bobby's notion of a concrete acceptance on our part of how we read last night's telegramis very importantJFK: In other words you want to-you have to get them to say we accept your proposal.
The Shoot-downof the U-2 Late in the afternoon of October 27, we move into what some recall being the most dramatic hours of the Cuban missile crisis.
The discussions take on an unmistakable urgency, as Taylor reports that low-flying American reconnaissance aircraft have encountered anti-aircraft fire, probably from Cubancontrolled batteries.
There is general agreement with Taylor's assessment that 24-hour surveillance is absolutely necessary at this stage.
But in the face of anti-aircraft fire from the Cubans, McNamara argues, ""we have to put a cover on""-that is, provide protection for the reconnaissance aircraft.
The President thinks the latter course will be necessary, although he postpones the decision a day to determine whether a general pattern is developing or whether the fire just encountered was an aberration.
The ExComm next receives news that Major Anderson's U-2 has been shot down over Cuba.
This has been generally believed to be the single most significant event of the missile crisis, so frightening and sobering to the American leadership that they sought and found a way to resolve the crisis peacefully less than 24 hours later.
Did this mean that the tougher, second letter from Khrushchev was only part of a plan to rush the Americans to the brink, or over it, and that such a plan 17.
Mr President, the Chiefs have been in session during the afternoon on-really the same basis as we have over here.
Either we decide not to send them in at all or we decide to send them in with proper cover.
The standardaccount of the U-2 shoot-down in RFK'sThirteenDays gives the very distinct but, on the evidence of this transcript,quite misleading impression that the U-2 shoot-down precedesthe discussion and Presidentialapprovalof the TrollopePloy, when in fact, considerably before the news of the shoot-down, it is RKF himself who is sent out to communicate to Stevenson the contents of the reply to Khrushchev'sfirst letter.
InternationalSecurity 12:3 | 64 and they're attacked, we must attack back, either the SAMs and/or MiG aircraftthat come against them, or the ground fire that comes up.
When you put the two of these together-the question of-you know stopping surveillanceand not stopping the ship-it seems to me we're too weakVOICE: Yeah, yeah.
I'd say we must continue surveillance.That's far more importantthan the ship.
Well-uh-my main point is I don't think at this particularpoint we should-uh-show a weakness to Khrushchev,and I think we would show a weakness if we-if we failed on both of these actions.
Therefore I would recommend that tomorrow we carry on surveillance, but that we defer the decision as late as possible in the day to give a little more time because if we go in with surveillance, we have to put a cover on, and if we start shooting back, we've escalated substantially.
If you're going to take a reprisal-the cover isn't much good because you've got anti-aircraft guns.
The main thing is to assure effective reconnaissance.Whether thatwhat that implies, we won't know really till weJFK: I would think we ought to take a chance on reconnaissancetomorrow, without the cover, because I don't think cover's really going to do you much good.
My personal view is that we .... ready to invade but make no advance decision on that.
Now that's a big one-then we knowMCNAMARA: Then I think we ought to either do one of two things.
We ought to decide at that moment we're either going to returnthat fire, tomorrow, but in a limited fashion against the things that fired against us, or against their air defenses, or, alternatively,if we don'treturn the fire tomorrow,we ought to go in the next day with sorties.
I'm ratherinclined to think that the more generalresponse-However, why don't we wait.
Let's be prepared for either one tomorrow-let's wait and see whether they fire on us tomorrow.Meanwhile we've got this message to U Thant-and we're-so let's be well prepared.
We've got to be very clearthen that-uh-if we're doing this tomorrow, and they do shoot weapons, and then we do need to have the general response, there's no time to do what you're talkingabout with Turkey, and then weJFK: That's why I think we ought to get to that.
I think what we ought to do is not worry so much about the cover, do the reconnaissance tomorrow.
If we get fired on, then we meet here, and we decide whether we do a much more general .... announce that the work is going International Security 12:3 | 66 ahead, announcethat we haven't got an answer from the Soviets, and then we decide that we're going to do a much more general one than just shooting up some gun down there.
Variousapproaches are suggested that may make the Turks more amenable to a missile trade, such as emphasizing how obsolete the Jupitersare and how much more secure the Turkswill be if the Jupitersare replaced by Polaris.
Finally, RFKand Bundy point out that any decision on the Turks is difficult at this stage because no one knows whether the Soviets will yet agree to the American proposal, just drafted, that omits the trade entirely.
What is the rush about this other than the fact that we have to makeMCNAMARA: I think the rush is what do we doVOICE: The U-2.
It was shot down near Banes which is right near a U-2 site in EasternCuba.
I think we can defer an air attack on Cuba until Wednesday or Thursday, but only if we continue our surveillance and-and-uh-fire against anything that fires against the surveillance aircraft,and only if we maintain a tight blockade in this interim period.
We think we-we have various other reasons to believe that we know the SAM-sites.
I wonder if this shouldn't cause a most violent protest .... a letter right to Khrushchev.
Here's, here's an action they've taken againstagainst us, a new order in defiance of-of public statements he made.
If there's any continuation of this, we just take those SAM-sitesout of there.
And if we're going to reconnaissance,carryout surveillance,each day, we must be prepared to fire each day.
We certainly shouldn't do it until we retaliateand say that if they fire again on one of our planes, that we'll come back with great force.
I think you've just got to take out that SAM-site, you can't (word unclear)with them.
I think we can forget the U-2 for the momentRUSK: It builds up, though, on a somewhat different plane than the all-out attack plan.
There are so goddam many-we could take it all day if-well let's say if we're sure the U-2's been shot down it seems to me we've got to announce it-it's going to dribbleout.
Then we ought to not say anything, don't you think, and just take the reprisal without making any announcement.
I think we ought to announce that-uh-that-uh-action is being taken-action will be taken to protect our fliers.
Exactly.Then we ought to go in at dawn and take out that SAM-site, and we ought to send the surveillance aircraftin tomorrow with the regular flights early in the morning, and we ought to be prepared to take out more SAM-sites and knock out theJFK: Well what we ought to do then is get this announcement written.
We're going to say it was shot down and we're going to continue our surveillanceprotected by United States fighter aircraft-DILLON: Suitableprotection.
Well why doesn't Ros-and you, General-get a statement which would cover in any case.
The only point is, the only thing that troubles us is the other plane was shot at.
They say-uh-that's why I'd like to find out whether Havana says they did shoot it down.
This is a change of pattern, now why it's a change of pattem we don't know.
The importantthing to find out if we possibly can is whether this was a SAM-site.
What we know is that that particularSAM was the one that had the .... radar .... which was required for control of the missiles.
And it was in operation, we believe, at the same time that the U-2 was over.
You could have an undisciplined anti-aircraft-Cuban anti-aircraftoutfit fire, but to have a SAM-site and a Russian crew fire is not any accident.
Explain the thing, where we are-uh-I'm just afraid of what's going to happen in NATO, to Europe, when we get into this thing more and more, and I think they ought to feel that they've a InternationalSecurity12:3 | 72 part of it.
A consensus appears to form, led by McNamara,that the Turks are to be told forthrightly that their Jupitermissiles ought to be defused in order to help prevent Soviet retaliation in the event of an American attack on Cuba.
The President expresses concern that any such arrangementwill be viewed by NATO as a trade of missiles, but Bundy points out that such a perception is unavoidable.
Refocusingon Cuba President Kennedy is absent from all but the very end of the discussion that follows.
One can see by his absence how controlling and decisive he has heretofore been.
He argues that, since these failures would almost certainly mean an American attack on Cuba, leading to war, a letter ought to be sent immediately to the Turks and to all the NATO governments explaining that the Turkish missiles are being defused, in order to reduce the likelihood of a Soviet counter-attack on Turkey.
The point is that if the United States attacks Soviet nuclear missiles in Cuba, and the Soviets respond against our NATO ally in Turkey, we very likely will find ourselves in a catastrophic nuclear war.
The focus of McNamara's attention is out on the horizon, if all diplomatic initiatives have failed, and an attack on Cuba is imminent.
McNamara's blunt appraisal brings the prospect of nuclear war for the first time into the center of the discussion.
The Strategic Air Command is on full nuclear alert and this state of extreme readiness for all-out war is 19.
His argument is a proposal for a contingency plan, to be undertaken if all else fails, to deal with the possibility of escalation to nuclear war.
Many ExComm members appear to believe that McNamara is saying that war, nuclear war, is becoming increasingly probable.This misunderstanding generates several pointed exchanges.
A telling index both of the degree to which McNamara has struck the fear of uncontrollable nuclear war into the ExComm, and of the importance of the President's absence, is that Ball and McCone express very directly their disregard for NATO sensibilities regarding the missile trade.
McNamara never says he believes it is too late to trade, but he suggests that the prospects are dim for the letter currently on its way to Khrushchev.
Nowhere in it does Khrushchev say precisely that he will remove Cuban missiles in exchange for a non-invasion pledge from the United States However, the message received simultaneously through the Scali-Fomin connection erased the ambiguity perceived by McNamara.
Against this background of awareness of nuclear danger, and the complementary pessimism about the prospects for the diplomatic response to Khrushchev, Llewellyn Thompson makes another critical contribution to the discussion.
Toward the end of the President's absence, Thompson expresses his belief that the growing pessimism over the prospects for the Trollope Ploy is unwarranted, premature, and possibly harmful.
Thompson is concerned that the Soviets may get wind of American-generated discussions within NATO about trading missiles.
Bundy notes that wide differences of opinion exist in the ExComm and calls on Thompson to lay out the situation.
Give it a chance to work, he argues, before sending out any more letters to anyone.
Thus Thompson, with a strategic assist from Bundy, appears to have buoyed up the President's confidence sufficiently to give the Trollope Ploy a chance to work, at a time when several of the others were ready to assume InternationalSecurity 12:3 | 74 it would fail.
Thompson refocused the President on a solution to the Cuban missile crisis, while others were out of the room trying to head off a Turkish missile crisis.
We're going to lose airplanes, and we'll be shooting up Cuba quite a bit, but we're going to lose airplanesevery day.
Unless you get a cease-firearound the worldMCNAMARA: That's the second proposition.
The third proposition is that if we do this, and leave those missiles in Turkey the Soviet Union may, and I think probably will, attack the Turkish missiles.
Now the fourth proposition is, if the Soviet Union attacksthe Turkishmissiles, we mustrespond.
Frankly,I don'tMCNAMARA: Well, I've got a-why don't I get through-then let's go back and attack each one of my propositions.
Now the minimum military response by NATO to a Soviet attack on the Turkish Jupiter missiles would be a response with conventional weapons by NATO forces in Turkey,that is to say Turkishand United States aircraft,against Soviet warships and/or naval bases in the BlackSea area.
Now that to me is the absolute minimum, and I would say that it is damneddangerousto-to have had a Soviet attackon Turkeyand a NATO response on the Soviet Union.
Now I'm not sure we can avoid anything like that, if we attack Cuba, but I think we should make every effort to avoid it, and one way to avoid it is to defuse the Turkishmissiles beforewe attack Cuba.
I would say that in the assumption that if you defuse the Turkish missiles that saves you from a reprisal, it may-may mean a reprisal elsewhere.
I think you're in a position where you've gotten rid of your missiles for nothing.
I didn't say it saved you from a reprisal.I simply said it reduced the chances of militaryaction against Turkey.
Well, but what good does that do you action against Berlin, or somewhere else MCNAMARA: You have to go back in my proposition and say if there aren't Jupiter missiles in Turkey to attack, they're going to employ military force elsewhere.
The State Department ... . we talked about this, and they said they'd be delightedto trade those missiles in Turkeyfor the things in Cuba.
I'm not opposed to it, now, all I'm suggesting is, don't push us into a position where we haven'ttraded it and we are forced to attack Cuba, and the missiles remain in Turkey.
Well, but IBUNDY: We were going to let him have his strike in Turkey,as I understood it last week .... at one point at least that was the way we talked about it.
We thought that if we could tradeit out for Turkey this would be an easy trade and a very advantageous deal.
And then we don't want it, and we're talking about a course of action which involves military action with enormous casualtiesand a great-a great risk of escalation.
Well, why don't we look at two courses of action VOICE Let's see what consequence George draws.
I would far rather-if we're going to get the damned missiles out of Turkeyanyway,say, we'll trade you the missiles, we're going to put Jupiters-I mean we're going to put Polaris in there, you're not going to benefit by this-but we will, if this is a matter of realconcern to you, to have these on your borders, all right, we'll get rid of them, you get rid of them in Turkey-in, in Cuba.
If this is a matter of grave concern to you, and you equate these things, which we don't but if you do, ok, we can work it out.
I don't think NATO is going to be wrecked, and if NATO isn't any better than that, it isn't that good to us.
Well, I mean, if you do this, you do it on the basis of an immediate trade and they immediatelyVOICE: And surveillance BALL: And surveillance.
What you do, with the Turks and NATO, you go through the propositions that Bob has outlined here.
Let me suggest this: let's get the message ready on the assumption that either the Soviet don't want a trade or we don't want a trade, one or the other, and hence the trade route of Jupiters in Turkey for missiles in Cuba is not acceptable, and therefore we're going to attack Cuba.
Before we attack Cuba we're going to reduce the danger to Turkey to a minimum.
But Mac, this other course will in a sense be that, so-let's get first the message written on the assumption thatBALL: write that.
You want to write one, or do you want me to draft it or what do you want to do I'll get a draft.
It's going to go to the Turks, to the heads of government of NATO countries, and the North Atlantic Council-same message in effect.
Max is going back to work out the surveillance problem for tomorrow with the Chiefs and see how much cover we need and so on.
We can carry this on I would think a couple of days, maybe three days, possibly even four.
I think that we ought to take this case to-send directly to Khrushchev by fast wire the most violent protest, and demand that he-that he stop this business and stop it right away, or we're gong to take those SAM-sites out immediately.That's what I'd tell him.
I'd tell him this is a-I'd just use one of the .... messages he sends us, and I'd send it right off, and if he won't-and I'd trade these Turkish things out right now.
We sat for a week, and evenybodywas in favor of doing it, and I'd make that part of the message.
I'd tell him we're going to conduct surveillance, as announced by the President, and one shot and in we come, and he can expect it.
Well, I think that we can assume that that kind of an approachwill be made ex the-I think we can assume an approachto tradethe missiles will be made one way or another.He'll know that.
But now let's assume that that's made and time goes by and nothing happens and we're losing airplanes.
Well, I mean this is a job for theMCNAMARA: Let's assume that the approach is madeVOICE: And he doesn't do it.
When I read that message of last night this morning, I thought, My GodI'd never sell-I'd never base a transaction on that contract.
Not once-there isn't a single word in it that proposes to take the missiles out.
Well his message this morning wasn'tMCNAMARA: Well, no, I'm speaking of the last-night message.
And beforewe got the damned thing read the whole deal changed-completely changed.
All of which leads me to conclude that the probabilitiesare that nothing's going to be signed quickly.
I think we ought to be preparedfor attack, all-out attack, but I think we ought to know how far we can postpone that.
But I don't think that's the only answer, and we ought to think of some other answers here.
Now John's suggestion, I think, is obviously one-to try to negotiate a deal.
But you shot down a plane today before we even had a chance to send you a letter, despite the fact that you knew that we were sending unarmed planes on a publicly announced surveillance.
Now we're telling you, Mr Khrushchev, this just one thing, that we're sending unarmed planes over Cuba.
If one of them is shot at, we're going to take the InternationalSecurity 12:3 | 80 installations out, and you can expect it.
I've been afraid of these damned flyers ever since they mentioned them.
He might just pull a trigger.Looks like we're playing Fourth of July over there or something.
I'm scared of that, and I don't see-I don't see what you get for that photographthat's so much more important than what you-you know they're working at night; you see them working at night.
If you're going to try to psychologicallyscare them with a flareyou're liable to get your bottom shot at.
He says that if you're going to-you ought to accept the trade if you're going to give up the Turkish bases, that you ought to say, ok, we'll give them up for Cuba.
McNamara says if we're going to hit Cuba, we've got to say to the Turks that we want you to give up your Jupiters, and we'll give you Polaris instead.
McNamara's drafting one, Ball drafting the other, both of them coming back with the two.
That's why I think any suggestion that we're willing to accept this unless there is an irrevocable decision that we're to take these out by bombing is very dangerous.
Is somebody forcing him to up his ante, or is he trying to just see-maybe we'll give more-let's try it, and I can always come back to my original position.
EitherKhrushchevwas overruled and-or Khrushchev and/or his colleagues were deceived by the Lippmann piece21 and the fact that Kreisky put this out which made them think that we were putting this out, that we were willing to-to make a trade.
Well, Lippmanncan work this thing differently.It's our position to say unless you agree not to shoot at our unarmedplanes until these things of yours are inoperable in Cuba, then we're going to have to hit you.
Well, would you rather send them a thing like this which says if they shoot at all you're going to take them all out, or would you ratherjust go in and take oneSAM-site out THOMPSON: I'm inclined to take one because I don't think giving an ultimatum is recommended.
The only thing that bothers me at all about it is the-uh-you can see that we have two conflicting things here.
One is to prepare for action in Cuba, and the other is to get a peaceful solution along the lines which he has proposed.
And the purposes are conflicting because if we want to get him to accept the thing that he put in his letter last night, then we shouldn't give any indication that we're ready to talk 21.
Columnist Walter Lippmann had published a piece in the Washington Post on Thursday, October 25, 1962, advocating a trade of Turkish for Cuban missiles as a way to end the crisis equitably.
You just ask yourself what made the greatestimpression on you today, whether it was his letter last night or whether it was his letter this morning.
That'swhat everybody and that'swhat's going to make an impression on him.
I think we ought to go-essentially go back to this problem and then when we get these messages to the Turks, the British, and the NATO messages.
We have to go back to-we have to instruct Finletter,we have really to agree on the track,you see, Mr President and I think there's a very substantial difference of opinionLBJ: McNamarais drafting that message.
Well I haven't been in as much of the discussion as some others, Mr President, but I'll ask Mr Thompson to speak.
It seems to me there are many indications thatuh-they suddenly thought they could get-uh-up the price.
And I think that we have to bring them back by upping our action and by getting them back to this other thing without any mention of Turkey.
We have to cover that later, but we're going to surface his first proposal which helps the public position.
And that-that somewhat diminishes the need for any talk about-about Turkey.It seems to me the public will be pretty solid on that, and that we ought to keep the heat on him and get him back on the line which he obviously was on the night before.
Well, I think we ought to-just a second-I'll just say, of coursewe ought to try to go the first route which you suggest.
Get him backthat's what our letter's doing-that's what we're going to do by one means or another.
But it seems to me we oughtto have this discussion with NATO about these Turkish missiles, but more generally about sort of an up-to-date briefing about where we're going.
We can't very well invade Cuba with all its toil, and long as it's going to be, when we could have gotten them out by making a deal on the same missiles in Turkey.
Turning up the Temperaturein Cuba Instructed by the President and Rusk, Robert Kennedy has gone to his office at the Justice Department where, at approximately 7:45m., he has met with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin.
The letter agreeing to what the International Security 12:3 | 84 Americans take to be the terms of Khrushchev's first letter is on its way to the Kremlin.
The President has also seen fit to convey a less formal, more personal statement to Khrushchev, through his brother and through Dobrynin.
RFKinformed Dobrynin of the contents of the letter and he also told him that, while there could be no public deal regardingTurkishmissiles for Cuban missiles, the Soviets should understand that those missiles in Turkey would probably be removed in due course anyway.-2 The RFK mission to Dobrynin was meant to keep the focus on Cuba, to emphasize that the Turkish missiles were irrelevant to resolving the crisis and to confirm that the United States was simply saying ""yes"" to the offer proposed by Khrushchev in his first letter of October 26.
But clarificationof the Turkish missile issue proved to be a distinctly subsidiary accomplishment of the RFKmission to Dobrynin.
Its real value may have been to strike the same fear of uncontrollable war into the Soviets that the previous ExCommdiscussion, initiated by McNamara,had struck into many ExCommmembers themselves.
As we come in on the final ExComm meeting of October 27, only a few are aware of the RFKmission to Dobrynin, and of course none yet knows the outcome.
Ironically,it is Taylor who quickly emerges as a moderating influence on a discussion that is evidently quite concerned to continue to apply pressure to force the Soviets to remove their missiles from Cuba.
Disagreeing with McNamara, Taylor expresses the view that they can do without low-level reconnaissance the following day.
The President agrees, but believes that any further reconnaissance will probably require a massive attack on all the anti-aircraftbatteries and SAM sites protecting the Soviet missiles.
Thompson's point of view has clearly by this time become the central assumption of the ExComm:Give the TrollopePloy a chance to work before talking about Turkishmissiles or shooting up Cuba.
RFK,returningfrom his meeting with Dobrynin, argues that the United States should not mention Turkey at the meeting of NATO allies called for the following morning.
He has just given the diplomatic effort a boost via Dobrynin and he doesn't want it sabotaged by loose talk about Turkish missiles at the NATO meeting.
Finally, as the meeting breaks up after almost twelve continuous hours (on this, the twelfth day of the crisis), we may feel that we are voyeurs on a conversationthat is private and not a little moving.
The moment is powerfully poignant, but it soon passes, as an unidentified committee member cracks a joke about making RFKthe mayor of Havana.
One senses that for McNamara, unaware of the decisive impact on Khrushchev of the RFK mission and utterly pessimistic, it seems, about the prospects for the Trollope Ploy, the joke is a grisly one.
Knowing only what he knew then, he must have guessed that the price of making anyone the ""mayorof Havana""might be a horrendous nuclear war.
Many members of the ExCommhave recorded in memoirs and interviews that when they left the Cabinet Room after the meeting just concluded, they were not optimistic, either about the prospects for a diplomaticresolution or about controlling a war in Cuba.Perhaps what is most remarkableabout the recollections, in the new light of this transcript,is the absence of mention that there was still the ace-in-the-hole, the missile trade.
Perhaps this is because it was only the President who expressed strong and repeated enthusiasm for the merits of the trade.
On the evidence of this document, one guesses that if President Kennedy had lived to write his own memoir of the missile crisis, it would have differed considerably from those of his brother and other close associates.
It is hard to avoid the impression that here was a man who went to sleep on the evening of October 27 knowing well what he would not do if the Trollope Ploy failed.
I would think that tomorrow we take certain steps to build up the pressurewe have the enforced surveillance;we shoot anybody who gets in our 23.
In firing that goes on in Cuba, we keep the-keep the focus on the Cubans.
I had suggestions in John McCone's draft that would tend to do that-the message to Khrushchevabout the necessity for enforced surveys, that would keep the monkey on Cuba's back in this regard.
It's something that is regrettablebut it's not something that we make a very public issue out of, we're enforcing this with respect to Cuba, not the Soviet Union-the surveillancebusiness.
The Chiefs have been-I went back this and talked this over with the Chiefs.
The planes returned the first to the missile sites and then the second turned back and cut out.
We think, however, the Chiefs would recommend, that we still go back with about six planes tomorrow, picking out targets which we don't know have this kind of flak around, to verify that the work is still going ahead, and also to prove we're still on the job.
But we're approaching the point, I think, Mr President, where low-level reconnaissancewill be entirely impossible.
When we reach that point, and if we're going to continue reconnaissancewithout actuallytaking out the whole works, we're faced with taking out a number of the SAM-sites that [threaten 24.
Rusk is apparently referring here to Washington , that is, the United States government, and its ability to apply various forms of pressure on Cuba.
I would add to that I don't believe we should carry out tomorrow's U-2 mission.... but I do believe we should carry out the low-level reconnaissancewith the necessary fighter escorts and preparationsfor following our reconnaissance, if it's attacked, with attack on the attackers.
Well, I think the point is that if our planes are fired on tomorrow, we ought to fire back.
Let me say, I think we ought to wait till tomorrow afternoon, to see whether we get any answer-if U Thant goes down there-we're rapidly approaching a real-I don't think that firing back at a twentymillimeter coming off the ground is good.
I think we ought to figure that Monday-if tomorrow they fire at us, and we don't have any answer from the Russians, then Monday, it seems to me, we ought to-we can consider making a statement tomorrow about the fire and that we're going to take action now any place in Cuba, on those areas which can fire, and then go in and take all the SAM-sites out.
I'd rather take-I don't think that it does any good to take out-to try to fire at a twenty millimeter on the ground.
You just hazard our planes, and the people on the ground have the advantage.
On the other hand, I don't want to-I don't think we do any good to begin to sort of half do it.
I think we ought to keep tomorrow clean, do the best we can with the surveillance.
If they still fire, and we haven't got a satisfactory answer back from the Russians then I think we ought to put a statement out tomorrow that we were fired upon, and we are therefore considering the island of Cuba as an open territory, and then take out all these SAM-sites.
Otherwise what we're going to do is find this buildup of the-of the protection for the SAM-sites, low, and the SAM-sites high-and we'll find ourselves without-our requirement will be so limited, that we'll find ourselves with all the disadvantages.
I think we ought to, tomorrow-let's get U Thant our messages-take-if they International Security 12:3 | 88 fire on us, tell them we'll take them all out and if we don't get some satisfaction from the Russians or U Thant or Cuba tomorrow night, figure that Monday we're going to do something about the SAM-sites.
Taylor reiterates the Chiefs' view that reconnaissanceis unnecessary the following day.
Discussion turns to what to do about a Soviet ship approaching the quarantineline.
It is agreed that a decision on whether or not to intercept it can be postponed until about noon the following day.
Mr President, just to remind us of seven things that have happened today.
Tomorrow,we'll need to be sure that the pressures continue to build up.
Rusk responds by proposing that the United States say its preference is to settle on a Cuban basis alone, but that the NATO allies ought to understand that this may not be possible.
Well now, will the introductionof Turkey,we think that if we take an action which we may have to take, I don't think we ought to saywhich we may well have to take the way it's escalating, if they hit Turkey and they hit Berlin, we want them-if they want to get off, now's the time to speak up.
And then figuring, I mean if we lose the gamble with-and I think that-if once they find, playing around and figuring on Turkey, we're willing to make some deal-if I were they I'd push on that, and then I'd push on Italy, figuring that well if they're going to go on that they can carry it one step further.
But if we are hardon this thing-the gains that we have-we know that we've got some respite-that see some way in Moscow-the way that they made the offer initially.Why don't we just wait anothereighteen hours, see if that's been eased at all.
We find out if U Thant is successful, then we find that he's not successful-the whole thing looks like it's collapsing, and we're going to have to go in there.
State the facts, and say we think that this should be based-based completely in the Western Hemisphere.
We have an obligation to talk with you, and more of an obligationand we'll meet with you again raising this irrelevance, at ten o'clock tomorrow morning.
Then if the thing blowstomorrow, then we go at ten o'clock the next morning and say thatRFK: Well, I think you've got to figure-that's another twenty-four hours.
Well-uh-one day, I can't believe it's going to make that much difference.
We will report to them when we hear and we suggest that we meet at ten o'clock tomorrow morning, and then the Russians come back and say we're only going to do it if you can get the bases out of Turkey,and then we come in and we talk to them and say, ""Now this is what our suggestion is, what do you want to do,"" and they say, ""We want to hold fast,"" and then on Tuesday we go in.
Let's just say, it seems to me that on Hare if we don't want to-we try to get the Russians off the Turkishtrade-then we probablydon't want to do anything with Hare for twenty-four hours till we get some sort of an answer.
Well, let's see-uh-let's give him an explanationof what we're trying to do.
We're trying to get it back on the original proposition of last night, and-because we don't want to get into this trade.
If we're unsuccessful, then we-it's possiblethat we may have to get back on the Jupiter thing.
If we do, then we would of course want it to come from the Turks themselves and NATO, rather than just the United States.
Bobby .... we need to have two things ready, a government for Cuba, because we're going to need one .... and secondly, plans for how to respond to the Soviet Union in Europe, because sure as hell they're going to do something there.
