Air Force Pilot Richard Heyser flies a spyplane over Cuba and takes photos of Russian medium-range missiles.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev has asked Cuba President Fidel Castro if he could put them there in May.
Ex-Comm, a group of American political leaders, meets for the first time to discuss the Soviet missiles.
Ex-Comm would meet several times throughout the crisis and the members rarely agreed on what to do.
More photos of the missile sites are analyzed and show that Cuba also has long-range Soviet missiles.
October 18, 1962 Robert Kennedy meets with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko.
Attorney General Robert Kennedy keeps a previously scheduled meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrei Gromyko, but does not mention the missiles.
Gromyko tells Kennedy that the only help the Soviet Union is giving to Cuba is assistance growing crops and missiles that are only for defense.
Ex-Comm meets and discusses sending United States ships to Cuba to prevent Soviet ships from reaching the island.
They are careful to call it a quarantine because a blockade is an act of war.
October 20, 1962 Robert Kennedy gives Ex-Comm's recommendation to the president.
After meeting all day the previous day, Robert Kennedy tells the president that Ex-Comm recommends a quarantine.
President Kennedy was in Chicago, but lies about having a cold so that he can return to Washington to deal with the crisis.
October 21, 1962 Ted Sorenson writes one of the most important speeches President Kennedy will ever give.
Attorney and advisor to the president, Ted Sorenson, writes the speech that Kennedy will give to the nation.
Informing Americans that the Soviets have missiles in Cuba that are pointed at the United States will be an important moment in American history and one of the most frightening speech as president ever gives.
October 22, 1962 President Kennedy gives a televised speech to the nation.
President Kennedy gives a speech that is carried live on television stations across the country to inform Americans that missiles have been discovered in Cuba.
He tells Americans that he has ordered a Navy quarantine around Cuba and orders the Soviets to remove the missiles.
This prevents a confrontation with United States ships that are around Cuba, although Soviet submarines trailed behind the United States ships as they moved into place.
He also accuses Kennedy of putting the world at risk of a nuclear war by ordering the quarantine.
Making no progress with his communications with Khrushchev, President Kennedy orders flights over Cuba to be increased from once to twice per day.
October 26, 1962 The United States begins discussions about invading Cuba.
October 27, 1962 An American pilot flies off course into Soviet airspace.
Charles Maultsby, an American pilot, gets lost flying a mission to Alaska and ends up in Soviet airspace.
After Khrushchev says that he will remove the missiles from Cuba if Kennedy promises not to invade Cuba, Kennedy agrees to the proposal.
The world goes to bed that night waiting to see if Khrushchev will accept the arrangement and bring the crisis to an end.
Khrushchev gives a speech on Radio Moscow and says that he has agreed to Kennedy's arrangement.
