Chic and I were in separate classes in the 31-week, 560G surface sonar course and would not enter the inner sanctum “behind the green doors” for another six months.
Our Director Emeritus, Ed Dalrymple was under orders to attend the SOSUS officer course and arrived a few weeks later, in mid-November, while US/Soviet tensions were still very high.
Kennedy would make a televised address that evening, on an urgent matter of national importance.
While most base residents probably had no idea of what would be the subject of his address, many of us had observed that the waterfront piers normally occupied by several submarines, destroyers, and other Navy ships mysteriously had become completely vacant.
In his address, “JFK” revealed that Soviet medium-range, surface-to-surface ballistic missiles with nuclear warheads, capable of striking Washington, DC were being installed on Cuban soil.
Further, he demanded those missiles be removed and stated that a Naval “quarantine” was being imposed on the island of Cuba, to prevent the introduction of additional missiles that were known to be en route aboard cargo ships.
Within an hour after the President ended his speech, all off-duty personnel on the Naval Station were rounded up, mustered, given brief instructions, and posted around the base perimeter in a continuous chain of security watches.
As they became available, within a day or two, these items were augmented by M-1 rifles and clips loaded with eight, .30 caliber cartridges.
My watch assignment on that first night was to “guard” the marine railway against swimmers and to blow my whistle if I saw any.
During a later night watch on the long concrete mole pier that juts out into the Gulf of Mexico, I was startled by a loud splash but relieved to discover it was caused by a large Manta ray.
Fleet Sonar School quickly modified its normal schedule, so that we students were attending classes every other day, alternating with days on which we stood security watches, four hours on, eight off.
Instructors, all senior petty officers and Chiefs, were also on that daily schedule and were on the watch bill as security section supervisors.
Unknown to us at the time, the United States had become aware of the missiles in Cuba a week earlier and was ramping up preparations for war.
Nike anti-aircraft missile batteries were set up by the United States Army in at least a couple of locations on the island as well as at other sites in southern Florida.
The sounds of powerful Navy F4 Phantom jet fighters and RF-8 Crusaders, probably flying out of the adjacent Naval Air Station at Boca Chica, roaring overhead at all hours, were a common occurrence.
These flights were especially unnerving in the middle of the night, as they rattled the Jalousie windows of the BEQs.
The Phantoms were probably escorts for the Crusaders, which flew frequent, low-level photo-reconnaissance missions over Cuba.
He then displayed large aerial reconnaissance photos of missile sites to the UN Security Council and explained what they revealed, exposing the Soviet lies.
Tense negotiations ended about a week later when President Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev struck an eleventh-hour deal.
In exchange for the withdrawal of their nuclear missiles from Cuba, the Soviets were promised that the United States would not invade that Communist-controlled island nation.
While this agreement allowed both sides to step back and take a deep breath, we did not relax our guard until late November or early December.
The resolution of the crisis and subsequent relaxation allowed a personal happy ending.
To my knowledge we have never before, nor since, been so close to the edge.
