We were even prepared for a nuclear war in the event the Soviet Union was attacked.
Little did they know that soon, they would face off in one of the most dangerous showdowns in world history, and then, shortly after that, both would be gone from the scene.
President Kennedy was assassinated in late 1963, and Khrushchev was ousted in 1964.
Cuban missile crisis: The other, secret one, Oct., 00:12:14 The revolutionary leader wanted to keep Soviet tactical nuclear weapons, and was angry at the Kremlin.
Never was the world as close to a nuclear war as at the end of October, 1962.
The Soviet Union had stationed medium-range missiles in Cuba and was preparing them to be fired; in Washington, United States generals planned air strikes against these positions and a subsequent invasion of the island.
Published before the 50th anniversary of the Cuban missile crisis, newly-released documents show that the situation was far more explosive than previously assumed, because Fidel Castro was playing his own game.
According to the report, the men were instructed to come to the Caribbean to be instructors for the Cuban military.
Former German paratrooper officers and technical troops so-called pioneers were also welcome.
Up to the time of the BND report, four former SS-men had accepted the offer, although only two can be shown to have reached Cuba.
Apparently, Castro was not only keen on making use of experienced German World War II soldiers, but he also tried to procure weapons in Europe.
With the help of an arms trafficking network led by two right-wing extremists, Otto Ernst Remer and Ernst-Wilhelm Springer, the Cuban government tried to purchase 4,000 Belgian submachine guns via Western Germany.
The obvious and probable conclusion is that Castro wanted to free himself of total dependence on Soviet weapons and instructors.
The documents reveal that the BND was well informed about the contacts between the Cuban regime and Europe.
Thanks to several viable sources of information in the Caribbean, the BND seems to have had amazingly-accurate information about Castro's secret rearmament.
For quite some time, information about these events in 1962 have been known to the Federal Archive in Koblenz.
Like Worldmeets.US on Facebook In June 1962 at the latest, BND analysts recognized that Cuba’s ongoing rearmament has changed from being defensive in character to offensive.
For the first time, construction sites were identified as potential sites for offensive missiles.
At the same time, according to the documents, the CIA assumed that only conventional weapons not nuclear ones were being shipped to Cuba.
On September 12, 1962, the BND informed the Federal Chancellery that since the end of the previous July, about 15 Soviet ships with more than 5,000 troops, mainly technicians and trainers, has landed in Cuba.
Information in BND files confirms much of what we know from other sources, from the discovery of missile installations in aerial photographs on October 15, the information possessed by President Kennedy the following morning, as well as the buckling under by Nikita Khrushchev 13 days later.
What is remarkable, however, is the detailed manner in which some sources informed the office of BND director Reinhard Gehlen, the former WWII Wehrmacht general.
The Cuban revolutionary also refused to return his heavy Soviet weapons.
It also shows that the Cuba Missile Crisis was by no means over with Khrushchev's announcement about the removal of offensive nuclear missiles on the morning of October 28, 1962.
On orders from Khrushchev, Mikoyan traveled to Cuba after receiving Castro’s fiery letter, remaining there for three weeks.
The documents, completely unknown until now, include several telegrams and the minutes of a four hour debate among Mikoyan, Castro and ""Che"" Guevara from November 22, 1962, showing that Castro was enraged.
Posted by Worldmeets.US The revolutionary leader blamed the Soviets for discovery of the missiles by the United States, saying that not enough was done to camouflage the missiles.
He also asserted that United States reconnaissance planes should have been shot down early on.
In contravention of ""Comrade Khrushchev’s orders,"" he said work had gone on in daylight.
The Cuban leader also hinted that he had uses not contemplated by Khrushchev in mind for the missiles.
According to Mikoyan, the Soviet leader wanted to inform the United States of the weapons' existence, and that they posed a deadly threat to nearly all of America.
With such a announcement, the missiles would have become a class means of nuclear deterrence.
Castro, on the other hand, reproached Mikoyan, saying that Cubans could have built permanent hideouts, for example, mock factories.
He claimed that poultry farms would have been suited to hide the missiles.
The revolutionary apparently preferred hiding the weapons for use in a first strike.
But Castro's key interest was to keep Soviet tactical nukes on the island.
President Kennedy announced the official lifting of the blockade on November 20, 1962, when he announced that there were no longer nuclear warheads on Cuba.
In case of a United States invasion, Pliyev was instructed to use these weapons in defense of Soviet positions.
Castro called for these highly hazardous bombs to be handed over to Cuban personnel, which would have made his regime the first nuclear power in Latin America.
But the Soviets wanted to avoid this at all cost, as they considered the revolutionary leader to be unpredictable.
Mikoyan even invented a non-existent law, according to which control over Soviet nuclear weapons was forbidden to other states.
Two new books about Berlin and Jewish history from Berlinica, available from Amazon and Barnes & Noble.
