It was an ambitiously intelligent and sophisticated book, ranking among the most important studies in American political science in the 1970s and signiªcantly inºuencing other ªelds.
Over the years, Allison’s volume helped shape interpretations in disciplines interested in decisionmaking, and provoked many methodological and conceptual critiques, as well as some on issues of evidence, sources, and missile crisis history.
He writes on Cold War history, and has been publishing on the Cuban missile crisis since 1963.
The author is indebted to Elizabeth Kopelman Borgwardt, Lynn Eden, Alexander George, Stephen Krasner, and Scott Sagan for critical comments, to participants in an April 1999 Center for International Security and Cooperation seminar and a January 2000 international history seminar for consideration of earlier drafts of this essay, and to Graham Allison and Philip Zelikow for privately addressing some questions about their research sources.
Their generosity has been a model of collegiality in assisting an author who is somewhat critical of their work.
The volume had wide use in programs that sought to understand and explain the behavior of organizations, and the tugs and rivalries within bureaucracies, even involving enterprises far removed from foreign policy and the United States government.
This essay does not hope to be exhaustive in examining and comparing the two editions’ models of explanation and the interpretations of the missile crisis.
Fair-minded critics may plausibly argue about some of this essay’s choices in examining theory and evidence, but the expectation is that most readers will ªnd the choices generally reasonable while tolerantly acknowledging that an author’s taste and interest sometimes inºuence the choice of problems.
This review essay, beyond this introduction and a later conclusion, is divided into two major sections.
The ªrst provides a comparatively short consideration of the 1971 Essence.
The second section offers a longer consideration of the revised Essence, with occasional reference to the ªrst edition.
That second section does not, however, discuss other scholarly critiques of the 1999 edition because none of any depth has yet been published.
Allison’s original volume was intentionally conceived not to address such basic questions of values and of purposes.
According to the 1971 volume, the understanding of process became the way to understand the substance of policy.
The book, while seemingly nonideological, was implicitly quite ideological in result and presumably in intention.
Allison narrowed the deªnition of the important questions in studying foreign policy, and probably wanted to improve the decisionmaking processes of the United States government.
By avoiding the major questions of United States purpose and of ideology, and by implicitly deciding against value-laden conceptions of American exceptionalism, Allison provided frameworks that usually treated the United States as what might be called an ordinary state, one in which he believed bureaucracies and organizations substantially deªne policy.
The particular inºuence of U.S. history, of the alleged values of the “Open Door,” and of conceptions of national mission and of American exceptionalism were implicitly dismissed, or ignored, in Essence.
The proper study was substantially of organizations and bureaucracy, and their signiªcant interactions.
The book brieºy applied similar frameworks of emphasizing bureaucracy and organizations in the Soviet Union.
By implicitly often minimizing (if not ignoring) the role of communist ideology and of centralized party control as authoritarian, Allison also usually treated the Soviet Union as an ordinary state.
The volume generally disregarded the often-ªerce scholarly dialogue, a quarter-century after World War II, by American historians between “revisionists” and “orthodox” interpreters in analyzing Cold War history and the questions of Soviet versus American blame for that conºict.
Essence also ignored the often-related disputes about the nature of the Soviet system and its effect on Soviet foreign policy.
Signiªcantly, Allison’s book brieºy but explicitly challenged foreign policy realism, with its deªning assumption that states seek to maximize power and security, and with modern realism’s frequently added but not essential assumption that divisions over policy within the government are not analytically interesting or signiªcant in explaining state behavior.
Essence offered a markedly different way of studying United States foreign policy.
Building on earlier more impressionistic and sometimes more subtle work in political science notably by Richard Neustadt, and by Roger Hilsman and Warner Schilling, among others, and emerging from a Harvard study group on bureaucratic politics (termed the “May group” after its chair, the well-known diplomatic historian Ernest May), Essence stressed the domestic making of foreign policy and seemed to reject the realist conception of a neo-Hobbesian world in which states operated.
Thus, in challenging realism, which was already the dominant analytical trend in American political science studies of foreign policy—a form of realism more constricted than the theories of George Kennan or Walter Lippmann—the book emphasized the need to look within the state, and in particular ways and places inside the state, to understand American foreign policy and its making.
Surprisingly, the 1971 Essence often narrowed, disregarded, or distorted historians’ work in the process of implying considerable “newness” for the book’s general analysis of the importance of bureaucratic politics.
Allison seemed not to know, or was unwilling to acknowledge, that historians for some time had been using a form of bureaucratic politics to structure parts of their studies in both domestic and foreign policy.
In large measure, Allison probably was not really interested in what historians had been writing, and he was primarily addressing a social science audience.
Allison would have been correct to contend that those many historical works lacked explicit models.
They did not seek to offer a general theory to explain behavior within the government, and many historical works emphasized differences in values and personality among competing government members.
Also, historians seldom, if ever, delved into organizational culture or ways of processing information, and thus often did not appreciate how organizations could inºuence policy by narrowing options, privileging particular responses, providing limited information, and selectively implementing orders or wishes from higher-ups.
Viewed from the critical perspective of what American historians had actually been writing about foreign policy and recent American history, and their frequent emphasis on bureaucratic differences in explaining policy, Allison’s work was less new than he contended.
But the 1971 Essence’s promise of rigor, explicit models, thoughtful laying out of assumptions, and attention to conceptualization and the role of “lenses” in interpreting evidence made the volume potentially very valuable to social scientists and very unlike history books.
Essence’s formal division between a theory chapter for each of the three models (that theory chapter usually also included many 1940s’ and 1950s’ historical illustrations) and then an applied-missile-crisis-history chapter for each model also made the book very different from historical writing.
Political science had moved more toward models and discussions of methodology and efforts to generate theory reaching beyond particular events, while history seemed more substantially empirical and also wanted sometimes to discuss the nature of the United States, or its core values and purposes.
Inside the political science profession, concerns about the nature of the United States or its core values were reserved most often for older practitioners, who frequently were treated as dated scholars.
These concerns were relegated also to those political scientists, whether young or old, who did political philosophy, not foreign policy analysis or international relations.
These three models, or lenses, or paradigms—and Allison often shifted terms and also employed others—were conceived, in part, as alternative ways of analyzing events and of seeing and emphasizing different facts because different assumptions were operating.
Unlike epistemological relativists in history, Allison did not challenge scholarly “objectivity” as either a goal or a result.
Yet his conception of “lenses,” unless there were explicit rules and standards for putting together the varying perceptions of events, had a peculiar quality of fragmenting reality and making observation, and knowledge, dependent upon the chosen theory.
He designed his explicit models to make analysts very aware of their assumptions, and to allow them to conduct rigorous inquiry.
But how to put together the varied ªndings of different theory-driven models could be, and was, unclear in Essence.
As a result, important portions of its conclusions would have to be supplanted, and not simply supplemented, by the ªndings from Models II and III, which Allison believed were usually superior.
Allison treated Models II and III in explicit theory and in his application in his history chapters as competitive and sometimes as complementary.
In the book’s tone and organization, there was some implication that Model III was superior, but there was no sustained argument to that effect.
Adding to difªculties, Essence was sometimes unclear on why a part of the book’s narrative on the missile crisis or its ªndings on certain events fell into Model II and not III, or vice versa.
Even more serious, Model III as a concept, and in its application in examining the Cuban missile crisis, had a suppleness that approached dangerous promiscuity.
In much of Allison’s explicit formulation, his discussion of Model III stressed that policy resulted from “pulling and hauling,” from negotiating and sparring, among the main actors.
Thus, the seeming near-parsimony of an actor’s “stand depends on where you sit,” or even more tempered formulations in Essence, dissolved in both the book’s “theory” chapter and the book’s application chapter into a grab bag of inºuences, with inadequate guidance to the reader for sorting them out or weighing the major factors.
Did the particular salient causal inºuence—whether personality, or background, or bureaucratic membership—on an individual vary from person 5.
In practice, in Essence, the result often was a set of descriptions and even some “theory” that seemed to indicate a kind of eclectic palace politics or cabinet politics approach—long familiar to historians and often employed by them—but Essence did this despite its lexicon of near-science and alleged precision.
The lexicon might brieºy conceal the mushiness of the model and thus also perhaps of the historical interpretation that the model’s application offered for the missile crisis.
Essence discussed, in a substantial endnote, philosopher of science Carl Hempel’s “covering law” model of historical explanation, and approvingly but brieºy Hempel’s conception (and that of some other philosophers of science) that explanation was logically the converse of prediction.
Nevertheless, after mentioning Hempel, Ernest Nagel, and Wittgenstein, the book provided models, or lenses, or paradigms with substantial mushiness.
Allison’s citations to analytical philosophy helped promise rigor, but the book did not deliver on that promise.
The book also seemed not to value the likely beneªts in the formulation of policy of “multiple advocacy,” to use Alexander George’s phrase.
In addition, Allison’s conceptualization and presentation of Model III were sometimes uncertain about how to treat the hierarchy among the pullers and haulers.
These central matters—of power—merited the closer attention of theory, of considerable emphasis on analytical distinctions, and of careful historical explanation in studying particular cases.
This 1972 essay was not explicitly presented as sometimes modifying Essence , but that essay can be interpreted that way.
But occasionally, the book suggested, more often in its applied-history segments, that he was above the “game,” and at another level.
Essence provided no conceptual guidelines, or even implicit rules, however, for combining these presidential roles and determining when one role or the other was crucial in explaining policy.
A basic problem with Essence was whether the Cuban missile crisis was a good subject for a test case-study.
That crisis was probably the most dangerous two weeks in modern history, and it was unusual among foreign policy events in that the president and many of his advisers focused sharply and often exclusively on missile crisis issues.
Thus, despite Allison’s defense of his choosing the missile crisis because it was a tough case study,9 there is serious reason to doubt whether generalizations from that crisis period would ªt more normal times and situations in the scholars’ efforts to construct conceptual frameworks to understand decisionmaking.
Some of this privileging resulted necessarily from the problem of dealing with then-recent events, when the available archives were skimpy at best, but a practice rooted in temporary necessity took on the form of virtually an operating principle about deªning what constituted valuable evidence in Essence.
The book’s afªrmed belief, and the operating practice in the book, was that skillful interviews would reveal the subtleties of bargaining and the differences in individuals’ priorities and perceptions, while documents were judged unlikely to yield such understanding.
Implicitly, but not explicitly, it was an oblique assault upon historians’ practices with their emphasis on archives and their faith in their capacity to wring evidence and interpretation from dusty papers.
The faith in interviews could carry over, as it often did in Essence, to a heavy but sometimes uncritical reliance on memoirs and on the books by others who had conducted interviews.
Perhaps in ways not intended, the 1971 Essence allowed later analysts to test, at least in part, the book’s guiding principles on the use of evidence.
Apparently Allison’s trusting faith in interview and memoir evidence helped him, unintentionally, to misunderstand these and other matters.
Allison’s uncritical acceptance of the wrong “history” may have occurred in part because his “theory” told him that events like this (especially organizations thwarting higher-level orders) happened, and then he implicitly relaxed 10.
Obviously the interviews often determined what was chosen from the public record, and how it was interpreted.
On the air force, see Merritt Olsen to Allison, January 11, 1978, courtesy of Zelikow, Allison, and Olsen.
Surprisingly, even during the Vietnam War, when many academics questioned the candor of Kennedy and Johnson administration foreign policy experts, Allison seemed not to doubt the probity of former Kennedy administration stalwarts, or to wonder whether their desire for prominence in future administrations might lead them to selective memory and self-serving recollections about missile crisis events.
Because Allison often used conªdential sources, and his footnotes are thus more than occasionally inadequate, independent checking by other scholars was sometimes difªcult in assessing his evidence.
Presumably, Allison’s American interview sources never mentioned “Mongoose,” or suggested that there had been such Kennedy administration efforts after the Bay of Pigs to eliminate Fidel Castro and topple his regime.
Despite Allison’s discussion of models and lenses of viewing, his book did not reºect caution, or critical self-awareness, in the determination of the reliability of some key evidence.
As presented in the 1971 Essence, Model II’s emphasis on organizational culture, and on the way it can ill-serve ofªcials at higher levels like the Executive Committee of the National Security Council , may actually impair the analyst’s understanding of organizations, their culture, and their behavior in some parts of the missile crisis.
Problems with organizations ill-serving superiors on major issues do not occur all the time, and perhaps not very frequently.
The difªcult task for Allison, or any analyst using such a theory about organizations, was to retain the theory as a guide, but to be critical of evidence and not to allow the theory to serve to validate soft, or dubious, evidence.
In a circular process, the theory or lens validated that soft evidence, thereby also helping to establish the value of the theory or lens.
Despite such criticism of Essence’s use of Model II, the model could still have considerable analytic value.
It reminded scholars, in looking at particular policies , that they might not be actually looking at high-level decisionmaker’s purposes, but rather at an organization’s mode of operation.
Such understanding could push a scholar to look for evidence that the policy was formed by an organization, not by a top decisionmaker.
Adding to problems facing a revision of the book, organizational theory had become more complicated and nuanced.
In turn, in dealing with Model III, scholars had usually found it difªcult to operationalize, in 12.
The division of labor among the two co-authors is undiscussed in the new Essence, aside from the statement that Graham Allison is a political scientist and Philip Zelikow a historian.
Allison served brieºy as an assistant secretary of defense in the early Clinton administration, and Zelikow was on George Bush’s National Security Council.
Compared to the 1971 book, the new edition is about one-quarter longer and considerably richer in evidence and in interpretation of the missile crisis, though the book also contains many seemingly unnecessary additions on the Bush administration’s policies, which are mostly treated in the three “theory” chapters.
Only three explicit models appear in the book, though Models II and III are somewhat reformulated.
Model II is renamed as “organizational behavior,” and the theory chapters for all three models are expanded.
Model I’s theory chapter now includes a brief discussion of rational choice theory, psychology, and game theory.
Model II’s theory chapter is supple and richer than in the 1971 volume, reºecting the quarter-century’s work on organization theory.
Model III, in a partial revision, is even more of a grab bag of various explanations than it was in the 1971 edition.
Organized essentially like the ªrst edition, the 1999 book still has three sets of two chapters (a theory chapter followed by an applied-history chapter on the missile crisis for each model), plus a preface, introduction, and conclusion.
One wonders whether Allison and Zelikow agree on the Neustadt dictum and why it is still in the book.
The revised book almost never states what major interpretations have been changed, or why.
The new edition usually avoids an explicit dialogue with the earlier edition, or its critics, and an explicit acknowledgment of mistakes in the 1971 edition.
Unlike the ªrst edition, the new one makes a somewhat expanded, but still-incomplete, effort to present an integrated interpretation at the end.
In the revised Essence, Model I is regarded with more respect than in 13.
But in newly added paragraphs, the 1999 book also seems unduly to narrow, and partly to misunderstand, Kennan’s thought and thus why he really does not properly ªt into the rational actor framework.
Contrary to the implications in Essence, Kennan, in his famous American Diplomacy , as well as in his two volumes of later memoirs, which are full of the stuff of internecine bureaucratic/personal rivalries, did not claim that United States policy had conformed, historically, to rational actor behavior.
It may be testimony to the inºuence of the 1971 Essence, and to the somewhat related changes in the international relations and United States foreign policy ªelds among political scientists and other social scientists, that there has been greater effort in the past quarter-century to operationalize, and test, theory.
Collingwood and, in line with his 1933 urgings, calls for “empathetic recon14.
Essence never discusses how such “empathetic reconstruction” could be rigorously operationalized for agreed-upon testing.
The 1999 Essence is concerned, brieºy, with the logic and nature of explanation.
The book revises, with an important addition, its earlier substantial endnote on Hempel and the “covering law” conception of historical explanation.
The expanded note informs readers that Zelikow, unlike Allison, rejects Hempel’s conception that the model of the “covering law” carries over from science into history.
That expanded endnote also has references to William James and John Dewey, and to Hilary Putnam’s recent defense of James, with Putnam emphasizing that James rejected the dualism of fact and interpretation, and of fact and value.
But Allison and Zelikow never explicitly acknowledge that their substantial difference on the nature of historical explanation, and thus apparently on the nature of “covering laws” and presumably on the fact/interpretation and fact/value dualisms, has no apparent implication, or effect, on the actual content of their collaborative book.
If it did, the revised Essence would reveal, explicitly or implicitly, such differences elsewhere.
In 1971, in addressing these three issues, Essence systematically applied each of its three models to each issue, thus producing nine sets of explanations.
Yet, without discussing the departure from that strategy, the 1999 book does not apply Model III to the question of why the Soviets put the missiles in Cuba.
Thus, the new book seems to give great weight to a Model I explanation of the 16.
Essence , 288, 95, for a reference to Collingwood but without any endorsement of his thought.
In 1971, Allison’s Model I single answer to the ªrst question, of Soviet purpose, was that the Soviets had sought signiªcantly to supplement their missile power by placing missiles in Cuba.
The 1971 Essence had dismissed other possible Soviet motives, including the Soviet effort to buttress Cuban defense from possible United States aggression.
Yet, there was nothing inherent in Model I, or in the logic and normal form of historical explanation, that limited a nation-state to just one motive, or that should have restricted an analyst to only one cause in explaining an event.
In Nikita Khrushchev’s 1970s’ memoirs, the Soviet premier had emphasized Cuban defense as his primary motive, and he brieºy suggested the desire for enhanced Soviet missile power as an additional purpose.
In the 1980s and early 1990s, different Soviet representatives usually accepted both motives, but sometimes split on which of the two was more important.
Accepting the two-motive answer, a few former Ex Comm members—McGeorge Bundy, Robert McNamara, and George Ball—also seemed to split on whether missile power was preeminent and “defense of Cuba” secondary, or vice versa.
In using Model I, Allison changed the implicit rules for the answer in Essence on the number of Soviet motives for the deployment.
That ambiguous phrasing might leave wiggle room for Cuban defense as an additional motive in the book’s analysis, but Essence on earlier pages seemed to reject “Cuban defense” as even one of the Soviet motives.
The reason for revising the “rule” on the number of motives is unstated.
The book argues, in part, that the deployment’s size (so many missiles) and its components (MRBMs and IRBMs, rather than shortrange nuclear weapons) were not essential to defending Cuba.
A more reasonable and appropriately supple explanation would have acknowledged that these weapons were viewed generally, in a rational actor framework by Soviet ofªcials, as desirable because they would both defend Cuba and enhance the Soviet missile arsenal.
Essence’s 1999 general dismissal of the Cuban defense motive is especially surprising given that Khrushchev repeatedly claimed Cuban defense privately and publicly; many of Khrushchev’s associates believed him in 1962 and also later; and a major book, “One Hell of a Gamble” (by Aleksandr Fursenko and Timothy Naftali) that exploits Soviet archives, and is usually uncritically trusted by Allison and Zelikow, emphasizes Cuban defense as a signiªcant Khrushchev motive and generally rejects a “Berlin” motive.
The revised Essence does not systematically argue with interpreters who maintain the importance of Cuban defense,22 though, in a strange twist at the end of the book’s section on Model I and Soviet motives for the deployment, Essence in own thinking during the missile crisis, that later endorsement of a critique seems very often contrary to their interest and should be taken seriously as an important indication of how evidence has changed views.
There may well be still-unexamined Soviet archives on Khrushchev’s 1962 thinking that may help resolve this factual/interpretive dispute.
Fursenko has recently been in the Soviet archives on the Berlin crisis, 1958–63, and reports that he found no evidence connecting it to the deployment of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
Interestingly, in a set of events unmentioned in the revised Essence but discussed in “One Hell of a Gamble,” Khrushchev’s desire to place missiles in Cuba ran into some early opposition among his advisers.
At ªrst, at a mid-May 1962 meeting of the Soviet Defense Council, Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan objected to placing Soviet missiles and troops in Cuba, but a majority endorsed the proposal.
Three days later, the Presidium, presumably including Mikoyan, approved Khrushchev’s venture.
There are puzzling questions why the revised Essence did not try explicitly to place these events, even brieºy, within its unused Model III framework on the issue of the Soviet deployment.
Allison and Zelikow’s argument that Berlin was one of two important Soviet motives for the deployment is clever but not compelling.
The two authors took some skimpy evidence, and ignore the fact that Khrushchev neither expressed this “purpose” to his 1962 associates, nor claimed it later in his memoirs and other post-1962 forums.
For Kennedy in October 1962, the fear of Soviet counteraction in Berlin, as Essence argues, in using Model I, does help explain the choice of a quarantine.
Kennedy opted for a quarantine, and not a more bellicose response, Allison and Zelikow stress, because JFK was afraid of a Soviet military backlash against Berlin in retaliation for United States action against Cuba.
That is probably a large part of the explanation, mixed with JFK’s fear of Soviet nuclear retaliation from Cuba against the United States if the United States selected a stronger response than a quarantine.
Like most interpretations, the book also stresses JFK’s worries about keeping the alliance system together.
According to the revised Essence’s application of Model I, President Kennedy could not tolerate Soviet missiles, and he had to act to get them out or face political reprisals at home.
Though other analysts might slightly quarrel with the mix, and many may desire a clear statement of priorities in the mix, this 1999 Model I history, as history, seems useful and eminently reasonable—as far as it goes.
In applying Model III to the quarantine, the 1999 Essence runs into some peculiar problems.
Most of the lengthy segment of the chapter on the quarantine is not about the choice of the quarantine, but about other matters, including the United States discovery of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
The nine-page segment on selecting the quarantine mostly describes various advisers’ thinking, and could mostly have been written by someone who rejected Model III as a useful lens.
But that nine-page segment does include a thoughtful, one-and-a-halfpage analysis of Kennedy’s concerns about domestic politics and international affairs.
That domestic-politics analysis is not dissimilar in its central arguments from the much briefer material in the book’s Model I, applied-history chapter.
Why JFK’s domestic political fears and concerns ªrst ªt Model I and then Model III is not explained.
Not according to the book’s discussion of the theory of Model I It is as if the co-authors are unsure about what Model I includes in practice, and how to apply their theory, part of the time, when doing applied history involving that model.
To some critics in the 1970s, that contention, absent any proof, seemed counterintuitive.
The 1999 book’s analysis, while similar to the 1971 version, is broader and also somewhat different.
It constitutes both an enrichment and a slight retreat by no longer relying exclusively upon the 1971 version’s analysis of standard operating procedure.
This explanation, then, ªts under Model II, but really emphasizes the “blunder” of that team and not a conception of SOP behavior.
According to the new Essence, the Soviet forces, upon reaching Cuba, discovered that the palm/forest belief was wrong-headed, but they did not adequately adjust to the new situation.
Instead, they followed the standard operating procedure of no camouºage, a procedure developed for deployments in the Soviet Union.
Essence , 102, for possibly more hedges about being suggestive in explaining Soviet action.
Thus, this organization, in facing a tug between two competing goals of a tight schedule and secrecy, focused on the schedule, not secrecy.
The requirements of camouºage would have made installation more difªcult, and impeded the schedule, which the organization presumably deemed more important.
The 1999 Essence’s interpretation seems plausible, and may even be correct.
But a critic might well comment upon how easily the book’s interpretation slides from providing some evidence to offering a speculative possibility (the organization was following SOP and facing a tug between secrecy and speed) to presenting a strongly asserted conclusion (the schedule was emphasized, and thus camouºage ignored), while rather casually noting that the organization understood that secrecy was important.
In this interpretive process in Essence, the theory of Model II almost unobtrusively ªlls in the gaps, paving over the great problem of the shortage of evidence.
According to the 1999 Essence, based upon Fursenko and Naftali’s book, Khrushchev had wanted the SAMs to go in ªrst to protect the missiles from U-2 surveillance.
It does not rely on Model II, and may dissolve the puzzle of why the SAMs did not shoot down U-2s.
Possibly, Khrushchev changed his mind during the summer about the role of the SAMs, and therefore the absence of a shoot-down order was not the product of various kinds of Model II behavior by others but, rather, of Khrushchev’s own intended decision.
Perhaps wary of provoking a United States attack by the Soviets downing a U-2 near the United States, he may well have decided against issuance of an order directing the Soviet commander to shoot down a U-2.
Thus, a Model I interpretation, especially in the absence of compelling alternative evidence, and stated with appropriate hedges about the problems of evidence, may sometimes be “the answer” to the puzzle.
The impossibility on the basis of available evidence of adequately explaining the absence of a shoot-down order should remind readers of Essence of how easily that book, by drawing upon Model II or Model III, sometimes uses a model as a substitute for evidence.
In Essence, the models do far more than organize evidence and suggest particular “lenses” for seeing particular patterns.
On occasion in Essence, the models, despite the authors’ hedges, serve virtually as substitutes for adequate evidence in some important situations.
In places, they more fully acknowledge the importance of hierarchy and differential power among advisers, and that the president’s choice of advisers and his efforts to set the agenda are signiªcant considerations for the analyst.
Probably no other sentence from that 1971 volume had attracted so much attention, and so much criticism.
Signiªcantly, the new edition explains that “depends” did not mean “always determined by,” but instead “substantially affected by” where you sit.
On military budgets and procurements, very probably much of the time, or at least more often than not.
Consider the ªrst day of the missile crisis, when the standing/sitting explanation’s difªculties are pronounced.
This simply was RFK, sometimes a “shoot-from-the hip” guy, at his reckless worst.
Probably most of the positions uttered the ªrst day do not ªt in a useful way the standing/sitting dictum.
Random selection probably gives better or equal results in matching statements than does bureaucratic position.
Maybe the standing/sitting dictum, in its softened formulation, should be systematically tested for the missile crisis.
It would be an interesting but admittedly narrow test to have some students, who do not know missile crisis history, go through the Ex Comm minutes, with the speakers’ names removed and some anonymous identiªcation substituted, to test the standing/sitting dictum, if analysts can agree in advance on how to interpret that softened version.
That speaker was—JFK.39 Presumably McNamara’s emphasis on the domestic-politics threat of the Soviet missiles did not ªt what analysts would expect, under the standing/sitting dictum, from a secretary of defense.
It is unlikely that analysts would expect that concern from the secretary of defense, because of his bureaucratic position, and not from the attorney general, because of his bureaucratic position, or instead from the secretary of state, because of his bureaucratic position.
In many of these cases, an analyst’s sense of knowing the adviser’s concerns about war, the adviser’s belief in toughness, and his fears about personal credibility may be better guides to interpreting the adviser’s behavior in the missile crisis.
Maybe the dictum should be that an adviser’s personality and general experience, far more than bureaucratic afªliation, often heavily inºuence that individual’s perceptions and advice, especially in potentially deadly crises.
Of course, the complexity of coming up with any comparatively simple formulation is that important shifts occurred during the missile crisis days.
And the next week McNamara spoke brieºy of possibly attacking the missile sites in Cuba.
Interpreting those shifts as just part of bargaining—of pulling and hauling—is too simple and unfair.
The missile crisis was unusual—the wrong decision could mean massive death, even nuclear annihilation.
In the missile crisis, the high-level advisers were seeking to deªne a course that would protect the United States, their president, the alliance system, and nuclear credibility.
National Security Adviser Bundy’s activity, because he sometimes apparently chose the role of “devil’s advocate”42 to focus the dialogue in meetings, is hard to interpret in particular situations.
Only probing, systematic analysis, reaching well beyond Essence’s efforts, is likely to provide rich answers in explaining the behavior of the 39.
That is one of the reasons why some historians stress the importance of full-length biography to understand “actors,” and that is why some historians argue that only through studying the “actor” in depth, and over time, can that person be well understood in a particular situation.
For such historians, brief rules of interpretation, involving emphasis on bureaucracy or other general formulations, are simplistic and frequently offer dubious insights.
Such theories, when reaching beyond the Joint Chiefs, who were not truly among the president’s men, do not take analysts very far in understanding behavior.
Not to recognize this important problem is to succumb to the false promise of questionable theory, and thus the likely illusion of understanding what the theory cannot adequately illuminate or explain.
And in the applied-history chapter on governmental politics in 1971 and even in 1999, despite some buttressing, much of the book’s discussion swirls around the president without focusing on him.
Much of the time in Essence, his role seems to be that of a resultant of forces, not the major actor.
Ultimately, the revised Essence seems deeply divided, and perhaps both unsure and unaware of its uncertainty, about how in the missile crisis history chapter on governmental politics to conceptualize the role of the president and his choices.
If the narrative in Essence can reasonably be read that way, maybe at least a fourth model is essential.
The Ex Comm minutes, if taken alone, reveal vigorous opposition by key advisers to a trade, with Bundy fearing damage to the NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) system, McNamara seeming at one point to suggest a U.S. attack on Cuba, and RFK forcefully opposing a Jupiter deal and worrying about injury in Latin America.
Virtually alone, the most “dove-like” person in the ªrst two Ex Comm sessions on Saturday was the president, who kept plumping for serious support for a trade.
He warned the others that the trade would look reasonable to many people.
He regretted that Khrushchev had made the demand publicly and not privately, and Kennedy stated that war would be an awful mistake, that war would shatter the NATO alliance, and that the United States might have to handle this matter unilaterally because American leaders best understood the perils and the prospects.
Most of his generally closest advisers, and especially McNamara and Bundy, seemed strongly opposed to a public Jupiter deal; and Rusk, though not a close adviser, 45.
President Kennedy’s only explicit support in the Ex Comm came from three comparatively minor advisers—Ball, who was not close to JFK; Vice President Lyndon B Johnson, who was certainly not close to the president and was a marginalized man; and Central Intelligence Agency Director John McCone, who was a Republican, not deeply trusted, and far from the president’s inner circle.
So, in short, JFK’s opponents on the Jupiter trade were his normal allies and his highly valued counselors on most matters; but JFK’s near-enemies on many matters within the administration had become his strong supporters on the speciªc issue of the Jupiter trade.
Theories of bureaucratic allegiance are remarkably unhelpful in explaining this lineup of proand antitraders.
And certainly closeness to the president, even on that perilous Saturday, does not explain this lineup—except perhaps inversely.
But the Ex Comm minutes, we now know, are not a good source for telling us what of signiªcance actually occurred on that fateful Saturday on the subject of the Jupiter trade.
On that early Saturday evening, before the third Ex Comm meeting but after the second formal session, where LBJ, McCone, and Ball had supported the president, while the president’s key advisers had disagreed with JFK, a key event took place.
A small group of about eight men (Bundy, McNamara, Rusk, Theodore Sorensen, RFK, Ball, Soviet expert Llewellyn Thompson, and Deputy Secretary of Defense Roswell Gilpatric) met privately in the Oval Ofªce with the president.
At that meeting, the decision was made to accept Khrushchev’s deal privately to trade the Jupiters.
RFK was sent to meet, shortly after 7:30 P.M., with Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin to make this offer and also to warn him that the crisis was becoming very perilous, that a settlement must be speedily achieved, that the Soviets’ Saturday shoot-down of a U-2 over Cuba was inºaming matters, that the Soviets must avoid another shoot-down, and that this secret deal on the Jupiters was contingent upon its being kept secret.
That early-evening, secret meeting in the Oval Ofªce is important for various reasons.
The best available evidence indicates that the president was the dominant person at that small session.
He called the meeting, selected the participants, and excluded about another eight men.
At this meeting, the president pushed for making the Jupiter deal, and everyone there loyally accepted it, though some had earlier expressed serious opposition to it.
The fact of a private deal undoubtedly met the objections of some of the serious opponents of a public deal.
But the central fact was that the president made clear that he cared deeply about this issue, he chose the policy, and nobody would resist him.
Conclusions The work of Allison in the 1971 Essence in helping to popularize the uses of organizational theory in studying decisions, and of Scott Sagan49 and others in pursuing and reªning the theory of organizational culture, and in discovering far more about organizational behavior in the missile crisis, are important to all analysts.
That useful reminder of near-disasters, by Allison and Zelikow, and by Sagan, among others, has profound implications for understanding much of the process, and some of the substance, of policy.
Sagan,50 for example, in his public dialogue with ardent realist Kenneth Waltz, made a powerful argument against nuclear proliferation on the grounds that organizational culture and difªculties of communication make deterrence unstable, because major decisions on nuclear use may not be taken by top civilian leaders, but by organi48.
But those recollections are fully consistent with the October 27 Ex Comm minutes, which strongly indicate JFK’s interests and preferences that day.
Put simply, but bluntly, what they do not know, or misunderstand, or are misinformed about, or cannot control can kill them—and many others, too.
In the 1962 Cuban missile crisis, precisely because it was a crisis, the activities and decisions of President Kennedy and of Premier Khrushchev were more important than was normally the case in each government’s handling, in the early 1960s, of what might be called ordinary business.
Crises ªx attention and make the government leader the central decisionmaker.
In understanding the Cuban missile crisis, and most United States foreign policy crises that are deªned at the time as crises, analysts should regard “bureaucratic politics” as an arena that is worth investigating in depth, while always remembering that the president usually makes the basic decisions—of war and peace, and of going near the so-called precipice.
Organizational actions may take control from the president’s hands in dangerous ways.
But the large gap between advisers “inºuencing” and “shaping” presidential decisions—a gap that Allison and Zelikow seem only sometimes to recognize—is profoundly important.
That is what some analysts including many historians, without explicit models, paradigms, and lenses, have long known from deep study in the details and documents of United States foreign policy, in looking at presidents and their advisers, and in focusing upon the president’s personality, values, aspirations, hopes and anxieties, and his background to explain important foreign policy decisions.
To focus unduly on others, to make too much of advisers, to see bureaucratic politics as the essential key to understanding presidential decisionmaking on central matters, especially in crises, is a fundamental mistake in the development of theory and certainly in understanding United States foreign policy.
Those who enter the presidency are neither unformed nor fully formed, but they are usually largely formed.
The experience of the presidency, with its burdens and loneliness, further shapes them.
An analysis of United States foreign policy decisionmaking in crisis that concentrates on process, and not on the key person, the president, and that fails to pay attention to the rich interpretive depth provided by biography, is a study that greatly risks distorting understanding.
Put simply, although a president’s past does not dictate his actions in crisis or at other times, that past—and his personal development in that past—has a strong bearing on how he judges issues, deªnes crises, interprets dangers, perceives challenges, and chooses policy.
No analysis of decisionmaking should simply be applied biography, but skimpy awareness of biographical matters may impoverish, and unduly constrict, that study.
Many books on foreign policy by historians, which the initial edition of Essence unwisely disregarded when mischaracterizing the ªeld of history, understood this important point in their usually ad hoc interpretation of decisionmaking and the relationship of a president to his advisers.
Without necessarily endorsing Collingwood’s epistemology, the effort at “empathetic reconstruction” of a president’s decisionmaking requires, among other matters, a deep understanding of that chief executive, of how he viewed the world, and perhaps even of why he viewed it that way.
The difªcult task for model makers in studying foreign policy and decisionmaking is to determine how to link the quest for generalization and theory to the aspects of the key decisionmaker that seem both idiosyncratic and important.
This task may be most difªcult when studying foreign policy crises, and the centrality of the president.
Of course, President Kennedy, Bundy, McNamara, Sorensen, and others among the president’s advisers understood in 1962, as well as before and afterward, that many lesser decisions by the government were made without substantial, or any, presidential attention.
Many decisions on middle-sized and smaller matters in foreign and domestic policy, and usually those involving most procurements and many budget issues, are far removed from the president’s focus.
He usually pays little or no attention to those problems and to their resolution.
It is in such arenas, well beyond crises and major problems in foreign policy, and often beyond major issues in domestic policy, that Essence of Decision, in its 1971 version and in its revised edition, is most valuable for concentrating analysts’ attention on the importance of bureaucracy.
It required greater awareness by the analyst of the questions asked, and the assumptions made, about process.
The volume reminded scholars that process in many ways may help deªne policy.
The frequent admonitions and useful emphases, since the 1971 book about Models I, II, and III, and the requirement of making clear which approach is being used, and assumed, have helped clarify thinking in discussing policy creation.
The 1999 revised edition, even with its numerous conceptual and evidential problems, may also help scholars think somewhat usefully about some of the processes of decisionmaking.
Ideally, however, the book’s conceptual narrowness, with its deªnition of policy heavily in terms of process, will not bar them from also reaching well beyond Essence’s restrictive formulation.
Resisting the narrowness of Essence, scholars should think deeply and critically about the underlying values framework of major policy, and perhaps even about the class background or social origins of major policymakers.
In United States foreign policy, in particular, those are dimensions that require thoughtful attention.
Otherwise, the implicit ideology of focusing on process, as Essence seems to urge, can trammel critical scrutiny, narrow dialogue about United States purposes, fail to note the comparatively similar social backgrounds of many policymakers, and block probing analysis of the American past.
