Imagine, Mr President, what if we were to present to you such an ultimatum as you have presented to us by your actions.
Having presented these conditions to us, Mr President, you have thrown down the gauntlet.
Our ties with the Republic of Cuba, as well as our relations with other nations, regardless of their political system, concern only the two countries between which these relations exist.
However, in this case we are not talking about quarantines, but rather about much more serious matters, and you yourself understand this.
You, Mr President, are not declaring a quarantine, but rather issuing an ultimatum, and you are threatening that if we do not obey your orders, you will then use force.
It would mean for us to conduct our relations with other countries not by reason, but by yielding to tyranny.
No, Mr President, I cannot agree to this, and I think that deep inside, you will admit that I am right.
This Organization has no authority or grounds whatsoever to pass resolutions like those of which you speak in your letter.
International law exists, generally accepted standards of conduct exist.
We firmly adhere to the principles of international law and strictly observe the standards regulating navigation on the open sea, in international waters.
We observe these standards and enjoy the rights recognized by all nations.
You want to force us to renounce the rights enjoyed by every sovereign state; you are attempting to legislate questions of international law; you are violating the generally accepted standards of this law.
Such morals and laws are not to be found, because the actions of the USA in relation to Cuba are outright piracy.
Unfortunately, people of all nations, and not least the American people themselves, could suffer heavily from madness such as this, since with the appearance of modern types of weapons, the USA has completely lost its former inaccessibility.
When you lay conditions such as these before us, try to put yourself in our situation and consider how the USA would react to such conditions.
I have no doubt that if anyone attempted to dictate similar conditions to you -the USA, you would reject such an attempt.
The Soviet government considers the violation of the freedom of navigation in international waters and air space to constitute an act of aggression propelling humankind into the abyss of a world nuclear-missile war.
