January 20, 1989 Long-held understandings about the Cuban missile crisis are undergoing dramatic revision as newly declassified documents expand and reshape our knowledge and interpretation of events.
The National Security Archive, as collector and repository of these documents, has played a key role in enabling scholars, policymakers and journalists to reevaluate the events of 1962.
In addition, United States conference participants include Kennedy Administration officials McGeorge Bundy, Robert McNamara, Theodore Sorenson, Pierre Salinger and Raymond Garthoff, as well as Senator Edward M Kennedy, John F Kennedy, Jr., and senior American scholars.
The Soviet delegation comprises eleven Khrushchev Administration officials, including Andrei Gromyko, Anatoli Dobrynin, Aleksander Alekseev, Georgi Kornienko and Fyodor Burlatsky.
Secretary Gorbachev is expected to close the final day of the conference (and only portion open to the press) with a major address.
To aid in this process, the United States delegation will bring significant documents to the conference, including 15,000 pages of declassified and unclassified United States government material collected and indexed by the National Security Archive.
Soviet officials have indicated that significant, official documents from their own archives may also be made publicly available for the first time.
Finally, the Soviets may use this occasion to make available for the first time both oral accounts and previously scaled records of this extraordinary period.
The first was the March 1987 Hawk’s Cay conference which brought together academics and senior Kennedy Administration officials.
Crisis Pnnpr* Project ""The Cuba Project,"" February 20, 1962 (Top Secret Sensitive; declassified as a result of a FOIA request, January 5, 1989) Outlines goals and a schedule of action for ""Operation Mongoose,"" the United States program of covert action against the Castro regime.
Director of Operations Edward Lansdale’s plan, although later scaled back, aims for the overthrow of the Cuban government through internal revolt by October, 1962.
President Kennedy would be briefed and give tacit approval to the guidelines on March 16, 1962.
The minutes confirm the magnitude of the air attack against Cuba considered by the Kennedy Administration.
United States Air Forces in Europe,"" November 28, 1980 Reveals that United States Jupiter nuclear IRBMs were turned over to Turkey on October 22, 1962 the same day President Kennedy announced the naval quarantine of Cuba to in response to the introduction of Soviet nuclear missiles into Cuba.
