The Cold War was a struggle between the United States and its allies and the Soviet Union.
Although direct military conflict never took place, diplomatic and economic struggles occurred.
The United States as well as Western European countries were greatly concerned.
In response to Stalin’s military movements, President Harry Truman issued the Truman Doctrine in 1947.
In his address to Congress, President Truman asked that the United States would aid any country that asked for help in resisting communism.
The Truman Doctrine became known as the basis for containment, the policy to keep communism from spreading to other countries.
After the Truman Doctrine, George Catlett Marshall, Secretary of State, proposed the Marshall Plan, the European Recovery Program through which the United States provided aid to Western Europe after World War 2, in June 1947.
The Marshall Plan was offered to all European countries, but Stalin would not let the countries his military was occupying take part.
The countries involved in this pact were the United States, Britain, France, Canada, Belgium, Denmark, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, and Portugal.
To ward off aggressors, American forces and nuclear weapons were to be kept in Western Europe.
In response to NATO, the Soviet Union formed a similar pact between seven Eastern European countries called the Warsaw Treaty Organization, or Warsaw Pact.
The countries involved along with the Soviet Union were Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, and Romania.
While these pacts were forming, the United States and the Soviet Union were in an arms race.
They were building lots of nuclear weapons, trying to outproduce each other so that neither dare attack.
By 1952, the United States tested a hydrogen bomb, a bomb more powerful than an atomic bomb.
While arms were building up, the Soviet Union went through a major change in power.
He said that the Soviet Union would follow a policy of “peaceful coexistence” with the West.
This “peace” was to continue until the early sixties, when new conflicts surfaced.
In the early 1960’s, new tensions arose between the United States and the USSR when Fidel Castro openly embraced communism and allied with the Soviet Union.
Anastas Mikoyan, the Soviet First Deputy Prime Minister, negotiated this alliance.
Increasing friction between the United States and the Soviet Union caused President Dwight D Eisenhower to sever diplomatic ties with Cuba.
Before the ties were severed, the Central Intelligence Agency had been training Cuban exiles for a possible invasion of Cuba.
Newly inaugurated President John F Kennedy approved this invasion on April 12, 1961.
On April 14, 1961, a group of B-26 bombers, which were piloted by Cuban exiles, attacked air bases in Cuba.
This raid was designed to destroy most of Castro’s air power before the land invasion was to take place.
On April 17, 1961, the land invasion of Cuba took place at the Bay of Pigs.
After the invasion in Cuba took place, more tensions between the United States and the Soviet Union surfaced.
In August 1961, the East German government, which was occupied by the Soviet Union, built the Berlin Wall.
Guards were on watch constantly and mines were placed around the wall to discourage escaping.
On October 14, 1962, United States spy planes spotted the first ballistic missile on Cuba.
He had several options, invasion, air strikes, a blockade, or diplomacy.
On October 22, 1962, President Kennedy ordered a naval blockade around Cuba to prevent the arrival of more missiles.
President Kennedy announced that he would turn back ships with the intent of delivering missiles to Cuba.
He also pledged full retaliation against the Soviet Union if even one missile is fired from Cuba toward any country in the Western Hemisphere.
President Kennedy demanded that Khrushchev dismantles and removes the missiles that were placed in Cuba.
Khrushchev agreed to remove the missiles and offered an on-site inspection.
United States aerial reconnaissance planes revealed that the missile bases were being dismantled.
