SENIOR CERTIFICATE/ NATIONAL SENIOR CERTIFICATE GRADE 12 HISTORY P1 NOVEMBER 2020 ADDENDUM This addendum consists of 14 pages.
SOURCE 1A The source below focuses on why Cuba and the Soviet Union became allies in the early 1960s.
When Fidel Castro came to power in Cuba, his relations with the United States of America got worse.
Castro was not a communist but became close to Nikita Khrushchev because of his support and friendship.
Later diplomatic and commercial relations between Cuba and the Soviet Union were established.
Castro nationalised all banks and US-owned companies and refused to pay compensation.
The USA responded by cutting off all diplomatic and commercial ties with Cuba in 1961.
Castro responded by announcing that Cuba was now implementing communism as a political ideology.
The United States government reacted by imposing a trade embargo on all Cuban goods.
This meant that Cuba did not have a market for its sugar and tobacco produce.
The USA had a huge number of military forces in Europe near Soviet borders … It was well known that the United States had nuclear missiles in Turkey which were pointed at the Soviet Union.
By the time John F Kennedy became president at the beginning of 1961, the Americans were already working on ways to get rid of Castro … This plan ended in disaster with the failed battle at the Bay of Pigs in April 1961.
Castro and his army quickly defeated the United States sponsored rebels and the failure was a huge embarrassment for Kennedy's administration … This helped to solidify Castro's alliance with the Soviet Union.
It outlines how the Soviet Union assisted Cuba economically and militarily.
We do not hide from the world public that we really are supplying Cuba with resources such as industrial equipment and goods which are helping to strengthen her economy and to raise the well-being of the Cuban people. … a certain amount of armaments is also being shipped from the Soviet Union to Cuba at the request of the Cuban government because of aggressive threats by imperialists.
Castro also requested the Soviet government to send military specialists and technicians to Cuba who would train the Cubans in handling up-to-date weapons which require high skills and in-depth knowledge.
It must, however, be said that the number of Soviet military specialists sent to Cuba can in no way be compared to the number of workers in agriculture and industry sent there.
The armaments and military equipment sent to Cuba are designed exclusively for defensive purposes.
The President of the United States and the American military know what means of defence are.
We have said, and we do repeat, that if war is unleashed , if the aggressor makes an attack on one state or another and this state asks for assistance, the Soviet Union has the possibility from its own territory to render assistance to any peace-loving state and not only to Cuba … We do not say this to frighten someone.
All Americans, as well as all of our friends in this Hemisphere, have been concerned over the Soviet Union's role to bolster the military power of the Castro regime in Cuba.
Along with these missiles, the Soviets are apparently providing the extensive radar and other electronic equipment which is required for their operation.
We can also confirm the presence of several Soviet-made motor torpedo boats carrying ship-to-ship guided missiles having a range of fifteen miles.
The Cuban question must be considered as a part of the worldwide challenge posed by the communist threat to democracy, peace, stability and prosperity.
It must be dealt with as a part of that larger issue as well as in the context of the special relationships which have long characterised the inter-American system.
It continues to be the policy of the United States that the Castro regime will not be allowed to export its aggressive purposes by force or the threat of force.
It will be prevented by whatever means may be necessary from taking action against any part of the Western Hemisphere.
SOURCE 2A The source below discusses the defeat of the South African Defence Force by the Cuban military forces at the Battle of Cuito Cuanavale.
In 1987 to 1988, the myth of the invincibility of the South African military machine was laid to rest, with important consequences for social change.
In July 1987, the South African Defence Force launched a major attack into south-eastern Angola.
This was an attempt to prevent the Angolan government forces from capturing the town of Mavinga from UNITA and to extend the area under UNITA control.
The South African and UNITA forces met unexpectedly strong resistance from Angolan and Cuban forces around the town of Cuito Cuanavale.
Despite the arrival of fresh SADF reinforcements in December 1987 and the use of their most destructive and sophisticated weapons, such as aircraft, artillery, tanks and armoured cars, they still suffered heavy casualties and failed to capture Cuito Cuanavale.
The South African Air Force found itself unable to match the modern Soviet equipment brought into battle by the defenders.
South African aircraft were unable to penetrate the radar/missile defences at Cuito Cuanavale and when the Cuban forces launched an air strike on the Calueque Dam in June 1988, the SADF air defence proved inadequate.
Nonetheless, the commitment of Cuban troops had radically altered the balance of power in southern Africa.
The prospect of more white conscripts being killed by a well-armed Cuban adversary , the cost of the war and the impact it had on South Africa's economy prompted South Africa to leave Cuito Cuanavale.
In April 1988, PW Botha's cabinet agreed to begin direct negotiations with Angola and Cuba under Chester Crocker's mediation.
A flurry of negotiations now gradually brought Crocker's linkage plan closer to reality.
Although it would take twelve rounds of talks, on 22 December 1988 two treaties were signed at the United Nations Organisation, one between Angola and Cuba arranging the withdrawal of Cuban troops, the other among Angola, Cuba and South Africa agreeing to Namibian independence.
Crocker's long fight was over, his goal of brokering a regional peace deal was realised at last.
It includes the terms of the tripartite peace agreement that Cuba, South Africa and Angola signed.
Cuba and Angola agree that the question of the independence of Namibia and the safeguarding of the sovereignty, independence and territorial integrity of Angola are closely linked to peace and security in the south-western region of Africa; that a tripartite agreement between Cuba, Angola and South Africa, containing the essential elements for the achievement of peace in the south-western region of Africa, is to be signed.
We now therefore hold it to be established that the conditions have been created which permit the commencement of the return to its homeland of the Cuban military contingent now present in Angolan territory, which has successfully fulfilled its internationalist mission.
ARTICLE 3 Both parties request the Security Council to carry out verification of the redeployment and the phased and total withdrawal of the Cuban troops from the territory of Angola … ARTICLE 4 This Agreement shall come into force upon the signature of the tripartite agreement between Cuba, Angola and South Africa.
They organised community programmes such as free breakfast for children, health clinics and shoes for children … The programmes were of key importance in the Panthers' strategy.
Firstly they fed the hungry, gave out food, clothing and medical care to poverty-stricken African Americans.
Secondly, it showed what could be achieved if you were organised … 'A lot of people misunderstand the politics of these programmes; some people refer to them as reform programmes.
They're not reform programmes, they're actually revolutionary community programmes.
A revolutionary programme is started by revolutionaries, by those who want to change the existing system for a better system.
A reform programme is set up by the existing exploitative system as an appeasing hand-out, to fool the people and to keep them quiet …' The first programme the Panthers organised was the Free Breakfast for Children.
Lesley Johnson explains how this led her to get involved in the Panthers.
And there were times when I was growing up, the week's oatmeal or whatever would run out and I went to school hungry.
It focuses on how the Oakland Community School contributed to the upliftment of African American children in the United States of America.
This city needs to organise to get things done in education, housing and the courts and to also uplift the lives of the African Americans.
I wanted to say that before I went on to talk about education … I talked yesterday about the Oakland Community School, about alternative education and community schools.
I'd like to begin today to give you a history of the Oakland Community School, why we started it, whom it serves and in what direction we feel we're heading.
We're working with children, who would be in public schools; who have not been to private schools or other alternatives; whose parents have no political affiliation and just want their children to have the best.
He called the programme 'potentially the greatest threat to efforts by state authorities to destroy and render the BPP ineffective and what it stands for', and gave carte blanche to law enforcement agencies to crush it.
FBI agents went door-todoor in cities like Richmond in Virginia, telling parents that members of the BPP would teach their children about black nationalism.
In San Francisco, writes historian Franziska Meister, parents were told the food was infected with contagious disease; free food sites in Oakland and Baltimore were raided by officers who harassed BPP members in front of terrified children, and participating children were photographed by the Chicago police.
Ultimately, these and other efforts to destroy the Black Panthers broke up the programme.
In the end, though, the public visibility of the Panthers' breakfast programmes put pressure on political leaders to feed children before school … … In 1975, the School Breakfast Programme was permanently authorised.
Today, it helps feed over 14,57 million children before school and without the radical actions of the Black Panthers, it may never have happened.
