The Beginning In the beginning of the Cold War Cuba was allies with the United States until the USSR became close to Cuba.
From the threat of the United States having nuclear weapons in other countries new Russia.
In October of 1962 an American U-2 Spy plane noticed that the Soviet Union was building nuclear weapons.
The other reason why Cuba became close to the USSR was from the Bay of Pigs Invasion to over throw Fedel Castro.
When President Kennedy got a hold of these images he wanted to keep it a secret from the USSR for fearing that the missiles could reach the White House.
After talking to his advisors many of which wanted to start an nuclear war, Kennedy decided to make a blockade around Cuba.
The Blockade The Blockade was the United States responds of the USSR secretly sending nuclear weapons to Cuba.
The aim of the blockade was to quarantine Soviet ships from bringing in more supplies to Cuba.
On October 22 President Kennedy address the country about the threat of the missiles.
Kennedy demanded the removal of the missiles and the sites the missiles were located at.
USSR leader Nikita Khrushchev agreed to meet with Kennedy, were they agreed on the devastating possibility of nuclear war.
During this meeting the United States also agreed to remove the nuclear weapons in Turkey.
Later in 1963, Kennedy address the country saying that peace is the important aspect to keep the world safe.
He also wanted to end the stereotypes and myths that were used in the Cold War.
Also from this a hot-line between the USSR and United States was created to better deal with future nuclear problems or problems in general that both countries have with one another.
There was also the singing of Limited Nuclear Test Ban Treaty on July 25th 1963.
Kennedy said to the American people, ""For, in the final analysis, our most basic common link is that we all inhabit this small planet.
Get Started if { Weebly.footer.setupContainer; } else { document.addEventListener { Weebly.footer.setupContainer; }); } Home Timeline 1950's Cold War Erupts Containment Who Started the Cold War Arms Race Red Scare Korean War President Eisenhower Affluent Society Women's in the 50's 1960's Civil Rights Movement Begins Martin Luther King Jr.
