After considering different options, President Kennedy decided on a quarantine to prevent Russian ships from bringing additional missiles to Cuba, and demanded that Russia remove the weapons.
The television, which gradually had become publicly accessible in the USA and Europe in the early 60s, added a new dimension in the news coverage.
The crisis was solved after two nerve-wracking weeks when Kennedy struck a deal with the Soviet Prime Minister, Nikita Khrusjtsjov.
Kennedy and his staff discussed different options to dealing with the conflict.
John F Kennedy’s brother Robert Kennedy played an important role during the crisis.
B.Choose at least 3 of the people below and find out more about who they were and what role they played during the crisis.McGeorge Bundy, Nikita Khrushchev, Fidel Castro, Robert Kennedy, Theodore Sorensen, C Douglas Dillon, Dean Acheson, Llewllyn Thompson, Robert McNamara, Lyndon B Johnson, Anatoly DobryninAfter studying the roles these characters played, make out fictional conversations that might have taken places during the Crisis.
Choose two opposing characters , make a few lines that characterize their rhetorical contributions in the Crisis and act out their conversation.C.On Monday, the 22nd of October, Kennedy held a televised speech where he informed the nation about the conflict and the possible outcome.
Listen to the first 8 minutes of the speech before you discuss the questions below.
You should have in mind that television as a means of media was in its early start.The United States has played an important role in the world for a long time.
Even though the nuclear threat is less imminent today, there are still countries that may pose a danger to world peace.
It features Bruce Greenwood as President John F Kennedy and Kevin Costner stars as Kennedy's aide, Kenneth O'Donnell.
Steven Culp portrays President Kennedy's younger brother, Robert, who was appointed as United States Attorney General.
Choose two opposing characters , make a few lines that characterize their rhetorical contributions in the Crisis and act out their conversation.\u003C\u002Fp\u003E\u003Cp\u003E\u003Cstrong\u003EC\u003C\u002Fstrong\u003E.\u003Cbr\u003EOn Monday, the 22nd of October, Kennedy held a televised speech where he informed the nation about the conflict and the possible outcome.
You should have in mind that television as a means of media was in its early start.\u003C\u002Fli\u003E\u003Cli\u003EThe United States has played an important role in the world for a long time.
