The United States intelligence on the transport of warheads to Cuba, Soviet leaders would never have taken the risk of putting underway at the time the crisis began on October 22, was the missiles into Cuba without an important expected benein fact remarkably good.
The nuclear warheads for the misfit in the strategic balance of power, which then heavily siles in Cuba were loaded on the cargo ship Poltava in favored the United States.
The Poltava, a large-hatch cargo freighter (built balance were indeed of key importance, a deceptive pseudofor the lumber trade, it was the only type of ship able to deployment would have provoked all the risks of United States reactransport the missiles concealed internally) had already tion with no assurance that the bluff would not be exposed, made two trips to Cuba with missiles in September and Ocand with no military strategic gain even if the gamble suctober.
There was, however, a real question in the minds and a false manifest of cargo.
A review of dezvous in the Atlantic Ocean with three or four submarines information on that question also helps to answer the quesfrom the Soviet Northern Fleet, which escorted it toward tion raised by Lebow.
The Poltava and 15 other Soviet ships at sea carrying arms stopped and soon returned WHEN IN OCTOBER 1962 the United States imposed to the Soviet Union. a naval quarantine cutting off any further shipment of SoThe United States also checked carefully when the missiles viet offensive military weaponry to Cuba, and considered a and related equipment left Cuba as the crisis was resolved. strategy to compel Soviet withdrawal of those missiles already No nuclear warheads were detected leaving.
There was no direct evidence Cuba in 1962 tended to confirm that none had been brought that there were any nuclear weapons in Cuba.
Jesse Helms of North Carolina far as I am aware, expected that nuclear warheads would be and former television evangelist Pat Robertson have recently provided for the missiles.
A check with more sensitive instruments there probably were no nuclear warheads yet in Cuba.
Nonetwo days later found no radioactive emanations from the theless, in the words of a now declassified ""top secret"" speship.
On its arrival in the Soviet Union on November 23, cial national intelligence estimate on October 20, ""In any the Aleksandrovsk, which departed from Cuba on Novemcase, it is prudent to assume that when the missiles are ber 5, unloaded six vans probably meant for transporting otherwise operational, nuclear warheads will be available:' warheads from storage facilities to launch pads.
The presRaymond L Garthoff is a senior fellow at the Brookings Instituence of the vans, detected earlier in Cuba, did not, however, tion, Washington, D.C., and author of Reflections on the Cuban mean that the nose cones with warheads had been there.
In 1962 he was special assistant for SovietThe Soviets also assured the United States in November bloc politico-military affairs in the State Department and deeply that the warheads (in one discussion, qualified with ""if involved in the missile crisis deliberations. any"") were no longer in Cuba.
They did not want to risk July/August 1988 40 creating a new issue by informing us that they had never Quoting from the yet unpublished edited transcript of been there.
He took risks, but not there had been any warheads our doubt might tempt the more than he had to take.
I had some conversations at Soviet leaders would have wanted to run the risks involved the time, and I was told that warheads were not there.
This in leaving any warheads in Cuba if they had been there. was to be the second step.
LET United States TURN TO Lebow's arguments that Khrushchev Lebow introduces this quoted statement by saying ""Burlatmay never have intended to send nuclear warheads to Cuba, sky said he had explored the question in 1962 and had and the evidence he believes supports those arguments. spoken to sources dose to Khrushchev.
He discovered that Lebow is correct in arguing that the Soviets have traditionKhrushchev intended to approach the missile deployment ally exercised strict control over all their nuclear weapons, in stages so as to minimize the risks:' If, however, readers and have been conservative about deployment beyond their were to understand those sentences to mean that Burlatsky own territory.
Logically and theoretically he is correct in had said that he ""discovered"" from sources dose to Khrushsaying that the Soviet purposes-deterrence, improving the chev that there was a two-stage plan, they would be in error.
It was his own logically would also apply to missiles in the Soviet Union. hypothetical construction of what Khrushchev probably inIt is less convincing, however, to argue that in practice tended.
Burlatsky has since written on this very subject for formed Soviet source reports that Khrushchev's proposal future publication, saying very much the same thing he said to Castro to place the missiles in Cuba referred to the weapat Cambridge, but not precisely what the nonverbatim acons as ""nuclear-missile"" forces.
While he had bluffed in a more general way in the missile gap a few years earlier, it was also true that that bluff had been called and contributed to the predicament that now inspired a new risk.
But he does not, in fact, advance any such evidence, and the available evidence earlier summarized is, if not conclusive, at least strongly against his hypothesis.
Both Lebow and I participated in the first formal meeting of Soviet and United States scholars and quondam missile crisis participants, held in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in October 1987.
Lebow notes a divergence in the views taken by two Soviet participants, Sergo Mikoyan, son of the late Soviet Politburo member Anastas Mikoyan, and Burlatsky, a prominent member of the Soviet political establishment in 1962 and now.
As he points out, Mikoyan was, at least initially in these discussions, sure that nuclear warheads for the missiles were in Cuba in 1962, or at least that they were going to be deployed there.
Paul Valerry, West Germany Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists 41 count of that meeting states, and not at all what Lebow whether the ship actually carried nuclear warheads.
Assistant Secretary for Public Affairs Robinformation that they were on the island.
This history pulls together a great deal of inthe reaction, and then make a decision regarding warheads.
Moreover, had nuclear warheads been decomplete, and to put it in final and authoritative form at ployed on the island, the American side certainly would this time would require the time and attention of a lot of have known about it, for they had at their disposal suffipeople who are necessarily preoccupied with other matters. cient means of information, including agents on Cuba.
So my suggestion is that this history be put in the approOf course, they would have used this fact in their public priate files:' 3 That was its fate until it was resurrected for announcements and secret negotiations with us. partial declassification.
The ""serious closed a ""plan"" he had ""discovered"" after having ""spoken division"" is entirely Lebow's inference from the word ""susto sources close to Khrushchev:' Moreover, Burlatsky aspected:' But the reason for this vague word as well as the sumed that Khrushchev planned to provide nuclear warphrase ""it is thought by some"" was not divided opinion; heads once the United States had acquiesced to the presence it was tight classification of information.
Burlatsky is a perfectly was prepared at the ""top secret"" level, which, in dealing good source, but particular care must be taken to distinwith intelligence materials, was a restrictive, low classificaguish what any source can report as information from what tion requiring omission of whole categories of what was then called ""codeword"" inthe source assumes, believes, or hypothesizes. telligence.
It was to guard such evidence that the ship was described as merely ""suspected"" of transporting nuclear IN ADDITION 10 ADVANCING his hypothesis, Lebow weapons.
Not even the name of the ship was given. suggests that the evidence both that Khrushchev intended Most of the best intelligence on such matters remains to deploy nuclear warheads on the island and that the warhighly classified.
When Lebow cites ""former officials"" who heads were en route can be explained away.
The warhead have ""confirmed"" a division of views or have been ""skepstorage sites and nose-cone transport vans could have been tical"" about ""the report"" of the weapons loading in Odessa, planted to lend credence to the idea that the system was he is almost certainly reporting differences arising from the nuclear armed.
Conceivably, the technical intelligence on fact that most officials, even most intelligence officers, were the loading and transport of the warheads could have been not cleared for and privy to the critical information on these generated to convey a clever deception.
Based on such nondocumentary sources who relied to do with the intelligence systems involved, however, I conon memory, Lebow refers to ""a detachment of the Ministry sider this to be extremely unlikely.
Moreover, I believe the of Defense whose sole responsibility was said to be handling intelligence is far more credible as a series of bits of connuclear weapons"" as having loaded the warheads.
Yet he sistent evidence than as part of an elaborate deception. correctly notes later that the KGB controlled handling of Lebow refers to the fact that ""the Cuba History, prepared nuclear warheads in the 1960s.
A ship suspected of transporting such warheads was heads for land-based strategic missile systems, including en route to Cuba at the time of the ;' and while medium-range as well as intercontinental systems.
This subnuclear weapons could have been flown to the island ""there stantially confirms that it was loading medium-range missile is no indication"" this was ever attempted.
But Lebow also states that this study ""reveals a serious division of opinion within the intelligence community as to THE WHOLE STORY of the nuclear warheads for the July/August 1988 42 Soviet missiles in Cuba illustrates the kind of detail in intelin Cuba were, or would have been, supplied with tactical ligence information and assessment-and its relation to ponuclear warheads.
Nor was there any intelligence assesslicy makingthat historians must later disentangle and inment that they would be.
Lebow is certainly in order in raising the question planning assumptions that automatically credited the sysof whether Khrushchev was bluffing about nuclear wartem with possible nuclear capability.
For the reasons I have indiwas that the United States Army invasion force being readied for poscated, and others, I differ with his interpretation of both sible commitment was, in a Joint Chiefs of Staff reversal the 1962 intelligence and the 1987 Soviet comments that of earlier orders, supplied with Honest Johns, without the he cites.
All of this, however, concerns only one issue that nuclear warheads but able to receive them quickly if later should be posed with respect to the subject. authorized.
This was not known to the president or his Ex Another issue from which some interesting inferences can Comm political advisers.
Nor was it known that even before be drawn was the potentially significant divergence in United States the FROGs were seen, one variant of the invasion plan was and Soviet leadership perceptions stemming from the quespredicated on United States use of tactical nuclear weapons.
The Soviet leaders almost certainly would . have believed that the United States leaders knew that they were sucAnother ramification of military planning during the cessfully interdicting the delivery of the nuclear warheads Cuban crisis, as disclosed in a declassified report, was to Cuba.
But United States intelligence estimators and crisis, that ""because the FROG could carry a nuclear weapdecision makers, with their properly prudent assumptions, on ... the movement of any FROG missiles into positions did not realize that they were effectively preventing the miswhich threatened the Base be placed in the category of an siles from being armed.
No one would have raised a risk of prompting a United States resort to arms. knows how these differing presumptions affected crisis deciAnd probably it would not have, assuming that the full sions on the two sides, but they were clearly elements in the chain of command worked properly.
But perceptions and equation not recognized at the time, or in analyses since the assumptions in military planning can have unanticipated crisis.
These presumptions might have importantly affected far-reaching effects.
During the crisis, United States aerial reconnaissance discovered that 2.
These notes, as well as The Cuba Crisis, 1962, have been declassified and are at the John F Kennedy Library, Dorchester, Massachusetts. ground) short-range missiles.
