Learning Objective H, WOR Read about the tense 1962 standoff between the United States and the Soviet Union that nearly resulted in nuclear war.
Google ClassroomFacebookTwitter Email Overview In October 1962, the Soviet provision of ballistic missiles to Cuba led to the most dangerous Cold War confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union and brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.
Over the course of two extremely tense weeks, United States President John F Kennedy and Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev negotiated a peaceful outcome to the crisis.
The crisis evoked fears of nuclear destruction, revealed the dangers of brinksmanship, and invigorated attempts to halt the arms race.
The Cuban Revolution After waging a successful guerrilla war against the regime of Cuban dictator Fulgencio Batista, Fidel Castro came to power on January 1, 1959.
Castro was not yet a communist, and United States policymakers initially took a cautious wait-and-see approach to his regime.
Over the course of 1959 and 1960, US-Cuban relations worsened due to Castro’s anti-US rhetoric and radical policies, especially his refusal to hold elections.
When it became clear that Castro intended to pursue an alliance with the Soviet Union, President Dwight Eisenhower cut off diplomatic ties to Cuba and began preparing contingency plans for overthrowing Castro and replacing him with someone more amenable to the United States.
Cuban Prime Minister Fidel Castro, left, shakes hands with Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev in 1961.
As US-Cuban relations deteriorated, Castro turned to the Soviet Union for support.
The Soviets signed multiple trade and aid agreements with Cuba, provided Castro with arms and weaponry, and also gave political support to the Cuban Revolution in the United Nations and other international organizations.
After the invasion, Castro turned to the Soviets for protection against future United States aggression.
The Soviets provided Cuba with nuclear weapons on the condition that the deal would remain secret until the missiles were fully operational.^1 1 start superscript, 1, end superscript Khrushchev claimed that his motivation for providing Cuba with nuclear weaponry was to safeguard the Cuban Revolution against United States aggression and to alter the global balance of power in favor of the Soviet Union.^2 2 squared In October 1962, United States U-2 spy plane flights over Cuban territory revealed the missile installation sites.
The Kennedy administration established a naval blockade to prevent any more missiles from reaching Cuba, and in no uncertain terms demanded the immediate removal of the missiles that had already been delivered.
The danger of this approach was that if the Soviets refused to remove the missiles, the United States would be forced to escalate the crisis by authorizing air strikes over Cuba to bomb the missile sites.
Contingency plans were drawn up for a full-scale invasion of Cuba and a nuclear attack on the Soviet Union, in the event that the Soviets responded militarily to Kennedy’s demands.^3 3 cubed Negotiating a peaceful outcome Though Khrushchev initially refused to acknowledge the presence of the missiles in Cuba and declared the United States naval blockade to be an act of war, he ordered the suspension of all weapons deliveries currently in transit.
Over the course of approximately two weeks, Kennedy and Khrushchev negotiated a peaceful outcome to the missile crisis.
The Soviets compared their provision of nuclear weapons to Cuba with the stationing of Jupiter missiles in Turkey, which were in range of Soviet territory.
Kennedy agreed to remove the missiles from Turkey, and also pledged that the United States government would not undertake another invasion of Cuba.
For Castro, this was humiliating and seemed to prove that the Soviets prioritized relations with the United States over relations with their own allies.
Castro hoped to negotiate the closing of the United States naval base at Guantanamo and the cessation of U-2 flights over Cuban territory.
He was forced into retirement by other Soviet officials who claimed that the missile crisis was proof of Khrushchev’s reckless decision-making and his inability to lead the Soviet Union.
Khrushchev’s successor, Leonid Brezhnev, came to power and sought to reduce tensions with the United States.
His calm but firm stance in the negotiations was heralded as great statesmanship, though it is often forgotten that his bungling of the Bay of Pigs invasion had helped lead to the missile crisis in the first place.
He and Khrushchev had peered into the abyss of nuclear destruction but had managed to pull back from it.
In order to prevent future crises, a Moscow-Washington hotline was set up in the White House to facilitate direct communication between the leaders of the Soviet Union and the United States.
In August 1963, the United States, the Soviet Union, and Great Britain signed a treaty banning atmospheric and underwater nuclear testing.
Nevertheless, the test-ban treaty failed to halt the arms race, as Kennedy simultaneously authorized a massive arms buildup that vastly expanded the United States nuclear arsenal and amplified United States strategic superiority in the Cold War.
