In a TV address on October 22, 1962, President John F Kennedy notified Americans about the presence of the missiles, explained his decision to enact a naval blockade around Cuba and made it clear the United States was prepared to use military force if necessary to neutralize this perceived threat to national security.
The two superpowers plunged into one of their biggest Cold War confrontations after the pilot of an American U-2 spy plane piloted by Major Richard Heyser making a high-altitude pass over Cuba on October 14, 1962, photographed a Soviet SS-4 medium-range ballistic missile being assembled for installation.President Kennedy was briefed about the situation on October 16, and he immediately called together a group of advisors and officials known as the executive committee, or ExComm.
Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev had gambled on sending the missiles to Cuba with the specific goal of increasing his nation’s nuclear strike capability.
The Kennedy administration had already launched one attack on the island–the failed Bay of Pigs invasion in 1961–and Castro and Khrushchev saw the missiles as a means of deterring further United States aggression.Kennedy Weighs the Options From the outset of the crisis, Kennedy and ExComm determined that the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba was unacceptable.
Second, he would deliver an ultimatum that the existing missiles be removed.In a television broadcast on October 22, 1962, the president notified Americans about the presence of the missiles, explained his decision to enact the blockade and made it clear that the United States was prepared to use military force if necessary to neutralize this perceived threat to national security.
United States Blockades CubaA crucial moment in the unfolding crisis arrived on October 24, when Soviet ships bound for Cuba neared the line of United States vessels enforcing the blockade.
But the Soviet ships stopped short of the blockade.Although the events at sea offered a positive sign that war could be averted, they did nothing to address the problem of the missiles already in Cuba.
A similar sense of doom was felt by other key players on both sides.A Deal Ends the Standoff Despite the enormous tension, Soviet and American leaders found a way out of the impasse.
The following day, the Soviet leader sent a letter proposing that the USSR would dismantle its missiles in Cuba if the Americans removed their missile installations in Turkey.Officially, the Kennedy administration decided to accept the terms of the first message and ignore the second Khrushchev letter entirely.
Privately, however, American officials also agreed to withdraw their nation’s missiles from Turkey.
In fact, another legacy of the crisis was that it convinced the Soviets to increase their investment in an arsenal of intercontinental ballistic missiles capable of reaching the United States from Soviet territory.Access hundreds of hours of historical video, commercial free, with HISTORY Vault.
The U-2 aerial photographs were analyzed inside a secret office above a used car dealership.
The treaty, which President John F Kennedy signed ...read moreCold War HistoryDuring World War II, the United States and the Soviet Union fought together as allies against the Axis powers.
Americans had long been wary of Soviet communism and concerned about Russian leader Joseph Stalin’s ...read moreArms RaceAn arms race occurs when two or more countries increase the size and quality of military resources to gain military and political superiority over one another.
The Cold War between the United States and the Soviet Union is perhaps the largest and most expensive arms race in ...read moreSuez CrisisThe Suez Crisis began on October 29, 1956, when Israeli armed forces pushed into Egypt toward the Suez Canal after Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalized the canal, a valuable waterway that controlled two-thirds of the oil used by Europe.
The Israelis were ...read moreNikita KhrushchevNikita Khrushchev led the Soviet Union during the height of the Cold War, serving as premier from 1958 to 1964.
Confronted with the evidence of his nation’s espionage, ...read moreBay of Pigs InvasionThe Bay of Pigs Invasion in April 1961 was a failed attack launched by the CIA during the Kennedy administration to push Cuban leader Fidel Castro from power.
