The American Perspective Karolina Sekerášová Bachelor's Thesis 2018 ABSTRAKT Tato práce pojednává o Krabiské krizi, která se odehrála v říjnu roku 1962, konkrétně od 16. října.
V reakci na to, byla Spojenými státy Americkými vyhlášena blokáda Kuby, která měla zabránit dopravení dalších zařizení na Kubu.
V první části práce je popsáno historcké pozadí a příčiny krize, následuje průběh krize a v poslední části jsou prodiskutovány faktory rozhodnutí a následky krize.
The main causes of the 13-day crisis, which set the world on the threshold of the nuclear war, were building of a military bases and deploying Soviet mid-range missiles in Cuba.
As a reaction, the naval blockade was announced by the United States of America, to prevent the transport of other equipment to Cuba.
The first part of the thesis describes the historical background and causes of the crisis, followed by the crisis, and the last part discusses the factors of the decision-making process and the consequences of the crisis.
I would also like to thank my father, for giving me the opportunity to study and for his endless support.
I hereby declare that the print version of my Bachelor’s thesis and the electronic version of my thesis deposited in the IS/STAG system are identical.
Those were the main characters and symbols of the greatest danger of a nuclear world so far.
This crisis had been preceded by many causes and events that had taken place over the last four years before the crisis itself.
After the Second World War, spheres of influence in Germany were divided among the victorious powers.
Although the Soviet Union tried to reduce the sphere of influence of the United States, the signing of peace treaties and the negotiations in Geneva and Paris were unsuccessful.
After Castro's putsch, the United States attempted another effort to overthrow Castro's regime.
In 1962, the United States intelligence service found out the presence of Soviet nuclear warheads in Cuba.
The United States responded to the Soviet presence missiles by announcing the naval blockade of Cuba.
Both countries had to make great concessions, but eventually, agreed on a compromise which calmed down the crisis and the threat of a potential war.
Although Americans have already suspected some ongoing situation on Cuba due to increasing number of Soviet soldiers on the island.
In that time, the photographic evidence and reports of missiles and nuclear weapons deployed in Cuba taken 2 days earlier were already in the President's hands.
The President immediately summoned his counsellor's meeting to look for a way out of the situation.
Several solutions were offered but Kennedy eventually opted for a naval blockade.
All ships carrying a bulk of offensive weapons and heading to Cuba were returned to the port they were sailing from.
On October 22 in the evening, Kennedy gave a speech on television and radio introducing the situation to the American people.
Two days later at 10 o' clock in the morning, a quarantine was imposed on Cuba.
In Khrushchev's letter to Kennedy on October 26, the First Secretary confessed for the presence of Soviet missiles in Cuba and suggested a possible compromise which should secure a guarantee for the Castro's regime in Cuba by the United States in exchange for withdrawing Soviet missiles from the island.
On the contrary, the United States president insisted that the removal of missiles and nuclear material would be carried out under the supervision of UN inspectors.
The secret addition of this agreement was the dismantling of United States missiles in Turkey.
On October 28, Khrushchev announced Kennedy's withdrawal of missiles from Cuba.
On November 20, President Kennedy officially announced the end of the crisis at a press conference.
The crisis which had brought the world to the threshold of a nuclear war was averted.
In the 1950s and 1960s, several serious crises emerged in the relations between the Eastern Bloc and the West.
The most significant events in connection to the later event in Cuba in 1962 were the Berlin Crisis and the political developments in Cuba, which at that time began to indicate the direction of Fidel Castro.
The German question Before the Vienna summit, the meetings were held in Germany between Khrushchev and Eisenhower.
The German situation has not been resolved due to the United States presidential election.
The United States administration with elected President Kennedy officially negotiated only once with the USSR and Khrushchev.
The meeting of two leaders took place in Vienna at the beginning of June 1961.
Negotiations were, however, marked by unsuccessful invasion in the Bay of Pigs.
Kennedy was for Khrushchev only a beginner, who just started his career on the political scene.
The Soviet leader believed that he could be able to dictate conditions through intimidation and ultimate.
He gave a speech proposing the transformation of West Berlin into a free and demilitarized city.
He demanded the abolition of Berlin's four-member statute and warned that the USSR was willing to hand over control over entry into the city.
Even though his propose was refused by NATO, he submitted a new proposal with drafts of peace agreements with both German states in January 1959.
Those agreements contained a request for West Germany to resign from NATO and East Germany from the Warsaw Pact.
While French President Charles de Gaulle was against any concessions of Moscow, the USA and the United Kingdom have been considering a compromise.
Problematic of the Germany question was supposed to be resolved at the Geneva Summit attended by the Foreign Ministers of the US, the USSR, France and Great Britain.
The negotiation lasted for three months but ended without any 4 Vladimír Nálevka, Karibská Krize , 12.
Inviting Khrushchev to visit the U.S.A. which should take place in September 1959.
Both leaders agreed on the next summit to be held in May 1960 in Paris.
However, the expected conference in Paris, which was due to begin on May 15, 1960, ended even before it started.
The U-2 spy plane was shot down by the Soviet Union two weeks before the conference.
When Khrushchev arrived in Paris he asked for an apology for espionage.
Refusing the apology by Eisenhower only meant a worsening of the tense situation.
Moreover, Khrushchev announced he would no longer deal with the president Eisenhower but the newly elected president of the United States.
The first evidence of the construction of a missile base in Cuba was acquired in August.
Four memoranda were sent to the White House by the CIA Director, John McCone.
However, none of these clearly records an effort to transform Cuba into a Soviet base.
Instead they highlighted the Soviet intent to designate Cuba as a hub for the spread of communism throughout Latin America.
Soviets ambitions were decidedly underestimated by the CIA while stressing out the fact that the Soviet Union would not consider the risk of retaliation by the United States.
Other important piece of information was contained in the report from a National Security Advisor McGeorge Bundy.
It covered increased shipping between Cuban and Soviet ports and twenty ships carrying military material.
According to this report, the Americans concluded that an air defence system was under construction in Cuba.
During the routine U-2 surveillance over Cuba on August 29, 1962 the first construction of SAM missile ramps in the province of Pinar del Rio in western Cuba was 5 Nálevka, Karibská Krize, 13.
However, such information did not call attention, as the SAM missiles were often sent to Soviet's allied countries.
Furthermore, the White House ordered avoiding Cuban 11 airspace during observing flight.
Director of Central Intelligence Agency John McCone introduced the presumption that the aim of SAM missiles in Cuba is to deter Americans from further exploration of the area.
The main pretence was, according to his hypothesis, import of medium-range missiles capable of reaching United States targets to the island.
As this detection could mean decreasing of United States superiority in amount of missiles, John McCone therefore requested more reconnaissance flights over Cuba territory.
On September 4, a warning was sent to Moscow by President Kennedy that he and the US government disagree with deploying missiles in Cuba.
Khrushchev responded on September 11, with denial the allegation of supplying Cuba with missiles and assault weapons.
Khrushchev insisted that Cuba which is threatened from being invaded, has every right to be supplied with military material.
He included a denial of any intentions to deploy strategic missiles outside the USSR territory.
This statement contained another warning to protect security and safety of its allies.
As a result, resolution which would authorize the President to launch an armed action against Cuba if necessary to prevent the consolidation of a military power that would corrupt United States security, was adopted.
Even though the President refused a direct attack on Cuba, he has agreed with Congress's request to call 150,000 midfielders and launching a military exercise in the 14 Caribbean territory for October.
A comprehensive report on the Soviet air defence intention in Cuba was submitted by Colonel John R Wright Jr. to Minister of Defence on October 1.
Wright was persuaded of existence of 15 bases for S-75 missiles located in the middle of the province of Pinar del Rio fully controlled by Soviet soldiers.
The US Government reacted to this statement by increasing the United States Armed Forces.
During the reconnaissance flight of U-2 plane on October 14, photographic evidence was taken.
Analysis of these pictures revealed a ballistic missile near San Cristobal.
Subsequently, the missile base in Guan Jay and 21 transport containers with military material and bombers in San Julian were identified.
If not, the Soviets could take similar actions elsewhere in the world because tolerating the Soviet base near the United States territory and its sphere of influence could be understood as a concession.
As a response to newly discovered fact, he established the Executive Committee of the National Security Council, called ExComm, formed by members from several departments.
The main task for the ExComm was to develop the best variants of possible solutions to the crisis.
On June 7, 1959, the United States government supported opposition forces in an attempt to overthrow Castro's regime and to establish a US loyal government in Cuba.
This unofficial support proposed sabotage in Cuban sugar factories and attacks by small aircraft with CIA-funded Cuban exiles.
After Havana was attacked by unmarked aircraft a protest to Washington has been sent from Cuban government claiming that the aircraft took off in Florida.
According to Nálevka, the Americans have never admitted the participation in this incident.
As a response to reducing the quota for imports of Cuban sugar into the US, Castro had nationalized all 15 Nálevka, Světová Politika ve 20.
Later that year, in September, Castro had a speech known as the First Haven Declaration.
The United States was blamed for interfering with internal politics of the Latin America states.
He has also declared receiving a missile aid from the Soviet Union in case of Cuba being attacked by the United States military forces.
The US ambassador has been recalled from Havana in October as well as export embargo has been imposed by the United States government.
A solution has been found in the Soviet Union along with other Eastern Bloc countries.
U.S.A. approach Although the United States government did not succeed in overthrowing Castro's regime in Bay of Pigs at first, it had not prevented them from planning other similar events.
Whether for supporting exile Cubans arriving in the USA or manoeuvring in the Caribbean Sea and the Atlantic Ocean.
These United States steps have been evaluated by the Soviets as interfering with Cuba's internal affairs attempting to disrupt the communist regime on the island.
In 1961, the deployment of United States mid-range missiles in Great Britain, Turkey and Italy could provoke the Soviets to an operation Anadyr.
Moreover, Soviets claimed that Jupiter rockets would hit the Moscow in sixteen minutes.
Ideje, Doktríny, Strategie (Praha: Proffessional Publishing, 2009), 177.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 16 3 Bay of Pigs Invasion Invasion in the Bay of Pigs was an unsuccessful operation of Cuban exiles led by the CIA, which attacked Cuba in April 1961.
The operation was funded and supported by the US government and was supposed to overthrow Fidel Castro.
Due to underestimation of preparations, it ended up with a complete defeat.
Invading warriors were defeated by trained Cuban armed forces equipped from the Eastern Bloc countries within three days.
As a result of these actions, Fidel Castro had fallen under the influence of Soviet Union even more.
According to Robert Dallek, the USSR was converging with Cuba because of the offer to deploy Soviet missiles as a response to the deployment of American rockets in Turkey and Italy.
The Soviets could use Cuba as the centre of communist expansion in Latin America.
Therefore, President Kennedy evaluated USSR-orientated Cuba as a security threat to the Western Hemisphere and considered the military invasion.
However, the President was terrified of invasion as it could result in retaliatory action by the USSR and possibly China and good image of USA would disappear.
This action could be understood as a violation of the principles of selfdetermination and freedom.
Despite this fact, the invasion seemed to be necessary although Kennedy has doubted the success of just 1,500 Cuban exiles.
On the other hand, he was confronted with an undemocratic regime which subverted the order in Latin America.
Moving away from Eisenhower and his policy could mean an accusation of appeasing Castro.
Invasion The project of an invasion was submitted to the new President Kennedy by CIA assistant, Allan Dulles, on January 20, 1961.
Despite his sceptical approach and negative view of seven members of the government, the action was marked as approved.
The date was set on April 17, 1961, in conjunction with the location selected in the south of the Cuba island in the Bay of Pigs.
Fidel Castro expected the invasion since the bombing of the air base in Havana and Santiago as well as high rise activity of Castro's regime opponents a week before.
A high alert was immediately announced for air forces to bomb the exile troop's ships.
Simultaneously, the arrest of people suspected of counter-revolutionary activity was ordered to prevent a rebellion 30 against the regime.
Nevertheless, exile troops were defeated within two days. men were killed and 1,200 men captured out of the total number of 1,500 men.
According to Bradley, main reasons for failure were the absence of air support during the invasion and the fact that the invasion did not initiate the rebellion among people of Cuba.
Other factors of the failure were caused by underestimation of Castro regime from the CIA side, choice of the swampy bay to proceed with the invasion together with the second air attack.
Consequences As a result of the debacle in the Bay of Pigs relations between the USSR and United States were deteriorating.
Furthermore, the prestige of Moscow increased on the contrary to decreased prestige of Kennedy and his administration.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 18 4 Operation Anadyr Operation Anadyr was a secret designation for the Soviet bases building project for Cuba's medium-range missiles, named after a river in north-eastern Siberia.
Although President Kennedy was assured that the Soviet Union did not and would never have its base in Cuba, the decision to build it was declared by Khrushchev on May 21, 1962.
Khrushchev considered the United States President too inexperienced and intellectually based politician who would not dare to intervene against the Soviet plan.
After debates with Khrushchev's closest advisors, a final decision had been made.
The main ambition of Anadyr was to balance the strategic stability of military forces and to respond to the deployment of rockets in Turkey and Italy.
Their plan was to acquaint Cuban government with Soviet's intention to build a military base.
The delegation travelled undercover with devisable names and was 38 presented as a group of agricultural experts.
A meeting had been assembled, where Rashidov met Fidel Castro and presented him the first draft of the potential military facility.
Castro requested a day to think out the plan and discuss it with other members of his government.
In particular, Castro strongly wanted the Soviet strategic base to be built.
Issa Plijev, the Second World War veteran was named the military commander 39 of the operation.
He recruited over 44,000 soldiers and sailors and the missile division.
In the course of next months, the form of the new Soviet-Cuban treaty was discussed.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 19 40 be subject only to the Soviet leadership.
The agreement should be concluded for five years with the possibility of further extension.
Castro has highlighted the political significance of the treaty and suggested its title.
First ships loaded with the military technology and cargo sailed from the harbour on Anadyr River on July 12, 1962.
It should have taken less than four months to get the cargo to Cuba under complete secrecy, although, the units responsible for the transfer of material did not know where they were going.
Mariel, a city situated approximately 40 kilometres west of Havana, was appointed a landing place.
Nuclear warhead missiles were never completed during the installation of devices.
From the beginning, they were stored and strictly guarded in Mariel port during the crisis.
Furthermore, they could only be triggered by direct command or permission from Nikita Khrushchev himself.
At the end of September, it was obvious that the predefined schedule of the operation Anadyr could not meet its end as not all of the ships were transported by October, 20 and the rocket complexes could not be in full operation sooner than a week later.
Soviets were also not satisfied with the plan of hiding rockets and technology which were previously developed by Rashidov's military experts.
The United States was acknowledged about increased traffic in the Atlantic by secret service of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Even though a large number of shipping boat between Soviet and Cuban ports must have been transcribed, the Americans were not alarmed.
The course of the crisis until the declaration of the blockade It was October 16 when the president was informed about aerial photographs from his National Security Adviser McGregor Bundy.
From the first day of the crisis, this committee has almost continuously met in virtually same composition.
Ted Sorensen , Llewelyn Thompson , George Ball and Alexis Johnson , Edward Martin , Rosewell Gilpatric (Deputy Minister of Defence), Paul Nitze , Adlai Stevenson (US Ambassador to the United Nations), Don Wilson , President's brother and Minister of Justice Robert Kennedy and Vice-President Lyndon Johnson were also attended.
After examining the pictures taken by the U-2 spy planes no one was convinced of Soviet's creating a military missile base in Cuba.
However, the CIA experts identified captured missiles close to San Cristobal as SS-3 and R-12 assault rifles.
Everyone in the Oval Hall, including Kennedy, was surprised even though there had been presumptions and indirect evidence from several Cuban refugees, that the Soviet Union was operating with military equipment in Cuba.
At the moment of revealing Soviet plans in Cuba, ExComm realized that any assurances given by Khrushchev or Ambassador Dobrynin were lies.
Kennedy asked his counsellors for an explanation of how it was possible for Soviets to do so.
There was a predominant view that the Soviet Union did not have confidence in its intercontinental ballistic missiles and by building a base in Cuba, they wanted to achieve 47 launch ramps for its mid-range missiles.
Most consultants have come to the conclusion 46 Nálevka, Karibská Krize , 80.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 21 that the situation calls for urgent solution and proposals for an immediate air strike against 48 missile base.
The idea of quarantine and naval blockade of the island was brought to light.
One supporting the blockade and the other supporting military intervention.
They showed the presence of up to 32 rockets with a range of up to 1,600 kilometres.
Military experts said they would be operational by the end of the week and according to their estimates, they could hit important military and civilian targets in the Southeast of the United States within a few minutes.
Even though there was not one functional tee hole available on October 16, five days later, there were 20 of 49 them.
New reports, however, showed that even the most accurate air strike would not have destroyed all of the assault missiles in Cuba and the whole action would require bombing of a military base and subsequent invasion.
Although the president was sceptical about the military action, he knew that if his government would not react, the Soviets would get the impression that the Americans were completely incompetent.
Kennedy held a meeting with Soviet Foreign Minister Andrey Gromyko on Thursday 18.
This meeting was scheduled for a long time period and its cancellation could cause unnecessary speculations.
Kennedy's intention was not to confront Gromyko with the photographic evidence of the Soviet base, but only to listen.
The Soviet minister introduced the issue of threatening Cuba by the United States and assured Kennedy that the only aid provided to Cuba is purely agricultural.
The president Kennedy felt astonished of how did Gromyko lie to his face even after reading the presidential statement pointing to the serious consequences of the deployment of the Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba.
Despite this Gromyko did not change his mind and assured Kennedy that there is no military base being built in Cuba and left the meeting.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 22 The ExComm adopted the blockade by the end of Thursday.
The idea of quarantine triumphed among the members of the committee As the final decision was only under president's competence, he should have clearly decided whether to run a blockade or a military action.
In the meantime the United States Armed Forces were supposed to prepare 52 for the smooth process of both above-mentioned options.
Although the president received arguments for both the blockade and the military intervention, he finally decided to blockade with and he wanted to familiarize the world with his decision in a public 53 speech scheduled for Monday, October 22.
From the point of view of the United States, it was necessary to carry legal support from Organization of American States which would gain the entire Western Hemisphere against Cuba and the Soviet Union on its side.
In the meantime, Kennedy received support from his closest allies France, Great Britain, Canada and Germany.
Events after the declaration of the blockade The moment President Kennedy delivered his evening speech and presented plans for the naval blockade, the crisis became a serious worldwide public matter.
Until then, events 55 from the previous week did not bring any attention to the world.
The President announced the blockade coming into force on October 24 at 10 o'clock in the morning and mentioned that this is only the first step in the prepared plan, stressing out that if any ships trying to break the blockade, the United States Navy will respond with a military force.
Meanwhile, in the Kremlin, a meeting was summoned between Khrushchev and his closest advisors.
Khrushchev apparently became fully aware of the seriousness of the situation because he arrived in the session upset and irritated.
He obviously did not want to launch a nuclear war but only intended to push the United States to the corner.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 23 supported by the fact that missiles in Cuba were obsolete and unsatisfactory for both the first strike and the retaliatory attack on the United States.
The second day, Tuesday, October 23, a meeting of the Organization of American States was held.
As a surprise to the White House, all Latin American countries unanimously supported and legitimized the blockade.
Meanwhile, the ExComm has reunited in Washington and decided to interpret the issue of the crisis in the UN meeting.
As the blockade was due to enter into force the next morning, the various situations were discussed as for example, what would happen if any of the ships did not stop on their way to Cuba.
The United States ships should avoid any military confrontation and only in the extreme case would have to shoot the enemy's bolt and rudder.
Shattered boats should be taken to the ports of Jacksonville or Charleston.
In the same day, the Guantanamo base was surrounded by Cuban troops and the Warsaw Pact troops and placed in combat alert.
These 57 measures were cancelled almost a month after the end of the crisis.
There, the United States demanded the end of the Soviet intervention in the Caribbean Sea.
On the other hand, the Soviets accused the United States of aggressive politics towards Cuba and demanded the immediate abolition of the blockade.
This led to an inevitable confrontation between 58 the United States and the Soviet members.
The United States representative Adlai Stevenson was equipped with photographs of military missiles bases awaiting the right opportunity to unveil them.
After exposing these photographs, Cuba and the Soviet Union have lost the support from the Third World states.
At the same time, Stevenson suggested that these photographs and 59 the whole situation be investigated by the United Nations Inspection Panel.
At ten o'clock in the morning of October 24, the blockade came into force.
The US military Forces moved to standby 2, followed by readiness for warfare.
Although Robert McNamara was responsible for the implementation of the blockade and the naval forces were to be subject to his direct command, he often had to argue with his military commanders, even with respect to his competences.
McNamara 60 never had a complete control over the Navy operations during the crisis.
The tense situation in the White House was complemented by the report that one of the Soviet submarines took the position between the ships and approached along the border with them.
The Essex aircraft carrier was supposed to contact the submarine an identify it.
According to his brother Robert, President Kennedy was experiencing the worst fears during the crisis at this time.
At 10 o'clock and 25 minutes, it was reported that the ships had stopped it's moving towards the sea.
On the Soviet side, during these events, Khrushchev was lost in his indecision.
First, he ordered the Soviet submarines to return fire immediately but on the day the blockade came into force, he suggested shutting down most of the ships.
He then announced that all the necessary weapons and materials were already 61 in Cuba and hence decided not to overcome the situation.
After finding that the Soviet ships did not brake maritime blockade and that Khrushchev has not yet taken any retaliatory action in Berlin, the Americans gained confidence and according to them, the isolation of Cuba gained international credibility.
On Thursday, October 25, other aerial photographs pointing to the fact that the construction of rocket bases continues at an extraordinary speed, were sent to the White House.
On that day, Khrushchev declared that the situation over the Caribbean territory should be resolved peacefully.
He made a proposal to dismantle missile facilities in Cuba and proposed that the Soviet would withdraw missiles in exchange for the United States not invading Cuba.
The day after that, the first inspection of the passing ship was carried out at the border of the blockade.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 25 63 Lebanon and leased by the Soviets.
Kennedy decided to demonstrate to Khrushchev the seriousness of the blockade and let it search trough.
The ship did not transport any weapons or military material so it was allowed to continue the journey.
On the same day, the President was more serious about the invasion of Cuba but was told by McNamara that this action would not be uncomplicated and easy to implement and would require the lives 64 of many United States soldiers.
This information, however, turned out to be counterfeit and was based on an interview by two Americans journalists.
This report, however, shocked the First Secretary so rapidly that he decided to end the crisis by offering Kennedy a peaceful solution.
In this mood, he sent a very emotional letter to the White House describing the war as a world-wide disaster for all people and assured the United States that missiles in Cuba would never be used for the attack and suggested the possibility of withdrawing the missiles in exchange for Cuba's 65 safety.
In this letter, the Soviets admitted the existence of missiles for the first time.
First, the ExComm received a second letter from the Khrushchev office, which was carried in a much more formal spirit than the previous one.
In this relatively aggressive text, the Soviet Union demanded the withdrawal of United States missiles from Turkey and Italy an at the same time promised not to take any action on Turkey.
President Kennedy was aware of this exchange trade and its disadvantages for both the United States and the NATO allies.
After all, he did not seek to withdraw missiles under the Soviet threat but did not want to step into a warfare because 67 of already outdated Jupiter missiles in Turkey.
Everyone was surprised by the contents of the above-mentioned letter in the White House.
With a risky solution came up Llewellyn Thompson, who suggested that the President should only answer the letter from October 26 and completely ignore the latest one.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 26 Robert Kennedy and Ted Sorensen, who produced a response which was signed by the President on Saturday and delivered to the Moscow in the evening that day.
Another unfavourable news which occurred on Saturday was the high-speed construction of jet 68 bombers IL-28 which continued in San Cristobal.
The most serious situation, which nearly threw both superpowers into the war on Saturday, October 27, was the downing of the U-2 reconnaissance aircraft with Rudolf Anderson.
He has been conducting a series of a spy aerial missions over Cuba in recent days.
Everything was about to escalate the crisis, even the President's advisor Kenny O'Donnell commented the situation as the most unpredictable and most 70 depressing during the time of Kennedy's agency at the White House.
Conclusively, it was the President himself who ceased the military action planned for Sunday morning against Cuba and the Soviet Union.
He decided to negotiate despite the action supported by 71 his military chiefs.
Robert clarified that the United States did not want to launch a conflict and introduced a letter addressed to Khrushchev.
He also stated that no agreement between the United States and the USSR could contain a commitment to withdraw missiles from Turkey but he indicated that 72 the President is willing to withdraw them within a next few months.
Simultaneously, he drew the attention to the fact that the United States is demanding an immediate response, which unless it involves the withdrawal of missiles, will take military operations against Cuba on Monday, October 29.
The President warned through the Pentagon, the United States headquarters in Germany and the West Berlin against the Soviet attack.
The Soviet Union reply arrived in the White House saying that the Soviets are interrupting the work on missile devices and are 68 Nálevka, Karibská Krize, 117.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 27 dismantling them before the return to the USSR, 75 The Soviet Union has agreed to remote the military material, and later, the United States has pledged to withdraw its missiles from Turkey.
It was probably the result of the fact that Khrushchev and his advisors were fully aware of huge predominance in both nuclear warheads and the number of long-distance bombers in the United States side.
The crisis ended and President Kennedy, ExComm and the rest of the American public could calm down.
Kennedy has received great recognition for patients and resolving the crisis by diplomatic means.
Kennedy announced the official end of the crisis at a press conference on November 20, 1962.
The main variable of the solution of the crisis was certainly time factor.
President Kennedy appreciated an extraordinary report of CIA after the discovery of missile bases.
However, if the incriminating photographs were taken about three weeks before, there would be more time for consideration of all alternatives by the US administration.
Their decision would not be affected by the possible completion of Soviet nuclear missiles in few days and its preparedness.
Kennedy's top priority was to determine whether the missiles are already operational and if not when they will be completed.
While considering possible alternatives the uncertainty about the time which played the significant role was a problem.
It is assumed that president would insist on the detailed and more sophisticated action after experience in Bay of Pigs.
The alternative of air attack depended on the exact location of all nuclear missiles on the island and those had to be precisely targeted and destroyed.
These alternatives, however, were time-consuming as the rain season is during October a frequent phenomenon in Cuba supported by numerous occurrence of hurricanes.
McNamara though argued that for air attack it would be necessary to know whether the missiles are working or not with certainty.
Previous considerations and estimates were still based on photographs taken during espionage flight.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 29 While Kremlin still suspected that Anadyr's operation was secret the United States administration had to use the moment of surprise.
If the completion of missiles were announced to the public, the United States would suddenly be in a subordinate position.
The political approach against Cuba has become an oppositional instrument to possible criticism of the current administration since the Cuban Revolution.
In his presidential campaign, Kennedy has blamed Republicans for allowing Cuba to become a communist area.
On the contrary, 83 After he took the office, he became a target of criticism of the Republicans.
The preelection campaign for November elections was graduating in summer 1962.
The Cuban question became a dominant 84 theme in Republican's pre-election campaign.
As a result, people would call for action which should have been promised by Republicans.
On the one hand, it was the Republican demand to intervene Cuba and influencing American public opinion.
On the other hand, there was no evidence proving the presence of offensive weapons in Cuba.
President was also instantly assured by Khrushchev and other Soviet officials that imported military arsenal serves only to defend Cuba and can be no threat to the United States.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 30 president during the pre-crisis and crisis weeks.
He could not allow the voters to start seeing him as a weak and indecisive leader because of the criticism of the Republicans and thus to reduce the electoral preferences of the Democrats.
On the contrary impulsive responses to the Soviet military presence in Cuba despite the lack of evidence of the presence of offensive weapons and persistent persuasion of the Soviets could seriously aggravate not only Soviet-American relations but also alliance relations between Western allies.
Diplomacy factor Another factor influencing Kennedy administration's decision-making process is a diplomatic factor that includes the issue of the legality of the possible military action of the United States towards Cuba and concerns about the allies' reaction to the surprise attack of the United States on Cuba.
The first aspect of diplomacy factor was closely linked to the minister of foreign affairs Dean Rusk, During the first talks, there was a predominant view that military intervention against Soviet missiles in Cuba would be inevitable.
Rusk argued that it is necessary for the United States administration not to underestimate the legality of any military action in the context of international law.
His was convinced that in order to provide support to the public and the allies the legality of the action is a necessity.
Since the beginning of the crisis, Kennedy's administration has been considered several options to justify a possible military intervention against Cuba.
The Ministry of Justice has submitted a proposal to appeal to the doctrine of self-defence.
This possibility was however disproved by the Foreign Ministry's legal department claiming that doctrines of self-defence cannot be invoked when no attack was thrown.
Legal issue would also have to be addressed in the case of a naval blockade.
With regard to the possible problems associated with defining the blockade in the context of international law, Kennedy decided to use term 'quarantine', which better represented the specify of the American counter-attack.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 31 one knew what quarantine signify and as a result, the likelihood of a violation of international law would have been reduced.
The second aspect of this factor is the fear of allies' reaction in the event of a surprise US military attack on Cuba.
Leaving aside the query of what would Khrushchev's reaction be or the moral dilemma of the United States, Kennedy could not be sure of the reaction of Western allies in the event of a surprise air attack.
This alternative entailed a high risk of Soviet retaliation which was primarily aimed at West Berlin or bases in Italy and Turkey.
The question was whether the western allies of the US would be willing to risk launching a nuclear war because of the deployment of offensive weapons on the western hemisphere and the United States feels threatened and whether they would be willing to risk a retaliatory attack on their own territory.
Therefore it was a serious concern in Kennedy's administration that possible supporting or rejecting the United States could cause a confusion and conjecture in the NATO.90 6.
Psychology determinant While considering alternatives, a psychological factor had to be included in the decision-making process by Kennedy and his administration.
This determinant implied two American approaches to Soviet administration and Khrushchev himself the inability of US administration to understand Khrushchev's intentions and the distrust of US administration against Khrushchev.
While selecting a suitable alternative, Kennedy's advisors often considered the reason why Khrushchev's team had organized such a risky action because they hoped that understanding the motives would lead them to better determination of an appropriate 88 Rusk, As I Saw It / by Dean Rusk as told to Richard Rusk, 233.
Even nowadays after the end of the bipolar conflict, when all declassified records of negotiations made during this period and testimonies of top leaders are available and archives of both superpowers are opened, there is no consensual output defining the reason for the Anadyr operation.
Kennedy's administration had faced the more complicated decision-making process.
The Soviet Union was indeed sealed and Khrushchev's actions were known only from his public statements or appearances.
The United States did not know whether Khrushchev had faced the internal pressures and had no detailed knowledge of the tensions in the Eastern Bloc.
The United States administration has even wondered if Khrushchev was still holding a leading position and is the one who decided fully.
The resolution of the German situation in West Berlin was one Khrushchev's main interests.
The United States administration believed that Soviets could propose a 92 possible way to resolve the exchange of Cuba for Berlin.
If the United States did not face the Soviet challenge, it would shake the Western Bloc's 93 confidence in the possible protection from the United States.
The argument about the defence of Cuba against possible US intervention was corrupted by the verity that the Soviet Union equipped Cuba with offensive nuclear missiles of medium and long range.
As it is obvious from above, Kennedy's advisors were not convinced that the Soviet operation had been triggered in order to start a war.
This caused a relatively rapid rejection of diplomatic pressure on the Kremlin as one of the possible alternatives which could significantly influence the United States response to Soviet military activity.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 33 arsenal began on July 12 and Khrushchev lied to Kennedy and his advisors from the very beginning.
In this case, the United States administration could not start negotiations as they did not know precisely whether Khrushchev would be able to meet the agreed conditions or utilize the whole action to get enough time to complete the operation.
When the photographic evidence from the U-2 reconnaissance flight proved that the Soviet missiles had been built in Cuba, it was presented to the President.
Even though the United States administration has been informed by the CIA about increased Soviet activity in the Caribbean, the reports did not contain any information on the possible 97 installation of offensive weapons on the island.
After the burst of Cuban Soviet relations Khrushchev declared that Soviet Union did not need to build missile base outside the USSR and that the missiles were being deployed purely as a support to the Cuban 98 people.
During September and first two weeks in October, Soviet Union delimited the possible installation of offensive weapons in Cuba several.
October 18, two days after Kennedy had clear evidence of the existence of offensive weapons in Cuba; Khrushchev was still refusing any activity.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 34 7 Consequences The fact that the United States and the Soviet Union were able to solve such a serious situation by diplomatic means had a positive impact on the development of the Cold War.
The American Soviet rapprochement increased America's popularity together with presidential prestige.
The confidence of the United States defence guarantee has rapidly decreased in Europe.0 7.
Therefore, the Soviet Union lost its ability to have a strategic base near the United States.
At the same time, the security guarantee for Cuba was secured as well as removal of United States missiles from Turkey.1 Although Kennedy's administration received support from Western European allies during the crisis, there was growing doubt about America's commitment to defending Europe in the event of a conflict with the Soviet Union.
Kennedy was afraid of the loss of prestige within the NATO and he publicly denied Soviet requests to remove missiles from Italy and Turkey.
It is unlikely that North Atlantic allies were aware of the strict secrecy of the pledge but during NATO Council meeting in December 1962, foreign ministers approved the United States government's procedure during the crisis.
The removal of Jupiter missiles was presented as a refinement and renewal of NATO armaments within the wider nuclear power regrouping.
The United States administrative consistently denied any connection between the withdrawal of Jupiter missiles and the crisis.
President Kennedy and his administration were criticized by right-wing opponents for not taking advantage of the opportunity and not resolving Cuban problem forever, especially when the United States had a clear predominance in both the number of strategic nuclear and conventional weapons.
Others have reproached his willingness to risk a nuclear war just to delay that one day the United States would be equally threatened by Soviet nuclear weapons.
They were blamed also for the factual support of Castro's regime and Cuban exiles could not forgive them the promise of non-aggression in Cuba.
Whereas Castro did not allow the Americans or the UN inspectors to review the complete withdrawal of offensive weapons from Cuba and did not terminate supporting of the guerrilla movement in other Latin American countries, Kennedy refused to officially confirm the non-aggression commitment.
In 1963, Kennedy and his advisors discussed possible ways to weaken the alliance between Cuba and the USSR and considered negotiations with Castro, who seemed to be interested in improving relations between the United States and Cuba.
Kennedy talked about peace and warned of the dangers that nuclear weapons could bring.
Therefore he called for cooperation and negotiations especially on the issue of an arm race stressing out that it was a common American and Soviet interest to avoid the war.
Therefore, he relayed that consulting with the US security experts is not always the best choice.
This approach is evident from the Oval Office meetings during the thirteen days.
During the Crisis, Kennedy was influenced by his experience and knowledge.
He thought of the next generation and what would squeeze of the nuclear knob mean to them.
TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 37 CONCLUSION The United States president has faced threats and ultimate from the USSR since his oath as the 35th president.
At the end of World War II it turned out that the United States and the USSR would not be able to cooperate together due to different ideological opinions but even those countries will compete thanks to the great potential.
The Soviet Union did not admire the considerable influence of the United States in Europe.
Although the Soviets maintained with the United States peaceful coexistence in Germany, this measures should be only temporary.
The Soviet Union did not have any military base near the United States, and therefore they focused on Cuba and Fidel Castro.
This inclination signified the first state emerged with the Western Hemisphere located in the socalled Eastern Bloc.
This was of course, not accepted by the United States who felt threatened.
Therefore, they interrupted all diplomatic relations with Cuba and began to plan a putsch in Castro's Cuba.
This plan took place shortly after Kennedy's election to the White House but ended up with a massive international scandal for Kennedy's government.
The Soviet Union took advantage of the situation and with the direct support of Fidel Castro deployed nuclear weapons to Cuba.
Even though the United States discovered the military equipment in Cuba later, they did not provoke a military attack.
However, the Soviet missiles in Cuba did not serve only as a tool for the intimidation of the United States but also for a possible trade.
As the Soviets neither the United States did not want to launch a war on this level, both countries have agreed to withdraw their missiles from their bases simultaneously convincing each other for negotiating a compromise when it comes to the fate of all humanity, and even cooperate in certain matters.
Thanks to the ExComm advisors was the whole crisis resolved diplomatically.
Even though the First Secretary Khrushchev was under much greater pressure than Kennedy, he still managed to keep his common sense and head cool and accepted a compromise, which concerned the withdrawal of TBU in Zlín, Faculty of Humanities 38 nuclear missiles from Cuba in exchange for the withdrawn of nuclear weapons from Turkey and Italy.
Third, it was the international pressure from the United Nations which forced both sides to act and come up with a peaceful solution.
