Shadow of the United States reconnaissance plane is seen on the foreground.
Editor Mary S McAuliffe CIA History Staff Central Intelligence Agency Washington, DC October 1992 These portions of the text were omitted.
A number of documents in this collection have been excerpted, some to re­duce their length, and others to speed the declassification of missile crisis information by omitting irrelevant material.
When the Historical Review Group systematically reviews these and other missile crisis records for declassification and release to the National Archives, we expect that most of the material omitted for reasons of length or relevance in our published excerpts will be declassified and made available to the public.
J Kenneth McDonald Chief, History Staff 11 September 1992 Preface The collection in this volume includes many of CIA's most important documents on the Cuban missile crisis.
The discovery of missiles in Cuba brought him back to Washington on the evening of 16 October, where he remained for the rest of the crisis.
It should be noted that these documents, many of them written hastily during a time of national emergency, contain occasional errors.
Mary S McAuliffe Deputy Chief, History Staff Persons Mentioned Brief Titles and Descriptions as of October 1962 Acheson, Dean Former Secretary of StateAlsop, Joseph ColumnistAlsop, Stewart ColumnistAnderson, George W., Jr., Adm.
USN Chief of Naval OperationsBall, George W Under Secretary of StateBohlen, Charles E Newly appointed Ambassador to France, former Ambassador to the Soviet UnionBowles, Chester President's Special Representative and Adviser on African, Asian and Latin American AffairsBundy, McGeorge Special Assistant to the President for National Security AffairsCannon, Clarence Representative Chairman, House Appropriations CommitteeCarroll, Joseph F., Lt.
Senator Chairman, Senate Foreign Relations CommitteeGilpatric, Roswell L Deputy Secretary of DefenseGraybeal, Sidney N Chief, Offensive Missiles Division, Office of Scientific Intelligence, CIAGrogan, Stanley J., Col.
Assistant to the DCI for Public USA AffairsGromyko, Andrei A Soviet Foreign MinisterHalleck, Charles A Representative House Minority LeaderHarvey, William K Chief, Task Force W (CIA unit tasked with carrying out Operation MONGOOSE)Hayden, Carl.
Senator President Pro Tempore of the Senate and Chairman, Senate Appropriations CommitteeHelms, Richard M Deputy Director for Plans, CIAHickenlooper, Bourke B Senator Chairman, Senate Republican Policy CommitteeHilsman, Roger, Jr.
USAF Supreme Allied Commander, Europe and Commander in Chief, United States European CommandParker, David Stewart, Col.
Senator Chairman, Senate Armed Services CommitteeSaltonstall, Leverett.
Senator Chairman, Senate Republican ConferenceScott, Paul ColumnistScoville, Herbert , Jr.
Deputy Director for Research, CIASmathers, George A Senator Secretary, Senate Democratic ConferenceSorensen, Theodore Special Counsel to the PresidentStevenson, Adlai E United States Representative to the UN and Representative in the Security CouncilSweeney, Walter C, Jr., Gen.
USA President's Military Representative until 1 October 1962; thereafter Chairman, Joint Chiefs of StaffThompson, Llewellyn E., Jr.
Former Ambassador to the Soviet UnionTidwell, William A Assistant to Deputy Director for Intelligence , CIAU Thant Secretary-General of the United NationsVinson, Carl.
Representative Chairman, House Armed Services CommitteeWarner, John S Legislative Counsel, CIAWheelon, Albert D Chairman, Guided Missile & Astronautics Intelligence CommitteeWiesner, Jerome B Science Adviser to the PresidentWilson, Don Deputy Director, USIA Acronyms and Abbreviations AG Attorney GeneralALPHA-66 Cuban exile groupBNE Board of National Estimates, CIACHICKADEE Special information handling channel for nondocumentary material generated by Col.
Construction begins on on SAM sites at Sagua laGrande, Caibarien, & Sancti Spiritus.
Construction of the remaining SAM sites, which apparently were u considered less vital than those listed above to the protection of offensive missile bases in Cuba, began in late September or early October.
THE PROBLEM To analyze the situation in Cuba and to estimate the pros­pects over the next year or so, with particular reference to Castro's relations with the Communists and to the potential for resistance to his regime.
By force of circumstances, the USSR is becoming ever more deeply committed to preserve and strengthen the Castro regime.
The Cuban armed forces are loyal to the personal leadership of the Castro brothers.
We believe it unlikely that the Bloc will provide Cuba with the capability to undertake major independent military operations overseas We also believe it unlikely that the Bloc will station in Cuba Bloc combat units of any description, at least for the period of this estimate.
The Cuban armed forces are well able to intimidate the general population and to suppress any popular insurrection likely to develop in present circumstances.
The Cuban economy is in deep trouble, in part because of the United States embargo and a consequent shortage of convertible foreign exchange, in part because of agricultural and industrial mismanagement.
The Castro regime retains the positive support of about 20 percent of the population, but disaffection is increasing.
This trend is manifested in growing passive resistance and in occasional open demonstrations of resentment.
Few, however, dare to accept the risks of organized active resistance in present circumstances, for fear of the regime's massive apparatus for surveillance and repression.
If arms and supplies became availahle and if confidence were created in the likelihood of outside support for a major Cuban uprising, resistance activity and potential would increase.
On August 10th at a nutting In Secretary Rusk's Conference Room attended by Rusk, Johnson, McNamara, Gilpatric, Bundy, Gen.
Taylor and a number of others for the purpose of discussing General Lansdale's Phase II activities, McCone reported on the sudden importation of materiel — at that time the characteristic of which was unidentified -and Soviet personnel, and at that meeting speculated that this could be electronic equipment for use against Canaveral and/or military equipment including medium range ballistic missiles.
On August 21st at a meeting in Secretary Rusk's office attended by the same group.
McCone again reviewed the situation as it developed since August 10th, reported definite information on surface to air missiles and again speculated on the probability of medium range ballistic missiles.
On August 22nd McCone gave the same information to the President, adding certain details concerning the number of Soviet and Chineese personnel who had recently entered Cuba as reported who just returned from Havana.
On August 23rd in a meeting with the President, Rusk, McNamara, Gilpatric, General Taylor, Bandy and others, McCone again reviewed the situation and questioned the need for the extensive SAM installations unless they were to make possiblethe concealment of MRBMs.
The same reasoning was applied in discussions with Senator Russell's Subcommittees, Chairman Vinson's Subcommittee and in private talk with Chairman Cannon prior to McCone's departure on August 23rd.
My hunch is we might face prospect of Soviet ahort-range surface-to-surface missiles of portable type in Cuba which could command important targets of southeast United States and possibly Juatin American Caribbean areas.
On September 13th McCone received communication from Carter stating that the BNE continued to feel that the installation of SA 2s is most reasonably explained by other than a desire to hide MRBM build-up.
I would lika to talk with you from Norstad's headquarters to tha White House or Pentagon situation room, tonight between 1700 and 1800 your time.
In reflecting on my observations of Thor installation in Britain and Jupiters in Italy Z can envisage a Soviet plan to package missile, control and operating equipment in soch a way that a unit could b* mad* operational a few hours after a site cleared and a modest concrete pad poured.
Do not wish to be overly alarming this matter but believe CIA and community must keep government informed of danger of a surprise and also that detection of preparatory steps possibly beyond oar capability once Cuban defense system operative.
Thrust of press reports reaching me is that there exists a clear demarcation between defensive and offensive preparations and I question if we can be sur« of this.
I recognise Cuban policy decisions most delicate and beyond Agency or my competence.
It is reported that during McCone1 s absence, Acting DCI, at a meeting held in Mr Bandy's office on 10 September, proposed an overflight which would cover the entire north and south perimeter of Cuba east of Havana and out to the eastern tip of Oriente Province except for an area in the immediate vicinity of Santa Clara where four SAM sites were known to exist and had been photographed.
It is reported that because of Husk's concern for the safety of the U-2 in view of the Sakhaolin violation on 7 September and the ChiNat loss on 10 September, the sense of the meeting that CIA be permitted to make 4 flights against Cuba, two peripheral and two overflights of limited penetration, including the Isle of Pines.
On October 4th McCone noted to the Special Croup that there had been no coverage of the center of Cuba and more particularly the entire western end of the Island for over a month, and afl flights since 5 September had been either peripheral or limited and therefore CIA did not know, nor could advise, whether an offensive capability was being created.
DCI objected strenuously to the limitations which had been, placed on overflights and there arose a considerable discussion (with some heat) as to whether limitations had or had not placed on CIA by the Special Group. were requested to prepare a comprehensive plan for aerial survey of Cuba and to submit the plan at a matting scheduled for Tuesday, October 9th.
Reviewed JC3 proposals and it was agreed that a U-2 flight flying frorn south to north across the western part of Cuba where at Least two SAM sites were known to exist should be undertaken promptly and that a number of similar sorties might be mounted If this flight did not activate ground-air fire.
On October 15th at a Special Meeting (and prior to receipt of the results of the October Hth flight), two additional U-2 missions to cover all of Cuba were approved and this was concurred in by higher authority.
However, information available to the Agency since August 10th indicated that the extent of the Soviet supply operations was much greater than had been reported on August 10th; furthermore, there were indications that construction work was undertaken by Soviet personnel, technicians with newly delivered Soviet equipment and while the nature of the construction was not known, it was probably either highly sophisticated electronic installations or COMINT and ELINT and possible electro-counter measure efforts or missile sites, probably ground-to-air.
DCI then stated that on August 10th in discussing the arguments for and against the so-called stepped up Plan.
B, or alternatively the modified Plan 3, he had stated that if it was decided to accept the modified Plan B and such a course is pursued, it is the opinion of the DCI that continuing Soviet aid and technical assistance -will present the United States with a more formidable problem in the future than it now confronts or has confronted in the past.
McCone then stated that con­clusive evidence indicated such a stepped-up Soviet effort.
DCI then read 21 August paper entitled, ""Recent Soviet Military Aid to Cuba"" as prepared by DD/L He then referred to 21 August paper of the office of National Estimates, subject, ""Soviet View of the Cuban Economy"" emphasizing the conclusion that under energetic Soviet direction, the potential of the Cuban agricultural, industrial and natural resources could be so developed that the economy would be reasonably viable and over a decade might even earn sufficiently from export surpluses to repay credits and advances already made to Cuba by the Soviet Union.
Therefore, the CIA's conclusion that Soviet economists in analyzing Cuba would conclude that in supporting Cuba the Soviets were not involving themselves with a permanent liability; furthermore, there was an opportunity of creating a viable and reasonably prosperous economy which, while not a showcase, would always be an annoyance to the United States and a model for all dissident groups in Latin America.
DCI then referred to the 15th August paper of the Board of National Estimates, subject, ""The Soviet Stake in Cuba"" and read the summary of this paper which is in numbered paragraph 7, page 3.
In support of the above DCI then briefly reviewed a chronology of unevaluated reports on recent Soviet military aid to Cuba, 21 August, and noted my reference to maps; location of the reported activities.
It was felt that a blockade of Cuba would automatically bring about a blockade of Berlin; that drastic action on a missile site or other military installation of the Soviets in Cuba would bring about similar action by the Soviets with .respect to our bases and numerous missile sites, particularly Turkey and southern Italy.
Also, there is a reluctance, as previously, to the commitment of. military forces' because of the task involved and also because of retaliatory actions of the Soviets elsewhere throughout the world.
McNamara expressed strong feelings that we should take every possible aggressive actionin the fields of intelligence, sabotage and guerrilla warfare, utilizing Cubans and do such other things as might be indicated to divide the Castro regime.
To date we had exper­ienced a very tight internal security situation, and probably this would become more so in the future.
The Attorney General queried the meeting as to what other aggres­sive steps could be taken, questioning the feasibility of provoking an action against Guantanamo which would permit us to retaliate, or involving a third country in some way.
The meeting was inconclusive with respect to any particular course of action.
It was felt that the President should be informed on the evolving situation and the DCI agreed to brief him at the Meeting on Wednesday, August 22nd at 6 o'clock.
McCone reviewed all of the substance of the August 21st briefing of the Secretary of State, Defense and others as reported and in addition explained in considerable detail the personal report concerning his personal observauonsans and the observations of his confidantes during a recent trip to Cuba as recorded in the attached memorandum.
The President expressed concern, but agreed with General Taylor and DCI that any policy matters would be discussed at the forthcoming meeting of the Principals to be held at the White House on August 23rd.
McCone advised that President had been briefed on the Cuban situation but added the information given usk advocated Lnforming Canadians and all NATO allies of growing seriousness oi situation; also advocated removal of restrictions on use of Guantanamo by the Lansdale group.
The president requested a continuing analysis of the number and type of Soviet and Oriental personnel imported into Cuba; quantity and type of equioment and its probable use; all construction particularly anxious to know whether construction involved SAM sites might differ from the ground sites.
DDCI should have Board of National Estimates working continuously on this analysis.
After the meeting in a private conversation with Robert Kennedy, I stated that I £elt Cuba was our most serious problem; I also added, in my opinion, Cuba was the key to all of Latin America; if Cuba succeeds, we can expect most of Latin America to fall.
Proposed plan of action for Cuba in the light of: The arrival of four to five thousand Soviet/Bloc technicians and possibly military personnel during July-August.
Arrival of many ship loads of equipment and materiel during July and August.
Modified plan will contribute importantly to our intelligence gathering and will impede Castro regime's economic progress but will not be sufficient to frustrate the regime's progress in view of the evidences of substantial Soviet technical assistance.
Being dominated by Moscow, such a Cuba would also serve as a possible location for MRBMs, for COMINT and ELINT facilities targetted against United States activities, most particularly Canaveral, and finally as an ECM station which might adversely affect our space and missile work.
An immediate continuing aggressive political action designed to awaken and alarm all of Latin America and all of the free world as to the extreme dangers inherent in the present Cuban situation.
Appropriate actions should be taken through domestic and foreign press media to inform and alarm the people, through the United Nations, through the Organization of American States and its subcommittees, by contact with each free world country at the level of head pf state, foreign minister and ambassador, and through semi-public or private organizations such as labor, church, farm cooperatives, youth groups, etcetera.
Instructions Concerning the Handling of Certain Information Concerning Cuba General Carter called Mr Cline to say that he had just completed a telephone conversation with the President and that according to the President's instructions the clamps were to remain on the release of certain information concerning Cuba except for the barest minimum access on a need-to-know basis for the purpose of preparing a comprehensive briefing for the President Tuesday morning, 4 September.
This instruction was interpreted to permit the release of a single copy of the report concerning Cuba to OCI for them to use in preparing the briefing with a deadline of 7-30m.
All recipients of these copies to be advised that there is to be no further dissemination except on a minimum need-to-know basis to those people who might need to beccme involved in the preparation of the bxiefingfbr the President.
Diey were also to be advised that no actions were to be taken on the basis of the information.
August ccmfiras extensive Soviet nllitary deliveries to Cuba in recent weekcs.
Surface-to-air missile sites, guided missile boats, and additional land armaments were observed.
The smaII amount of permanent construction at these sites and the speed of the work indicate the program is proceeding on a crash basis.
B The pattern now emerging suggests as many as 24 sites may eventually ""be aet up — enough to ""blanket the entire island.
At least 8 Komar-class missile boats have been delivered to Cuba in recent weeks.
These PT-like boats carry two missile launchers each, with the radar guided missile effective against surface targets to ranges of between 15 and 17 miles.
Some Cuban naval personnel have received training in the USSR, but it is not known if this included Komar training.
These boats are in addition to 13 or more torpedo boats and 6 submarine chasers delivered by the USSR earlier this year.
The photography shows that current deliveries to Cuba also contain land armaments, including tanks and possibly self-propelled guns.
Reports indicate other shipments have contained artillery, tanks, and possibly combat aircraft, but these are not confirmed.
The photography cf 29 August turned up the highest number of MIG aircraft yet noted, some 37.
At least 1,700 Soviet military technicians arrived in Cuba in late July acd early August in coonection wlth these military activities.
At least 1,300 more Soviets are arriving unannounced this veek; no reports an their activities so far.
Still additional bloc personnel probably have arrived on some of the cargo ships.
RAY S CLINE Deputy Director Annex A Surface-to-Air Missile Deployment in Cuba Annex B Description of Komar-dass Missile Boat Annex C Cuba's Air Defense Capabilities Annex D Sigint Collection Annex USSR-Cuba Comminique of 2 September 12.
Action Generated by DCI Cables Conceming Cuban Low-Level Photography and Offensive Weapons 1.
At the Special Group Meeting the following day, General Lernnitzer raised the issue and said that use of RF -101 or F8U air­craft flown by United States pilots would be feasible from the military point of view.
General Carter informed Secretary Gilpatric on 1 September that the General and Karl Kaysen agreed a full readout was necessary and that some low-altitude flights were needed to pinpoint the sites.
General Carter asked DD/R on 5 September to initiate steps for fixing to cover Cuba.
The President and Secretaries of State and Defense were briefed by General Carter late 6 September of a more detailed readout of the 29 August mission which led our analysts to suspect the presence of another kind of missile site—possibly surface-to-surface--at Banes.
The White House put a complete freeze on this information; however, Bundy gave an OK to put the analysts to work on providing information to the policymakers on a need-to-know basis but without normal distribution.
USIB was brought up to date in executive session at its 7 September meeting on information concerning the SA-2 sites, the new unknown site at Banes, and also the freezing atmosphere of the White House.
There is no evidence that the information was passed outside of the Agency, presumably because it was a reaffirmationof a position you had already taken before Secretaries Rusk and McNamara, General Taylor and Messrs; Johnson, Gilpatric and Bundy on 10, 21 and 23 August.
On 10 September you cabled following ""Difficult for me to rationalize extensive costly defenses being established in Cuba as such extreme costly measures to accomplish, security and secrecy not consistent with other policies such as refugees, legal travel, etc.
However, it was also this date that General Carter sent a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense calling further need to conduct tactical reconnaissance of Cuba, particularly the facility near Banes, indicating that the site would require in the near future photography of a larger scale than acquired by a U-2, and recommending that SecDef initiate necessary action to provide for employment of this tactical-type reconnaissance.
On 13 September you cabled your views of the importance of going ahead with securing release of Cuban prisoners.
At the USIB meeting of 19 September, General Carter, in discussing terms of what would be necessary if a complete SA-2 defense would make use of the U-2 extremely hazardous if not impossible, again stated a desire to use RF-101's over Cuba.
After its use over Kamchatka, was disapproved, General Carter urged its possible use against Cuba and State appeared enthusiastic.
It would indicate a far greater willingness to increase the level of risk in US-Soviet relations than the Soviet Union has displayed thus far, and consequently would have important policy implications with respect to other areas and other problems in East-West relations.
The following day, 20 September, you cabled suggesting a most careful consideration of the conclusion that introduction of offensive missiles was unlikely.
ASSUME YOU NOTING PRESS REPORTS SHOWING HOW CONGRESSIONAL REPUBLICANS PRESSING FOR A FORMOSA-TYPE RESOLUTION AUTHORIZING PRESIDENT TO USE TROOPS IF NECESSARY lN CUBA 7.
AS RESOLT OF U-2 VIOLATION OF SAKHALIN AND PRESIDENT'S PUBLIC PROMISE TO ""REVIEW PROCEDURES,"" SPECIAL GROUP HAS APPROVED AIR FORCE PROPOSAL TO STAND DOWN AIR FORCE U-2 OPERATIONS FOR ""TIME BEING, "" 19.
The following is a reconstruction of the reasons for the meeting at the White House in Mr McGeorge 3undy's office on 10 September 1962 at approximately 5:45m., and a report on what transpired at that meeting.
This memorandum is based upen discussions with Mr Parrott of the White House, General Carter, Dr.
A memorandum for the record prepared by Mr McMahon records that at approximately 10:00 on the morning of 10 September he received a telephone call from Mr Parrott passing on a request made by Mr Bundy on behalf of the Secretary of State.
Mr Parrott indicated that Mr Bimdy desired an answer within a half hour.
Mr McMahon immediately contacted the Chairman of COMOR which was in session at that moment, and they agreed to provide a response as quickly as possible.
Mr Parrott called a second time to advise Mr McMahon that Mr Roger Hilsman had advised that he would accept the responsibility for providing the answers to the Secretary of State, and that he had scheduled a meeting that afternoon with Mr James Reber, the Chairman of COMOR, in order to obtain the answers.
With the above background to the meeting, it is apparent that the primary concern was to insure that there would be no incidents involving a U-2 in the overhead reconnaissance of Cuba.
The meeting opened with an analysis of the risk of incidents involved in the Agency's proposal for two extended overflights covering the remainder of Cuba which had not been covered in the 29 August and 5 September missions.
He urged that the routes be so designed as to have the U-2's over the Island the minimum possible time, and there was general discussion on the desirability of avoiding the SAM sites.
He raised the question as to whether some of the needed coverage couldn't be obtained from peripheral flights with oblique photography.
Carter's message to McCone procedures to effect release of the Cuban prisoners.
The site configuration and the equipnent observed are coapatible with a cruise nissile system and not compatible with surface-to-air or ballistic systeics.
Although our knowledge of Soviet cruise missiles is incoaplate, we know of three systems which could fit those facilities observed at Banes.
He have eliminated other operational Soviet cruise nissile systems, with ranges froa 1000 to 4000 nn, because their missiles probably would be too large for the Banes facility.
SS-N-1-a destroyer-launched cruise anti-ship homing missile launched from 30 foot inclined rails.
SS-N-2-a Komar class patrol craft-launched cruise anti-ship homing missile, launched from inclined rails 25 to 30 feet long.
There are several items of circumstantial evidence which tend to support the conclusion that the Banes site, is for relatively short range coastal defense cruise missiles.
It is located where short-range aissiles could defend against seaborne assault on deep water ports in Nipe Bay south of Banes.
Thus far, the Soviets apparently have not given Cuba any weapons which provide then a long range striking capability, suggesting that their policy is to provide for Cuba's defense only.
If the analysis that the Banes missile site is a coastal defense installation is correct, it would follow that sinilar facilities nay be set up at a number of other locations favorable for protecting beaches against asphlbious attack.
We doubt that Cubans have been given sufficient training in the use of such aissiles to allow them to have operational control over the sites.
It seems likely that Soviet technical training personnel would be needed for some tise to come and would be available for operating the installation in time of crisis, 27.
McCone to Carter, Cable, with attached note from MSC , 16 September 1962 Central Intelligence Agency Office of the Deputy Director Get a copy to Cline & Kent and Helms and have Cline advise to do action.
DO NOT WISH TO BE OVERLY-ALARMING THIS MATTER BUT BELIEVE CIA AND COMMUNITY MUST KEEP GOVERNMENT IHFORMED OF DANGER OF A SURPRISE AND ALSO THAT DETECTION OF PREPARATORY STEPS POSSIBLY BEYOND OUR CAPABILITY ONCE CUBAN DEFENSE SYSTEM OPERATIVE, 3.
AS NOTED IN 85-2 , HOWEVER, PRESENT STATE OF CUBAN ECONOMY IS VERY BAD AND SUBSTANTIAL UPTURN WILL BE DELAYED UNTIL AFTER 1963.
We believe that the USSR values its position in Cuba primarily for the political advantages to be derived from it, and consequently that the main purpose of the present military buildup in Cuba is to strengthen the Communist regime there against what the Cubans and the Soviets conceive to be a danger that the United States may attempt by one means or another to overthrow it.
In terms of military significance, the current Soviet deliveries are substantially improving air defense and coastal defense capabilities in Cuba.
A decision to provide such weapons will continue to depend heavily on the Soviet estimate as to whether they could be introduced without provoking a United States military reaction.
D The USSR could derive considerable military advantage from the establishment of Soviet medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba, or from the establishment of a Soviet submarine base there.
E The Latin American reaction will be to the evidence of an increased Soviet commitment to Cuba, rather than to the technical implications of the military buildup.
If it became clear that the USSR was establishing an ""offensive"" base in Cuba, most Latin Ameri­can governments would expect the United States to eliminate is, by whatever means were necessary, but many of them would still seek to avoid direct involvement.
The possible establishment of Soviet medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles in Ciba, or the establishment of a Soviet submarine base there would indicate a far greater willingness to increase the level of risk in US-Soviet relations that Soviet union has displayed so far, and consequently would have important policy implications with respect to other areas and other problems in East-West relations.
Since the moment of Castro's triumphal march into Havana, the Intelligence Community had on missile and missile-associated activity in Cuba before 1 Jan 1962.
On 15 February 1962 an inter agency interrogation center was established by CIA at Opa Locka, near Miami, to handle Cu­ban refugees-.and improv.s the quality of intelligence collected from them.
In May 1962, NPIC began publishing a series of formal listings in which these reports were evaluated in the light of photographic coverage.
Between 14 August and mid-October this office sent NPIC 13 memoranda asking for a check of 25 separate reports containing information which was thought to raise the possibility of Soviet offensive weapons in Cuba.
In all cases, HPIC either lacked the necessary coverage or made a negative finding.
Readout of the 29 August coverage snowed an SA-2 site near Sagua La Grande which apparently was the basis for the reported activity there, and the target card was changed to show a confirmed SA-2 site.
A substantial proportion of these dealt with the deployment of defensive nis-siles and related activities.
Knowledge on the part of the analysts that such a deployment was in fact going on, plus the nomal difficulties encountered by untrained observers in tell­ing an offensive missile from a-defensive one, tended to throw a sort of saoke-screen around the Soviet offensive deployment when it finally began.
The CIA analytic""apparatus,-however, recognized and correlated the first authentic reports of HRBlt equipment ever to be received in Washington, and took action upon then.
This information, received on 27 September, dovetailed, in many respects with the earlier report.
Another report, too general to be used in the process described above, is nevertheless of interest as the first good information distributed on the Soviet Offensive build-up.
On 20 September, CIA disseminated a report that Castro's personal pilot, Claudio Morinas, had said on 9 September ""We have 40-mile range guided missiles, both surface-to-surface and surface-to-air, and we have a radar system which covers, sector by, sector, all of the Cuban air space and as far as Florida.
A large zone in Pinar Del Rio province within a preimeter bounded by hte cities of San Cristobal, San Diego, Consolaciodn Del Norte, and Las Pozas is heavily gurded by Soviets with the assistance of Peruvian and Colombian nationals.
After dark on 12 Sep 62, I was driving east on Avenida 23, when I observed and counted 20 Soviet trucks towing 20 long trailers going west on Avenida 23.
The trucks were driven by Soviets in civilian clothes short-sleeved shirts in various colors.
As the truck convoy neared its destination at Campo Libertad, the militia jeep was waved off, and the Soviet trucks and trailers proceeded into Campo Libertad.
The trailers, the longest I have ever seen in Cuba, were ... four wheeled.
I believe the tranposrt trailers were carrying large missiles, so long that the tail end extended over the end of trailer.
I would guess that the missiles were a few feet longer than the trailers.
From the tail end of the missile it locked as if the bottom and two sides of the missile had a wooden frame, and the entire missile was canvas-covered.
It looked as if the tail end of the canvas silhouetted the two fins of the four fins of the missile.
The top of the canvas-covered missile was toller then the top of the truck towing it.
I am not positive that the trailer was carrying a missile, but it surely looked that way.
I do not know where the truck convoy originated told me that Soviet cargo ships, names unknown, had docked at the Flota Blanca piers around 10 or 11 Sep 62.
He told me that all Cuban dock-workers and other Cubans who worked in that area, were forbidden to to be in the area during the unloading of the ships and that the unloading was handled only by Soviet personnel.
He said the cargo unloaded at the Flota Blanca docks consisted of missiles.
I do not know where he got his information, but he is usually pretty reliable.
On 17 Sep 62, about 2100 hours, while travelling by automobile from Havana toward my hiome in Pinar Del Rio, I observed a convoy of 10 motorcycles, 16 trucks, and eight trailers proceeding southwest on the central Highway toward Pinar Del Rio.
Although the vehicles were scattered over a distance, I am of the opinion that they were all part of the same convoy.
The motorcycles were followed by six MAZ-502 trucks, each carrying about 30 Rebel Army soldiers armed with 9 mm submachine guns ...and rifles.
The trucks were followed by eight Soviet-built flatbed-type trailers approximately 32 feet long, seven of which were carrying what looked like huge tubes extending over the entire length of the flatbed and completely covered with canvas.
I could not distinguish what the eight trailer was carrying since it was completely covered with canvas.
However, I did notice what looked like the large metal prongs sticking out from under the canvas at the rear of the trailer.
The trucks were in turn followed by five motorcycles driven by narmed Rebel Army soldiers.
Because of darkness and rain I could not distinguish the drivers of any of the vehicles in the convoy were.
The Attorney General reported on discnssions with the President on Cuba; dissatisfied with lack of action in the sabotage field, went on to stress that nothing was moving forward, commented that one effort attempted had failed, expressed general concern over developing situation.
In effect it seemed to be the consensus that phase two as approved on September 6, was now outmoded, that more dynamic action was indicated, that hesitancy about overflights must be re­considered , that actions which could be attributed to indigenous Cubans would not be important or very effective, and that a very considerable amount of attribution and ""noise"" must be expected.
During the meeting McCone reviewed the earlier meeting with General Lansdale, and pointed out to the group that this meeting clari­fied General Lanadale's authority over the entire MONGOOSE operation and that the CIA organization was responsive to his policy and operational guidance , and this was thoroughly understood.
McCone reviewed details of the Doaonn negotiations, discussions -with the President.
Attorney General, Eisenhower, the decision not to approach Congressional leadership, the discussion, with Senator Javits, and the final report from Donovan.
Me Cone stated there was a feeling in CIA and Defense that the ""activist policy"" which founded the Mongoose operation was gone and that while no specific operational activities had been the amount of ""noise"" from minor incidents, such, as the sugar, the students firing on the Havana Hotel and other matters and the extreme caution expressed by State had led to this conclusion.
More Importantly, however, the decisions to restrict U-2 flights had placed the United States Intelligence Community in a position where it could not report with assurance the development of offensive capabilities in Coba.
McCone stated he felt it most probable that Soviet-Castro operations would end op with an established offensive capability In Cuba, inciudtng MRBMs.
Bandy took issue stating that he felt the Soviets would not go that far, that he was satisified that no offensive capability would be installed in Cuba because of its world-wide effects and therefore seemed relaxed over the fact that the Intelligence Community cannot produce hard information on this important subject.
McCone said that Bundy's viewpoint was reflected by many in the Intelligence Community, perhaps a majority, but be just did not agree and furthermore did not think the United States could afford to take such a risk.
Bundy then philosophized on Cuba stating that he felt that our policy was not clear, our objectives not determined and therefore our efforts ware not productive.
It was obvious that he was not in sympathy with a more active role such as those discussed at 5412 on Thursday as be felt none of them would bring Castro down nor would they particularly enhance US. position of world leadership.
Buudy seemed inclined to support the Track Two idea and also inclined to play down the more active Lansdale operation.
Bundy had not talked to Laasdale bat obviously had received some of the ""static"" that is being passed around in Washington.
McCone is reporting on the discussions at Thursday's 5412 meeting repeated the views of the President and expressed by the Attorney General.
It was agreed that the whole Government policy with reference to Cuba must be resolved promptly as basic to further actions on our part. la general.
Bandy's views were that we should either make a judgment that we would have to go in militarily or alternatively we would have to learn to live with Castro, and his Cuba and adjust our policies accordingly.
McCone then elaborated on his views oi the evolution of Soviet-Castro military capability stating he felt defense was just phase one, phase two would be followed by various offensive capabilities and indeed the existing defensive capabilities such as the 21s a very definite offensive capability against nearby American cities and installations.
McCone stated that he thought that the establishment of a very axjwnsive deffensive mechanism could not be the ultimate objective of the Soviets or Castro and therefore the objective was to establish an offensive base or to insert sufficient Soviet specialists and military leaders to take Cuba away from Castro and establish it as a true Soviet controlled satellite.
McCono stated that he felt there were only two courses open — one was to taka military action at the appropriate time or secondly to pursue an effort to split Castro off from the Communists and for this reason he, McCone. had vigorously supported the Donovan mission as it is the only link that we have to the Castro hierarchy at the present time.
Bundy rejected the idea of regular NSC meetings stating that every President has to organise his Government as he desires and that the Eisenhower pattern was not necessarily adaptable to the Kennedy type of administration.
Me Cone stated that if this is the case he intended to request occasional NSC meetings to review specific estimates or other intelligence situations and the next one would be a report and discussion of the estimate of Soviet air defense capabilities.
Bandy rejected the idea the several Special Groupe 5412, CIA, Mongoose, and North Vietnam together feeling it was better to keep them separated.
Implications of an Announcement by the President that the United States would Conduct Overhead Reconnaissance of Cuba, and of the Actual Reconnaissance Thereafter NOTE: The following are the conclusions reached by a panel of members of the Board of National Estimates and of the ONE Staff 1.
The President's announcement would be vigorously condemned by the Soviets and the Cubans as evincing an intention to commit acts of international aggression.
Americans would probably look upon it as incompatible with the principle of non-intervention.
On the other hand, those few which desire the United States to take decisive action against Cuba would probably consider the announcement as a disappointingly weak manifestation.
The Cubans, or some other country, would probably bring the matter before the UN shortly after the announcement.
The Soviets and the Cubans would probably be impressed by the evident willingness of the United States government to raise still further the level of tension over Cuba, and to commit itself to further risks.
We do not believe, however, that this would lead to any change in Soviet policy toward Cuba.
While the announcement would create new strains in Soviet-American relations, this effect would not be so strong or so long-lasting as to influence basic Soviet choices with respect to Berlin.
The demonstration of military capability which such an incident would provide would almost certainly impress many Liatin Americans.
The President made the judgment that we should proceed with the negotiations, recognizing there would b« some political consequences and criticisms, but he, the President, was willing to aceept this as a fact.
The President then requested that the report be worded to indicate a probability rather than an actuality because la the final analysis we only saw crates, not the bombers themselves.
The President further requested that all future information ba suppressed.
Furthermore, that within CIA circles a minimum number of exports be informed.
It w*i therefore agreed that the US1B members would be instructed to restrict the information to their personal offices and fuUy and currently inform the Chlefa o£ Staff, the Chairman, the Service Secretaries and the Secretary of Defense.
However operational division* and the joint and specified commands would not be informed at this time, except at the direction of the above people who are receiving the information.
At this point the President mentioned that ""we'll have to do something drastic about Cuba"" and I am anxiously looking forward to the JCS operational plan which U to be pvetented to ms next week.
McCone effected the above instructions by calling Mr Cline, who was unavailable, and then Mr Sheldon who agreed to prepare a procedure for review fan Thursday morning.
McCone then called the Attorney General and advi*ed him of bis talk with the Cannon Committee.
At 11:15 General Elsenhower called McCone stating he waa sorry a meeting could not be arranged, he was leaving very early the following morning for Gettysburg.
McCone told General Eisenhower there vero torna defendable evidences of shipments of twin-engined light jet bombers.
Positive action might b« indicated and then he said there had bven two instances where action was warranted but had not been takes.
Eisenhower did not elaborate; however, I know from previous discussions ha feels that when Castro embraced Communism publicly and announced publicly his allegiance to Moscow, we had then a reason to act militarily and if we had chosen to so act, such action would have been defendable.
On Thursday morning McCone reported by telephone to Mr Kennedy, reviewing the Eiaenhowar discussion and stating that he, McCone, was concerned over Donovan's safety In view of the rash of publicity, most particularly ths Hsrald Tribune article, and that he had instructed that contact b« made with Donovan and that if things were not proceeding satisfactorily and a conclusion to tha negotiations along the lines agreed in sight, then Donovan should coma out.
MeCone stated he was not so sure and that he therefore concluded to bring Donovan out unless things were going well.
With reference to the political implications, McCone recalled that he hsd told the President and tha AG that he would take all, or his full share of responsibility, that he wished ths AG to bear this In mind as the position taken in this respsct by Mr McCone in the first conversation after his return from Europe still stood.
Subseauent research by the interpreters, comparing the August 29th photography with that of two similar installations recently noted elsewhere, had by September 14th enabled them to identify the installation as a cruise missile site.
Prior to the finding of offensive ballistic missiles in Cuba, quite a different public attitude existed.
In planning for any U-2 operations over well-defended, denied territory we were always aware of criticism that attended the U-2 incident over the USSR in May of 1960.
The two incidents involving the straying of a U-2 over Sakhalin on August 30th and the loss of a Chinese Nationalist U-2 over the China mainland on September 8th served to sharpen the already existing apprehensions.
There were expressions of extreme concern from some publ'c leaders over the increase in tension that might result from overflights, and others voiced the opinion that such flights were illegal or immoral.
Although many public figures conceded the necessity of the United States securing intelligence by whatever means required, they were quick to -jaution that the use of the U-2 was quite a different matter from the classical use of spies and agents.
Bach track was drawn to cover high priority targets agreed upon by an inter-agency group known as the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance, a committee of the Un ted States Intelligence Board.
At the time the Soviet arms build-up began in Cuba, flights over Cuba were being forecast and flown at the rate of two per month.
Late in August, Mr McCone suggested to General Carter, who was acting as DCI during Mr McCone1 s absence, that low-level reconnaissance of Cuba be proposed.
General Carter requested the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance to consider the kind of information that could be obtained thus.
As a result of the Committee's deliberations and because of the heavy cloud cover encountered over eastern Cuba on the September 5th mission, General Carter, on September 10th, 1962, addressed a memorandum to the Secretary of Defense recommending that the.Secretary initiate the necessary action to provide for employ­ment of tactical-type reconnaissance against Banes, which was still unidentified, or other targets identified by the Committee on Overhead Reconnaissance as being suitable for low-level reconnaissance.
A special meeting was held on September 10th to ;onsider the specific track for that second flight.
General Carter presented a CIA proposal for a single high-level flight designed specifically to photograph the Banes area, where earlier photography had not been conclusive, and generally to search for SAM sites in those areas of central and eastern Cuba that had not been covered since the September 5th flight.
He pointed out that the long peripheral flight would draw undue attention to the mission and further that should the aircraft fall into enemy hands after an overflight had occurred, this would put the United States in a very poor position for standing on its rights to overfly international waters.
Taking these views into account the plan was changed and four flights were substituted for the one.
The delay in completing the photographic coverage was due solely to the unfavorable weather predicted durfng this period.
Much of Cuba was under heavy cloud cover throughout most of September, and the cloud patterns were rapidly and continually changing.
The few periods of acceptable weather were so fleeting that they had passed before flights could be mounted.
The weather was checked for a possible mission every day beginning on September 6th.
There was a oneor twoday period around the middle of the month when the forecasts were moderately favorable.
This was the first of the four flights agreed upon on September 10th, and it was the first day or. which weather permitted a successful flight.
A flight was launched but it aborted because of aircraft fuel problems.
The flight along the northeastern coast was successfully flown the next day, October 7th.
As the September overflight program progressed, identifying additional SAM sites, it became apparent that an island-wide SA-2 defense was being constructed.
The group reauested JCS, and CIA to examine all alternative means of conducting aerial reconnaissance and to report back as soon as possible.
Accordingly, the track of the flight planned at the October 9th meeting to test the operational readiness of the known SAM sites was drawn to cover the area in which MRBM's were suspected.
The weather was checked daily on October 10th, 11th and 12th, but the forecasts were unfavorable.
As of October 16th, blanket authority was given for unrestricted overflights of Cuba.
Attached at Tab A is a summary of weather forecasts and the status of missions, S September through 14 October 1962.
In weighing their decision to install ballistic cissiles ia Cuba, tho Soviet leaders must have considered the military utility of these weapons with and without nuclear warheads, the targets in the United States and elsewhere which they could reach, and the strategic value of deploying missile forces of various sizes in Cuba.
Because of their type of guidance and relative inaccuracy, ballistic missilcs have utility against fixed targets of known location, and not against such targets as convoys or naval forces at sea.
It is highly unlikely that the Soviets would see' any advantage in deployment for this purpose, but they might regard this threat as contribution to the deterrence of Latin American support for United States or Cuban refugee opera tions against the Castro regime.
From the present base area in Cuba, 700m. missiles with nuclear warheads could reach eastern United States targets within an arc including Savannah and New Orleans, including 7 SAC bomber and tanker bases and at least one important naval base.
The 1,100m, missile would threaten a much more significant number of critical military targets, including 18 SAC bomber and tanker bases, an ICBM base, and three major naval bases.
In addition, such targets as the Panama Canal and United States bases as far east as Puerto Rico could bo reached.
On Monday evening, 15 October late, I was Informed that the latest readout from Cuban U-2 photography indicated initial deployment of Medium Range Ballistic Missiles.
I immediately authorised the dissemination of this information on. a very limited need-to-know basis to USIB members and their immediate commanders.
On Tuesday morning at 11:45 I attended an NSC Meeting at the White House which included the President, Secretary Rusk, Secretary Ball, Secretary Martin, Secretary McNamara, Secretary Cilpatric, General Taylor, the Vice President, Secretary Dillon, the Attorney General, Mr McGeorge Bundy, and myself.
I made a preliminary briefing to the group as to what we thought we saw and Mr Lund ah I and Mr Graybeal eacpanded thereon.
Secretary Rusk was greatly disturbed about this new development but pointed out that Mr Me Cone had predicted such a possibility back in mid-August.
Here he was referring to infiltration and sabotage efforts; We should review our policy on a provisional government and try to get all the various factions working together.
In any event, we must keep Cuba isolated from the Free World although in doing so we must not isolate ourselves.
Mr McNamara pointed out thai if we are going to take overt military action, it must at all costs be done on a 100% basis and before any of the missiles become operational.
General Taylor pointed out that the element of surprise would be essential but since this would then be a one-shot operation, we should establish an immediate blockade and then look toward invasion although this latter prospect did not enthuse him.
He stated that the decision to invade would be the hardest one to make because of the long-time involvements and the lack of any substitute for the Castro regime.
Mr Bundy pointed out that the Soviet decision must have been made early in the summer and that these missiles probably arrived in Cuba at about the time the President was making bis policy statements.
The President pointed out that the missiles certainly had to be removed one way or another, and stated that he would meet again at six o'clock thai evening with his advisers, la the meantime there was much information to be gathered and much analysis to be don* as to pros and cons of all the various courses of action.
He authorised as many U-2 flights as needed to get full, complete, 100% coverage of the island.
Notification of NSC Officials of Intelligence on Missile Bases in Cuba 1.
At aicut 2100 on the evening of 25 October the President called me on the phone at a dinner party I was attending at the apartment of Mrs.
Anna Ghennault, widow of the late General, at 4101 Cathedral Avenue, He said he had heard stories that CIA officers were alleging that intelligence on offensive missile bases in Cuba had been available for several days before it was called to the attention of the President.
He asked me to confirm that I was responsible for the analysis of this kind of intelligence and appropriate dissemination of it to higher authorities, and to tell him the facts in the case.
I told the President that I Tras responsible in CIA for substantive analysis of intelligence and the dissemination of current intelligence to the President and the National Security Council.
I said I could state categorically that the stories he had heard were untrue, since I was sure the mission with the first photography of the MRBM offensive bases was flown on 14 October and it took approximately 24 hours for the film to be returned, processed, delivered to the National Photographic Interpreta­tion Center and scanned by PI analysts.
I said I was sure the technical analysis did not turn up the evidence until late afternoon or early evening of 15 October, that I myself heard of it first at that time, and that we completed the analysis before passing the information formally to the White House on tie morning of 16 October.
In view of concern over this period of intelligence handling of this sensitive information, I have tried to reconstruct what I know of the events of the evening of 15 October and morning of 16 October, as follows.
Under direct orders from the President, given to me and General Carter at the White House several weeks earlier when the possibility that the Banes coast-defense missile was a longer-range weapon, I had issued instructions to tha Director, NFIC, to see that intelligence on new offensive weapons in Cuba came to me as soon as analysis had identified the type of weapon and that absolutely no dissemination of this intelligence should be made without my approval.
Cn 15 October I spent all afternoon at the opening sessions of the Commonwealth Intelligence Methods Conference.
When I returned to my office at 1730 I found a delegation of PI and military intelligence analysts awaiting me.
The DCI had gone to the tfest Coast and General Carter was then at an informal reception for the Commonwealth conferees in the Executive Dining Rooa at the Headquarters building in LIcLean.
I said it would take several hours to vnrap up a definitive report with fully considered analysis.
General Garter said he was going to dinner with General Taylor and General Carroll and would let them know.
McGeorge Bundy for the White House and he said he thought he might be at the dinner and would notify him there.
I instructed them to complete a written report and stand by for action early the next morning.
A few minutes later I decided it was a mistake to wait until morning to alert the key officers at the White House and State Department, so they should insure early attention to the problem on the next day.
I assumed General Garter would have alerted the Pentagon adequately via JCS and DIA but that he might have missed the ¥hite House.
Accordingly I called Mr McGeorge Bundy, found he had not seen General Carter, and double-talked the information to him in broad terms.
I had more difficulty indicating securely to him that I really meant MRBM's rather than aircraft or other equipment we had anticipated, but the light finally dawned and he called the Secretary of State to pass on the word.
At Mr Bundy's invitation I went immediately to his office, having cleared this with General Carter, who had another engagement and instructed me to follow through on the Vftiite House formal notification.
If I remembeer correctly, Alex Johnson also came in to get the briefing.
At any rate Mr Bundy said that he had arranged an 1100 meeting whith the President to fill him in and consider the United States policy problems involved.
I showed him the memorandum we had prepared, discussed the evidence, and advised his Graybeal could support him fully with analytical back-up.
I said I felt the Acting DCI should handle the briefing of tie President, with which General Garter agreed; that he probably did not need me, with which he somewhat reluctantly agreed; and that somebody had better get back to see that the DCI an the West Coast got the word, and continue research and analysis on the Cuban missile problem with all of which General Carter heartily agreed.
I presume General Carter did surface the automation at 1100, the DCI returned later that afternoon, and a whirlwind of intelligence reporting and policy formulation on Cuba set in from which we have not yet recovered.
At 2:30 this afternoon, the Attorney General convened in his office a meeting on Operation MONGOOSE consisting of General Lansdale and Colanel Patebell, General Johnson of the Joint Staff, Robert Hurwitch of State , Hewson Ryan of USIA, and the undersigned.
He indicated tbat there had been noticeable improvement during the year in the collection of intelligence but that other actions had failed to influence significantly the course of events in Cuba.
He spoke of the weekly meetings of top officials on this problem and again noted the snail accomplishments despite the fact that Secretaries Husk and HcKamara, General Taylor, McGeorge Bundy, and he personally had all been charged by the President with finding a solution.
He obviously did not like the earlier memarandum, since he felt it shoved no ""push"" in getting on witb the acts of sabotage.
When aaked for my comments, I stated that we were prepared to get on with the new action program and that we would execute it aggressively.
I pointed out, hovever, that the objective of Operation MONGOOSE would have to be determined at same point since the Cubans with whom we have to work were seeking a reason for risking their lives in these operations.
I retailed my conversation with the young Cuban from the DRE who pointed out that they were willing to commit their people only on operations which they regarded as sensible.
I defined ""sensible"" in Cuban terminology these days as meaning an action which would contribute to the liberation of thedr country, another way of saying that the United States, perhaps to conjunction with other Latin countries, would bail them out mili­tarily.
She At­torney General's rejoinder was a plea for new ideas of things that could be done against Cuba.
He said that these meetings might later be changed to every other day when and if he finds a daily get-together is not necessary, The meetings are to last no more than one-half hour.
An examination of photography from Mission 3101 dated 14 October 1962 has revealed an MRBM Launch Site and two new military encampments located along the southern edge of the Sierra Del Rosario in west central Cuba.
Equipment includes at least 5 canvas-covered missile trailers, approximately 75 vehicles and 18 tents.
Equipment includes 35 vehicles, 15 large tents, 8 small tents, 7 buildings and 1 building under constjmction.
ARTHUR G LUNDAHL Director National Photographic Interpretation Center 51.
McCone meeting schedule.-23 October 1962 17 October 1962 Wednesday 8:30m.
Meeting at State Department with study group 20 October 1962 Saturday 8:30m.
Stated Kohler discussions with Khrushchev did not fit in with Soviet action in Cuba.
Suggested we might give Khrushchev an ""out"" on the grounds that he does not know what is going on in Cuba and discussed various types of action ranging from a limited military strike to minimise losses to the calling of a Summit conference.
IL 28's have been delivered Three MRBM sites under construction and can be ready in two weeks Warhead locations unknown; also unknown whether MRBM's are nuclear or conventional.
Me Cone responded by reading numbered paragraphs 2, 3, and 4 of attached memorandum dated October 17th.
Thompson emphasised Khrushchev wants Berlin settlement but on his terms.
Also Khrushchev recognises that action by us would be derisive among our allies.
McCone reviewed recent Chicadee reports, indicated considerable automony in hands of field commanders much more so than we have.
The establishment of a ""trading position"" to force removal of United States overseas baaes.
To satisfy their ambitions in Latin America by this show of determination and courage againat the American Imperialist.
This will increase tension everywhere and undoubtedly bring retaliation against United States foreign military installations, where substabtial United States casualties would result.
McCone memorandum, 17 October 1962 October 17, 1962 Several alternatives indicated below were posed for consideration at the close of meeting covered by memorandum dated October 7th.
Effect on the ""balance of nuclear powor equation"" of the MRBM installations in Cuba.
Turkey, and other countries had lived under the Soviet MRBMs for years; therefore, why should the United States be so concerned.
Warning to Khrushchev and Castro and if tha response is unsatisfactory, convening Congress, seeking a declaration of war, and proceeding with an all-out blockade.
McCone memorandum, ""Brief Discussion with the President—9:30m.—17 October 1962"" Brief Discussion with the President 9:30m. 17 October 1962 Confirmed the situation and explored possible actions.
President seamed inclined to act promptly if at all, without warning, targetting on MRBM's and possibly airfields.
I briefed Eisenhower on all aspects of the recent Cuban-Soviet build-up and showed him. the U-2 pictures of three MRBM missile sites under development.
With respect to the current situation, Eisenhower felt that it would prove to be intolerable, that its purposes can not be clearly defined, and that discussions or adamant demands to either Khrushchev or Castro or both, would be of no avail.
Secretary Ball emphasized the importance of time, stating that if action was over cuickly, the reoercussions would not he too serious.
McNamara took issue claining that the military equation would not be changed by the appearance of these missiles.
Bohlen and Thompson questioned the real purpose of the Soviet's actions in Cuba and seemed to feel that their acts may be in preparation for a confrontation with President Kennedy at which time they would seek to settle the entire subject of overseas bases as well as the Berlin question.
McCone presented most recent photographs and indicated CIA opinion that the first missiles will be operational wi&in one or two weeks.
MeCone stated that we must all bear in mind that we have two objectives, one, disposing of the missile sites, and the other, getting rid of Castro's communism in the Western Hemisphere.
The meeting adjourned for dinner and in the evening Secretary Rnsk came forward with the following plan.
We should be alert for an attack on Turkey and be prepared for the consequences in Berlin, Quernoy, Matsu, Korea, etc.
Also during the course of these meetings, McCone reported to the group and later to the President the results of his discussions with General Eisenhower, as covered in the attached memorandum of October 17th, this subject.
These were all referred to as State papers and some were revised the following day.
October 1962 MEMORANDUM FOR FILE Early in the morning of October 18th, Secretary McNamara called Mr McCone at his residence expressing great concern over the reports from NPIC as a result of their examination of the two flights run on October 15th.
Lundahl was at the house with the enlargements which indicated that, in addition to the three mobile MRBM sites detected on flight October 14th, there appeared to be now two IRBM sites with fixed launchers zeroed in on the Eastern United States.
Ke furthermore indicated that this would be an indication of weakness which would have serious effect on our Allies.
This, he indicated taught have the possibility of prevention of action and settlement by political meana.
One to study the advantages of what might be called a Blow course of action which would involve a blockade to be followed by such further actions as appeared ' necessary as the situation evolved.
Although there is continuing improvement of these sites, these mobile missiles must be considered operational now and could be launched within 18 hours after the decision to launch.
A refire from each launcher could be accomplished within 5 hours after the initial firing.
Fixed, soft sites which could achieve initial operational capability during December 1962 are now being developed near Havana.
We believe that the 2200-nm intermediate range ballistic missile is probably intended for these sites.
However, there are seven, large Cuban munitions' storage areas south of Havana which could be converted to Soviet needs in a relatively short time.
It is likely thatther installations now being examined in photography will raise the number to 32, all of which could be ready in the next week.
Offensive missiles systems are being introduced into Cuba primarily through the Port of Mariel.
It is significant that all three of the Soviet missiles now being deployed in Cuba (SS-4, SS-5, SA-2) probably use red fuming nitric acid as an oxidizer so that a common propellant supply and storage could be used.
By deploying stockpiled shorter range ballistic missiles at overseas bases against which we have no BMEWS warning capability, the Soviet Union will supplement its ICBM home force in a significant way.
This same offensive force also poses a common threat to the U.S. and a large portion of Latin America for the first time.
This site is in a more advanced state of readiness and could have the essential features for an operational capability within one month.
These new sites are not included in the numbers appearing elsewhere in this paper.
Continued surveillance would go ""forward so that we would know of the siutation within Cuba, as it evolved.
The possibility of more extreme actions has not been dismissed,however initiating such actions was considered unwise.
The argument in favor of the blockade was principally that it initiated a positive action which could be intensified at our will or could be relaxed depending upon evolving circumstances.
Soviet reactions are expected to be severe and very probably involve a blockade of Berlin and a widespread propaganda effort, however it was considered that w«« could have some control over the extent of Soviet reaction and in the event of a confrontation, would be negotiating from a position of positive action which would be intensified at our own direction.
October 1962 Steps which would make air strike more acceptable to blockade group.
Prior notice to Khrushchev by message from the President giving Soviets capability of backing down and strengthening our case with our Allies and world opinion in the event that Khrushchev takes such action as blokade Berlin.
Some effort to try to minimize number of Soviets killed, or at least show we wanted to avoid them.
Message to Khrushchev might urge him to remove Soviet technicians immediately.
Example President might make reference to Soviet construction of ""Fishing Port"" in Cuba, saying that in view other Soviet actions we are convinced Soviets were constructing Naval base.
No attack on Havana to avoid killing foreign diplomats and thus arousing public opinion against us in those countries.
A major Soviet objective in their military buildup in Cuba is to demonstrate that tbe world balance of forces has shifted so far in their favor that the United States can no longer prevent the advance of Soviet offensive power even into its own hemisphere.
In this cnnection they assume, of course, that these deployments sooner or later will become publicly known.
The public withdrawal of Soviet missiles from Cuba would create serious problems in the USSR's relations with Castro; it vould cast doubt on the firmness of the Soviet intention to protect the Castro regime and perhaps on their commitments elsewhere.
Conversely, anti-Communists and those who relate their own interests to these of the United States would be strongly discouraged.
It seems clear that, especially over the leng run, there would be a loss of confidence in United States power and determination and a serious decline of United States influence generally.
If the United States confronts Khrushchev with its knowledge of the MRBM deployment and presses for a withdrawal, we do not believe the Soviets would halt ths deployment.
The attitudes of other states toward a blockade action are not considered in this paper„ It is obvious that the Soviets would heavily exploit all adverse reactions.
This would be true whetter the action was limited to an effort to neutralize the strategic missiles, or these missiles plus airfields, surface-to-air mlssile sites, or cruise mnissile sites, or in fact an outright invasion designed to destroy the Castro regime.
In reaction to any of the various forces of United States action, the Soviets would be alarmed and agitated, since they have to date estimated that the United States would not take military action in the face of Soviet warnings of the danger of nuclear war.
They vculd recognize that United States military action posed a major challenge to the prestige of the USSR, We must of course recognize the possibility that the Soviets, under pressure to respond, vould again miscalculate end respond in a way which, thrcugh a series of actions and reactions, could escalate to general war.
Qi the other hand, the Soviets have no public treaty with Cuba and have not acknowledged that Soviet bases are on the island.
We do net believe that the USSR would attack tbe US, either from Soviet bases or with Its missiles in Cuba, even if tbe latter were operational and not put out of action before they could be readied for firing, 12.
They might react here with major barassments, interruptions of access to the city or even a blocfcade, with or without the signing of a separate peace treaty.
We believe that whatever course of retaliation the USSR elected, the Soviet leaders would not deliberately initiate general war or take military measures, which in their calculation, would run the gravest risks of general war.
At least one Soviet regiment of 1020-nm medium range ballistic missiles is now deployed in western Cuba at two launch sites near San Cristobal.
Each of these sites presently contains eight missiles and four unrevetted, field-type launchers which rely on mobile erection, checkout, and support equipment.
We believe that the 2200-nm IRBM is probably intended for these sites because they closely resemble Soviet sites believed to be associated with testing and deployment of this missile system.
Site 1 is considered :o be in a midto late-stage of construction and should be operational within six weeks.
The 2200-nm IRBMs could have 3to 5-megaton warheads, if our planning estimate for the payload weight is correct.
Possible central missile checkout, storage, and repair bases have been located at Soroa, between the two estern deployment areas, and at Managua, south of Havana.
It is significant that three of the Soviet missiles now being deployed in Cuba probably use red fuming nitric acid as the oxidizer, permitting exploitation of a common system for propellant supply and storage.
These cruise missiles have a range of 35 to 40 miles and are probably derived from the AS-1.
Such SA-2 sites provide for six launchers with missiles, and an additional six missiles in an adjacent hold area.
Reload and refire from a single launcher will take approximately 3 to 5 minutes.
There are several refugee reports indicating the presence of tactical missiles in Cuba, although there is no photographic confirmation thus far.
By deploying stockpiled MRBMTRBMs at overseas bases, the Soviet Union will supplement its ICBM home force in a significant way.
The planning for this operation must have started at least one year ago and the operation itself begun last spring.
Firm evidence indicates the presence in Cuba of four MRBM and two IRB3M launch sites in various stages of construction and organized into at least three regiments.
Of these, two regiments of eight launchers each are mobile and designed to launch MRBMs with a range of about 1,100m., while one regiment of eight fixed launchers may be designed for IRBMs with a range of about 2,200m.
In any case, it is prudent to assume that when the missiles are otherwise operational, nuclear warheads will be available.
We estimate that operational MRBM missiles can be fired in eight hours or less after a decision to launch, depending on the condition of readiness.
It is possible that further evidence will uncover additional launch sites which are presently undetected, but the extent of our coverage leads us to believe that such evidence would not drastically iIncrease the total now deployed.
In the near future, therefore, Soviet gross capabilities for initial attack on United States mlitary and civilian targets can be increased considerably by Cuban-based nissiles.
Consequently, it is unlikely that the USSR is installing these missiles primarily in order to use them in bargaining for United States concessions elsewhere.
If the United States acquiesces to the presence of strategic nissiles In Cuba, we believe that the Soviets will continue the buildup.
We have no basis for estimating the force level whlch they would wish to reach, but It seems entirely clear now that they are going well beyond a token capability.
This course of United States action would provide strong encouragement to Conmunlsts, pro-Communists, and the more anti-American sectors of opinion in Latin America.
We believe that, especially over the long run, there would be loss of confidence in United States power and determination and a serious decline of United States influence, particularly in Latin Anerica.
Should any additional Latin American government fall to the Communists the Soviets would feel free to establish bases in the country in question if they chose.
A major immediate consequence would be that the Soviets would probably estimate lower risks in pressing the United States ham in other confrontations, such as Berlin.
Instead, tbey would propose negotiations on the general question of foreign bases, claiming equal right to establish Soviet bases and assuring the United States of tight control over the missiles.
They might risk violent encounters in attempts to penetrate the blockade, but they would not resort to major force in the area of Cuba or forceful retaliation' elsewhere, at least initially.
If United States enforcement of the blockade involved use of force by the US, the Soviets night respcad en an equivalent level, but vculd seek to avoid escalation.
Thus any blockade situation would place the Soviets under no immediate pressure to cheese a response with force.
They cculd rely on political means to compel the United States to desist, and reserve a resort to force until the United States had actually used force.
They would estiisate that the inherent difficulties of enforcing the blockade and the generally adverse reactions, including those of United States allies to it, would result in enormous pressures on the United States to desist.
They could heighten these pressures by threatening retaliation in Berlin or actually undertaking major harassments on the access routes, which could become tantamount to a blockade, and would probably do so at some stage.
He do not believe that even a severe blockade, of itself, would bring down the Cuban regime.
Castro would tighten internal security and, unless action against the regime subsequently developed on Cuban soil, the Cuban population would be increasingly reluctant to oppose the regime.
In the case of United States use of force against Cuban territory, the likelihood cf a Soviet response by force, either locally or for retaliation elsewhere, would fce greater than in the case of blockade.
The Soviets would be placed automatically under great pressure to respond in ways which, if they could not save Cuba, would inflict an offsetting injury to United States interests.
This would be true whether the action was limited to an effort to neutralize the missiles, or these missiles plus airfields, surface-to-air missile sites, or cruise missile sites, or in fact an outright invasion designed to destroy the Castro regime.
In reaction to any of the various forms of United States action, the Soviets would be surprised and probably alarmed, since they appear to have estimated that the United States would probably not take military action in the face of Soviet warnings of the danger of nuclear war.
Since the USSR would almost certainly not resort to general war ard could not hope to prevail locally, we believe that the Soviets would consider retaliatory actions outside Cuba.
The timing and selection of such coves would depend heavily upon immediate context of events and the USSR'S appreciation of United States attitude.
They vould probably react here with major harassments, interruptions of access to the city or even a blockade, with or without the signing of a separate peace treaty.
Retaliation against some United States installation overseas is possible but in our view unlikely.
We believe that there vcmld probably be a difference between Soviet reaction to all-out invasion and Soviet reaction to more limited United States use of force against selected objectives in Cuba.
We recognize that such an estimate cannot be made with very great assurance and do not rule out the possibility of Soviet retaliation outside Cuba in case of invasion.
Finally, we believe that, whatever course of retaliation the USSR elected, tbe Soviet leaders would not deliberately initiate general war or take military measures, which in their calculation, would run grave risks of general war.
We want to bring you up to date very briefly on the deployment of Soviet military weapons systems to Cuba.
You have been briefed many times on the major buildup of equipment in Cuba prior to mid-October.
There are four and possibky five MRBM aites deployed in field-type installations.
Two of these sites probably are in a state of at least limited operational readiness at this time.
All of the sites are in a state of continuous construction and improvement and we would expect the remaining MRBM sites to become operational in about one week.
In addition two fixed IRBM sites {with four launch pads at each site and permanent storage facilities) are being constructed near Havana.
One of these sites appears to be in a stage of construction that leads to an estimate of operational readiness of six weeks from now,e. about 1 December and the other in a stage indicating operational readiness between 15 December and the end of the year.
We have not seen nuclear warheads for any of these missiles, but we do not rely on ever seeing them, in our photography.
We have found what appears to be a nuclear warhead storage facility at one of the IRBM sites at Guanajay, near Havana.
It will probably be completed about 1 December along with the missile site itself.
Since the missile systems in question are relatively ineffective without them, we believe warheads either are or will be available.
The Poltava, a Soviet ship which we think the most likely carrier of security-sensitive military cargoes into the tightly guarded port of Mariel has made two trips to Cuba and is due back in about ten days.
In summary, we believe the evidence indicates the probability that eight MRBM missiles can be fired from Cuba today.
If able to refire, they could theoretically deliver the same load approximately five hours later.
Analysis of the comparative photographic coverage of the offensive-missile sites in Cuba now leads us to conclude that the Soviets did not have as their main objective an immediate operational capability at any of the identified sites.
From the status of the sites as of our last coverage , we estimate that Site 1 could now have full operational readiness and that Site 2 could achieve this status by 25 October.
By full operational readiness we mean the ability to launch in salvo four missiles per site with a retire capability of four missiles per site within 4 to 6 hours.
Although we are unable to determine a precise date for an operational capability, we believe these sites may be ready to launch missiles between 1 December and 15 December.
Foundations of structures which might be intended to be future nuclear warhead storage facilities have been observed at the San Cristobal Sites 1 and 3 and at Sagua La Grande Site 1.
The tank trailers observed in the quay area of the Puma Gerardo port facility are similar to those seen in 22 May 1962 photography taken before security fences were erected.
Two of these sites, Santa Lucia and Deleite, each have an alternate site located 3 to 5 nm from the primary site.
The KOMARs must return to base or to a tender for reloading. ... for these craft have not yet been identified in Cuba.
Tne remaining two have been observed operating in the Mariel area, but it is not known nether they are based there or were operating from the Havana base.
Tne KOMARs have all been transported to Cuba as deck cargo on Soviet ships, two and four per shipload.
The apparent Soviet objective to rapidly achieve full operational status for their MRBM and IRBM regiments rather than to achieve an immediate operational capability at each site as the missiles and equipment arrive, may be very significant to the planners judging various Soviet courses of action.
It is believed that sufficient copies have been forwarded to you to meet the immediate operational requirement for preparation of briefings.
Marshall S Carter Lieutenant General, USA Deputy Director of Central Intelligence EVALUATION OF OFFENSIVE THREAT IN CUBA Significance 1.
The sizes of the missiles, associated equipment, and buildings found at the San Cristobal and Sagua La Grande sites are almost identical and are compatible with the 1000-nm missile system.
Two fixed sices for 2200-nm, ballistic missiles are under construction in the Guanajay area near Havana.
An additional fixed site has been observed at Remedios in Eastern Cuba which is similar to those at Guanajay.
This is probably a valid indicator of deployment of a second grouping of 2200-nm ballistic missiles.
These craft have all been transported to Cuba as deck cargo on Soviet ships, two and four per shipload.
Whereas it probably took several weeks to establish base and logistic support for the first craft to become integrated fully operational units, additional units can probably become operational within one week after offloading.
It was decided that at a minimum an air strike must include both the missile sites and the air fields and such SAM sites aa ara necessary, and General Taylor was instructed to plan accordingly.
The Attorney General failed to make an absolute recommendation with respect to future military actions, indicating this question could be decided as the situation developed from day to day, and that only preparatory steps should be taken now.
McCone urged on the other hand that the President in a public statement indicate an intention to remove the missiles and other potential weapons by means and at a time of his own choosing if surveillance did not prove conclusively that the Soviets and the Cubans were removing them.
The meeting adjourned to be reconvened at 2:30, with additional principals in attendance.
On my report of my discussion with General Eisenhower at my residence this morning, the following information was given later to the Attorney General.
Therefore Eisenhower would accept the handicaps from a military point of view, of warning or notice, and therefore would follow the suggested plan of initiating a blockade, conducting intense surveillance, and announcing the intention of taking military action if the Soviets and the Cubans either maintained the status quo of their missile installations or continued the construction of their missile bases.
Meeting with the Vice President en 21 October 1962 On Sunday night, October 21 at 8:30 I briefed Vice President Lyndon Johnson »t the request of the President, conveyed through McGeorge Bundy.
The briefing involved a review of photography by Lundahl paralleling briefings given to General Eisenhower and others.
We then discussed policy and details of the proposed speech by the President in considerable detail.
The thrust of the Vice President's thinking was that he favored an unannounced strike rather than the agreed plan which Involved blockade and strike and invasion Later if conditions warranted.
IX followed the position and the arguments used in my briefing paper of 20 October.
The Vice President finally agreed reluctantly but only after learning among other things the support Indicated by General Eisenhower.
Thus weaken Western resolve and unity in countering Soviet moves in the East-West global contest, particularly over Berlin and Germany.
IV. the first indication that the USSR had taken a decision on Cuba came in late July.
A At that time, 4 Soviet passenger ships after a voyage under secrecy conditions arrived at the western Cuban naval base, Mariel.
As of 20 October, fifteen such unpublicized passenger voyages have been counted.
In early August, dry cargo vessels began arriving in unprecedented numbers.
The earlier deliveries, up to about 1 September, appeared to consist largely of military construction, transportation, and electronics equipment, and led to speculation that the Soviets might be deploying a SAM system.
Photography of 29 August and 5 September confirmed that a SAM systen was being deployed.
One MIG-21 was seen, as were eight Komar-class missile boats and one land-based anti-shipping cruise missile site.
Support sites—six presently identified, still field-type, but signs of permanent-type installation appearing.
Readiness—as of 17 October, 17 sites appeared— in photography—to have both missiles on launchers and the essential radar in position.
Only one, however, has emplaced around it the radar-controlled guns which normally are installed to provide some defense against low-flying aircraft.
About 60 15's, 17's and 19's arrived prior to 1 January 62, and there are now at least 39 MIG-21s.
While there is no direct evidence of air-to-air missiles in Cuba, such equipment is being supplied to Indonesia, Egypt, and probably to Iraq, We think it likely that Cuba will get at least equal treatment.
Made connection between Berlin and Cuba as part of effort to demonstrate seriousness of Soviet commitment to Castro, but discreetly enough to avoid Western counteraction.
C As of 17 October, four aircraft had been uncrated, of which one is partially assembled.
The observation of IL-28 crates led us to mount an intensive reconnaissance effort, beginning on 15 October.
The photography showed, for the first time, the deployment of surface-to-surface ballistic missile systems.
A We have identified four and possibly six sites for the 1,100-n.m. missile and two fixed sites for the 2,200-n.m. missile.
Another two sites are near Sagua La Grande just east of Havana, ffe have identified six of the eight launchers and seven of the sixteen missiles.
There is preliminary evidence of two additional sites near San Cristobal.
The keys to these identifications are the size of the missile body, the unique erector-launcher equipment, and the position and spacing of equipment.
The missile corresponds exactly in length to those observed in parades in Moscow.
The 1,020-mile-range missile is a single-stage ballistic missile using storable liquid fuels.
Photography alone cannot permit us to be very precise about the operational readiness of these missiles.
The sites at Sagua La Grande will probably not achieve the same stage of construction until 1 November or later.
These sites are still in fairly early stage of construction which we do not expect to be completed until some time in December.
We know less about the 2,200-mile missile, but believe it to be also single-stage, using storable liquid fuels and with an autonomous guidance system.
There is new evidence of the beginning of construction of what may be a new fixed four-pad MRBM or IRBM missile site at Remedias, East of Havana.
A However, we are pretty sure that a facility being constructed near the IRBMH site at Guanajay is a nuclear storage facility.
B In any case it is prudent to assume that when the missiles are otherwise operational, nuclear warheads will be available.
Based on known voyages of ships, we believe at least 8,000 Soviet military and about 3,000 non-military personnel are now in Cuba.
This matches fairly well with our estimate that the Soviets would need about 10,000 military for the assembly activity now going on.
For pre-emptive or first strike purposes, Cuban missiles have an advantage over Soviet-based ICBH's — shorter flight times and no BMEWS detection.
C Sites now identified will, when completed, give Soviets total of 36 launchers and 72 missiles.
There are clear indications that at least five Soviet offensive missile regiments, each with eight launchers and at least sixteen missiles, will become operational in Cuba.
Director of Central Intelligence Director, Defense Intelligence Agency SUBJECT: Additional Information Missions 3111 and 3113 1.
A newly identified possible launch site, five oreviously reported MRBM launch sites and two IRBM launch sites were observed on Mission 3111.
A newly identified confirmed MRBM launch site was located on Mission 3113.
MR Site 1 The seven canvas covered missiles are now draped with netting and three of the four erectors are canvas covered, MR Site 2 The six missiles and three erectors are parked in a common area.
MR Site 3 Cloud cover prevents a corrolete analysis; however, one erector and possibly two others are observed.
The Sauga La Grande area MR Site 4 consists of four launch positions, two containing erectors and six canvas covered*-isslles or. trailers and MH Site 5 consists of four erectors or. pads and four canvas covered missiles on trailers.
ARTHUR C LUNDAHL Director National Photographic Interpretation Center 77.
Attached are copies of the cables Mr Karamessines discussed with you yesterday.
The Soviet decision to embark on the current military buildup in Cuba probably was Made in April 1962.
The decision paralleled political and economic moves which gxeatly strengthened the Soviet-Cuban relationship.
The program probably was planned and set in motion during the period April through June.
These units arrived in Cuba during the last week in July and by 1 August work had begun at several locations in Cuba.
The buildup in Cuba has been taking place in stages which can be distinguished reasonably well.
The first deliveries of men and equipment arrived in late July, and through most of August they appear to have been primarily of equipment for SAM and coastal defense missile installations.
Work started first in western Cuba and gradually spread throughout the island.
Eight of the 12 Komar guided-missile boats were delivered in August, as well as some land armaments.
Most of the 39 or more MIG-21s arrived during the first week of September.
Two shipments of IL-28 bombers—22 aircraft in all—appear to have arrived in late September, and a third shipment may be en route.
There is no sign of a slow-down in the military shipments; about 20 Soviet vessels are en route with probable military cargoes, and one or two are leaving Soviet ports almost daily.
There is no evidence of new rissile sites in Cuba since the report given to you at 2:30m. yesterday.
Thus what ve have seen to date completed or urderway is still 24 launcher positions for Medium Range Ballistic Missiles located at six base complexes, and 12 launch pads for Intermediate Eange Ballistic Missiles , located at three bases — a total of 36 launchers at nine separate bases.
As explained, we expect deployment of 2 missiles per launch position, but to date what we have actually seen are 30 and possibly 32 Medium Range Missiles.
We now estimate the remaining 2 MRBM sites will come into full and 29 October operational readiness on 25 October and 29 October respectively.
These MRBM's are considered mobile; they are fired from a trailer, bed type of launcher, and their location as now established right suddenly shift to a new location difficult to detersive by surveillance.
The 3 IRBM sites still seem likely to reach full operational readiness in December.
However, emergency operational readiness of some of the IRBMs might be reached somewhat earlier.
Of the 24 primary surface-to-air missile sites in Cuba, ve believe 22 are now operational.
The Soviet fleet Bupport vessel, TEREK, is new in the Atlantic on a high-speed run from the Kola Inlet Northern Fleet Base near Murmansk in Russia.
Leadership meeting on October 22nd at 5:00 ATTENDED BY: The Leadership, except for Senator Hayden, The President, Rusk, McNamira, McCone and Ambassador Thompson McCone read a summary of the situation, copy of which is attached.
There were a few questions of a substantive nature, Hickenlooper asking when missiles would he la operational status.
Secretary Rusk then reviewed his current appraisal of the Soviet Union indicating there had been some radical mores within the USSR which were indicating a tougher line.
He stated that he immediately ordered extensive overflights; that McCone briefed President Eisenhower; that we most recognise that these missiles might be operational and therefore military action on our part might cause the firing of many of them with serious consequences to the United States; furthermore the actions taken, and further actions which might be required, might cause the Soviets to react in various areas, most particularly Berlin, which they could easily grab and if they do, our European Allies would lay the blame in our lap.
We have no idea how the Bloc will reatt but the indications are, from unconfirmed sources, they will attempt to run the blockade.
It was the President's considere judgment that if we have to resort to active military actions, then this would involve an invasion.
Senator Rusaell then demanded stronger steps, stated he did not think we needed time to pause.
McNamara then described the blockade, indicating that this might lead to some form of military action; that th«r« would be many alternative courses open to us.
The President then reviewed in some detail time required Vinson then asked if the Joint Chiefs of Staff actually approved the plans for the invasion.
He said, ""One might question whether the misiiles are or are not offensive.
This was the first time anyone has raised doubt 2a to whether the MRBMa and the IRBMs are offensive missiles.
He then read the message received from the Prime Minister which in effect agreed to support as in the United Nations and then raised many warnings including the dangers to Berlin, Turkey, Pakistan, Iran, etc., etc.
A great many Senators expressed concern over the proposed action with the OA5, Indicating that they felt the OAS would delay rather than act.
Fulbright then stated that in his opinion the blockade was the worst of the alternatives open to us and it was a definite affront to Russia and that the moment that we had to damage or sink a Soviet ship because of their failure to recognise or respect the blockade we would be at war with Russia and the war would be caused because of our own initiative.
Fulb right then repeated his position and stated in hia opinion it would be far better to launch an attack and to take out the bases from Cuba.
Fulbright repeated that an act on Russian ships is an act of war against Russia and on the other hand, an attack or an invasion of Cuba was an act against Cuba, not Russia.
The meeting was concluded at 6:35 60 permit the President to prepare for his 7:00 o'clock talk to the nation.
During this meeting Senator Hickenlooper expressed himself a* opposed to the action and in favor of direct military action.
He stated that in his opinion snips which were accosted on the high sea and turned back would be a more humiliating blow to the Soviets and a more serious involvement to their pride than the losing of as many as 5,000 Soviet military personnel illegally and secretly stationed in Cuba.
Three additional MRBMs and four additional MRBM launchers raise the totals to 33 missiles and 23 launchers.
Lundahl displayed the most recent photographs snd a map showlng 97 per east coverage of the island.
Robert Kennedy stated that the question had been raised as to why tha situation was not reported earlier, what was wrong with our Intelligence.
It was agreed that the rapidity with which the MRBM site construction took place, and other events took place, accounted for the suddenness of the finding and that tha leadership and selected prats should be contacted privately.
DCI was requested to contact Fulbright, Russell, Vinson, Halleck, Dirksen, and Hiekenlooper, and for the press, Alsop, Krock and David Lawrence.
McNamara raised questios of when blockade proclamation will be issued, become effective, and discussed plane for the intercept of the first ship which would be the Kimovsk.
It waa decided that if OAS acted on Tuesday, the proclamation would be issued, effective Wednesday morning, October 24.
The President discussed the program, defending the steps taken, stated earlier action would not hare bean supported and would not have shot off the possibility at missiles, emphasised that mobile misailes can come in at any time and be sat up rapidly.
McNamara discussed several military actions. including extension of tours of duty of Navy and Marina Corps personnel, and these ware approved.
McNamara than raised question of reaction to firing on a U-2, indicated pilots instructed to take evasive action.
It was decided that we would bo immediately informed through JCS to the Secretary of Defense and a prompt decision for retaliation would then be made by the President.
Taylor reported eight attack aircraft are maintained in hot alert and can destroy SAM sites within two hours or approximately the time that the U-2 would get back if the attack on it failed.
It was requested that CIA and Defense carefully analyze air traffic and report currently so that if there is a marked build-up, the Committee will be advised and appropriate action can be taken.
McCone suggested consideration be given to taking foreign flag ships on a bare boat basis.
Xt was presumed that they will return not later than 1:00 o'clock today.
It Is very important that NPIC and DCIs office receive prints at earliest moment.
Also Important that if the photography is productive of new and more convincing information, print at should be sent to Governor Stevenson at once.
The President raised question of security of our own air fields in Florida during surprise strafing, etc.
After a brief discussim of communications Bundy stated that subject under study by Dr.
Following meeting McCone, Wiesner, Smith and Edwarde met and reviewed the CIA Latin American communication syitem.
This whole communication problem is to be followed up energetically by CIA with Wlesner and all appropriate actions taken.
Secretary Ball reported Goremor Stevenson and Mr McCloy felt they did not have enough information to make a convincing case before the UN Security Council.
They requested a large map marked in color, showing the actual locations of a few of the sites, possibly one MRBM site, one IRBM site and one or two air fields; pictures of the sites showing progressive construction with dates indicated; Indication, but not necessarily the numbers, of all of the sites; a pre-May 1.
Bundy explained idea of creating staff to support the Committee indicating each member should h»ve a working staff member, details to be worked out later.
DDCI should consider appropriate assignment after conferring with State and Defense and daterminiag their nominees.
Meetings with Mr Krock, Mr David Lawrence, and Mr Scott At 12:40 Mr Arthur Krock called at my office at my invitation.
I reviewed the situation generally -with him, answering questions concerning the background of the decisions, die arguments in favor of the coarse of action versus a blockade coupled with the political debate oa the one hand and surprise military action on the other.
At 5:00 o'clock at my invitation Mr David I>awrence and Mr Scott called at my office and I reviewed the situation with them.
They questioned me in considerable detail as to why we did not know this sooner, how Keating got his information and the penetration of intelligence activities during the months of August and September.
I explained the situation, substantially as outlined to the leadership at their meeting.
However, they did recognize that MRBM sites can be Installed quickly and with very little advanced preparation which can be detected.
Both gentTemcn <jtestioned me at considerable length as to -why Administration spokesmen spoke ao categorically that the build-up was purely defensive and that no offensive capability was being installed.
They were concerned about repeated statements by the President, Chester Bowles, the Vice Fresident and other Administration spokesmen, but most particularly the State Department briefing held on Thursday, October 18th, which was two or three days after the original data was in our hands, at which time tbs briefers again repeated the statement that the ""build-up involved defensive and no offensive weapons.H They said they thought this briefing was a deceptive mistake and wondered why the briefing was carried on.
I inadvertently met with Mr Scott of the Scott/Allen combination who accosted me as I headed Senate Office Building.
Ho said, ""McCoae, I guess we're going to have to blow you out of this for not reorganising your estimating processes, most particularly your Board of National Estimates.
Scott said that he felt that such an Estimate was reckless, it did not serve the Government in establishing policy, and it was a frightful disservice to the people of the United States.
Scott apparently has road the latest Cuban estimate published about'Septernbe r 20th, which contains wording as quoted above.
Meetings with Senator Russell, Senator Hickenlooper, and Chairman Vinson 1.
In a meeting on October 23rd, Senator Russell indicated a less critical attitude toward Administration policy than was evident at the leadership meeting the night before.
He in general approved the plan of actions, indicating strong reservations concerning the effectiveness and the utility of the blockade, expressed serious concern over the Soviet/ United States confrontation which would result from the blockade, and accepted the course of action only because it would lead to the next phase which would be that of taking the missiles and offensive weapons out of Cuba at a time and by means of our own determination.
During the conversation, I outlined my feelings that our purposes must be to remove the missiles and also to remove Castro as is outlined in a separate memorandum.
He expressed confidence in the President as did Senator Russeli but serious reservations concerning some of the President's advisors who he felt would, influence the President to follow a very weak and compromising line.
I pointed out that the warning now had been given and action could be taken now ""at a time of our own choosing and by means of our own determination"" and after again reviewing the wording of the speech, Russell agreed this was correct.
There was an extended discussion of actions to be taken under various as turned Soviet resistance activities such as failing to stop, refusing right to board, ships turning around, heading in another direction, etc.
McCone questioned these findings; however Gilpatrie said that this had been thoroughly studied and McCone concerns as expressed at the morning meeting were unfounded.
He indicated Lemnister might be used as CINCEUR with Norstad remaining as SACEUR, Bundy stated that this is complicated as the two posts are so co-mingled that they really must be held by one man.
Taylor raised question that if this was dona it would hart Lemnitser's prestige.
The President said that he felt that Norstad was so experienced and so capable and his judgment bo sound, as evidenced by today's cable, copy of which I have not seen, thai he would take the risk of NATO country criticisms, he did not thlnv that Lexnnitxer would be hurt, and he wished Norstad to remain.
In the prolonged discussion of report on Civil Defense problems, the President Boomed particularly concerned over the situation if we should launch attacks which might result in four or five missiles hftlng delivered on the United States.
DOD ipoVesmen stated that the area covered by the 1100 mile missiles involved 92 million people.
X got the conclusion that not very much could or would be done; that whatever was done would involve & great deal of publicity and public alarm.
Emphasis continues to be placed on the READINESS status of the offensive missiles in.
Some of Mission 5002, the low altitude photographic coverage of 23 October 1962, arrived during the preparation of this report and preliminary comments have been incorporated in the discussion of the Guanajay IRBM sites.
We do not believe the measures to achieve a higher degree of action readiness for Soviet and bloc forces are being taken'on a crash basis.
Communist reaction to the United States quarantine action against Cuba has not gone beyond the highly critical but uncoramitting statement issued yesterday by the Soviet government.
Attended byi Congressional Lesdership , the President, Rusk, McNamara, McCone and Robert Lovett.
Secretary Rusk reported on the United Nations, stated there is no confirmed Soviet reaction or statement of intentions but discussed exchange with.
The President categorically stated oa several occasions through the meeting there vai no formal or Informal direct approach for a Kennedy/Khrushchev meeting and no negotiations toward that end.
It was the consensus that the discussions at leader­ship meetings must be kept most confidential.
Russell complimented Secretary Rusk on the unanimous OAS action and his unusually complimentary remarks were strongly supported by Dirksen, Hickenlooper and Mansfield.
Dirksen than brought up the question of a Summit meeting, stating that he felt such a confrontation between Khrushchev and Kennedy at this moment would be as usless unless ground rules were established indicating that constructive results would develop.
The President agreed; stated that we must now wait until the confrontation of the ships and that the next 24 hours will bring out important developments.
Smathers qustioned about reported Cuban orders not to shoot unless attacked.
McCone stated that this information had come through intelligence channnels and seemed to be correct.
McCone replied the Cubans were excluded except for camp construction and then it was reported they were kept under careful surveillance.
Fulbright questioned McNamara at some length concerning his preparations for invasion and askad specifically whether all steps were taken so that an invasion could be initiated in a minimum time.
McNamara atatud that all preliminary steps were being taken, outlining some of the details, hot not many o£ them; that preparations ware being made so that an invasion, could be accompiiahed with the 7-day lead tlme discussed at previous meetings.
Meeting adjourned, the President seeiting agreement that the leadership would remain on 3-hour alert.
Three of the Soviet ships suspected of being possible ballistic missile carriers enroute to Cuba are reportedly altering their course.
We are at this time unable to determine whether these bunkers are for storage or checkout of nuclear warheads, or for both of these functions.
Two of the dry cargo ships not known to have reversed course may be carrying non-military cargo, but the BELOVODSK has 12 HOUND helicopters.
Changes in course appear to have been executed in midday on 23 October, before the President signed the proc­lamation establishing the quarantine.
We still see no signs of any crash procedure in measures to increase the readiness of Soviet armed forces.
There is as yet no reaction to the turn-around of Soviet shipping, which had not become publicly apparent.
McCone reported on intelligence, reviewing summary of 25 October, including penciled memorandums as indicated, plus Clice memorandum of 2.
S October on talks with Sir Kenneth Strong, and the Watch Report of same date.
McNamara raised the question of accelerating or raising the escalation of the actions we have so far taken, expressing concern over the plateau, indicating determination to meet our ultimate objective of taking out the missile sites.
ALL MEMBERS PRESENT McCone gave intelligence briefing covered by Situation Report of 10/25 and followed with resume of Bloc shipping {SC 11064/62) dated 10/25 and summarized answers to specific quoitions as indicated on the third page; also referred briefly to reaction to the Soviet government statement.
There followed a long discujsion of policy matters, notea of which are covered in the attached.
The meeting considered three drafts of scenarios of three possible courses of action, that is, air strike, the political path and progressive economic blockade, all of which are attached.
Two pages of notea on small White House note paper Situation Report 10/25 3 pages SC 11064/62 Canadian Reaction (OCI 3569/62 Draft: Scenario for Alrstrike; Political Path; Progressive Economic Blockade 93.
You asked me to give you a paper by 5:00 in. today on the San Roman/Attorney General/Harvey/Lansdale/MONGCOSS problem in connection, with submarines and the 50-Cuban project.
I have talked only to Bill Harvey but in the light of rny prior knowl­edge of Special Group/MONGOOSE/Lansdale/voice level, etc., it is my clear opinion that this whole problem is centered around jurisdictional bureaucracy not unlike the tangle I had with Gilpatric and the Air Forces.
The deliberative MONGOOSE system was not utilized for this particular project.
Harvey rightly realized that intelligence collection was essential and that it should be geared to a turnover of the assets to the military in place in the event military operations took place.
The detailed planning is still going on but cannot be firm until the sub­marine commanders are available.
The Cubans are not owned by San Roman but have been recruited and checked out by CIA and in a number o£ cases have been CIA agents for a long time.
Unfor­tunately San Roman, like other exile group leaders, is looking out for the future cf San Roman.
The targets planned for this operation as have been previously indicated to you, are to include the MRBM and IRBM sites.
I am convinced that if we are to have military operations in Cuba, and even now during this doubtful period of heavy military involvement in planning for such operations, the direct CIA-JCS coordinated liaison and control must be effected -the time has long since passed for MONGOOSE-type, Special Group-type consideration.
Emphasis is placed on the READINESS status, construction pace and any significant changes at the offensive missile sites in Cuba.
No additional missiles, missile transporters, or erectors have been identified , 4.
No additional sites, launchers or missiles have been located, but there is road construction around Re-medios which suggests the fourth IRBM site we have been expecting there.
We estimate that it would cost the USSR more than twice as much and take considerably longer to add to its ICBM strike capability from the USSR as great an increment as the potential salvo from Cuban launching sites.
There are further indications that some Soviet and satellite elements, particularly air and ground elements in Eastern Europe and European Russia, are on an alert or readiness status.
There is some evidence, that additional tactical aircraft have been placed on five-minutes alert in East Germany, where two areas along the West German border have been closed off for exercises.
Most'of the OAS nations have offered to participate in some form in the quarantine, and, NATO members have agreed with minor reservations to deny landing and overflight rights to Soviet planes bound for Cuba.
One, the CIA plan to have ten teams go into Cuba by submarine to gather intelligence on missile bases and other points of interest.
McCone stated there was an organizational problem with Lansdale under current conditions and a meeting had been called for this afternoon to resolve this problem and to establish a course of action on the Lansdale MONGOOSE organization.
McCone also advised the President that plan for political organization, of Cuba in event of an invasion was under study and would be considered at tie 2:30 meeting.
There followed an extended discussion of operational matters, details of which, are covered in the attached notes.
Item 2N was approved and Mr Gilpatric undertook to expedite the construction work necessary to establish the 50 KW radio transmitters in the Florida Keys.
The infiltration of agents is'to be held up pending a determination by the Department of Defense through General Carroll, as to just what military information is desired and determination by State, through Alexis Johnson, as to just what political^information is desired.
There has been no evidence of attempts at interdiction of United States reconnaissance aircraft.
The probable nuclear bunkers adjacent to the MRBM sites are not yet ready for storage, assembly or checkout.
They indicate, however, that a prerequisite must be ""proof"" that the United States does not intend to attack Cuba.
This report does not attempt to estimate Soviet intent to attack the United States.
This provides an increasing, integrated, operational readiness posture.
Microwave relay towers have been noted at some of the MRBM and IRBM site areas covered on 27 October, indicating that an integrated microwave command and control communication system will be utilized in Cuba.
All 24 MRBH launchers now appear to have reached full opera­tional readiness.
One nuclear storage facility is complete, but none of the bunkers observed is yet believed to be in operation There are some indications that the -2 lost yesterday over Banes was brought down by the SA-2 system.
I As of 0700 EST, two or possibly three more Soviet ships are heading for Cuba in addition to the two dry cargo ships and four tankers we have been watching.
Rec no plane surveillance McNamara: Noted difference in Chiefs Personally agree with Rusk recommendations Nitze: UN ask what we want to prove inoperable of weapons McNamara: Have as our objectives a UN recon. plane on Monday President: Secy. not go today but let's go on assumption either we or UN will go on Monday Decision made to release a brief statement welcoming the K message McCone 106.
No reconnaissance flights today despite a recommendation of the Secretary of State supported by the Secretary of Defense.
Cline was instructed to support the DCI's position that the removal of the missiles should not end by giving Castro's a sanctuary and thus sustain his subversive threat to other Latin American nations.
October 1962 SUPPLEMENT 9 TO JOINT EVALUATION OF SOVIET MISSILE THREAT IN CUBA PREPARED BY Guided Missile and Astronautics Intelligence Committee Joint Atomic Energy Intelligence Committee National Photographic Interpretation Center 2200 HOURS 28 OCTOBER 1962 NOTICE This report is based primarily on detailed analysis of low-altitude photography taken on Saturday, 27 October 1962.
No new MRBM or lRBM sites have been detected; however, we have had no high altitude coverage appropriate for search since 23 October 1962.
There is more evidence of the intent to have nuclear warhead bunkers at each launch site.
The enclosed table includes a list of Soviet offensive aissile weapons aod associated equipment in Cuba.
Very little equipment has been observed at the three IRBM sites in Cuba, The only equipment identified, in addition to structures under construction, has been two possible fuel trucks and two possible oxidant trucks.
If the IRBMs and other associated equipjaent are in Cuba they are probably in an unlocated facility between the port of Maricl and the sites.
A study of Soviet sea shipments to Cuba, however, indicates that it is unlikely that aany IRBMs had reached Cuba prior to the institution of the Quarantine.
There art, however, nuclear weapon storage bunkers under construction at each of the MRBM and IRBM sites.
If nuclear weapons are in Cuba they are probably in an unlocated facility between the entry port of Mariel and the sites.
All IL-28 aircraft are at San Julian in western Cuba; three or four appear to be assembled.
An additional 23 or 24 aircraft in crates have also been observed at this airfield.
Each disassembled aircraft consists of 1 fuselage crate 60X8X10 feet; 2 wing cratos 9X40X8 feet; and 2 engine crates9X30X8 feet.
Implied numbers are those we estimate to be organic with Soviet MRBM/IRBM units or represent the highest number observed.
On 23 October you gave a brief intelligence report saying that construction at tie sites was continuing.
At an evening meeting that day you. briefed on military developments within the WARSAW pact countries,describing an increased level of Soviet military communications.
On 24 October you briefed on the continued rapid progress in the completion of the missile sites and of the fact that 22 Soviet missile ships were en route to Cuba.
On 25 October you told the Group there had. been no change in the construction pace; you covered the Watch Committee report stating that Soviet armed forces were increasing their state of readiness; you described the Soviet ships en route to Cuba carrying helicopters, you covered the departure of a Cubana plane from Canada to Havana; and also briefed on the turn-around of 15 of the 22 Soviet ships.
At an evening meeting you briefed in detail on the status of Soviet shipping 4.
On 26 October, which was attended by Stevenson, you covered the Watch Committee report which concluded that Soviet armed forces had completed measures for an alert but that ifaere were no significant deployments.
You summarized the status of shipping and made the point that ships coutd carry Soviet arms.
You reviewed briefly Castro apprehensive reaction to the United States quaranting he seems to fear in uprising.
You directed that Ray Cline participate in the draft reply to Khrushchev's letter.
You asked that Cline insure supporting your position that the removal of the missiles should not end by giving Castro a sanctuary.
You mentioned the point that press stories based on special intelligence must be prevented.
After the meeting you talked with the President and Secretary Rusk emphasizing that Castro might remain in Cuba with a greater security and this is the situation we must be careful of.
You covered the shipping situation and pointed to the danger of sabotage in Latin American countries urging that all Embassies' and consulates be alerted.
Committee Report which, concluded that Soviet armed forces remain on alert and you reviewed briefly current developments in Laos, South Vietnam, and India, Soviet nuclear subs, and Soviet nuclear tests and you pointed out that our ability to analyze these tests had been impared by DOD withdrawal of collection vehicles.
On 31 October you told the Group that there was continued evidence of construction and concealment but noted that evidence that some of the launchers had been moved from the MRBM sites, might be construed as the first step at dismantling.
You further pointed out that photos were compared with those taken on Saturday and orders to cease were probably not issued until Sunday night or Monday morning.
There was discussion of the""intelligence gap"" and you reviewed the Cuban SNIE of 19 September, noting that it failed to fully appraise all reports available.
You pointed out that Cuba, probably would engage in reconnaissance with anti aircraft fire since they had claimed that they had developed a pattern of reconnaissance.
Decision was made at this meeting to cover IL-28 base in San Julian and MRBM sites.
On 2 November you told the Group there was evidence that the Soviets were dismantling missiles, but the assembly of Il-28 bombers was continuing.
Deployment and Withdrawal of Soviet Mis­siles and Other Significant Weapons in Cuba NOTE This memorandum assesses our evidence concerning the number of Soviet missiles deployed to and subse­quently withdrawn from Cuba, the chances that Soviet missiles remain in Cuba, and the situation and outlook with respect to rates of withdrawal of lL-28s and other significant Soviet weapons in Cuba.
We cannot exclude the possibility that more actually arrived, and that some therefore remain, but we think that any such number would be small.
The Soviets normally provide two missiles for every URBM and IRBH launcher and, since several of the launchers already had two, we believe that they intended to provide two each for the others, or a total of 72 for the 36 launchers identified.
Of these, 48 would be MRBMs, of which we identified 33, and the reminder would be IRBMs, of vhich we have no evidence that any had reached Cuba by 22 October.
The pattern of the nise identified sites strongly suggests that at least one nore was planned to form a pair with the ninth.
Among the Soviet ships which turned back from the Cuba run, upon announcement of the United States quarantine, were five of the seven which we know to have been capable of carrying missiles.
Our analysis indicates the missiles were shipped in one piece—less only warheads—on the transporter in a package about 68 feet long as hold cargo.
The can in this way account for at least 36 missiles—six on each of six voyages.
The Soviet claim of 42 is consistent with our evidence, but we cannot rule out a sonewhat higher nunber, prinarily because of the possibility that two or core of the seven other -voyages delivered nissiles.
Sources inside Cuba have provided numerous reports in recent weeks claining that strategic missiles have been retained in Cuba and concealed from aerial reconnaissance.
Specifically, at Mayari Arriba—about 40 miles northwest of Guantanamo— we have identified both from photography and ground sources a Soviet installation which may be missile-associated.
Such a renewed crisis would find the Soviets in an even core disadvantageous position than before to protect their interests or avoid humiliation.
February 1963 THE WHITE HOUSE PRESIDENT'S FOREIGN INTELLIGENCE ADVISORY BOARD February 4, 1963 MEMORANDUM FOR THE PRESIDENT Your Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board has completed a review of actions, which were taken by the foreign Intelligence agencies of our Government to discharge their responsibility for intelligence coverage, assessment and reporting on the Soviet military build-up in Cuba during the month preceding your report to the Nation on October 22, 1962, concerning the USSR's establishment of offensive missile sites in Cuba.
In the course of our review we sought to determine whether there werelessons to be learned from an objective appraisal of tha strengths and weanessss of the United States Foreign Intelligence efforts as dislosed by the Cuba experience.
We directed particular attention to thooe areas of the intelligence process, which are concerned with such matters as the acquisition of intelligence, the analysis of intelligence, and the production and dicssminatrion of intelligence reports and estimates in support of national policy formulation"" and operational requirements.
The second phase consisted of a much briefer period beginning on October 22 and culminating with the Presidential announcement on October 22 concerning measures for meeting the Soviet offensive threat in Cuba.
Soviet Union had taken steps to establish a strategic nuclear missile complex in Cuba.
THE POST-OCTOBER 14 PHASE We note that the definitive photographic evidence obtained as a result of the October 14 and subsequent overflights of Cuba was promptly processed and submitted to the President in time for decisisve action before the Soviet MRBM and IRBM systems become fully operational.
In pointing to the high performance which was achieved by our foreign intelligence agencies during the post-October 14 period, we recognise that it would be difficult Tor the intelligence community to operate with the same intensity and efficiency under less critical aonditions.
Thus one of our major problems remains the achievensnt of very high performance between crises.
THE PRE-OCTOBER 14 PHASE As to the pre-October 14 period, we conclude that our foreign intelligence effort should have been more effective in obtaining adequate and timely intelligence as to the nture and scope of the Soviet military build-up as it developed over a period of months , and exploiting the available intelligence as a basis for estimating Soviet and Cuban plans and intentions.
In view; of the fact that the Soviet move came dangerously close to success in an area less than ninety miiles from our shores, the absence of useful early warning of the enemy's intention must be stressed.
We did not find that during this period there was within the intelligence community the focused sense of urgency or alarm which might well have stimulate ""a effort.
Intelligence Acquisition Clandestine agent coverage within Cuba was inadequate.
Although the limited agent assets of the Central Intelligence Agency and of Army Intelligence did produce some valuable reports on developments in Cuba, we believe that the absence of more effective clandestine agent coverage, as an essential adjunct to other intelligence collection operations, contributed substantially to the inability of our Government to recognize at an earlier date the danger of the Soviet nove in Cuba.
V/e find also that full use was not made of aerial photographic surveillance, particularly during September and October, when the influx of Soviet military personnel and armaments had reached major proportions.
The president granted authorisation for all U-2 flights which wero recommended to him by his policy advisers on the Special Group having responsibility for such matters.
The Special Group approved, in one instance with modifications, all U-2 overflights recommended to it.
Until October 3, when the Defense Intelligence Agency urged that suspicious areas of Cuba be covered by U-2 photographic missions, it appears that there was a failure on the part of the intelligence community as a whole to propose to the Special Group J-2 reconnaissance missions on a scale commensurate with the nature and intensity of the Soviet activity in Cuba.
The need for more frequent and extensive aerial photographic surveillance during the summer and fall was even more pressing in view of the inadequacy of clandestine agent resources and the limited effectiveness of other collection methods such as legal traveler, third country diplomat, refuse interrogation, and signal intelligence coverage.
Although we were unable to establish the existence of a policy which prevented overflying areas of Cuba where surface-to-air missile installations wers present, the Central Intelligence Agency and others believed that such a restriction did in fact prevail.
We note in this regard that in the December 25 report of the Director of Central Intelligence it is stated that although the paucity of records makes it impossible to determine whether or not there was such a restriction, it is nevertheless clear that operational elements were under the impression that such an injunction was in effect.
Apparently the Special Group was not made fully aware of the delaying effects on the acquisition of aerial intelligence which could and did result from changes in a CIA proposal for the conduct of a U-2 mission.
On September 10 the CIA proposed that the Spscial Group approve and recommend the scheduling of a U-2 flight to provide extensive peripheral coverage of Cuba as well as two legs directly over Cuban airspace.
The Secretary of State objected to this combining of an actual overflight with the overflying of international waters.
He felt that the long peripheral flight would draw attention, and if the aircraft were to fall into eneny hands after an overfliglit of Cuba, this would put the United States in a poor position to stand on its rights to overfly international waters.
Accordingly, the Secretary of State proposed that the September flights be broken into four, separate missions, two of them peripheral and two directly over Cuba, and the CIA made plans to do so.
Director of Central Intelligence points out in his December 26 report that the poor weather in September plus the necessity for flying four separate missions instead of one resulted in prolonging the time required to get the desired coverage of Cuba, In fact, the next successful U-2 mission was not flown until September 26.
We feel that under these circumstances the Special Group should have been informed of the factors operating to delay the four-flight coverage, and given an opportunity to reconsider the advisability of a mission over the critical target sreas urgently requiring surveillance.
We also feel that the Special Group should be possessed of a mechanism, which would automatically pick up such omissions of reporting.
It appears that within the Special Group further consideration should have been given to proposals by the Acting director of Central Intelligence in August and September for low-level photographic reconnaissance of certain targests in Cuba.
When the Special Group took up the matter on September 14, note was taken that the Secretary of Defense did not wish the low-level operations to be considered until results of U-2 coverage of the same area became available.
Granting the obvious appropriateness of the recommendtion of the Secretary of Defense, we must point out that when the U-2 flights were delayed there should have been immediate re-examination of the proposal for low-level flights.
This, estimate concluded that the establishment of Soviet medium and intermediate range ballistic missiles in Cuba would be inconsistent with Soviet practice to date and with Soviet policy as the community then assessed it.
This mistaken judgment, made at the very time when the Soviets were installing MRBMs and IRBMs in Cuba, we attribute to the lack of adequate intelligence coverage of Cuba, the rigor with which the view was held that the Soviet Union would not assume the risks antailed in establishing nuclear striking forces on Cuban soil, and the absence of an imaginative appraisal of the intelligence indicators which, although limited in number, were contained in reports disseminated by our intelligence agencies.
The Estimate of September 19 pointed away from the likelihood of the establishment of Soviet nuclear missile systems in Cuba, An important cautionary statement appeared in a discutssion paragraph, namely, that the contingency of such a development should be examined carefully, even though it would run counter to current Soviet policy.
This cautionary statement, however, was not carried forward into the conclusions of the Estimate.
We believe that the near-total intelligence surprise experienced by the United States with respect to the introduction and deployment of Soviet strategic missiles in Cuba resultsd in large part from a malfunction of the analytic process by which intelligence indicators are assessed and recorded.
This nalfunction diminished ths effectiveness of policy advisers, national intelligence estimators, and civilian and military officers having command responsibilities.
We believe that the manner in v/hich intelligence indicators were handled in the Cuba situation may well be the most serious flaw in our intelligence system, and one, which, if uncorrected, could lead to the gravest consequences.
Our Government was not provided with the degree of early warning of hostile intentions and capabilities which should have been derived from the indicators contained in the incoming intelligence.
Had the intelligence community systematically prepared and periodically presented compilations of accumulated indicators, this would have permitted appropriate policy-level consideration of davelopments in Cuba and of alternative courses of action so required.
The practice followed in the Cuba situation of providing White House stuff members with some of the raw indicator reports was not an acceptable substitute for professional analytical reporting on a developing crisis situation.
While raw intelligence reports were used effectively in targeting the October 14 U-2 mission which led to the discovery of offensive missiles in Cuba, the significance of the important indicators involved was not communicated to the President.
Despite the intelligence indicators which were accumulating even before the U-2 discovery on October 14, the Intelligence community did not produce for the benefit of policy-level consumers a revision of its erroneous National Intelligence Estimate of September 19.
We believe a further and exhaustive examination, not limited to Cuba, should be made by the intelligence community of the complex analytic process employed throughout the community in the assessment of intelligence indicators.
We are also aware that the illustrations listed are but a small number taken from the great volume of reports which were received and which included some demonstrably erroneous information.
These indicators were acquired from a variety of intelligence sources, such as refugees, clandestine agents, and friendly foreign diplomats.
Intelligence Reporting Our review of the intelligence reporting process reveals that limitations which were placed on the publication and disseminaticn of reports and information concerning the situation in Cuba were either misinterprets or misapplied.
One such limitation was imposed by the Director of Central Intelligence in May 1962.
One consequence was that during the pre-October 14 period as information became available on the offensive build-up in Cuba, It was not published by the CIA even in the President's Intelligence Checklist.
The President placed limitations on the publication of reports on weapons which might be offensive, pending receipt of further information con­cerning c suspected missile installation at Banes.
The President made olear that he wished to impose no limitation whatever on the collection and analysis of intelligence relating to offensive weapons and he emphasized that he wanted all such information collected, analyzed, and promptly reported to officials having a real need to know.
However, the United States Intelligence Board interpreted the Presidential instructions as an injunction not to print any information on offensive weapons in Cuba in any intelligence publication.
Although the Director of Central Intelligence exempted CIA's Presidential Intelligence Checklist from this injunction, the Checklist issues prepared subsequent to the President's instructions failed to include information from any of the refugee or agent reports on the sightings of offensive missiles in Cuba.
The misinterpretations of this directive endangered the necessary flow of information and serve as a warning that in future situations requiring such restrictions attention must bo given to establishing secure channels for transmission of vital information to officials having a clear need to know.
Emergency Planning The Cuba experience points up the neod for advance planning to ensure that our human end material intelligence resources are sufficient, and are adequately organised, to meet the demands of 'an emergency such as that which confronted our Government in this instance.
As a result, signifi­cant information did not reach some elements of the Government, both in V/ashington and the military commands, and in some instances important intelligence was not brought to the attention of the President and some other high officials.
Two examples of ths consequences which followed were officials who checked in normal places concerning such matters as the October 10 speech of Senator Keating were told that there was no evidence of offensive weapons, although in fact raw intelligence had already led to the targeting of the San Cristobal area where offensive missile installations were subsequently found through U-2 photography on October 14, and fop a brief period the limitation on publication operated in such fashion as to preclude the.
As a consequence, it was necessary to call in certain military commanders from the field and give them oral briefings on the subject.
The restriction served to hamper the commanders in their planning for possible military action involving Cuba.
We note next that when U-2 overflights of Cuba began on an accelerated basis on October 14, no more than a 10-day supply of photographic film was on hand in the entire country to meet the demands resulting from the sudden step-up cf aerial recconaicsance operations.
Moreover, in the absence of a central processing facility for developing photographic film in quantity, under appropriate security safeguards, it was necessary to make use of film laboratories at scattered locations considerably removed from Washington.
James R Killian, Jr., Chairman President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board William 0.
Baker, Member Clark Clifford James Doolittle Gordon Gray Edwin H Land William L Langer Robert D Murphy FPrank Pace, Jr.
The President The White House I am returning the report of the President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board dated February 4th commenting on the intelligence community's actions in connection with the Cuban crisis.
It 1b ray understanding that the Board will make recommendations to you for corrective measures which they feel should b« taken within the Intelligence community.
When these re commendation* are received, I would hope for an opportunity to comment upon them as I did an the recommendations contained In their interim report of December 28th.
When I appeared before the Board on November 7th, December 9th, and December 28th, 1 stated that there vai an understandable reluctance or timidity in programming U-2 overflights over Cuba after we had discovered the presence of surface-to-air missile installations.
Thia caution was understandable not only because of the extremely severe criticism of ""U-2 incidents"" dating back to the Powers' incident on May 1, 1960, but also because of the more recent loss of a Chinat U-2 and a U-2 intrusion over Sakhalin in early September.
This same attitude apparently dictated the Secretary of State's action in revising a CIA-proposed flight at the Special Group meeting held in Mr Bundy's office on September 10th.
It was, I believe, the same attitude that caused the Special Group in considering my request on October 4th for extensive Cuban reconnaissance to ask JCS, and CIA to study all alternative means of conducting aerial reconnaissance and to report back on October 9th.
I further advised the Board that I felt the analysts, both in the intelligence community and elsewhere In Government, including the State Department, were so convinced that the Soviets would not accept the inevitable confrontation resulting from placement of offensive missiles in Cuba, that they were inclined to dismiss such evidence as there was to the contrary.
This, I find, is one of th« difficulties of dealing with the imponderable a of what the other fellow will or will not do.
With particular reference to the Cuban situation, it should be noted that for two years the intelligence community had been surfeited with reports of ""missiles in Cuba, "" all of which proved to be incorrect prior to those which we received on or about September 20th.
About 3,500 agent and refugee reports were analyzed in the preparation of my report to the Killian Board and of this number, only eight in retrospect were considered as reasonably valid indicators of the deployment of offensive missiles to Cuba.
Although the intelligence community's Inquiry into its actions during tha Cuban crisis revealed certain areas where shortcomings existed andvhtre improvements should b« mid* in various t;eu of intelligence collection and process­ing, the intelligence community operated extensively and well in connection with Cuba.
Every major weapons system introduced into Cuba by the Soviets was detected, identified, and reported before any one of these systems attained an operational capability.
The vary substantial effort directed toward Cuba was originated by an earlier concern with the situation in Cuba and the effort, already well under way, contributed to the detection and analysis of the Soviet build-up.
The procedures adopted in September delayed photographic lntelligence, but this delay was not critical, because photography obtained prior to about 17 October would not fca.ve been sufficient to warrant action of a type which would require support from Westarn Hemisphere NATO allies.
Agent reports helped materially; however, none giving significant information on offensive missiles reached the intelligence community or policy-makers until after mid-September.
Some restrictions were placed on dissemination of information, but there is no Indication that these restrictions necessarily affected analytical work or actions by policy-makers.
The 19 September estimate, while indicating the improbability that the Soviet Union would place MRBM's and IRBM's in Cuba, did state that ""this contingency must be examined carefully, even though it would run counter to current Soviet policy""; the estimators in preparing the 19 September estimate gave great weight to the philosophical argument concerning Soviet intentions and thus did not fully weigh the many indicators.
McCone to Carter, Cable, with attached note from MSC , 16 September 1962 29.
Special National Intelligence Estimate 85-3-62 ""The Military Buildup in Cuba,"" 19 September 1962 34.
Supplement 1 to Joint Evaluation of Soviet Missile Threat in Cuba, 20 October 1962 70.
THK to Elder, 22 October 1962, with copies of two cables sent to all Chiefs of Station 78.
