People also thought World War II will solve the problems left by World War I, and unfortunately that also did not happen.
The Cold War started because the two sides, United States led North Atlantic Treaty Organization and Soviet Union led Warsaw Pact, distrusted each other.
The Soviet Union dislikes the United States because they thought that the United States purposely waited later to join the war to fight the Germans.
There were also differences between the forms of government that the two sides had.
The United States was a democratic country, but the Soviet Union was a communism country.
Even though there were many disagreements, they did come to some agreement.
They agreed to separate Germany into four parts, one side under the control of France, Britain, and United States and another one under the control of Soviet Union.
This setting created a border between the two sides, which caused the two sides to move further away from each other and turn more hostile against each other.
There were numerous conflicts between the United States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War.
During the Cold War, tension started to build up between the United States and the Soviet Union.
However, after the Crisis, the bomb started to be dismantled piece by piece.
The Soviet Union withdrew the missiles in Cuba and United States promised to remove missiles in Turkey as soon as possible.
After president John F Kennedy discussed with his advisor for almost six days, they decided to establish a blockade around Cuba to prevent more weapons from entering Cuba.
Then on 22 October 1962, the President delivered a speech on the television to inform the public about the Soviet nuclear missiles and bombers in Cuba.
At the same time, he announced a naval quarantine around Cuba would be put into effect until the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw the missile from Cuba.
After days of argument in the United Nation and through letters between the two head of states, the Soviet Union Chairman Khrushchev proposed in a letter that United States would pledge not to invade Cuba and lift the quarantine in exchange for the removal of Soviet missiles in Cuba.
On the next day, however, the United States received another letter from the Soviet Union.
It demanded that the removal of Jupiter missiles in Turkey as part of the deal for the Soviet to remove missiles in Cuba.
After a long day of meeting, the president decided to pledge that United States would never invade Cuba publically, while secretly, John F Kennedy informed Khrushchev that the Jupiter missiles would be removed from Turkey as soon as possible.
John F Kennedy asked his brother, Robert Kennedy to tell Soviet Ambassador Anatoly Dobrynin that United States will make a public pledge not to invade Cuba and secretly remove missiles in Turkey as soon as possible.
This showed that President Kennedy was willing to resolve the crisis as peaceful as possible by letting both the United States and the Soviet Union to move back a step.
The removal of missiles in Turkey reduced the tension between the Soviet Union and the United States.
Fifteen Jupiter nuclear missiles were first placed on Turkey in July 1960.
Then in April 1963 the last missile was dismantled in Turkey and the missile warheads were transported back to the United States as part of the secret agreement between the United States and Soviet Union.
Jupiter missiles increased tension because of both its range and speed.
The missile is a type of intermediate range ballistic missile with a range of 1,500 miles.
Not to mention that it also carries a nuclear warhead that could create mass destruction to the targeted area.
NATO could easily fire missiles at Moscow, the capital of Soviet Union, within around fifteen minutes.
In response to the NATO placing Jupiter missiles in Turkey, the Soviets placed missiles in Krasnovodsk and Kirovabad.
This started a arms race in the Eastern Europe with created tension between the NATO and the Soviet Union Some people believed that the removal of missiles in both Cuba and Italy did not decreased the tension in the Cold War.
However the removal did reduce the tension, because it decreased the armament of missiles on both sides.
After the Soviet Union found out that the NATO placed nuclear missile in Turkey and Italy, they responded by placing nuclear missiles in Soviet Union facing the west.
This showed that by placing nuclear missile near another country starts an arms race between two nations.
This greatly increased tension, due to the fact that nuclear missiles could cause server devastation to a region and possibility of starting a nuclear war.
Placing missiles in Turkey and Cuba increased the tension in the region and threatens peace between the Soviet Union and the United States.
When missiles were placed in Turkey, the Soviet Union also placed additional missiles facing the west in Soviet Union.
Additionally, when Soviet Union placed missiles in Cuba, the chance of starting a nuclear war increased.
By taking away the missiles, the tension could be decreased dramatically.
This brought the two sides a step away from having huge armament build-ups.
Afterwards, they worked together and signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty in 1963.
If any of the countries involved, Cuba, Soviet Union, and United States, decided to attack the other first, then a nuclear war many imagined would become reality.
Limiting the nuclear weapon test decreased the tension in the Cold War by limiting nuclear weapon development.
At that time, the United Nations Disarmament Commission brought together the United States, Soviet Union, France, Canada, and United Kingdom to start a discussion on the topic of banning nuclear testing.
However there were no obvious results from the discussion because there was disagreement on how to verify underground testing and how many on site inspection is allowed.
The United States and the United Kingdom held that the number must be determined by scientific fact and detection capability.
This showed that the Soviets tried to limit the amount of times on site inspection is allowed.
The Soviets also feared that on site inspection would lead to spying on the military structures and might reveal the actual number of deliverable nuclear weapons.
This shows that John F Kennedy believed that an arms build up was not an efficient way to maintain peace.
This treaty did not only stopped an arm buildup, it also prevented radioactive substance form polluting the environment.
Even though, the agreement was discussed over a long period of time, after the Crisis the process speed up significantly.
The three countries started negotiation on July 15, 1963 and reached a conclusion within ten days.
It was then ratified by the president on October 7, and entered into force on October 10.
This Nuclear Test Ban Treaty banned nuclear testing in the atmosphere, sea, and outer space for any reason.
Some people thought that the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty could not really limit nuclear testing and improve the environment, since underground testing was not part of the treaty.
However, with a Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, the speed of developing nuclear weapon could be greatly decreased.
It could also prevent nuclear contamination of the environment, because nuclear fallout from the nuclear weapon would not fall into another country’s border.
The treaty was the first step in limiting the development of nuclear weapon, by means of limiting the testing of such weapons The treaty greatly decreased the tension between both countries.
The treaty banned any nuclear explosion that would cause radioactive substances to fall into another country.
Limiting nuclear explosion test could prevent nuclear pollution and ultimately prevent the development of new nuclear weapons.
This showed that President Kennedy was willing to bring peace between nations and believes that this goal was important and needed both United States and Soviet Union’s attention.
The treaty brought the two countries under a milder situation and they started to rebuild trust by following the treaty and keeping promises.
After limiting the nuclear test United States and the Soviet Union formed direct communication between each other.
Tension increased between both sides because of distrust and lack of communication.
The treaty provided direct communication between the head of two states at Washington D.C. and Moscow.
This greatly decreased the chance of miscommunication thus decreasing tension between United States and Soviet Union.
There was a long process in the negotiation of a direct communication link between the United States and Soviet Union.
Soviet Union proposed safeguards against surprised attack and expressed concern over accident war that may happen due to miscommunication.
In the crisis, it took the United States hours to receive and decode a message from the Soviet Union.
The crisis convinced the both side that an efficient and secure direct communication was needed to resolve crisis faster.
The communication during the crisis proved to be too slow, creating unnecessary tension.
In the working paper, it included a proposal of direct communication between major capitals to make sure that there is a direct and fast communication in time of crisis.
The memorandum that was signed by both countries states the following, “Each Government shall be responsible for the arrangements for the link on its own territory.
This outlined the basic agreement that was made between the two countries on direct communication.
Both the United States and the Soviet Union believed that a direct communication decreased tension between both countries.
President Kennedy believed that in order for United States and Soviet Union to have peace they needed to have more understanding and communication.
Soviet Union Chairman Nikita Khrushchev also believed that direct communication benefits Soviet Union in that it simplified the diplomatic procedures.
This showed that both the Soviet Union and the United States believed that a direct communication link could decrease the tension of the possibility of starting a war.
President Kennedy believes that it is the first step of maintaining peace, while Chairman Khrushchev thought that the direct communication simplified the communication between both nations.
Some people believe that the direct communication between the United States and Soviet Union was used rarely and almost never used.
However, the direct communication was used a few times to prevent misinterpretation of military movements and decreased tension.
In the Arab-Israel war of 1967, the United States used the hotline to notify the Soviet Union on United States fleet movement in the Mediterranean Sea.
President Richard Nixon used the hotline during the India-Pakistan conflict in 1971.
The hotline was modernized by the agreement made in 1971, 1984 and 1988.
This showed that the hotline was used significantly to the point that there were three agreements within twenty years to modernize the hotline.
This proved that the hotline decreased the chance of miscommunication and suspicion during the later parts of the cold war.
The direct communication formed between the United States and the Soviet Union decreased the tension caused by inefficient communication and misinterpretation of military movements.
During the crisis it took hours to receive and decode the three thousand words message from the Soviet Union.
New events could happen much faster than the speed of their communication.
With a direct communication the time needed greatly decreased, thus decreasing tension.
The outcome of the Crisis was removing nuclear missiles near each country.
Publicly, the Soviet Union agreed to remove missiles in Cuba and as a secret deal between the both countries, United States agreed to remove nuclear missiles placed in Turkey.
This agreement set up a direct communication between the United Stated and the Soviet Union for emergency and prevents misinterpretation of events.
The direction communication was used in many occasions to prevent interpretation of United Stated military movements.
This decreased the tension between the two countries, and prevented accidental conflict.
Another agreement made by the two sides was the limited test ban treaty.
The treaty banned nuclear testing in the atmosphere, in outer space and under water.
This limited the arms race between the United States and the Soviet Union to a degree since countries could no longer test nuclear weapon except testing it under ground.
That’s why we have developed 5 beneficial guarantees that will make your experience with our service enjoyable, easy, and safe.
Money-back guarantee You have to be 100% sure of the quality of your product to give a money-back guarantee.
Read more Zero-plagiarism guarantee Each paper is composed from scratch, according to your instructions.
Read more Free-revision policy Thanks to our free revisions, there is no way for you to be unsatisfied.
We will work on your paper until you are completely happy with the result.
Read more Fair-cooperation guarantee By sending us your money, you buy the service we provide.
Check out our terms and conditions if you prefer business talks to be laid out in official language.
If you need a custom written term, thesis or research paper as well as an essay or dissertation sample, choosing Course Scholars a relatively cheap custom writing service is a great option.
