ActiveHistory provides entertaining, educational award-winning interactive simulations, decision-making games, self-marking quizzes, high-quality worksheets and detailed lesson plans for teachers and students.
Roleplay Unit! .cent { text-align: center; } Background: Origins of the Cold War,1945-61 If the Origins of the Cold War have not already been studied using the detailed unit at ActiveHistory, the following provides an efficient, effective overview.
Teacher Lecture Interactive Multimedia Presentation | Student activity sheet to accompany the presentation Complete with video clips, the comprehensive presentation guides through the origins and development of the Cold War.
This unit is based around extended roleplay activities firstly from the Soviet, then from the American, perspectives.
Students gain a thorough understanding not just of the events but also about the role of particular individuals and develop an appreciation of how close the world came to nuclear holocaust in 1962 and who deserves credit for their handling of this terrifying crisis.
Soviet RoleplayStudents Worksheet | Roleplay Cards This two-part Soviet roleplay involves thinking through the arguments for and against placing missiles in Cuba from the Soviet perspective in a general sense based on essential historical context.
Then, each member of the class takes on the role of a named Soviet advisor with a clear agenda.
After they have formed their proposal, the teacher takes on the role of Khrushchev to talk through the arguments.
The final outcome is a detailed set of notes outlining the position of various Politburo members which will be invaluable for the essay writing / sourcework analysis examination.
Each student takes the role of a member of EX-COMM, and prepares a statement arguing for a course of action in response to Khrushchev's policy regarding Cuba.
The rolecards have been carefully written so that the students do not simply learn about the policy of each key character , but also learn about the relationship between the individuals concerned.
After watching two short video clips about Kennedy's final decision , students produce a concluding write-up reflecting on how effectively he dealt with the initial stage of the crisis.
Slideshow of ExComm This slideshow rotates a gallery of images of the key characters involved in EX-COMM and can be left running on the whiteboard during the reflection/roleplay phase of the activity.
The Crisis EscalatesStudent Worksheet | Teacher-led Multimedia Presentation In this second roleplay, designed to last about an hour, students witness the crisis unfold step-by-step.
At each stage, they have to discuss what they think Kennedy should do, then make comments about his actions after being told what he actually decided.
The Teacher-led Multimedia Presentation provides all the materials a teacher needs to help students complete the Student Worksheet.
Mandela, an Audio History | War in Ukraine: Worksheet / Lesson Plan | Rise of Pinochet: Diplomatic Causes | Rise of Pinochet: Domestic Causes | 1066: Battle of Hastings Simulation | Spanish Civil War: Video Worksheets | View more About ActiveHistory is the work of full-time history teacher Russel Tarr.
ActiveHistory provides vast amounts of worksheets, lesson plans, interactive simulations, self-marking quizzes, model essays and teacher support materials for the history classroom.
